THE ORDER AND usage of the keeping of a Parliament in England, AND THE
DEScription of tholde and ancient City of Excester.

Collected by John Vovvel alias Hooker gentleman.

Floret Virtus in aetaernum



TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, grave and prudent, the Mayor and Senators of the
most ancient and honorable City of Excester, John Vowel alias Hooker
gentleman and Chamberlain of the same, wishes a happy success in government
with the long continuance thereof to the benefit of the public wealth and
increace of worships.
WHEN I DO THINK and consider (right worshipful) of the noble state and great
majesty of the high Courts of Parlements of this Realm which for the
exelle^cie and worthiness thereof, is of all true English men to be honored and
embraced: I do forthwith fall in great dislike as well with my self as with
others, which being in learning ignorant, in wisdom weke, in experience
unskillful, and in every respect very unfit for such an honorable assembly,
should be chosen and admitted to the same.

For by the ancient orders and prescribed laws of this land: only such are
tobe elected and to have place there as for gravity, wisdom, knowledge and
experience, are reputed and known to be the most chosen and principal
personages of the whole land and Realm. And this court being in authority
highest, and in power cheifest: none should to be thorderers, Judges and
councellers thereof, but such as in virtues and good conditions are answerable
to the same.

The order (therefore) among the Romans was that none should be received or
allowed to be of their Senate house: unless he were grave in years, and well
experienced in common affairs of the public wealth. The Lacedaemonians
admitted none to be an Ephorus amongst them: but that he were a tried man for
knowledge and experience. The Athenians would be assured that he should be wise
and learned, that should be of their counsel.

The like order also was and is within this Realm, the same being derived and
taken chiefly from among the Romans, among and under whom: diverse of tholde
and ancient Kings of this Realm, have been bred and brought up.

And by means of the wisdom, learning and knowledge, learned among them, have
not only attained to the Septer of this realm: but also some of them have
been the monarchs and Emperors of the whole world.

These good Kings and Princes (I say) finding this land by disordered life,
lawles liberty, and lose behauior to be brought to an utter ruin, decay and
desolation, no reason longer ruling, nor good order allowed, then as private
affections and selfwil would allow and like of: after many devises,
consultations and attempts for redress, no way could be found so good, no
remedy so present, nor help so speedy: as to erect and establish a Senate of
the most grave, wise and expert personages of the whole Realm, called by the
name of a Parliament. For as Patricius in his third Book, De institutione
Reipub* says. The best order of government of the commonwealth: proceeds
alwais from tholde and ancient Senators, which are reputed and taken to be the
fathers of the commonwealth. For as fathers for their Children: so these for
the common wealth are most careful and tender.

And albeit the King or prince be never so wise, learned and expert: yet is it
impossible for any one to be exact and perfect in all things, but a Senate of
wise, grave, learned and expert men, being assembled in council together: they
are as it were one body, having many eyes to se, many feet to go, and many
hands to labor withal, and so sircum spect they are for the government of the
commo^welth: that they se all things, nothing is hid or secret, nothing is
strange or new, nothing is to great or weighty to them, but whether it be in
causes of war, or of peace: they will be well advised, and measure all things,
with good reason, circumspection and policy.

Moses therefore, although (having talked with God face to face, he were above
all others most wise, discreet and learned, yet not trusting all together to
his own wits: made choice of all thelders of Israel, and by their council
did order and direct the publque state and common wealth of his people, and
likewise being councelled by his father in law Iethro, to provide among all
his people, strong, couragiouse and valea^t men, (and such as feared God,
dealed truly, and hated covetousness) to be rulers over the people, to govern
and judge them, he did so, only the greatest and weightiest matters which
touched God: were brought before him alone.

Wherefore according to the good profitable and ancient orders of the Romai^s
and Israelits: these good Kings do erect a Senate or Parliament. Laws are
prescribed how the same should be kept, orders made what manner of persons
shall be elected and chosen for the same, and constitutio^s setfoorth how and in
what sort laws and ordinances shall be made for the benefit of the commonwealth. And surely these good and wholesome orders being put in ure and
execution: the benefit thereof grew so much in short time, that there was as it
were a Metamorphoses of the state of the public weal in those days, for
what Sedition and contention had disordred: good order and concord recovered.
What loosenes and dissolutnes of life had marred: honest be hauiour restored.
What disobedience had decayed: loiable obedience amended. And finally what
soever by any disorder was amiss: was by these means reformed and redressed:
and the evils which were crept and brought in by ambition, covetousness, debate,
malice or envy: were so reformed as that the people being better governed and
instructed: would not be carried with every affection, neither yet prefer
private profit and wilful lusts, before the common and public wealth.

Lo, such are the fruits which grew of the Parlements, and thus does it fare
in all estates where good men do rule, wholesome laws are made, and good order
kept and observed, and so long do common welths flourish: as when princes do
rule and govern by law, and people loyally obeying do live under law.

Erasmus in his Book De institutione principis Christiani* says, that good
laws under a good Prince: do make a happy Realm and fortunate government.
Cuius tum felicissimus est status, cum principi paretur ab omnibus, atque ipse
Princeps paret legibus leges autem, ad architypum aequi et honesti responde^t
nec alio spectant, quam ad Rem commune^ in melius prouehendam. Whose state is
then most fortunate when the people do obey the Prince, and the Prince
obeys the laws, and when laws be made just and right, and for the better
advancement of the commonwealth. And surely these are so in seperable that in
a good common wealth they cannot be disseuered, but a good Prince and good laws
must be concurrant, for although it be a rule that Quod principi placet legis
habet vigore^, and that Princes heasts ar laws: yet the Ethnicks them selves
do hold thoppinion and affirm, that unless the laws be just and made
according to the rule of wisdom, and for the common wealth: it is no law, for
that is a law, Quod sapienti bonoque principi placet cui nil placet, nisi quod
honestu^, ac quod senioru^, iuditio atque se^tentia probatum est fore Republica.

And surely in my oppinion, if it behooves Princes to be valiant in arms, and
expert in martial affairs, whereby to with stand the enemy, and to repress
the rebel: much more ought he to be wise and learned, that he knowing the laws
and keeping the same, may the better govern his people in peace and keep them
in dutiful obedience.

Wherefore Justinian the Emperor in the proheme to the instituts, has this
sentence. Imperatoriam maiestatem, non solu^ armis decoratam sed et legibus
armatam esse oportet, vt vtrumque tempus, et bellorum, et pacis, recte possit
gubernari. an Emperor or a king ought not only to be skilful in feats of
arms: but also to be well learned and instructed in the laws: that he may
preuail against his enemy, as also peaceably govern his Subjects. It is also
an old sentence, and for the worthiness thereof graven in Gold among the
professors of the common laws of this Realm, Arma Regum Lex.

And therefore the Egiptians did think it more honorable and commendable that
Kings should be rather learned in good studyes, then addicted to martial
feats, and therefore their kings did with great diligence apply the^ selves to
the studyes of wisdo^e and knowledge, neither did any King among them think
that he did or could govern well: unless (as in authority, so also in
wisdom, virtue and learning) he did excel all the rest of his Subjects and
people. Then if it be so necessary and expedient for the commonwealth that the
same be governed by learned and wise rulers, and guyded by just and good laws:
how happy, blessed and fortunate is this realm of England, which has found
both the one and the other?

For neither Athens with their Solon, and his laws. Sparto with their Licurgus
and his laws. Egypt with Mercurius and his laws. Rome with their Romulus and
his laws. The Italians with their Pithagoras and his laws, and finally a
number of other famous contries and worthy governors, of whom great aduaunt is
made: are not to be compared to this little i will and Realm, which in both
respects has passed and excelled them all. For the Kings and rulers thereof
(not for a short time: but in the course of many hundrethes of years) have not
been so valiant as wise, not so courageous as prudent, not so puissant as
learned, and not so politic in the feeldes: as grave in the Senates. Likewise
the laws, in equity most upright, in judgments most true, and in conscience
most reasonable. The observation and keeping of which laws: has heertofore
preserved this Realm from forain enemies, defended it from civil seditions,
and kept the people in safety, so that is vrified which Melanchton writes of
Solon. Denique vita hominum, tranquilla et honesta manebit: seruandi leges,
dumpia cura manet.

It rests now that if we do mind to be the natural Children of so wise
fore Fathers, the obedient Subjects of most worthy Rulers, the obseruers of
most godly and wholesome laws: that like to our ancestors we do carefully and
obedyently in all dutifulnes live after their race and dispose our selves after
their examples: for if we do once yield to the breach thereof, then be assured,
the destruction of our selves, the decay of our posterity, and utter ruin of
our commonwealth will shortly and immediately follow.

For no longer shall our life be in safety: then we do dutifully obey the
Prince and obediently observe the laws.

The old and ancient Fathers in the former ages, were so straight in this
point, that they would in no wise commit the least breach of any law. For Chilo
the Lacedemonian, was of the oppinion, that the commonwealth could no longer
endure then when the laws were firmly observed.

Heraclitus of Ephesus says, that Citizens are more bounden to fight for
defense of their laws: then for keeping of their walls, for with out walls
the City might stand, but without laws it could not continue, and yet both
are to be defended.

Archidamus says, that in all well governed common welths: all degrees and
estates of people are like obedient to the order of the laws as well the
magistrate: as the inferior, and the King: as the Subject. Saint Paul says,
that he is not the just man, which only knows the laws: Sed qui factis
legem exprimit which living under the law does obey and keep the same. And
surely if we English men would do the like, and follow the steps of such common
welths, as whose states continued so long as they kept their laws, and also
consider how this Realm hitherto, by that means has been and is preserved:
we shall not need to fear of our estate, dout of our fall, or mistrust of our
decay. No forain inuations shall preuail against us, nor yet intestine
seditions be able to anoy us, for such is the nature of the parlements, that
all mischeefs, inconveniences and euels are foreseen: and all good orders
devised as before the common and public weal, no man of what estate so ever
he be: can go awry or transgress his commission, but is under the order of
that assembly, and of such ordinances as by the same are to be devised. For
the King him self although he be the cheifest ruler, yet by the laws of this
realm, he cannot establish order or make any law: but only in Parliament, and
with advise and consent of all the estates and sages of the same, which law
being kept, how can he with tyranny oppress his people, or with exactions ran
sack and spoil his commo^s? If the noble man can be no farther allowed, then
to do and speak that which shall be liking to the King and his whole Parliament:
what wro^gs or injuries can he offer or minister? If no man ought to be a
knight of the Parliament, unless he be Cinctus gladio: that is to say, wise,
prudent, expert and politic in martial affairs: what wars can advisedly or
rashly be taken in hand? if no man can be a Citizen or a Burgess there, unless
he be ancient, wise, grave and resiant in the place for which he is chosen:
what evil laws can pass and be concluded? yea what things amiss in any part
of the Realm, shall not upon diclosing, forthwith and spedely be redressed?

If Salomo^s wise and ancient senators ought to have place in Parliament: what
shall the rash and yung cou^cellers of Rohoboha^do there? If Moises by the advice of such ancient elders of Israel as were wise, valea^t, dealed truly,
feared God, and hated covetousness, did direct the people in judgment and
govern the^ in justice: what shall children, yungmen, and such as neither fear
god nor hate iniquity, which are of no experience or knowledge: sit in Senate
of the wise, and give judgment among the grave and learned? Finally if the
old Senators and wise Fathers, ought there to sit in ancient order and in
grave manner: what place is there for punies, rash heddes and yung men, who
having no learning, and less experience, are carried away (as a fether with the
wind) with every light toy, making no account nor having any regard at all to
the public weal?

And surely that our Parlements should be kept in such order: the good ancient
Kings of this realm with great advise did so ordain, and great penalties are
prescribed, and punishments appointed against such as shall be remiss in
observing, or guilty in the breach thereof. If we therefore, for whose safety
and preservation so good and wholesome laws, which have been made and
heertofore observed, should degenerate from our forefathers, and be remiss or
careless in the keeping of the same: let us be assured that as we shall right
worthily, so shall we assuredly feel the smart thereof to the utter destruction
of our selves, the subuertion of the commonwealth, and decay of our posterity,
for so has it happened and be fallen to all the estates, kingdoms Realms,
Cities and common welths, of all the world, whose destruction and decay began
with the contempt and decay of their laws and orders.

Where is the well governed estate of the Atheniences? What is become of the
noble estate of the Romans? What is become of the prudent government of the
Ephoros in Sparta? Nay what is become of the Israelits the chosen people of
God? are not they driven out of their own land, and become vagabo^ds through
the whole world? are not they so lothesome that all sorts of people do in a
manner shun and abhor them? It is an old saying: Felix quem faciunt aliena
pericula cautum, happy is he that can beware by an other man's harm. Well, if
their be any fear of God in us, if any zeal to our common weal, any care of
our posterity, or account of our own safety: let us have an ernest regard
to the preservation of that which is the preservation of us, Let us keep that
which keeps us, maintain that which maintains us, and defend that which
defends us. Let us prevent and beware that in choice of the Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses: none be chosen which are strangers to the commonwealth, yung of
years, weke of discretion, and timerose to speak: but such as are grave, wise,
ancient, and expert, fearing God, dealing truly, according to the ancient
orders, lawdable customs and prescribed laws of this Realm.

And for as much as the orders, vsages and customs of the Parlements of this
Realm, are for the most part, and to most men hidden and unknown, and yet
most expedient and necessary, that none should be ignorant of them: I have
thought good upon considerations to make a collection of them, and finding some
alteration and variety of the Parlements in these days, from them which were
used in the elder days: I have made the description both of the one and of
the other.

The first and ancientest orders I have translated out of an old, and an
ancient Lattin Record, which I have of the Parleme^ts kept in the time of King
Edward the Son of King Etheldred, named Edward the confessor, about the year
of our Lord. 1046, which were duly for many years before and after his days
kept and observed.

The others are of mine own devise and collection, according to that which I
saw and learned at the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the xiij. year of
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Anno. 1571. at which I was present, being one
(though unworthy) of the said house and assembly. I have bee^ the more willing
to set the same forth: because I know it most necessary and needful to be
known, and that it touches the whole estate and common wealth of this Realm
very near. For if the Rulers and governors of Cities and towns, do not more
carefully look to the choice of their Citizens and Burgesses: their states may
paraduenture be in danger to be shaken, and their governments be in peril to
perish.

And as for zeal and good will to the whole commonwealth, and my native
Country, I have taken this little trauail: so of bounden deutie, I have thought
good to offer and present the same unto you, partly that a Legiar and
memorial of so worthy and necessary a matter: might remain and be among your
Records, for the better instruction of your selves, and all others which shall
repair unto you for the same. But chiefly to yield my self unto you most
humble and thankful, for your good will and tender affection toward me, for
albeit you had the choice of sundry wise men, which (for their gravity,
experience and knowledge far exceeding me) were more fit to have supplied a
place in that honorable assembly: yet you of a good will conceiving the best,
made choice of me preferring me before the wise, and joining me with the
discreet, and although by means of sickness, the use of my speech not serving,
I could not speak my mind in that pluce, as of duty and conscience I ought
and would have done: yet in such credit of that assembly I was, that by a whole
and a general concent of the Parliament: I was eftsoons chosen to be a Comitte
in sundry matters of charge and importance, and they with whom I was joined,
although they were personages of much honor, and great experience: yet such
credit they gave to my words and so allowed of my sayings: that with good
allowance they relied unto the same. Whatsoever credit or commendation, grows
to me heerby, I do, must and will, wholly impute it unto you. And therefore as
one bounden unto you, and altogether dedicated to your service and
commandment: I do offer this my simple and rude collection unto your
worships, praying and beseeching you not to have respect to the simplicity,
rudenes and sclendernes of the matter offered: but to the good will of the
offerer.

I have before this attempted and begun to to draw and make a discourse, of the
antiquity, estate and government of this City, thinking when I began: I
should long ere this have absolved the same, and have offered it unto you. But
in the middle of my trauails, being by your conse^ts, called to follow the
weighty affairs of the right worshipful, Sir Peeter Carew knight, in Ireland:
I was cut of and dissapointed, since being returned, I have for the most
part been so over charged with sickness, and mine affections have been and are
so distempered: as that opportunity and power have not yet served to follow the
absoluing of that, which my good will and ernest desire wissheth.

Nevertheless, having perused the description of this City, which was of
mine own collection: I have upon the sight of more matter enlarged, augme^ted
and brought the same to such a perfection, as for the time and matter
sufficient. The imperfections (if any be) I will here after as occasion shall
serve: supply and amend, in the mean time, having joined the same unto this,
and thinking it most meet to be offered unto you: I do most humbly pray you,
accept the same in good part.

The Lord God from whom comes what so ever is good, and who directs the
councels of the Just, and prospers the diuices of the godly: send his holy
spirit upon you, that you living in the fear of him, may hate iniquity,
abhor covetousness, and without affection give just Judgments, and in all
truth, equity and justice: govern, rule and direct the people, over whom he
has made you the gouerners and Rulers, whereby his name may be glorified, the
commonwealth prospered: and you at length sitting with the xxiiij Elders, may
be crowned with them, and enjoy that peace and blessing which is prepared for
such as execute justice and give true Judgments.

Post mortem Vita



The old and ancient order of keeping of the Parliament in England used in the
time of King Edward the confessor.
FIrst the monicion or summons of the Parliament ought to be made or done forty
days before the beginning of the Parliament.

The Summons of the Spirituality.
ALl Bishops, Abbots, Priors and all other great Clarks that hold by county
or barony, by reason of their holding, ought to be monished, and also to come
to the Parliament, and none other inferiors of the Clergy, unless their
presence were profitable and necessary for the Parliament. And to those the King
is bound to give their costs coming and abiding at the Parliament, and such
inferior Clarks not to be monished to come to the Parliament. But the king was
accustomed to send his writs unto such discrete men, desiring them to come and
be at the Parliament.

Also the King was accustomed to send his monicions or summons to the
Archbishops, Bishops and other exempt persons, that is to say, Abbots, Priors,
Deanes and other ecclesiastical persons that have jurisdiction by such
exemption and distinct privileges, that they for every Deanery and Archdeconry
through England should elect and choose or cause to be elected and chosen, two
discrete and wise proctors of their own Archdeconry which should come and be
at the parliament, there to sustain and allow, and to do that thing that every
man of their Deanery or Archdeaconry might do if they weer there in proper
persons, and those Proctors so sent, for the Clergy: should bring with them
their double proxies sealed with double seals of their superiors. The one of
the proxies to remain with the Clarks of the Parliament: and the other to remain
with the said proctors, and under this manner the Clergy ought to be called to
the Parliament.

The summons of the Temporaltie.
ALso all and every Earl, Baron and their peers, that is to say, that have
lands and rents to the value of an Earldome or of a whole Barony, that is to
say, xx. knights fees, every fee containing.xx. pound land, which amounts to
iiij. hundred pound in the whole, or to the value of an whole Barony, that is
to say xiij. fees: and the third part of a knights fee, every fee accounted at
xx. pound. which amounts in the whole to iiij. hundred Marks. And no inferior
persons of ye Temporaltie shall come to the Parliament by reason of his hold
unless his presence be necessary and profitable, and they to be ordered for
their charges at the kings costs, as is spoken of before of the inferior Clerks.

The summons of the Barons of the five Ports.
ALso the King ought to send his writs to ye warden of the five ports that he
should cause to be elected or chosen for every of ye said ports: two discrete
and wise Barons that should come and be present at the Parliament, there to
answer, sustain, aledge and do all things concerning the said parliament,
as well as if all and every of the Barons were there personally. And these Barons
so elect and chosen: shall bring with them their double proxies, double sealed
with the common seal of the port. The one thereof to be delivered to the Clerks
of the Parliament: and the other to remain with the said Barons so chosen and
elected. And when it shall chance the said Barons (license obtained) to
depart: they were accustomed to have a writ sealed with the great seal to the
warden of the five ports for their reasonable expenses done from the first of
their coming to the Parliament, until the time of their departing and coming
home, to be levied of ye comminaltie of every party having express mention
made in the writ from the said first day of their coming: until the time of
their license obtained, and it was accustomed that mention should be made in
the said writ what every Baron should take of the commons for a day, that is to
say, some more, some less, a consideration and respect had to the honestest,
for their tarying, labors and expenses, and it was not accustomed that any
certain sum was limited by the said Court.

Of the knights of the Parliament.
ALso the king was accustomed to send his writes to all the Shirifs within the
Realm, that they should cause to be chosen two honest, wise and discrete
knights for every Sheere to come to the Parliament with such proxies, as is
before spoken of the Barons of the five ports. But for the expenses of the
said two knights for every sheere was not accustomed to be granted
abooue.xiij. shillings.iiij. pence for a day.

Of the Citizens of the Parliament.
IN the like the Mayor of London and the Shiriffes. The Mayor and Baliffes, or
the Mayor and Citizens of York, and all other Cittyes were wunt to be warned
that they for the comminaltie of their cittyes should elect and choose two
discrete honest and wise Citizens to come and be at ye Parliament under the
form as is spoken of before of the Barons and of the knights of the sheere.
And the said Citizens were accustomed to be like and equal in their expenses
for coming, abiding and returning to and from the Parliament as are the knights.

Of the Burgesses of the Parliament.
IN like manner the Bayliffes and wise men of the Boroughes were accustomed,
and ought to be warned that they should choose two discrete, honest, and wise
Burgesses of them selves, and by the^ to come and be at the Parliament, in like
manner as is spoken of the Citizens. But it was not accustomed that two
Burgesses should have for their charges abooue x. shillings, and sometime not
abooue vj. shillings.viij. pence. and that should be taxed by the Court, after
the ability of the borough, and the honesty of the Burgesses.

Of the two principal Clerks of the Parliament.
ALso two principal Clerks of the Parliament shall sit in the midst of the
Justices which shall inrolle all plaintes, and matters of the Parliament. And it
is to be known that these two Clerks be not subject to any of the Justices
of England, nor that any Justice has any authority in the Parliament except
he be assigned to any thing by the King, and Peers of the Parliament.

And when they be assigned with other Suetors of the Parliament to hear and
determine diverse pleaes and peticions to be finished by Parliament, yet the two
Clarks to be immediate subjects to the King and Parliament in common, unless
one of ye Judges or two be assigned to examine and amend their inrolling. And if
the peers of ye Parliament be assigned to hear and examine any special
petition, after they have broken their matter: they shall give their sentence
and Judgment in the full Perlement, and the two Clarks inrolle the same, and
all other plaints and judgments of the Parliament in the principal of the
Parliament, and there to deliver those rolls to the Treasurer before the
Parliament be finished.

Provided that the said Clarks shall have a transumpt or Copy of it, if they
list, and these two Clarks shall have for their expe^ces xiij. shillings and
iiij. pence, unless they have any fees or offices by the king, and be daily
waitors having meat and drink of the Kings cost: and then they to have.vj.
shillings and viij. pence every day during the Parliament.

Of the five Clarks.
ALso the King shall assign five Clarks, wise and approbate, of whom, the
first shall atte^d the Bishops. The second the proctors of the Clergy. The
third the Earls and Barons. The fourth the knights of the Sheeres, and the
fifth: the Citizens and Burgesses.

And every of them shall have ij. shillings a day: unless they be the Kings
servants, and have sufficient living of the King, and then they to have but
xij. pence the day, which Clarks shall write all doutes between the King and
the Parliament, and they to be at their councils where so ever they be
commanded. And in case they shall be vacant: they shall help ye two principal
clarks to inrolle their business.

Of the causes and douts of the Parliament.
WHen any breach, difficulty of dout, or defuse cause of war or peace does
appeer within the Realm or without, that case ought to be declared in writing
in the full Parliament, there to be treated and disputed among the Peers of the
Parliament, and if it be necessary: the King shall command or in the Kings name
it shall be commanded that every degree, and the persons of every degree of the
Parliament shall be present in the parliament, and to the Clark of every degree in
the Parliament, the cause, breach and dout shall be delivered, and by him at a
certain place to be to them delivered and declared.

And the upon they to study, imagine and consider how this dout or breach may
be provided for, as they in time coming shall make answer for the prseruation
of the King, them selves, and the commons whose persons they do represent, and
so in this behalf they shall make their answer or council to be written, so
that every degrees answer and aduisement heard: the whole Parliament to admit
and allow the best and wisest council and thereafter to do, and whereas been
diverse opinions: then to incline to the more part of the Parliament.

And in case there be any discord between the king and any of the estates, or
between estates, whereby the peace of the Realm, or the people of the country
might be disturbed: in this case if the King think it expedient, it ought to be
commoned of, and reformed by the advice of all the Peers of the Realm. Or in
case the King and Realm been troubled with wars, or a doutful case be
depening before the Chau^celler of England, or a defuse judgment be depending
before the Justices, and if in those the Peers of the degrees of the Parliament
cannot agree: then the Earl Steward, the Earl Constable, and the Earl
Marshall, or two of them: shall elect.xxv. persons of every degree of the
peers of the Realm, yt is to say: two Bishops, three proctors for the
Clergy, two Earls, three Barons, five knights of the Sheeres, five Citizens,
and five Burgesses, and these.xxv. may condescend into xij. of them selves, and
these xij. into.vj. of them selves, and these six may condescend into three,
but these three cannot condescend into a less number without the Kings
concent, and then those three may condescend into two, and the two into one,
and after his opinion and determination: the matter shall be ordered unless the
King will descent as he may, and then may he and his council examine and amend
the ordination, so it be unwritten and done out of the Parliament house without
their concents.

Of matters of the Parliament.
THe matters whereof the Parliament is holden or kept: ought to be delivered
into the Parliament, and to be called upon in manner of a calendar, according to
every man's petition, and no respect to be had to any man's person: but that
he who lays first his bil in: shall be first heard.

In the Calendar of the Parliament every matter ought to be had in memory under
this manner and form.

First: of wars if their be any, of matters concerning the King and Queens
person, and of their Children.

Secondly: of matters concerning the common weal, and to ordain new laws
debarring the old laws made in times past, whose execution have been
prejudicial.

Thirdly: the matters concerning the private weal, and these to be examined
according to the file and Calendar as is before written.

The days and hours of the Parliament.
THe Parliament shall be holden every day, Sundaies, Allhallon day, all souls day
and the nativity of Saint John the Baptist excepted. And every feriall day it
should begin at mid prime time, and that hour: the king is bound to be in the
Parliament and all ye peers of the Realm. On the holy days the parliament
shall begin at the prime, because of the divine service should be first heard.

The degrees of the Parliament.
THe King is head and cheef at the beginning and at the end of the parliament,
and to him no comparison is to be made, and so the King is one degree by him
self.

The second is of Archebishops, Abbots and Priors, holding by Baronyes.

The third is of the Proctors of the Clergy. The fourth of Earls Barons and
other estates and gentles holding to the value of an Earldom or Baronye as is
before written. The fifth of Knights of the Sheeres.

The sixth of Citizens and Burgesses, and so the Parliament is of six degrees.
And it is to be noted that if any of the said degrees be absent after their
first lawful monicions or summons: the Parliament is not of sufficient effect.

The form of the Parliament.
Since it is showed under what form every man ought to be monished, and how
long time the monitions should be, and what they be that should come unto it:
it is to be known who they be that ought to be monished to come to the
Parliament by reason of their offices. And also it is to be noted that the two
principal Clarks of the Parliament for the King and his Council, and other
secondary Clarks, of whom and of whose office mention shall be hereafter made.

The cheef Crier of England with his deputies, and the cheef Porter of England,
howbeit these two offices were accustomed to be occupied by one person, these
ought to be there the first day of the Parliament.

The Lord Chaunceler of England, the Treasurer, the Chamberlain, the Barons of
the Eschequer, the Justices, all the kings Clarks and knights, with Sergeants
at the Law of the kings retinew or fee: ought to be there the second day,
unless they have a reasonable impediment or let.

Of the beginning of the Parliament.
THe King ought to be in the Parliament the first day and should sit in the
midst of the high bench. The sixth day: the Chaunceller, the Treasurer, the
Barons of the Eschequer and the Justices were accustomed to record the
defaults done in the Parliament in form following. The first day they must call
all the Citizens and Burgesses of all England, and for lack of their
apparaunce: a City shall be amerced in a C. pound, and a borough a C. marks.

The second day: they shall call knights of Sheeres, and in default of their
appearance: the sheere shall be amerced a C. pound.

The third day: the Barons of the five ports, and after them the other Barons,
and then the Earls, and for lack of appearance of every Baron: they shall be
amerced a C. marks, and of an Earl: a C. pound, the like shall be done to them
that be Earls and Barons Peers, that is to say, as have Lands and rents to ye
yearly value of an Earldom or of a barony as is before expressed. The fourth
day: the Proctors of the Clergy shall be called, and for lack of their
appearance: their Bishops shall be amerced a C. marks for every Archdeaconry that
makes default.

The fifth day: Deanes, Priors, Abbots, Bishops and Archbishops, and for lack
of apparaunce of an Archbishop: he shall be amerced a C. pound, a Bishop, an
Abbot and a Prior, which hold an whole barony: a C. marks.

Of the Proclamations.
THe first day of the Parliament: proclamation shall be made first in the Hall or
in the Monastery or some other open place where the Parliament shall be holden or
kept, and after in the City or Town openly that every man having Bil or
Peticion to be eranuned or determined in ye Parliament that is should be laid in
within five days of the beginning of the parliament.

Of the preaching of the Parliament.
AN Archbishop or some famous discrete and eloquent Clark tobe assigned by the
Archbishop in whose province the Parliament shall be kept and holden, shall preach
on the first of ye five days in the full Parliament and in the Kings presence,
and he shall begin when all the Parliament or the most part shall be there
assembled, and in his prison or prayer he shall require all the whole Parliament
that they humbly beseech almighty God for the peace and tranquillity of the
King and Realm.

Of the Speaker of the Parliament.
AFter the Sermon done: the L. Chaunceller of England or the cheef Justice
elect, shall stand declaring in the parliament house, first generally and then
specially the causes of the Parliament, and wherefore the same is holden.

And it is to be noted that every man (the King excepted) shall stand while the
said Speaker does declare his matter, to th'entent that every man may hear
him: and in case he do speak obscurely or darkly or so low that he cannot be
heard: he must begin again, or else an other speak in his place.

What the King shall say after the Speaker has done.
THe King after the speaker has declared the causes of the Parliament: shall
desire the Spirituality and the Temporaltie naming every degree, that is to
say, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Archdeacons, proctors and others of
the Clergy, Earls Barons, knights, Citizens and Burgesses, and others of the
Temporaltie, that they do diligently studiously and loouingly indeuer them
selves to examine pertract and handle the causes of the Parliament, to the honor
of God principally: secondarely to the Kings honor, and lastly to the wealth of
the Realm.

Of the Kings absence.
THe King ought daily to be present in the Parliament, unless he be sick or
diseased: and then he may keep his chamber, so that he lodge not out of the
manor or town, where the Parliament is holden, and then he ought to send for
xij. persons of the great estates that be monished or summoned to the
Parliament, whereof two to be Bishops, two Earls, two Barons, two Knights, two
Citizens and two Burgesses, to see his person and to certify of his estate,
and in their presence he ought to commit power to the Archbishop of the
province, to the Lord Steward and to the cheef Justices, that they jointly and
severally shall begin and continue the Parliament in the Kings name, making
express mention in his commission of his disease to the other estates, and that
the persons abooue named can express the same, for it is a perilous case and
dangerous for the communaltie and Realm that the King should be absent from
the Parliament: but only for bodily sickness.

Of places and seats in the Parliament.
FIrst as it is before said, the King shall sit in the midst of the bench, upon
the right hand the Archbishop of Canterbury, at his left hand the Archbishop of
York, and then Bishops, Abbots, and Priors in order, and then every man in his
degree, and amongst his peers, and that this order be kept: the Lord Steward
of England is bound to look unto, unless the King assign some other.

At the Kings righ foot, the Chaunceller of England, the cheef Justice of
England with his fellows, and their Clarks, that be of the Parliament. And at
his left foot shall sit the Treasurer, the Chamberlain, the Barons of the
Eschequer, the Judge of the common place with their Clarks that been of the
Parliament.

Of the porters of the Parliament.
THe cheef Porter of the Parliament shall stand within the great gate or
Monastery, hall or place, where the Parliament is holden and shall attend that no
man enter into the Parliament except he be called for matters that he shows in
the Parliament. And it is expedient that the said Porter have knowledge of every
man's name that shall enter into the Parliament, and if need require to have
many porters under him.

Of Cryers of the Parliament.
THe Crier shall stand without the Parliament door, and the Porter shall show
him when and what he shall call. The king was accustomed to appoint his
Sergea^ts at arms to keep the Parliament door, that no thrust, press or noise,
were made there, by means whereof the Parliament might be let, and that such
thrust, preace or noise might he avoided, and proclamation should be made that
no person enterprise such things there, under pain of imprisonment, for by Law:
the Parliament door should not be shut, but he kept by the Porter or Sergeaunt
at Arms.

Of the help for the King.
THe King was not accustomed to demand help of his Realm but only for war
that was instant, or for the creation of his Sons to be made knights: or his
Daughters to be married, and these helps ought to be demanded in the full
Parliament, and in writing to be delivered unto every degree, and they in
writing to make answer. And if this help ought to be granted: then every
degree of the Parliament should co^cent thereto. And it is to be known, that two
Knights or two Citizens, or two Eurgesses which come to the Parliament, in
granting or denying any thing demanded in the Parliament: have more
authority then the greatest Earl in England. And in like case, two proctors
for the Clergy in one diocese: have more authority then their Bishops in
things to be granted or denied in Parliament, and ye reason is this. The King
may hold his parliament for the communaltie of his Realm without Bishops,
Earls or Barons, so that they have lawful su^mons and come not, for some time
there was no Bishop, Earl nor Baron, and yet ye King hid keep his Parliament,
but of the contrary, if the communaltie of the Clergy and of the Temporaltie
be monished to the parliament as they ought to be by the Law, and for certain
causes they do not or wilnot come, as if they pretend that the King has not
ruled or governed them accordingly, and do therein express wherein he has not
ruled them accordingly: in this case the Parliament which the King holds with
the Bishops, Earls and Barons is of no effect, and therefore in all things that
are to be granted, ordained, established or broken by parliament: the
communaltie of ye parliament of necessity must concent thereunto. For in the
co^munaltie are contained iiij. degrees of Parliament, that is to say, proctors
of the Clergy, Knights of Sheers, Citizens of Cittyes and Burgesses of Towns,
and these persons do represent the whole co^munaltie of England where as
the other estates do represent but their own persons.

For bills and peticions of the Parliament.
THe Parliament ought not to be ended whiles any peticion depends undiscussed
or at least to whom a determinate answer is not made, and if the King permit
the contrary: he is perjured, also no Peer of the Parliament shall depart
from the same without license obtained of the King and of his peers, which
license is to be obtained in open parliament, and to be recorded in roll of
Parliament. And if it happen any of the Peers to be sick, during the Parliament
so that he cannot come to it: then for three days he shall send his excuse to
the Parliament, but if after three days passed he come not: then two of his
peers shall be sent to him to see his person, and thereof to advertise the
Parliament, and if any suspicion be had: these two Peers shall be sworn to
testify the very truth, and if it appeer he have fained him self sick: he
then to be amerced as a fault for his not appeeraunce at the beginning of ye
Perlement, and if he be sick then before: then he shall make a sufficient to
appeer in Parliament for him.

No person of the Parliament can be excused having his health and memory.

The ending of the Parliament.
THe finishing of the Parliament must be assigned, appointed and openly
proclaimed both in the Parliament, and within the palace of the Parliament. And
if there be any will say, that he has no answer of his bil delivered into the
Parliament: then the Parliament to continue, but if no man so say: it is to be
supposed that every man has remedy or assigned how to have remedy by the
Laws, and at the proclamation made, if there be no Bills to be laid in: the
King may license his Parliament.

Of the Coppyes of the Records of the Parliament.
THe Clark of the Parliament shall deny to no man the copy of his process, but
shall deliver unto every man that demands it, taking for every ten lines a
penny.

And if the party be poor and thereupon makes his oath to have nothing: the
roll of the Parliament shall be ten inches broad. The Parliament shall be kept
whersoeuer it shall please the King.

THese orders in process of time did success, and were out of all use, few or
no Parlements being kept, from the time of William the Conqueror, until the
reign of King Edward the first, who by th'aduise of his wise and learned
counsailers prescribed a form and order how the Parlements within this Realm
should be observed and kept, which orders also in the course of certain years
grew out of use in many points, and the order here ensuing: is that which is in
our days received and used.

THE ORDER AND Usage how to keep a Parliament in England in these days,
colected by John Vowel alias Hooker gentleman, one of the Citizens for the
City of Exeter at the Parliament holden at Westminster Anno domine
Elizabethae Reginae decimo Tertio. 1571.
By whom and for what cause a Parliament ought to be summoned and called.
THe King who is Gods anointed being the head and cheef of the whole Realm and
upon whom the government and estates thereof do wholly and only depend: has
the power and authority to call and assemble his Parliament, and therein to seek
and ask the advice, council and assistance of his whole Realm, and without
this his authority: no parliament can properly be summoned or assembled. And ye
King having this authority, ought not to summo^ his Parliament: but for
weighty and great causes, and in which he of necessity ought to have the advice and counsel of all the estates of his Realm, which be these and such
like as follows.

First for Religion, for, for as much as by the Laws of God and this Realm,
the King next and immediately under God is his deputye and Vicar in Earth, and
the cheifest ruler within his Realms and dominons: his office, function and
duty is, abooue all things to seek and see that God be honored in true Religion
and Virtue, and that he and his people do both in profession and life live
according to the same.

Also that all Idolatries, false Religions, heresies, scismes, errors,
supersticions, and what so ever is contrary to true Religion, all disorders and
abuses, either among the Clergy or the Laietie, be reformed, ordered and
redressed.

Also the assurance of the King and Queens persons, and of their Children
their advancement and preferment in marriages, the establishing of succession,
the suppression of Traitors, the aduoyding or eschewing of wars, the
attempting or mooving of wars, the subduing of Rebels, and pacifying of
civil wars and commotions, the leuying or having any aid or Subsidye for the
preservation of the King and public estate.

Also the making and establishing of good and wholesome Laws, or the repealing
and debarring of former Laws, as whose execution may be hurtful or
prejudicial to the estates of the Prince or commonwealth. For these and such
like causes being of great weight, charge and importance: the King (by ye
advise of his council) may call and summon his high Court of Parliament, and by
the authority thereof establish and order such good Laws and orders as then
shall be thought most expedient and necessary.

The order and manner how to summon the Parliament
THe King ought to send out his writs of summons to all the estates of his
Realm, at least forty days before the beginning of the Parliament. First to
all his Lords and Barons, that is to wit, Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicountes and Barons, and every of these must have a
special writ, then to the Clergy, and the writ of their summons must be
addressed to every particular Bishop, for the Clergy of his diocese, and all
these writs which are for the Clergy: the King always sends to ye
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and by them they are sent and dispersed
abroad to every particular Bishop wtin their several provinces, and so the
Bishops give summons to the Clergy.

Lastly, for the summoning of the Commons: he sends his writ to the Lord
warden of the five ports, for the election of the Barons thereof, and to every
several Shiriffe, for the choice and election of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses within his county.

How and what persons ought to be chosen for the Clergy, and of their
allowaunces.
THe Bishop ought upon the receipt of the writ sent unto him for the sumoning
of his Clergy: forthwith to summo^ and warn all deanes and Archdeacons within
his diocese to appeer in proper person at the Parliament, unless they have
some sufficient and reasonable cause of absence, in which case he may appeer by
his Proctor having a warrant or proxy for the same.

Then must he also send the like summons to the Deane and Chapter of his
Cathedral Church, who shall forthwith assemble their Chapter and make choice
of some one of them selves to appeer in their behalf, and this man thus chosen:
must have thrir commission or proxy.

He must also send out his summons to every Archdeaconry and peculier,
requiring that the whole Clergy do appeer before him, his Chau^celler or
Officer at a certain day, time, and place, who being so assembled: shall make
choice and election of two men of the said Clergy to appeer for them, and
these shall have their commission or proxy for the same.

These Proctors thus to be chosen ought to be grave, wise, and learned men,
being professors either of Divinity or of the ecclesiastical Laws. and that
can, will, and be able to dispute in cause of controversy, conuincing of
heresies, appeasing of Scismes, and devising of good and godly constitutions
concerning true Religion, and orders of the Church.

These Proctors (thus elected) ought to have reasonable allowances for their
charges, according to the state, quality, or condition of the person, as also
a respect had to the time, the proctors of the Dean and Chapter are to be paid
out of the Eschequer of the Cathedral Church. The Proctors of the Clergy are
to be paid of the Clergy, among whom a collection is to beleuied for the
same, according to an old order used among them.

How and what manner of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses ought to be chosen, and
of their alowances.
THe Sheriff of every County having received his writes: ought forthwith to
send his precepts and summons to the Majors, Bayliffes, and head Officers of
every City, Town corporate, Borough, and such places as have been accustomed
to send Burgesses, within his County, that they do choose and elect among
them selves two Citizens for every City, and two Burgesses for every Borough,
according to their old custom and usage. And these head Officers ought then to
assemble them selves and the Alder men and commen council of every City or
Town, and to make choice among them selves of two able and sufficient men of
every City or Town, to serve for and in the said Parliament.

Likewise at the next County day to be holden in the said County after the
receipt of this writ, the Sheriff ought openly in the Court of his Sheer or
County, between the hours of viij. and.ix. of the fore noon: make
Proclamation that every free holder shall come into the Court, and choose two
sufficient men to be Knights for the Parliament, and then he must cause the
writ to be openly and distinctly read, whereupon the said free holders then and
there present: ought to choose two Knights accordingly, but he him self cannot
give any voice, neither be chosen.

These elections a forsaid so past and done: there ought to be several
Indentures made between the Sheriff and the free holders of the choice of the
knights, and between the Mayor and the head Officers of every particular City
and Town of the choice of their Citizens and Burgesses, and of their names and
of their mainperners and Sureties. Of these Inde^tures, the one part being
sealed by the Sheriff: ought to be returned to the Clark of the Parliament, and
the other part of the Indentures, sealed by such as made choice of the Knights,
and such as made choice of Citizens and Burgesses under the several common
seals of their Cities and Towns: ought to remain with the Sheriff, or
rather with the parties so elected and chosen.

The charges of every knight and Citizen was wunt to be a like, which was xiij.
shillings.iiij. pe^ce by the day, but now by the Statute it is but viij.
shillings, that is, to every Knight, and every Citizen iiij. shillings, and to
every Burgess the old usage to have v. shillings, but now it is but iij.
shillings and iiij. pence limited by the Statute, which alowaunces is to be
given from the first day of their journey toward the Parliament, until the last
day of their return from thence. Provided that every such person shall be allowed
for so many days as by iorneyi^g xxvj. miles every day in the Winter, and xxx.
miles in the Summer, he may come and return to and from the Parliament.

In choice of these Knights, Citizens and Burgesses: good regard is to be had
that the Laws and customs of the Realm be heerin kept and observed, for none
ought to be chosen: unless he be resiant and dwelling with in the Sheer, City
or Town, for which he is chosen. And he ought to be a grave, wise, learned,
skilful, and of great experience in causes of policies, and of such audacitie
as both can and will boldly utter and speak his mind according to duty,
and as occation shall serve, for no man ought to be silent or dum in that
house, but according to his talent he must and ought to speak in the
furtheraunce of the King and commonwealth.

And the Knights also ought to be skilful in martial affairs, and therefore
the words of the writs are that such should be chosen for Knights as be Cincti
gladio, not because they shall come into the Parliament house in armoure, or
with their Swoordes: but because they should be such as have good experience,
and knowledge in feats of War, and of martial affairs, whereby they may in
such caces give the King and Realm good advise and council, likewise they
ought to be Lay men and of good fame, honesty, and credit, being not vtlawed,
excommunicated, or perjured, or otherwise infamose, for such persons: ought not
to have place or to be admitted into the Parliament house.

The degrees of the Parliament.
IN times past there were six degrees or estates of the Parliament, which every
of them had their several officers and ministers of attendaunce, but now the
same are reduced into four degrees. The first is the King, who in his
personage is a full and whole degree of him self, and without whom nothing can
be done.

The second degree is of the Lords of the Clergy and of the Temporaltie, and
are all called by the names of Barons.

The third is of knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, and these be called by the
names of the communaltie.

The fourth: is of the Clergy which are called by the name of conudcacion, and
these persons have no voice in the Parliament, nether can they do any thing
other the^ to entreat in causes of Religion, which from them is to be commended
to other estates.

Of the places and houses of the Parliament.
AS it lies in the King to assign and appoint the time when the Parliament
shall begin, so that he give at the least forty days summons: so likewise he
may name and appoint the place where it shall be kept, but wheresoever it be
kept, the old usage and manner was that all the whole degrees of the parliament,
sat together in one house, and every man that had there to speak: did openly
before the king and his whole Parliament, but heerof did grow many
inconveniences, and therefore to avoid the great confusions which are in such
great assemblies: as also to cut of th'occasions of displeasures which
eftsoons did happen, when a mean man speaking his conscience freely, either
could not be heard, or fell into the displeasure of his betters, and for sundry
other great greefs, did divide this one house into three houses, that is to
wit, the higher house, the lower house and the convocation house.

In the first: sits the King, and his Lords spiritual and Temporal called
by the name of Barons, and this house is called the higher house.

The second is: where the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses do sit, and they be
called by the name of Commons, and this house is called the lower house.

The third is: where the prelates and Proctors of the Clergy sit being called
by the name of the Clergy, and this house is called the convocation house, of
every of these houses: their orders and officers, we will breefly subuect and
declare perticulerly in order as follows.

Of the higher house.
THe higher house (as is said) is where the King and his Barons do sit in
Parliament, where the King sits highest, and the Lords and Barons beneath him
each man in his degree, the order is this. The house is much more in length
then in breadth, and the higher end thereof in the middle is the Kings seat or
Throne hanged richly with cloth of estate, and there the king sits all ways
alone. On his right hand: there is a long bench next to the wall of the house
which reaches not so far up as the Kings seat, and upon this sit the
Archbishops and Bishops every one in his degree. On his left hand: there are
two like be^ches, upon the inner: sit the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and
Vicounts. On the other which is the hindermoste and next to the wall: sit all
the Barons every man in his degree. In the middle of the house between the
Archbishops seat and the Dukes seat: sits the Speaker, who commonly is the
Lord Chaunceller, or keeper of the great Seal of England, or the L. cheef
Justice of England as pleases the King, who does appoint him, and he has
before him: his two Clarks sitting at a Table before them upon which they do
write and lay their Books. In the middle rowme beneath them: sit the cheef
Justices and Judges of the Realm, the Barons of ye Eschequer, the Queens
Sergeants and all such as be of the Kings learned Council, either in the common
Laws of the Realm: or of the Ecclesiastical laws, and all these sit upon
great Wool sacks, covered with red cloth.

At the lower end of all these feats is a bar or a Rail, between which and the
lower end of the house: is a void rowme serving for the lower house, and for
all Suitors, that shall have cause and occasion to repair to the King or to the
Lords. This house as it is distinct from the others: so there be distinct
Officers to the same belonging and appertaining, which all be assigned and
appointed by the King, and all have allowances for their charges at the Kings
hands, of which Officers what they are, what is every of their offices, and
what allowances they have: shall be written in order hereafter.

Of the Officers of the higher house and first of the Speaker, and of his
office.
THe cheifest Officer of the higher house: is the Speaker, who is appointed by
the King, and commonly he is the Lord Chaunceller or keeper of the great Seal,
or Lord cheef Justice of England, his office consists in diverse points.

First: he must on the first day of the Parliament, make his oration in the
higher house, before the king, his Lords and commons, and then and there
declare the causes why the King has summoned that parliament, exhorting and
aduising every man to do his office and duty, in such sort as may be to the
glory of God, honor of the King, and benefit of the commonwealth.

Also he must make one other oration, but in way of answer to the Speakers
Oration, when he is presented to the King.

Likewise he must make the like, on the last day of the Parliament, and you
shall understand that upon these three days: he stands on the right hand of
the King near to his seat, at a bar there appointed for him, but at all other
times: he sits in the middle of the house as is before said.

When he has ended his oration upon the first day: he must give order unto the
lower house in the Kings behalf, willing them to repair unto their house, and
there (according to their ancient order and customs) make choice of their
Speaker,

All Bills presented unto the higher house: he must receive, which he has
forthwith to deliver to the Clerks to be safely kept.

All Bills he must cause to be red twice before they be ingroced, and being
red three times: he must put the same to question.

If any Bil put to question do pass with their consent: then the same must be
sent to the lower house, unless it came first from thence, and in that case:
it must be kept until the end of the Parliament.

If any Bil be denied, impugned, and clear overthrown: the (...)more to be
thencefoorth received.

If (...) be put to question, and it be doutful whether side is the greater and
gives most voices: then he must cause the house to be divided, and then judge
of the Bil according to the greater number.

If any Bill be imperfect or requires to be amended: he must choose a certain
number of that house, as he shall think good, and to them commit that Bil to be
reformed and amended.

If any Bil or message be tobe sent to ye lower house: it is his office to make
choice of two of the Kings learned council there being to be the messengers
thereof.

If any Bil or message be sent from the lower house: he must come from his
place to the bar and there receive the same, and being returned to his place
and every Stranger or messenger departed: he must disclose the same to the
Lords.

Item if any disorder be committed or done in the house by any Lord or other
person: he ought with the advice of the Lords to reform the same, but if it be
among the Lords, and they will not be reformed: then he must forth with
advertise the King.

Item he ought at the beginning of the Parliament: to call by name all the Lords
of the Parliament, and likewise at other times as he sees occasion, whose
defaults ought to be recorded, and they to pay their fines unless they be
dispensed with all by special license from the King, or have some just and
reasonable cause of absence.

Item he must see and cause the Clarks to make true entries and true records
of all things done there, and to see that the Clarks do give and deliver the
copyes of all such Bills there red to such as demand for the same.

Item he shall keep the secrets and cause and command every man of each degree
in that house to do the like.

Also he ought not to go any where, but the gentleman Sergeant ought to attend
upon him, going before him with his Mace, unless he be Lord Chaunceller for
then he has a Sergeant of his own.

His alowance that he has is at the Kings charges.

Also for every private Bil that passes and is enacted: his has x. pound for
his part.

Of the Chaunceller of the higher house.
THe Chaunceller is the principal Clark of the higher house, and his charge is
safely to keep the records of the Parliament and the Arts which be past.

All such Statutes as be enacted: he must send to the Kings several Courts
of records to be enrolled, as namely the Chauncery, the kings Bench, the
common place, and the Eschequer.

All such Acts as are to be imprinted: he must send to the Printer.

All such private Acts as are not imprinted, if any man will have the same
exemplified: he must transmit the same to the Lord Chaunceller to be engrossed
and sealed, and for the same, he to take the fees appointed and accustomed.

He has for his alowance an ordinary fee for term of life of the King.

Of the Clarks of the Parliament.
THere be two Clarks, the one named the Clark of the Parliament: and the other
named the Clark of the Crown. The Clark of the Parliament his office is to sit
before the Lord Speaker, and to read such Bills presented as he shall be
commanded.

He must keep true records and true entries of all things there done and to be
entered.

If any require a copy of any bil there: he ought to give the same receiving
the ordinary fees.

If any Bil after his ordinary readinges, be to be engrossed he must do it.

The council of the house he may not disclose.

At the end of the Parliament: he must deliver up unto the Chaunceller, all the
Acts and records of that house, saving he may keep a transumpt and a copy
thereof to him self.

He has his alowance of the King.

Also for every private Bil which is enacted: he has three pound.

Also for every Bil whereof he gives a copy: he has for every ten lines a
penny according to the custom,

THe Clark of the Crown: his office is to supply the place and the rowme of the
Clark of the Parliament in his absence, and has in all things the like charges
and profits, as the Clark ought to have.

He must give his attendaunce to the higher house from time to time and do
what shall be enjoined him.

All such Acts as be not imprinted, if any man will have them exemplified
under the broad Seal: he must exemplify them, and have for the same his
ordinary fees.

These two Clarks at the end of the Parliament: ought to be present in the
house, and within the lower bar at a board before them, their faces toward the
King, and there the one must read the bills which are past both houses: and
the other must read the concent or disagreement of the King.

Of the Sergeants or porters of the higher house.
THere is but one Sergeant which has the charge of keeping of the doors, for
though there be diverse doors: yet the keepers thereof are at his assignement.

He ought to see the house be cleene and kept sweet.

He ought not to suffer any manner of person to be within she house, so long as
the Lords be there sitting, other then such as be of the learned council, and
of that house, and except also such as come in message from the lower house
with Bills or otherwise, and except also such as be sent for, and be admitted
to have any thing there to do.

Also he must attend and go always with his Mace before the Speaker, unless
he be Lord Chaunceller, or keeper of the great Seal, for then he has a
Sergeant of his own.

He ought to keep safely such prisoners as be commanded to his ward, and to
fetch or se^d for such as he shall be commanded to fetch.

This Porter or Sergeant has besides his ordinary fee: a standing allowance
for every day of the Parliament.

Also he has for every private Bil which is enacted: xl. s.

Also he has for every prisoner committed to his ward: a certain alowance for
his fees.

Also he has of every Baron or Lord of that house, a certain reward.

Of the lower house.
THe lower house (as is said) is a place distinct from the others, it is more
of length then of breadth, it is made like a Theater, having four rows of
seats one abooue an other round about the same. At the higher end in the middle
of ye lower row: is a seat made for ye Speaker, in which he always sits,
before it: is a table board, at which sits the Clark of the house and there
upon lays his Books, and writes his records. Upon the lower row on both
sides the Speaker: sit such personages as be of the kings privy council, or of
his cheef Officers, but as for any other: none claims nor can claim any
place, but sits as he comes, saving that on the right hand of the Speaker,
next beneath the said Councelles: the Londoners and the Citizens of York do
sit, and so in order should sit all the Citizens accordingly. Without this
house: is one other in which the under Clerks do sit, as also such as be
Suitors and attenda^t to that house, and when so ever the house is divided upon
any Bil: then the rowme is voided, and the one part of the house comes down
into this to be numbered.

The office of the Speaker of the lower house.
THe cheef or principal Officer of this house: is the Speaker, and is chosen
by the whole house or the more part of them, he himself being one of the same
number, and a man for gravity, wisdom, experience, and learning: chosen to
supplye that Office during the time of the Parliament, and is to be presented to
the King the third day following.

His Office is to direct and guide that house in good order, and to see the
ordinances, vsages, and customs of the same to be firmly kept and observed.

When he is presented unto the King sitting in his estate royal in the
Parliament house, for the purpose: he must then and there make his oration in
commendation of the Laws and of the Parliament, which done: then he has in
the name of the house of the commons: to make to the King three requests.

First: that it may please his majesty to grant that the commons assembled in
the Parliament may have and enjoy the ancient privileges, customs and
liberties as in times past have appertayned and been used in that house.

Then that every one of ye house may have liberty of speech, and freely to
utter, speak and declare his mind and oppinion to any Bil or question to be
proponed.

Also that every Knight, Citizen and Burgess, and their servants, may have
free coming and going to and from the said Parliament, as also during the time
of Parliament, and that they, nor any of their Servants nor retinewe: to be
arested, molested, sued, imprisoned, or troubled by any person or persons.

And lastly, that if he or any other of that company, being sent or come to
him of any message, and do mistake him self in doing thereof: that his
Majesty will not take the advantage thereof but graciously pardon the same.

He must have good regard and see that the Clark do enter and make true
records, and safely to keep the same, and all such Bills as be delivered into
that house.

He must on the first and third day, and whenever he else will, call the house
by name, and record their defaults.

All bills to be brought and to be presented into that house: he must receive
and deliver to the Clark.

He ought to cause and command the Clark to read the Bills brought in, plainly
and sensibly, which done: he must breefly resite and repete the effect and
meaning thereof.

Of the Bills brought in he has choice, which and when they shall be red:
unless order by the whole house be taken in that behalf.

Every Bil must have three readings, and after the second reading: he must
cause the Clark to ingrose the same, unless the samr be rejected and dashed.

If any Bil or message be sent from the Lords, he ought to cause the messengers
to bring the same unto him, and he to receive the same openly, and they being
departed and gone: he ought to disclose and open the same to the house.

If when a Bil is red, diverse do rise at one instant to speak to the same, and
it cannot be discerned who rose first: then shall he appoint who shall speak,
nevertheless every one shall have his course to speak if he list.

If any speak to a Bil and be out of the matter: he shall put him in
remembrance and will him to come to the matter.

If any Bil be red three times, and every man have spoken his mind: then shall
he ask the house whether the Bil shall pass or not, saying thus, as many as
will have this Bil pass in manner and form as has been red: say yea, then the
affirmative part say yea, as many as will not have this Bil pass in manner and
form as have been red: say no. If upon this question the whole house or the
more part, do affirm and allow the Bil: then the same is to be sent to the
higher house to the Lords. But if the whole house or the more part do deny
the Bil: then the same is dashed out and to be rejected, but if it be doutful
upon giving of voices, whether side is the greater: the^ must a division be
made of the house, and the affirmative part must arise, and depart into the
utter rowme, which (by the Sergeant) is voided before hand of all persons that
were there, and then the Speaker must assign two or four to number them first
which sit within, and then the other which be without, as they do come in, one
by one, and as upon the trial the Bil shall be allowed or disalowed by the
greater uumber: so to be accepted as is before said.

If upon this trial the number of either side be like: then the Speaker shall
give his voice and that only in this point, for other wise he has no voice.

Also if any of the house do misbehaue him self, and break the order of the
house: he has to reform, correct, and punish him, but yet with the advice of
the house.

If any foreign person do enter into that house, the assembly thereof being
sitting, or do by arresting any one person thereof, or by any other means
break the liberties and priueledges of that house: he ought to see him to be be
punished.

Also during the time of the Parliament: he ought to sequester him self, from
dealing or intermedling in any public or private affairs, and dedicate and
be^d him self wholly to serve his office and function.

Also he ought not to resort to any noble man, counceller or other person to
deal in any of the Parliament matters: but must and ought to have with him a
compitent number of some of that house, who may be witnesses of his doings.

Also during the time of Parliament: he ought to have the Sergeant of Arms with
his mace to go before him.

Also he has the liberty to send any offender, either to Sergeants ward, or
to the Tower, or to any other prison at his choice, according to the quality
and quantity of the offense.

He has allowance for his diet, one hundred pounds of the King for every
Sessions of Parliament.

Also he has for every private Bil passed both houses and enacted: five
pounds.

At the end, and on the last day of the Parliament: he makes his oration before
the King, in most humble manner declaring the dutiful service, and obedience of
the Commons then assembled to his Majesty: as also most humblye praying his
pardon if any thing have been done amiss.

Of the Clark of the lower house.
THere is only one Clark belonging to this house, his office is to sit next
before the Speaker, at a Table upon which he writes and lays his books.

He must make true entry of the records and Bills of the house, as also of
all the orders thereof.

The Bills appointed unto him by the Speaker to be red: he must read openly,
plainly and sensibly.

The Bills which are to be engrossed, he must do it.

If any of the house ask the sight of any Bil there, or of the book of the
orders of the house: he has to deliver the same unto him.

If any desire to have the copy of any Bil: he ought to give it him, receiving
for his pains after ten lines a penny.

He may not be absent at any time of sitting, without special license.

He ought to have for every private Bil passed and enacted: forty shillings.

He has allowed unto him for his charges (of the King) for every Sessions: ten
pound.

Of the Sergeant or porter of the lower house.
THe Sergeant of this house is commonly one of the Kings Sergeants at Arms,
and is appointed to this office by the King. His office is to keep the doors
of the house, and for the same: he has others under him, for he him self
keeps the door of the inner house, where the commons sit, and sees the same
to be clean.

Also he may not suffer any to enter into this house during the time of the
sitting there, unless he be one of the house, or be sent from the King or the
Lords, or otherwise licenced to come in.

If any such person do come: he ought to bring him in, going before him with
his Mace upon his shoulder.

If any be committed to his ward: he ought to take charge of him, and to keep
him in safety until he be required for him.

If he be sent for any person or to go in any message: he must leave a
substitute behind him, to do his Office in his absence.

He must always attend the Speaker, and go before him, carrying his mare upon
his shoulder.

His allowance (during the time of the Parliament) is xij. d. the day of the
Kings charges.

Also he has of every Knight and Citizen: ij. shillings and vj. pence, and of
every Burgess, ij. shillings.

If any be commanded to his ward: he has of every such Prisoner, by the
day.vj. shillings and.viij. pence.

If any private Bil do pass and be enacted: he has for every such Bil.xx.
shillings.

Of the Conuocacion house.
THe convocation house, is the assembly of the whole Clergy at and in some
peculier place appointed for the purpose.

But as the Barons and Lords of the Parliament have their house several and
distinct from the Commons: even so the Archibishops and Bishops do sequester
them selves and have a house several from the residue of the Clergy. And this
their house is called the higher Convocation house, the other being named the
lower Convocation house. Both these houses have their several Officers,
orders and vsages, and each Officer has his peculier charge and function, as
also certain allowances, even as is used in the Parliament houses of the Lords
and commons.

The Archbishops and Bishops do sit all at a Table and do discourse all such
causes and matters as are brought in question before the^, either of their own
motions: or from the higher Court of Parliament, or from the lower house of
Convocation, or from any private person. Every Archbishop and Bishop sits
and takes place according to his estate and degree, which degrees are known
by such degrees and offices in the Church: as to every of them is assigned, for
one has the personage of a Priest, an other of a Deacon, this is a Subdeaco^,
he is a Sex, ten and so forth, as such officers were wunt to be in ye Church.

The Bishops do not sit at the fore noon, but only at the after noon, because
they being Barons of the higher house of parliament: do resort and assemble
them selves there at the forenoones with the Temporal Lords.

The Conuocacion house of the rest of the Clergy: do observe in a manner the
like orders as the lower house of the commons do use, for being assembled
together on the first day with the Bishops: are by them willed to make choice
of a Speaker for them, whom they call the Proloquutor, when they have chosen
him: they do present him unto the Bishops, and he thus presented: makes his
oration, and does all things as the Speaker of the lower house for the Commons
does, as well for the ordering of the Clergy and of the house, for his order
in sitting, the order in speaking, the order of recording the things done among
them, and all other such like things.

And this is to be understood, that the whole Clergy can deal and entreat
but only of matters of Religion, and orders of the Church, which their
doings and conclusions cannot bind the whole Realm: unless they be
confirmed by Act of Parliament, but yet sufficient to bind the whole Clergy to
the keeping thereof, so that the King (who is the supreme governor of both
estates) do consent and confirm the same. And forasmuch as by knowing the
orders of the Parliament house: you may also know the orders of both the
Convocation houses, which are like and correspondent to y^ others. These shall
suffice for this matter.

Of extraordinary persons which ought to be summoned to the Parliament.
BEsides the personages of the former degrees which ought to be summoned to the
parliament: the King also must warn and summon all his councellers both of
the one Law and of the other and those have their places only in the higher
house, namely the two cheef Justices and their associates, of the Kings bench,
and the common places, the Barons of the Eschequer, the Sergeants, the
Attorney, the Soliciter, the Master of the Rolls, and his fellows of the
Chauncerye.

The offices of these personages are to give council to the King and Parliament
in every doutful cause according to the Laws.

Also if any Bil be conceived and made disorderly: they ought to amend and
reform the same, upon order and commaundemet to them given.

Also they must attend to come and go at the commandment of the King and
Parliament.

Also they may not speak nor give advise: but when they be asked and put to
question.

Also they have no voice in Parliament: because they are commonly councellers to
the same.

They are all retained at the Kings charges.

Likewise all officers of the Parliament are to be summoned, as namely the
Chaunceller of the Parliament, the Clarks, the Sergeants, the Porters and such
others, who likewise are retained at the Kings costs. Of their offices and
charges, it is already perticulerly declared.

Of the days and hours to sit in Parliament.
ALl days of the week are appointed saving and excepted the Sundays and all
principal feasts, as namely the feasts of All hallown day, Christmas, Easter,
Whitsontide, and Saint John ye Baptistes day, and also such other days as the
Parliament by concent shall appoint and assign.

The beginning is at eight of the clock in the morning, and does continue
until.xi. of the clock.

They do not sit at after noones, for those times are reserved for Committies
and the Convocation house.

In the morning: they begin with the Common prayer, and Letanye which are
openly red in the house.

Of the King, his office and authority.
Having declared of all the estates, degrees, and personages of the Parliament:
it rests now to speak also of the King and of his office, who is all in all,
the beginning and the ending and upon whom rests and depends the effect
and substance of the whole Parliament, for without him and his authority:
nothing can be done, and with it: all things take effect, nevertheless when he
calls and assembleth his Parliament: there are sundry orders which of him
are to be observed, and which he ought to see to be kept and executed, or else
the Parliament surcesseth to be a Parliament and takes not his effect, of which
orders: these be the cheef which do ensue.

First: the King ought to send out his summons to all the estates of his
Realm, of a Parliament assigning and appointing the time, day and piace.

Also his summons must be at the least forty dyaes before the beginning of his
Parliament.

Also he must appoint and provide all such officers as ought to attend the
Parliament, who must be found at his charges.

Also the King ought not to make any choice, or cause any choice to be made of
any Knight, Citizens, Burgesses, Proctors of the Clergy, Speaker of the common
house, or Proloquutor of the Convocation house: but they must be elected and
chosen by the laws, orders and customs of the Realm, as they were wunt and
ought to be, and the Kings good advise yet not to be contemned.

Also the king ought to grant, permit, and allow to all and every of the
estates and to every particular man, lawfully elected and come to the Parliament
all and every the ancient freedoms, privileges, immunitie, and customs
during the Parliament: as also during the times and days coming and going to
and from the Parliament, but yet the same humbly to be requested of his highness
by the Speaker in his oration at the beginning of the Parliament.

Also the King in person ought to be present in the Parliament three days at
the least during the time of the Parliament, that is to say, the first day when
the whole estates according to the summons make their appearance, which is
called the first day of the Parliament. On the second day when the Speaker of
the common house is presented, which is counted the beginning of the Parliament.
And the third day which is the last day when the Parliament is proroged or
dissolved, for upon these days: he must be present, unless in case of
sickness, or absence out of the Realm, for in these caces: the King may summon
his Parliament by commission, and the same is of as good effect, as if he were
present in person, and as for any other days: he is at his choice and liberty
to come, or not to come to the Parliament.

Also the King ought to propone unto the Parliament house in writing all such
things and matters of charge, as for which he calls the said Parliament, and
accordingly as the same shall then by the consent of all estates be advised,
concluded and agreed, so the King either has to allow or disalowe the same,
for he can (of him self) neither add nor deminish any Bil, but accept the same
as it is presented unto him from the estates of the Parliament, or else
altogether reject it.

Also the King as he does prefixe and assign the day, and time when the
Parliament shall begin: so also he must assign and appoint the time when the
same shall be proroged or dissolved, which ought not to be as long as any
matters of charge, weight or importance be in question, and the same not
decided nor determined.

Of the dignity, power and authority of the Parliament and of the orders of
the same.
THe Parliament is the hiest, cheifest, and greatest Court that is or can be
within the Realm for it consists of the whole Realm, which is divided into
three estates, that is to wit, the King, the Nobles, and the Commons, every of
which estates are subject to all such orders as are concluded and established
in Parliament.

These three estates may jointly and with one consent or agreement: establish
and enact any Laws, orders, and Statutes for the commonwealth, but being
divided, and one swaruing from the other: they can do no thing, for the King
though he be the head, yet alone: cannot make any Law, nor yet ye king and his
Lords only, nor yet the King and his Commons alone, neither yet can the Lords
and the Commons, without the King do anything of auail. And yet nevertheless
if the King in due order have summoned all his Lords and Barons, and they will
not come, or if they come they will not yet appeer, or if they come and appeer,
yet will not do or yield to any thing: then the King with the concent of his
Commons (who are represented by the Knights Citizens and Burgesses) may ordain
and establish any Act or Law, which are as good, sufficent and effectual: as if
the Lords had given their consents.

But of the contrary, if the Commons be summoned, and will not come, or coming
will not appeer, or appeering will not consent to do any thing, aledging some
just weighty and great cause. The King (in these caces) cannot with his Lords
devise, make, or establish any Law, the reasons are these, when Parlements were
first begone and ordained: there were no Prelates or Barons of the Parliament, and
the Temporal Lords were very few or none, and then the King and his Commons
did make a full Parliament, which authority was hitherto never abridged, again
every Baron in Parliament does represent but his own person, and speaks in
the behalf of him self alone.

But in the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses: are represe^ted the Commons of
the whole Realm, and every of these gives not consent only for himself: but
for all those also for whom he is sent. And the King with the consent of his
Commons: had ever a sufficient and full authority to make, ordain, and
establish good and wholesome Laws for the common wealth of his Realm, wherefore
the Lords being lawfully summoned and yet refusing to come, sit or consent in
Parliament: cannot by their folly abridge the King and the Commons of their
lawful proceeding in Parliament.

The Lords and Commons (in times past) did sit all in one house, but for the
aduoiding of confusion: they be now divided into two several houses, and yet
nevertheless they are of like and equal authority, every person of either of
ye said houses being named, reputed, and counted a peer of the Realm, for the
time of the Parliament, yt is to say, equal, for Par, is equal. And therefore
the oppinion, censure and judgment of a mean Burgess: is of as great auail:
as is the best Lords, no regard being had to the party who speaks: but the
matter that is spoken.

They be also called Peers as it were Fathers for Pier, is a Father, by which
is meant that all such as be of the Parliament: should be ancient, grave, wise,
learned and expert men of the land, for such were the Senators of Room, and
called Patres conscripti for the wisdom and care that was in them in governing
of ye commonwealth. They are also called Councellers, because they are
assembled and called to the Parliament, for their advise and good council in
making and devising of such good orders and Laws as may be for the commonwealth.

They, therefore which make choice of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, ought to
be well advised that they do elect and choose such as being to be of that
assemblye, and thereby equal with the great estates: should be grave, ancient,
wise, learned, expert and careful men for their commonwelth, and who (as
faithful and trusty councellers) should do that which should turn and be for
the best commodity of the commonwealth, otherwise they do great injury to
their Prince and common weal.

Also every person of the Parliament during the times of the Parliament, and at
his coming and going from the same: is free from all troubles, arrests and
molestations, no action or suit taking effect which during that time is begun,
entered, or commenced against him, in what Court so ever the same be, except in
causes of Treason, Murder and Felony, and except also executions in Law,
awarded and granted before the beginning of the Parliament.

Also every person having voices in Parliament: has free liberty of speech to
speak his mind, oppinion and judgment to any matter proponed, or of him self
to propone any matter for the commodity of the Prince and of the commonwealth,
but having once spoken to any Bil: he may speak no more for that time.

Also every person once elected and chosen a knight, Citizen or Burgess and
returned: cannot be dismissed out of that house, but being admitted: shall
have his place and voice there, if he be a Lay man. But if by error a man of
the Clergy be chosen: then he ought and shall be dismissed, also if he be
excomunicated, outlawed or infamose.

Also every one of these houses ought to be incorrupt no briber nor taker of
any rewards, gifts, or money, either for devising of any bil or for speaking of
his mind: but to do all things uprightly, and in such sort, as best for the
King and commonwealth.

Also every one ought to be of a quiet, honest, and gentle, behavior, none
taunting, checking or misusing an other in any unseemly words or deds, but all
affections set a part to do and indeuer in wisdom, sobriety and knowledge,
that which that place requires.

Also if any one do offend or misbehaue himself: he is to be corrected and
punished by the advice and order of the residue of the house.

Also all the Prisons, wards, gailes within the Realm and the keepers of the
same: are at the commandment of the Parliament for the custody and safe
keeping or punishment of all and every such Prisoners as shall be sent to any of
them by the said Palrement houses or any of them, how beit most commonly the
Tower of London is the prison which is most used.

Also if any one of the Parliament house be served, sued, arrested or attached
by any writ, attachment or minister of the Kings bench, Common place,
Chauncery, or what Court soever within this Realm: the party so troubled and
making complaint thereof to the Parliament house: then forth with a Sergeant at
Arms, is sent to the said Court, not only aduertising, that the party so
molested is one of the Parliament house: but also inhibiting and commanding the
Officers of the said Court to call in the said process, and not to deal any
further against the said party, for the Parliament being the hiest court, all
other Courts yield and give place to the same.

Also as every one of the Parliament house is free for his own person, for all
manner of suits to be commenced against him: so are also his Servants free, and
not to be troubled nor molested, but being troubled: have the like remedy as
the Master has or may have.

Also no manner of person being not one of the Parliament house: ought to enter
or come within the house, as long as the sitting is there: upon pain of
imprisonment or such other punishment; as by the house shall be ordered and
adjudged.

Also every person of the Parliament ought to keep secret and not to disclose
the secrets and things spoken and done in the Parliament house, to any manner of
person unless he be one of the same house: upon pain to be sequestered out of
the house, or otherwise punished, as by the order of the house shall be appointed.

Also none of the Parliament house ought to depart from the Parliament: without
special leave obtained of the Speaker of the house, and the same his license
be also recorded.

Also no person being not of the Parliament house: ought to come into the same,
during the time of the sitting, so every one coming into the same: owes a
duty and a reverence to be given when he enters and comes in.

If a Baron or a Lord come and enter into ye higher house: he ought to do his
obeysaunce before the cloth of estate, and so to take his place.

Also when he speaks: he must stand bare headed, and speak his mind
plainly, sensibly, and in decent order.

If any come in message or be sent for to the higher house: they must stay at
the inner door until they be called in, and then being entered: must first make
their obeysau^ce, which done: to go to the lower end of the house and their to
stay until they be called, and being called: they must first make one low
courtesy and obeisau^ce, and gooing forwards must in the middle way make one
other low courtesy, and then being come forth to the Bar: must make the
third courtesy, the like must be done at the departure.

Also when any Knight, Citizen, or Burgess does enter and come into the lower
house, he must make his dutiful and humble obeysaunce at his entry in: and then
take his place. And you shall understand that as every such person ought to be
grave, wise and expert: so ought he to show him self in his Apparail, for in
times past: none of the councellers of ye Parliament came otherwise then in his
gown, and not armed nor girded with weapon, for the Parliament house is a place
for wise, grave and good men, to consult, debate, and advise how to make Laws,
and orders for the commonwealth, and not to be armed as men ready to fight, or
to try matters by the Sword: and albe it the writ for the election of the
Knights, have express words to choose such for Knights as be girded with the
Sword, yet it is not meant thereby that they should come and sit armed: but be
such as be skilful in feats of Arms, and besides their good aduises: can well
serve in martial affairs. And thus the Romain Senators used, who being men
of great knowledge and experience as well in martial affairs, as in politic
causes, sat allwaies in the Senate house, and places of council in their Gowns
and long Robes. The like also was always and has been the order in the
Parlements of this Realm, as long as the ancient Laws, the old customs,
and good orders thereof were kept and observed.

Also if any other person or persons either in message or being sent for, do
come: he ought to be brought in by the Sergeant and at the first entering: must
(following the Sergeant) make one low obeysaunce, and being past in the middle
way: must make one other, and when he is come before the Speaker: he must make
the third, and then do his message, the like order he must keep in his return.
But if he do come alone or with his learned council, to plead any matter, or
to answer to any objection: he shall enter and go no farther then to the Bar
within the door, and there to do his three obeysaunces.

Also when any Bil is committed, the Committes have not authority to conclude:
but only to order, reform, examine, and amend the thing committed unto them,
and of their doings they must give report to the house again, by whom the
Bill is to be considered.

Also every Bil which is brought into the house: must be red three several
times, and upon three several days.

Also every Bil which upon any reading is committed and returned again: ought
to have his three readings unless the Committes have not altered the bil in any
substance or form, but only in certain words.

Also when any Bil upon any reading is altogether by one concent rejected, or
by voices after ye third reading ouerthrown: it ought not to be brought any
more to be red during ye Sessions of Parliament.

Also if any man do speak unto a Bill and be out of his matter: he ought to be
put in remembrance of the matter by the Speaker only and by none other, and
be willed to come to the matter.

Also whenever any person does speak to any Bill: he ought to stand up, and
to be bare headed, and then with all reverence, grauitte, and seemly speech, to
declare his mind. But when so ever any Bil shall be tried either for allowances,
or to be rejected: then every one ought to sit, because he is then as a Judge.

Also every Knight, Citizen, and Burgess before he do enter into the
Parliament and take his place there: ought to be sworn and to take his oath,
acknowledging the King to be the supreme and only governor of all the estates
within his Realm as also to renounce all foreign Potentates.

The order of the beginning and ending of the Parliament.
ON the first day of the summons for the Parliament, the King in proper person
(unless he be sick or absent out of the Realm) being apparailled in his
royal and Parliament Robes: ought to be conducted and brought by all his Barons
of the Clergy and Laity, and the Commons summoned to the Parliament, unto the
Churrh, where ought a Sermon to be made by some Archbishop, Bishop or some
other famous learned man. The Sermon ended: he must in like order be brought
to the higher house of Parliament, and there to take his seat under the cloth of
estate, likewise every Lord and Baron (in his degree) ought to take his place.

This done: the Lord Chaunceller or he whom the King appoints to be the
speaker of that house, makes his oration to the whole assembly, declaring the
causes why and wherefore that Parliament is called and summoned, exhorting and
persuading every man to do his best endeavor in all such matters as shall be in
the said Parliament proponed as shall be most expedient for the glory of God, the
honor of the King, and the commonwealth of the whole Realm. Then he directs
his talk, unto the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, aduertising them that the
Kings pleasure is, that they do repair to their house, and there according to
the old and ancient custom: to choose and elect some one wise, grave, and
learned man among them selves to be Speaker for them, and gives them a day
when they shall present him to the King. And these things thus done: the King
arises, and every man departs. This is accounted for the first day of the
Parliament.

THe second or third day after, when the Speaker is to be presented: the King
with all his Nobles (in like order as before) do assemble again in the higher
house, and then come up all the commons of the lower house, and then and there
do present their Speaker unto the King. The Speaker forthwith makes his
dutiful obeysaunces: begins and makes his oration before the King, and
prosequuteth such matters as occasion serves, and as is before resited in the
office of the Speaker, and this done: every man departs. And this is
accounted for the beginning of the Parliament, for before the Speaker be
presented, and these things orderly done: there can no Bills be put in, nor
matters be entreated of.

LAstly when all matters of weight be discussed, ended and dermined: the King
commands an end to be made.

And that day the King, his Nobles and Commons do again assemble in the higher
house, in their Robes, and in like order as is before recited, where the
Speaker makes his oration, and is answered by the Lord Chaunceller or Speaker
of the higher house. Then all the Bills concluded and past in both houses,
that is to say, in the higher house of the Lords, and in the lower house of the
commons, are there red by the titles, and then the King gives his concent or
descent to every of them as he thinks good. And when the titles of all the
the Bills are red: the Lord Chaunceller, or Lord Speaker by the Kings
commandment, pronounces the Parliament to be proroged or clean dissolved.
And this is called the last day or the end of the Parliament, and every man is
at liberty to depart homewards.

The names of all such personages as ought to appeer and be in the Parliament.
In the higher house.
The King. The Lord Speaker. A Proctor for the kingdom of France. A Proctor
for Scotland. A Proctor for the Duchy of Aquitane. A Proctor for the Duchy of
Guyen. A Proctor for the Duchy of Angewe. The Archbishop of Canterbury The
Archbishop of York. The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Durham. The Bishop of
Winchester. The Bishop of Chichester. The Bishop of Exeter. The Bishop of Elye,
The Bishop of Couentrie. The Bishop of Rochester. The Bishop of Sarisbury. The
Bishop of Wells. The Bishop of Norwich. The Bishop of Lincoln. The Bishop of
Worcester. The Bishop of Herford. The Bishop of Oxford. The Bishop of
Gloucester. The Bishop of Peterborough. The Bishop of Bristowe. The Bishop of
Westchester. The Bishop of Carliel. The Bishop of Saint David. The Bishop of
Saint Ass. The Bishop of Bangor. The Bishop of Landaffe. The Duke of Norfolk.
The Marquis of Northampton The Marquis of Winchester. The Earl of Arundel. The
Earl of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Oxford. The Earl of Darby. The Earl of
Rutland. The Earl of Cumberland. The Earl of Worcester. The Earl of Bathe.
The Earl of Warwick. The Earl of Lecester. The Earl of Susser. The Earl of
Huntington. The Earl of Penbrook. The Earl of Harford. The Earl of
Sowthampton. The Earl of Bedford. The Vicecount Montagew. The Vicecount
Hereford. The Vicecount Bindon. The Lord Sowch. The Lord be la ware. The Lord
Aburgaueny. The Lord Awdeley. The Lord Barkley. The Lord Morley. The Lord
Cobham. The Lord Dakers of the South. the Lord Dakers of Gudeslond. The Lord
Gray. The Lord Scroope. The Lord Latimer. The Lord Sturton. The Lord Clinton.
The Lord Dudley Baron of Dudley. The Lord Lomeley. The Lord Mountioy. The Lord
Conyes. The Lord Mountegle. The Lord Winsor. The Lord Wentworth. The Lord
Sands. The Lord Vaus. The Lord Mordant. The Lord Borough. The Lord Bray. the
Lord Wharton. The Lord Rich. the Lord Crumwel. The Lord Euere. the Lord
Stafford. The Lord Darcy of Menel. the Lord Willoughby. The Lord Paget. The
Lord Darcy of Chiche. the Lord Chandoys. The Lord of Loughborough. the Lord S.
John of Blastowe. The Lord Buckhurst. the Lord Hunsdon. The Lord of Effingham.
the two cheef Justices. The Barons of Th'eschequer. the Kings Attorney. The
Kings Sergeants at Law. the Kings Solicitor. The Kings learned Counsel.
Likewise every such person whom the King endoweth and honoreth with the
degree and estate of a Baron ought to be su^moned to the Parliament and to have
place there among the Barons according to his degree.

And yet nevertheless the Son of a Duke, of a Marquess, or of an Earl,
though he be a Baron (his Father yet living) he shall not have a place in the
Parliament: except he be otherwise honored either by the King or be advanced
by means of some Marriage to the degree of a Baron.

In the lower house.
The County of Bukingham. ij. Knights. The County of Midlesex. ij. Knights.
the County of Bedford ij. Knights. The County of Cornewail. ij. Knights. the
County of Cumberland ij. Knights. The county of Cambridge ij. Knights. the
County of Chester ij. Knights. The county of Darby ij. Knights. the County
of Deuon ij. Knights. The county of Dorset ij. Knights. the County of Essex
ij. knights. The county of York ij. Knights. the County of Gloucester ij.
Knights. The county of Huntington. ij. Knights. the County of Hertford ij.
Knights. The county of Hereford ij. Knights. the County of Kent ij. knights.
The county of Lincoln ij. knights. the County of Lecester ij. knights. The
county of Lancaster ij. knights. the County of Monmouth ij. knights. The
County of Northampton ij. knights. the County of Notingham ij. knights. The
county of Norfolk ij. knights. the County of Northumberland ij. knights. The
county of Oxford ij. knights. the County of Rutland ij. knights. The county
of Berkshere ij. knights. the County of Surrey ij. knights. The county of
Stafford ij. knights. the County of Shropsheer ij. knights. The county of
Sowthampton ij. knights. the County of Suffolk ij. knights. The county of
Somerset ij. knights. The county of Sussex ij. knights. the County of
Westmerland ij. knights. The county of Wiltsheer ij. knights. the County of
Worcester ij. knights. The county of Warwick ij. knights. the County of
Mongomerie j. Knights. The county of Radnor j. Knight. the County of Dinghby
j. Knight. The county of Pembrook j. Knight. the County of Cardigan j.
Knight. The county of Mayoth j. Knight. the County of Carmarthan j. Knight.
The county of Carnaruan j. Knight. the County of Brecknock j. Knight. The
county of Glamorgan j. Knight. the County of Anglesey j. Knight. The county
of Merioneth j. Knight. The City of Earlile ij. Citizens. The City of
Chester. ij. Citizens. the City of Excester ij. Citizens. The City of York.
ij. Citizens the City of Gloucester ij. Citizens. The City of Hereford ij.
Citizens. the City of Canterbury ij. citizens. The City of Rochester ij.
citizens. the City of Lincoln ij. citizens. The City of Westminster ij.
citizens. the City of London ij. Citizens. The City of Norwich ij.
citizens. the City of Oxford. ij. citizens. The City of Winchester ij.
citizens. the City of Bristow. ij. citizens. The City of Bathe. ij.
citizens. the City of Chichester ij. Citizens. The City of Salisbury ij.
Citizens. the City of Worcester ij. Citizens. The City of Couentrie ij.
Citizens.
The Barons of the five Ports.
Hastings. ij. Barons. Winchelsey ij. Barons. Rye. ij. Barons. Rumney. ij.
Barons. Hyeth. ij. Barons. Dover. ij. Barons. Sandwich. ij. Barons.
Burgesses.
Bedford town. ij. Burgesses Buckingham town. ij. burgesses Wickham, ij.
burgesses. Ailisbury, ij, burgesses. New Windsor, ij, burgesses. Reding, ij,
burgesses. Wallingford, ij, burgesses. Abingdon, ij, burgesses. Launceston, ij,
burgesses. Leskerd, ij, burgesses. Lestuthiel, ij, burgesses. Dunheuet, ij,
burgesses. Truro, ij, burgesses. Bobmin, ij, burgesses. Helston. ij, burgesses.
Saltashe, ^ij, burgesses. Camelford, ij, burgesses. Portlowe, ij, burgesses.
Grounpound, ij, burgesses. Perin, ij, burgesses. Tregonye, ij, burgesses.
Tresenna, ij, burgesses. Saint Iyes, ij, burgesses. Saint Germins, ij,
burgesses. Saint Michael, ij, burgesses. Foy, ij, burgesses. Saint Mawes, ij,
burgesses. East Loo, ij, burgesses. Cambridge, ij, burgesses. Derby town, ij,
burgesses. Totries, ij, burgesses. Plimmouth, ij, burgesses. Barstable, ij,
burgesses. Plimpton, ij, burgesses. Tauistock, ij, burgesses. Dartmouth, ij,
burgesses. Poole, ij, burgesses. Dorchester, ij, burgesses. Lime, ij,
burgesses. Melcombe, ij, burgesses. Weymouth, ij, burgesses. Birtport, ij,
burgesses. Shaftisbury, ij, burgesses. Warham, ij, burgesses. Colchester, ij,
burgesses. Maldon, ij, burgesses. Kingston upon Hul, ij, burgesses.
Knaresborough, ij, burgesses. Scatborough, ij, burgesses. Ripton, ij,
burgesses. Haydon, ij, burgesses. Boroughbridge, ij, burgesses. Tuske, ij,
burgesses. Aldeborgh, ij, burgesses. Beuerley, ij, burgesses. Cicester, ij,
burgesses. Huntington, ij, burgesses. Saint Alb^ns, ij, burgesses. Lempster,
ij, burgesses. Maidstone, ij, burgesses. Boston, ij, burgesses. Grimesby, ij,
burgesses. Stampford, ij, burgesses. Grantham, ij, burgesses. Lecester, ij,
burgesses. Lancaster, ij, burgesses. Preston in Aldernes, ij, burg. Liuerpool,
ij, burgesses. Newton, ij, burgesses. Wigan, ij, burgesses. Clithero, ij,
burgesses. Monmouth, ij, burgesses. Northampton, ij, burgesses. Peterborough,
ij, burgesses. Berkley, ij, burgesses. Higham ferry, ij, burgesses. Notingham,
ij, burgesses. East Stratford, ij, burgesses. Lin. ij, burgesses. Yermouth, ij,
burgesses. Thetford, ij, burgesses. Castle, ij, burgesses. New Castle upon
tine. ij, bur. Morepeth. ij, burgesses. Barwick. ij, burgesses. Woodstock, ij,
burgesses. Banbury, ij, burgesses. Sowthwark. ij, burgesses. Blenchingly, ij,
burgesses. Rigat. ij, burgesses. Gatt^n. ij, burgesses. Lichfeeld. ij,
burgesses. Stafford, ii, burgesses. New Castle under Line. ii, bur. Tamworth,
ii, burgesses. Shrewisbury. ii, burgesses. Bridgenorth, ii, burgesses. Ludlow,
ii, burgesses. Great wenlock, ii, burgesses. Sowthampton. ii, burgesses.
Portesmouth. ii. burgesses. Peterfeeld. ii. burgesses. Stockbridge, ii.
burgesses. Christ's Church, ii. burgesses. Ipswich, ii. burgesses. Dunwich, ii.
burgesses. Oteford, ii. burgesses. Aldborough, ii. burgesses. Sudbury, ii.
burgesses. Ey. ii. burgesses. Wells. ii. burgesses. Taunton. ii. burgesses.
Bridge water, ii. burgesses. Minhed, ii, burgesses. Horsham, ii. burgesses.
Midhurst, ii. burgesses. Jews, ii. burgesses. Shereham, ii. burgesses.
Brember, ii. burgesses. Steyning, ii. burgesses. East Greensteed, ii.
burgesses. Arundel, ii. burgesses. Apleby, ii. burgesses. Wilton, ii.
burgesses. Hindon, ii. burgesses. Heytesbury, ii. burgesses. Westbury. ii.
burgesses. Calue, ii. burgesses. Devises, ii. burgesses. Chipenham, ii.
burgesses. Malmesbury, ii. burgesses. Bodwin the great ii, burgesses.
Ludgarsail, ii. burgesses. Old Salisbury, ii. burgesses. W^tton basset, ii,
burgesses. Marleborough, ii. burgesses. Wiche. ii. burgesses. Warwick, ii.
burgesses. Mongomery. i, burgess. Radnor, i, burgess. Dinghby, i, burgess.
Pembrook, i, burgess. Cardigan, i, burgess. Flint, i, burgess. Carmarthan.
i, burgess. Carnaruan, i, burgess. Brecknock, i, burgess. Cardiffe, i,
burgess. Bew moris, i, burgess. Harford west, i, burgess.
As the King (by advancing any man to the honor of a Baron) does enlarge and
augme^t the number of the Lords of the higher house: so does he also increace
the number of the lower house, when he does make and erect any new County, or
incorporate any Borough, or Town, so that in his letters Pattents he does
nominate them by the name of a Burgess.

And therefore when so ever the King does call his high Court of Parliament: the
writs of summons must be sent out for choosing of Knights, in the new Counties,
and Burgesses in the new incorporated Boroughs or Towns, as well as to the other
old and ancient Cities, and Towns, and every of them shall (upon such
summons) be bound to appeer and have the full privileges belonging to a Knight
or a Burgess of the Parliament.

Post mortem vita



THE Description of the City of Excester, COLLECTED AND GAthered by John
Vowel alias Hooker, gentleman and Chamberlain of the same City.

Floret virtus in aeternum



THE DESCRIPTION OF the City of Excester, collected and gathered by John
Vowel alias Hooker, gentleman, and Chamberlain of the same City.
EXcester or Exeter is a famous and ancient City, being the Metropole and
Emporium of the west parts of England, situated in the Province called
Deuonia, which is Deuonsheer. Of the first foundation thereof (by reason of the
sundry inuations of foreign and strange nations, and of their hostilities and
mortal wars, in burning and destroying this City) there remains no
certain memorial, neither among the records of the said City, nor yet in any
other writer. But most certain it is that it was first builded by the Brutes
or Britons, for the names which they gave unto it: Brutus.
are yet at these presents had in remembrance, as well among the Cronographers
of this Realm: as also among the Cornish people, who sometimes were one with
this Province, but are now in a Province of them selves and borderers to this,
being the remanent of the blood of Brutus.

For when Cadwalader King of this land by reason of a great famine and
Pestilence, Cadwalader.
was enforced to forsake the same and flee into little Britain (which now is
under the dicion of the French King) diverse and most part of his people fled
also, some into Wales and some into Cornwall, where ever sithe^ce they and after
them their posterity have remained and continued.

The old Cronographers, Corinnia.
serchers, and writers of antiquities, do find that this City was called
Corinia, and thereof the Monastary of this City was called Ecclesia
Coriniensis: which name if it were first given as it should seem by Corineus,
who after the ariuall of Brutus into this land, was made the first Duke of
these two Provinces of Deuon, and Cornwall, and who the^ after his own name
called it Corinia, but now Corinibia, whereof this City ever has been and is
the Metropolie and Emporium and always parcel, sometimes of ye kingdom, then
of the Duchy, and after wards of the Earldom, and now again the Duchy of
Cornwall, out of all dout it is of no less antiquity then the said names do
importe.

The Britons in their tung call it by sundry and diverse names. The first and
eldest in remembrance in their speech is Cairpenhulgoyte, Cairpenhulgoit.
that is to say, the prosperous cheef Town in the wood, as it does appeer by
Geffery of Monmoth and Ponticus Virimus. It was also called Penhaltcayr, that
is to say, Penhaltcair.
the cheef City or Town upon the hill, as appears in the trauerse between
the Bishop, Dean, and Chapter of this City, and the Mayor and comminaltie of
the same: in a long suit concerning their liberties.

But the names which the Cornish people do at these presents remember and
retain are Pencayr, Pencayr.
Cayrruthe, Cayrriske. Pencayr is to say the cheef City. Cayrruth.
Cayrruthe signifies the red City, Cayrriske.
taking that name of the soil of the ground whereupon it is situated, which is
red. Cayrryske is ye City of Iske being so called, and taking his
denomination of the River which fleeteth by the said City called in British
Iske. And of this name Houedon in his Cronicle makes mention saying thus,

Anno domini. 877. Excercitus danorum, ab warham nocte quadam federe dirupto ad
Exancester diuerterunt quod brittannice dicitur Caerwiske. Ptolomeus the famous
Astronomer, who was about the year of our Lord. 162. (Coel being King of this
land) names the City Isca and the River Isaca. king Coil
And Bale the sercher of antiquities, following the same opinion does also name
the City Isca and the in habitant or dweller therein Iscanus. Bale.
But under correction and with reverence be it said, a man may think that
Ptolomeus being in Alexandria, and so far distant from this Realm was
happily misinformed: or else the Printer mistaken because it is most likely
that the River should be called Isca according to the British speech in those
days when it was called Isca, which name by tra^sposing of two middle letters
does yet remain, being now named Icla or Ecsa. But whatsoever Ptolomeus or
Baleus censures and judgments be heerin: it is most certain, that the names
which the Britons gave were of longest continuance, and this City called by
their dominations by the space of xv. hundred years until the coming of the
Saxons, the Pictes, and Scots into this Realm, which was about the year of
our Lord 450, for they as they prevailed and conquered: did always alter and
change the names of all places and Towns, accounting it a great part of
their glory and renown to give new names of their own device, or of their own
native Contries, for so write ye Cronographers.

Picti, Scoti, Angli, Daci et Normandi, in hac insula rerum potiti, cuncta
immutarunt, pro trophaeis habentes, Locis a se deuictis noua imponere nomina.
Wherefore as of all other Cities and Towns (few excepted) so of this also they
changed and altered the old names and called it Muncketon, Muncketon.
by which name it was so called by the space of three hundredth and od years,
until the time and coming of King Adlestane. For he about the year of our
Lord. 932. Adlestane.
being much grieved with the Rebellion of the Cornish people, because they
refused and denied to acknowledge him for their lawful King: did bend his
power, and conducted his army against them, and (with force when he had
subdewed them) returned to this City, and for a perpetual memory to this
commonwealth, whiles he soiorned him self therein: repaired and new builded the
City and the walls thereof, which before with force and fire were utterly
destroyed. And then altered and changed the name thereof calling it after the
name of the River Esseterra or Exeterra, Exeterra.
that is to say Exeter. For so writes Polidorus. Est Exonia vrbs Deuonie
comitatus loco precelso ad occidentem versus posita abluiturque flumine Exi, a
quo nomen habet.

Others therbe which name it Excestrum, Excestre,
and thinks it to be so called of the River which is named Exestrum, for
this write they Clarissima vrbum est Excestria, que ab amni Excestro, qui
eandem preterfluit, est sic nuncupata.

I find it also in an old written Cronicle that it is named Exancestria or
Exancestre, Exancestre.
which name should seem to be so given, by the Sarons at their abode and being
in this land, for commonly the names which they gave to such Towns, Cities
and Fortes as they either builded or reedified, did end in Cestre as Chestre,
as Glocestre, Lecestre, Ma^chester, winchestre, worcestre, Oscestre,
Colchestre, Cicestre, Ilcestre, Bicestre and this City of Exancestre with
others, for Cair in British, and Cestre in Saxony, is in English a Fort, Town
or Castle.

This City is walled round about, and so is thought was from the begininig.
It is all together four square, but declineth toward a roundnes, and
contains in circuit or compass xvj. hundred whole paces, after five foot to
the pace, which accounting one thousand paces to a Mile: is a mile and half
and some what more.

The situation of it is very plesaunt and amenous, being set upon a little
hill among many hills, the Contrie round about being Mountanose and full of
hills. It is pende^t toward the Sowth and West parts after and in such sort,
that be the Streets never so foul or filthy: yet with a shower of rain they
are cleansed aad made sweet. And albeit commonly hills are dry: yet nature is
so beneficial to this hill that it is full of springes, and by that menes every
part of the City is furnished with wells and Tyepittes, the commodity
whereof has well appeered in sundry times of necessity, but especially in the
late Commotion which was in the year of our Lord. 1549. for though then the
enemy by spoiling of the Pipes, whereby water was conuayed to the fountains of
the City from certain Springs distant not a Mile from the same, did abridge
them of that water: yet most comfortably did they enjoy the wells and
Tyepittes within the walls, which abundantly fleeted with waters to the
satisfying of all the people therein.

There are also within this City certain Fountains called Conduits, unto
which through certain canalis or Pipes of Lead, waters are conveyed from
Springs rising out of certain places and feelds without this City, and these
waters are of most price, the same by reason of the carriage being purified
and made lighter then the waters springing within the City, and by that menes
more fit for the dressing of meats. Of these Fountains one being of great
antiquity, and of late reedifyed, stands in the middle of the City at the
meeting of four principal Streets thereof, and whereof it takes his name,
being called the Conduit at Quarterfoies of Carsoxe, and this serves each
part of the City a like.

At the higher part of this City, is a very old and ancient Castle called
by the name of Rugemont, that is to say the red hill, taking that name of the
red Earth whereupon it stands. The Cite of it is eminent, and above both the
City and country adjoining, for they do all lie as under the lee there of.
It has a goodly prospect toward the Seas, for between that and it is no hill
at all, it is strongly diched round about, and was so builded (as is thought)
by Julius Caesar* or rather by the Romans after him, Caesar.
for they had their recourse to it for their defense and refuge many years.

The same also was sometimes the Palaice of such Kings, as to whom the
Kingdom of west Sex or west Saxons was alloted unto. After that: it was the
habitation of the Earls of Cornwall, and last of all to the Dukes of Exon, and
of Cornwall, for to those estates: the signiory of this City did appertain,
the same being parcel sometimes of the Earldom, but now of the Duchy of
Cornwall It. is now in marvelous ruin and decay, not easily by force to be
gotten, were it reedified and environed.

At the lower end and part of this City, without the walls: fleeteth a
goodly River called in British Iske. Ptholomeus by misinformation calls it
Isaca, but the old writers name it Esse, Exe, Exa or Excestrum, which names be
yet retained.

It has his spring or head in a certain Moer or desert, distant from this
City near about xxiiij. miles called Exemore: it flows into the main Seas,
but by the way is increced with sundry Rivers, Brooks and Lakes, namely:
Creedy, Collome, and others, in it is great plenty of Salmon, Trout, Peal,
dace, Pike, and other fresh water Fish, which are had in the less price for
that the Seas being so near: do furnish the City and the country abundantly
with sundry kinds of Sea Fish most delicate. The main Sea it self is not
distant from the City abooue eight miles out whereof comes an Arm serving
for the Port of ye same, which sometimes as appears by old and ancient
records: did flow up to ye walls of the City, where both Ships were wunt
to be laden and unladen, of all kind of Merchandise at a proper place
appointed for the same, which at this presents keeps his old and ancient
name, being callen the VVatergate.

The decay thereof happened in the year of our Lord. 1312. Courtney
by one Hugh Courtney the third of that name, and Earl of Deuon who being
offended and incenced against this City, his wrathful humor could not be
satisfied unless he might impair the state of that commonwealth, and therefore
seeing and understanding among other commodities, the use of the Haven to be
one of the cheifest: did never quiet him self until he had destroyed the same.
Wherefore in the year of our Lord. 1313. being the fifth year of the reign of
King Edward the second, he enterprised his pretenced devise and mischeef.

For where as the Lady Awmerle Countess of Deuon his Ancestrix, had builded
certain Wears upon the River of Exe, the one within the manor of Exminster,
being in ye west side of the River and the other within her manor of Topsham,
being in the East side of the River: leuing between the said two weres, a
certain aparture or open room of thirtye foot, through which all Botes,
Ships and Vessails without let might have their usual passage and repassage,
toward and from this City. The said Earl to abridge and destroy this
commodity: did leuye and build a new Wear in the said open place, stopping,
filing and quirting the same with trees, timber and Stones, in such sort that
no vessail could pass or repasse.

After him Edward Courtney Earl of Deuon and Nephew to the said Hugh did not
only maintain and continue the fact of his ancester and grandfather, by daily
repairing and defending the same: but also woorking an utter destruction for
any passage for Ships thencefoorth to ye City, under pretense to buyld
certain Milles, did erect and make two other wears, the one Saint James
overthwart the River, and the other at Lamperford, by means whereof, not only
the City sustained the whole loss of their haue^: but the whole Country
adjoining, for which iniuryes upon complaints made, writs and commissions of
inquiry were sent out, and the said Earls for the same by verdict and
presentment, at several times found guilty, but such was his authority and
power: that it auailed nothing.

Nevertheless the said Earl Hugh (the water course unto the City thus
destroyed) builded a place called a Key, for the charge and discharge of all
Wares and Merchandise within that port, at a Town of his own called Topsham,
distant from the City about three miles, from whence ever sithence all wares
and Merchandises have been carried and recaryed to and from the City by Horse,
Cart or Wain, though to the gain of the Earl and his Tenaunts: yet to the
great trouble and hindraunce of this City and Merchaunts thereof.
Nevertheless the port has evermore, and yet does retain his old and ancient
name, being called ye Port of this City of Exon, and always has been and
presently is a tribute paid unto the City for all kinds of wares and
Merchandise discharged within that Port, and called by the name of the petty
and town costome.

And albeit the water course thus destroyed, can hardely be restored to his
old pristinate and natural estate, for that through long continuance the
old course cannot be discerned: yet now at length after many attempts and
great expenses, a water course and passage begun in the year. 1564. is
recovered, and by sluices, Botes and vessailes of xx. tons tight are brought
to the City, and there discharged at the old and ancient place called the
Water gate. Where is builded a fair and a large Key or Wharf, as also an
engine called a Crane fit for the purpose.

Within this City were sometime but few parish Churches, but when that
Innocencius tertius, in the year of our Lord. 1198. had established the
Article of Transubstanciation adding the same to the Simbole, as appears in
the Decretal, titulo de summa trinitate, cano^, firmiter, the^ his next
successor Honorius, Anno. 1218. did not only confirm the same: but also
decreed Reservation, Candlelight and praying for the dead as appears Decret.
titulo de celebratione missarum, canon, sane cum et sane cum creatura, by which
means ye number of Preests did not only increace: but Churches also in all
places began daily to be builded. And therefore in this City in ye year of our
Lord, 1222. being the.vj. year of Henry the third, the parish Churches therein
were limited out and augmented to the number of xix. Churches within the
City and suburbs of the same. And most certain it is, that in times past
they were livings competent and sufficient to maintain an Incumbent, but that
kind of Religion now avoided and the Gospel preched: the liuelihods are so
small as not sufficient to maintain a poor Clark or Scoller, which is the
cause that so many of them dooly vacant without Incumbents.

Besides these parish Churches, Church of Exon.
there was also a Monastery sometime of Monks of Saint Benets order, but
sithence a Cathedral Church being very fair and sumptuously builded, with
free Stones, and the Pillars of gray Marble, standing and situated in the East
part of the City, Ethelvvolphus.
which as some do report that Etheldred the third Son of Echelwolphus
should first found and buyld. Some think that King Edgar did it, truth it is
that both the said Kings builded every of them a house of Religious persons
within this City, Etheldred
but the first was utterly burnt and destroyed by the Danes: and the other in
process of time united to the Monastery, Edgar.
which now is a Cathedral Church, which is most certain and true that King
Athelstane the Son of King Edward the elder did both found and buyld it, as
it does plainly appeer in the history of the said Church where it is written.
Athelstanus subiugatis cornuquallen sibus reuersus est ad ciuitatem que
antiquitus Muncketon vocabatur, nunc autem Exeter, ac ibi sedens Anno. 932. non
tam lacerata eiusdem Ciuitatis maenia reparabat, quin et mansum quoddam dedit
ad fundandum Monasterium pro monachis Deo et Sancto Petro famulantibus. This
King besides his expenses and charges in building of this Church (which at the
first was but small) placed therein Munkes of S. Benettes order, provided
liuelehodes for them, and made unto them a governor and Ruler called by the
name of an Abbote, toward whose liuelihodes he gave Morckshull and Treasurers
Bear, which at these presents do yet remain being annexed to the dignity of
the Tresurership. The Church thus begun: Kings, Princes, and noble men (from
time to time) were gladly contributors to the absoluing and finishing of the
same. For about lxxx. and od years after Adlestene. King Knoght called Cahutus
or Canutus at the sugestion of one of his Dukes named Athelred, Canutus
did confirm and grant to Athelwolde (then Abbot of the said Church) and to
his successors, many and sundry privileges and liberties, under his Letters
Patentes, dated the second year of his reign. Anno domini. 1019.

After him near about xxx. years King Edward the confessor removed the Munkes
unto Westminster, S. Edward,
and made this a Cathedral Church, remoouing the Sea the^ at Crediton to this
City, making Leofricus Bishop thereof, as appears by his letters Patents
dated the viij year of his reign, Leofricus
An. 1050. Howbeit the Munck of Bury and Polidorus and others, do affirm and
write that ye settling of this Bishops seat in this City, was in the xij. year
of Wiliima the Conqueror, for thus they write. Habitum est Londini sub
Lanfra^co Antistitum et sacerdotu^ comitium, quo decretum est, quod aliquot
seeds Episcopales, que in opidulis et pagis ante fuerant, in vrbibus et locis
celeberrimis, collocarentur, quo factum est, vt Bathonia Lincolnia, Sarisburia,
Exonia, Cestria et Cicestria vrbes, huiusmodi, nouis Episcoporu^ domiciliis
sunt nobilitate. But the reverence of these writers reserved, this cannot be so
of this Church, the Charter thereof witnesing the contrary, and declaring how yt
King Edward and Edith his wife did put Bishop Leofricus in possession of this
Sea them selves.

Likewise William ye Conqueror in the third year of his reign. Anno. 1069.
did not only confirm the former Charter, but also at the instance and suit of
William vvareweste then his Chaplain and after Bishop of the same Sea, did
give unto it the segniory of Plimpton, Brampton and S. Stephens, in Exeter,
which the said William being Bishop did distribute, giving Plympton to the
Channo^s there, Brampton was afterward annexed to the Deanery, but Saint
Stephens with a Court Baron to the same, was always reserved to the Bishop and
his successors, whereby they are Barons and so Lords of the Parliament. It was
also enlarged from time to time, with possessions, revenues, buildings, riches
and privileges, by Kings, Princes, Prelates, Bishops, and sundry others, as
hereafter I shall particulerly touch and declare by Gods grace at large in a
particular Book thereof. And this one thing is to be noted, yt albeit there were
near iiij. hundred years distant from the foundation to the absoluing thereof:
yet is so uniformly and decently compact, as though it had been builded at one
instant.

The Bishop is distinct from the Channons, both in house and reuenew, his
liuelihods being no parcel of that which does appertain to the Church and
Channons. It was sometimes of great large revenues, but the more part thereof
prodigally has been exhaunsed by a wastful Bishop.

The Bishop and Cha^nons have very fair houses which are situated about the
Church and Cemitory, and are enclosed every night, by shutting fast of certain
gates, whereby they claim them selves to be exempted from the jurisdiction of
the City. In the middle thereof: is a very fair Conduict or fountain, where
into waters by certain pipes are conveyed from certain places out of the City,
and the same from thence conveyed to the Bishops, and some of the Channons
houses.

The City it self is very populus, and was sometimes chiefly inhabited with
Clothyers or Clothworkers of broad clothes, serving much for the Spanish and
South Countries, which were of such goodness and substance: as that the names
of them do yet continue in these parties, but now it is chiefly inhabited with
Merchaunts, Kersey Clothyers and of all sorts of Artificers, among whom ye
Merchants are ye cheifest and the welthiest.

The government of this City was sometimes by four Bayliffes called
Prouostres, but shortly after the Conquest: there was ordered a Senate of xxxvj,
and in these latter days of xxiiij. persons of the most sober, grave and
wisest Co^moners and franchised men of the same, of which number one was and is
yearly chose^ to be the cheifest governor for the year following and is called
by the name of a Mayor.

This Mayor associated with the foresaid four Bayliffes, has the discerning
of and in all manner of actions betwixt party and party, and for which he
keeps on every Monday a Court in the Guilde hall of the said City, but the
Bayliffes having the like jurisdiction: do according to their old and ancient
customs keep the like Courts, being distinct from the Mayor at all days and
times when them best likes, which their Court: is called by the name of the
Prouostres, Court, for Prouostres was their first names. Thus the Mayor and
Bayliffes both jointly and severally have jurisdiction to discern in causes
between party and party, but if the matter do touch the Prince, the Crown,
the common peace, or the state of the City and the commonwealth of the same:
then the same are decided and determined either by the Mayor and Justices, or
by the Mayor and common Counsel, or by the Mayor him self, or by some other
Officer or officers according to the nature or quality of ye cause or matter.
But because it requires a large discourse to discribe the government of the
commonwealth of this City, the charge of every several Officer, the
diversity of officers, their several jurisdictions, with a number of other
things incident to their charges: I do mind hereafter by Gods grace, at large
to set the same forth in such sort that all estates and degrees, and every
particular Officer and other person within that City shall know his charge,
Office and duty, and what to every of them appertains.

In the mean time: let it suffice that partly through good government and
partly of a civil inclination, the people of this City as very obsequions
and obedient to the Queen and her laws, and have in great reverence and awe,
their governors and Magistrates for the time being. And this one thing is not
so strange as notable, that even from the beginning, they have from time to
time been careful for their commonwealth, and most vigilant for the
preservation thereof, which as in time of peace they did well rule and govern:
so also in ye troublesome times and unquiet estates they have most valiantly
defended against the incurtions and assaults of their enemies, as by the
sundry Historyes it may appeer.

For Aruiragus, Aruiragus.
King of this land minding to stay the Realm in his ancient libertyes: denied
to pay to the Romans the tribute which they demanded, wherefore Claudius the
Emperor sent Vespasian the Duke of the Romain Army into this Realm, either
to recover the tribute or to subdue the land. This Vespasian is he who in the
xxiiij. year after this did besiege and destroy Iherusalem, wherefore ye Duke
landing in Torbay which was then called Totonesium littus, came to this City,
laid siege to the same, with continual assaults and batteryes for eight days.
Aruiragus the King being then in the East parts and hearing of this:
gathers his Army and power, marches toward this City and incountreth
with the enemy. The Romain after long fight (not able to preuail) ends the
matter by composicion, and because this shall not seem to be a devised and
fained matter: I will write the words of four sundry Historyes. The Cronicle
of the Cathedral Church of the said City has these words Anno dom. 49.

Vespasianus, cum Romano exercitu ciuitatem nunc voca tam Exeter octo diebus
obsedit: sed minime preualuit, Aruirago Rege Ciuibus auxilium prestante.

Gaulfride of Monmothe writes thus. Vespasianus a Claudio missus est, vt
Aruiragu^ vel pacificaret, vel Romanae subiectioni restitueret: cum igitur in
portu in rutupi applicare Vespasianus cepisset: obuiauit ei Aruiragus, atque
prohibuit ne portu^ ingrederetur retraxit itaque se vespasianus a portu illo,
retortisque velis in littore Totnesio applicuit: nactus de inde tellurem
Kayerpenhulgoite que nunc Exonia vocatur obsessurus eandem adiuit cumque diebus
octo eam obsedisset, superuenit Aruiragus cum exercitu suo, preliumque
commisit: die illa valde laceratus sunt vtrorumque exercitus: sed neuter est
potitus victoria: mane autem facto, mediante Gen wissa Regina concordes effecti
sunt. Matthew of Westminster writes. Aruiragus Britannoru^ Rex in tantam
prolapsus est superbiam quod Romanae potestati noluit diutius subiectione
parere: Vespasianus igitur a Claudio missus, cum in rutupi portu applicare
incepisset, Aruiragus illi obuians prohibuit ne ingrederetur: ac Vespasianus
retortis velis in Totonesio littore applicuit: et ciuitate^ que Biitannice
Kayer penhuelgoite nunc autem Exonia appellatur obsedit: elapsis inde septem
diebus Aruiragus superuenit, preliumque cum Romany commisit et vtrorumque
exercitu valde lacerato, mediante Genvvissa Claudii filia, duces amici facti
sunt.

In the History entitled, Noua Cronica de gestis Anglorum a Britonibus vsque
ad Henricum sextum: in effect is written the like. Vespasianus a Claudio missus
est vt Aruira gu^ pacisicare vel Romani ditioni restitueret, cui obuia^s
Aruiragus prohibuit ne terram suam ingrederetur: timens Vespasianus armatorum
cohortem retraxit seseretortisque velis in Totonesio littore est appulsus,
atque vrbem Exone obsedit: post septem dies superuenit Aruiragus: preliu^
committitur, laceraturque vtrorumque exercitus, sed neuter potitur victoria:
demum mediante Genuissa Regina reconciliati snnt.

It was also in many troubles and great perplexities in the uncertain and
troublesome estates of this Realm, when some times the Romans, sometimes ye
Picts, sometimes the Scotts and sometimes the Saxons made their incursions and
wars upon and in this land, by reason whereof the Records and memorialles of
the states in those days were for the most part lost and consumed. And yet
nevertheless Matthew of Westminster writes ye it was beseeged by Penda King
of Mercia. Edvvin.
An. 632. in the time of Cadvvallin one of the last Kings of the Britons. The
history is Edvvin the Saxon King of the Northumbers, having wars against
Cadvvalline or Cadvvallo, did so preuail and had such conquests over him,
Cadvvalline,
that he was fain and driven to forsake his Realm of Wales and flee into
Ireland: where Cadvvallo being careful to recover his land and cuntreye:
repaired his Army and gathered a new force, and often times did attempt to
land there within his own Contreye, but all was in vain, for Edvvin was ever
in redines and always resisting him would not suffer him to land in any place.

For this Edwin had about him a certain man named Pellitus who was a Magitian
and skilful in Nicromancie, and by his science and Art: did forshow and declare
unto Edwin what things were doing and attempted against him.

Cadwallo having such evil success: was in utter despair to recover or auail
against Edwin, wherefore he sailed into Armorica now called Britain unto ye king
thereof named Solomon to whom he disclosed his miserable estate and fortune, as
also complained much of Pellitus and of his Sorceryes. When these two Kings had
consulted of the matter: it was at length concluded and thought best, that some
witty and bold man should be sent over and give the attempt to kill Pellitus,
whereupon Brienus Nephew to king Cadwallo takes upon him to attempt this
matter, and appareling him self in poor man's weed: saileth over into England
and traueleth unto York where King Edwin lay and kept his Court. And there he
joined and accompanied himself among the poor people, whose custom and manner
was to lie about the Kings gates, at dinner and Supper times, awayting for the
Alms after Dinner and Supper. Pellitus being the Kings Alomener and having
the charge to distribute the alms: comes forth and sets the poor people
in order. Brienus by his being there: watches his time to woork his feat, and
sudainly in the prese of the people, with his weapon which he had prepared for
the purpose: thrusts Pellitus into the body and kills him, and forth with
(the thing in such a throng not perceived) shifteth him self away privily, and
through woods, thickets, hills and Dales, comes to Exeter, where he
discloseth and declares unto the Britons what he had done, they glad and
rejoicing heerof, and hoping that now their King Cadwallo would return: do
prepare and make ready both them selves and the City as well for the resisting
of their enemies: as also for the receiving and ayding of their King.

Penda hearing of this injury done to King Edvvin his contreye man, and minding
to revenge the same: gathered a great army of Saxons, marches unto Exeter and
beseegeth y^ same round about, minding the utter subuertion of the City, and
nation, but the Citizens and Britons manfully withstanding his force: defended
both them selves and their City, until that king Cadwallo (being heerof
advertised) did with his force come over, who not only reskewed and delivered
both his City and country: but also joining battle with his enemies gave
them the overthrow.

3 It was also in great trouble in the time of King Allured or Alphred the
fourth Son of Ethelvvolphus, Alphred
for Polidorus and others do write that in the fifth year of ye said Kings
reign: the Danes concluded a peace with the King, and gave hostages for the
keeping thereof, notwithstanding contrary to the same, most perfideously they
assembled the^ selves and with all haste marched toward this City and
perforce entered and took ye same.

Daci etenim qui Religionem et fidem pre suo commodo postponendam ducebant
Londino se mouentes maximusiti neribus Exoniam proficiscuntur: vrbemque per vim
capiu^t. but long they inioyed no rest there: for the winter passed, the King
to be revenged of their periurye: marched toward the said City with his
power, which the Danes understanding, and not able to abide the vexation and
trouble of the Citizens: would not abide the end, but fled some to Dartmouth,
and there took shipping, who were in a tempest at the Seas for the most part
drowned, some fled to Chipenham or as so^e write to Bristovv, whom the king so
hardly pursewed that he never gave over until he had overcome them, and slain
their Captains, Hubbert and Hungar.

4 Likewise in the xix. year of ye reign of the saidking, ye Danes contrary to
their faith, pledges and promises did again come to this City and laid siege
to the same. Danorum Excercitus Anno. 877. ab warham nocte quadam federe
dirupto ad Exeancestre diuerterunt quod Britannici dicitur Cayerewise at audito
Regis aduentu: ad puppes fugerunt, et in mare predantes manebant.

5 It was also besieged by the said Danes in the xix year. of king Elgered.
Anno. 1001. For the Danes which were the^ in Normandye hearing of the good
luck, success and great spoils their company in England had in every place,
and their teeth set on edge therewith: sudainly prepared their Ships to sail
and come over, and as it chanced they landed upon the costs of Deuon and
forthwith took their journey and marched toward this city of Exon, thinking
to have found them napping, and to have taken them unawares and upon a sudain.
Sed Ciuibus viriliter resistentibus recesserunt, the inahbitants and people of
Deuon, Somerset and Dorset hearing thereof in all haste assembled themselves
minding both to reskew the City, as also to encounter and adventure the
feeld with the Danes. And meeting with them as they were coming from the siege
of the City: joined battle with them at a place called Pinho distant about
iij, miles from the City, where was a cruel fight and a great slaughter had
between them. And thus does Houedon also testify for says he, Memoratus
paganorum exercitus de Normannia in Angliam reuectus ostium fluuii Eaxe
ingreditur et mox ad extinguendam vrbem Exancestre egreditur sed dum murum
illius destruere moliretur ac ciuibus vrbem viriliter defendentibus repellitur:
vnde nimis exasperatus more solito villas succendendo agros depopulando
hominesque cedendo, per domnoniam vagatur: quare domnanienses in vnum
congregati, in loco qui dicitur Pinho certamen cum eis ineunt.

King Sweno being in Denmark and advertised heerof, Svveno.
as also how King Eldred alias Etheldred or Egelred, had caused all the Danes
in the Realm sudainly in one night to be slain, being much grieved there with:
did provide and prepare an army for the revenge thereof, and in the year. 1002.
landing into diverse parts of this Realm did most cruelly spoil the land,
sley the people and bring the whole estate to an unspeakable miserye. But at
length (receiving a tribute for peace) returned home again into his own
country, howbeit the Citizens of Exon hearing of this cruelty used in the East
parts: made them selves strong and prepared the City in redynes to withstand
y^ force of such an enemy, if happily he should attempt hostilite and force
against them. But the Dane being returned home and knowing nothing of this
preparation: one Hugh then Earl of Deuon, (as Princes lack no fawners) sent
his letters into Denmark to King Sweno, certifying him both of the state and
wealth of this City, and of the great preparation made therein to withstand
him, persuading him not to sustain such a matter, and as Coals will be soon
enkendled: so forthwith the Dane was in his heat, and prepared all things in
a redynes to woork his will against this City.

Wherefore the year following being ye year of our Lord. 1003. he landed upon
the costs of Deuon and Cornwall, with a huge host and marching toward this
City gave and laid siege to the same in the beginning of August and continued
until the xiiij. of ye Kalendes of September, during which time, though the
assaults were often ferce and cruel: yet there wanted no stomach in the
Citizens to withstand the same. But in continuance of time when they saw them
selves weke, Victualles to fail, the fire round about them, their walls beaten
down, them selves daily slaughtered and murdered, and with this their decay,
the enemy to be the stronger, and yet in all their distress their king Eldred
fled into Normandye having no care for their miseryes, nor preparing reskewes,
for their aid and succor: it was no maruail though in so heavy a case they
were amassed and astonished, and yet consulting and considering with the^ selves
that Sweno was a Dane, a cruel enemy, a bloody murderer and a very usurper,
having no other title to ye Realm of England but tyranny: did with one consent
agree and conclude never to yield or give over as long as any were left alive,
which might withstand such an enemy, wishing rather to dye in truth, and for
their commonwealth: then to live with reproach and infamy, and to depart
rather with mortal Fame: then to be miserable slaves to an usurping tirant.
When therefore after man^ long assaults they were spent and few or none left
alive to withstand so mighty and so many enemies: the Dane on the.xxvij. of
August entered the City, and when he had served his bloody appetite, in
murdering the poor widows and Children: he spoiled the City, burned the
houses, rased the walls, beat down the Temples, and left nothing which either
by sword, fire or spoiling might be consumed.

And so Renolph writteth. Daci cum suo Rege Swano Excestriam venerunt et vrbem
funditus destruxerunt, nulla re incolumi relicta, que aut ferro aut igne
poterat vastari: et omnia spolia cineribus tantum relictis secum deportauerunt.

The like words Henry of Huntington in the sixth Book of his historyes,
writes in this sort. Anno dom. 1^03, Daci ira exarserunt, sicut ignis quem
sanguine velit aliquis extinguere: aduolantes igitur quasi multitudo locustarum
quidam Exestriam veneru^t, et vrbem totam funditus destruxerunt, et omnia
spolia secuin, cineribus tantum relictis deportauerunt. Houedon also writteth.
Rex danorum Swein per iniuriam et proditionem Normanici comitis hugonis quem
Emma Domnaniae prefecerat, ciuitate^ Exon infregit spoliauit murum ab orientali
vsque ad occidentale^ portam destrux it et cum ingenti praeda naues repetiit.
William Co^querer.


6 It was also besieged by William the Conqueror in the first year of his
reign Anno. 1068.: for when he first entered the land using by dent of Sword all
hostility: this City entering in leage with the nobility and Towns of this
Country, did conclude and promise, each to the other to withstand the enemy to
the vttermoste, and accordingly did prepare for the same, but when the
Conqueror had prevailed and subdued almost the whole Realm, and
understanding that this City would not yield: sent his Army from London and
besieged the same, and perceiving the siege to continue: marched him self as
far as Salisbury toward the same. In the mean time, y^ Citizens advertised
that the whole Realm had yielded, and seeing their confederats to shrink daily
from them: and by that menes they to war daily weaker and weaker, being not
able to withstand so great a power and Army as was round about them: did by
way of entreaty offer conditions of peace, and submitted them selves to the
King, who according to their composition received their submission, and after a
greeuouse fine taken: did restore the City unto them again. But in token of
his conquest: he altered the Gates of the Castle, and swore all the people to be
his liege Subjects.

Houedon in his History makes mention that King Harolds wife should be within
the City during this assault and besiege, for these be his words, Hyeme
imminente Rex VVil helmus de Normania in Angliam rediit et Angliae importabile
tributum imposuit: deinde in domnomam host^^^er profectus est ad ciuitatem
Excestriam quam ciues et nonnulli Anglici ministri contra illum retinebant et
obsedit et in fregit: Githa vero commitissa matter scilicet Haroldi Regis
Anglorum, ac soror Swani Regis danorum cum multis de ciuitate fugiens, euasit,
e^ Flandriam petiit: ciues autem dex tris acceptis regi se dederunt.

7 Also in the second year of King Stephen. King. Stephen,
Anno. 1137. the Lords and Peers of the Realm remembering the oath they had
made to King Henry the first, to whom they swore to be true to Maude the
Kings daughter and to her heirs (and yet contrary to the same had sworn them
selves to King Stephen:) began to repent them selves, and consulted how to
restore Maude the Empress, wherefore assembling together in armor did divide
them selves and took sundry Cities and Castles. Baldwin Ridiuers.


And Baldvvin Ridiuers Earl of Deuon with force of Arms took this City,
whom King Stephen pursuing: did drive him out of the same to ye Islle of VVight
then his Lordship. But the King when he had received the City into his faith:
did march toward the Isle of VVight, and taking the same, did banish the said
Earl. But Maude ye Empress remembering this City for this faith did enlarge
the liberties, for whom ever after an aniuersary was kept at the charges of the
City. Howebeit some say that this Baldvvin took Oxforde or Westchester, and
not Excester and from thence fled to VVight.

8 It was also in some trouble in the xi. year of King Richard the second.
King Richard.
Anno. 1387. For a controversy being befall between the King and his Uncles,
Duke of York.
the Dukes of York and Glocestre, none were then so much in the Kings favor as
Robart Vere Marquis of Doublin, Michael Dalapool Earl of Suffolk, and others
of their faction: whom the King commanded to collect and assemble an Army,
Duke of Glocestre
in and for his defense against his uncles, but they, whether they mistrusted
their own part, or whether they were minded to make them selves stronger,
leuing their journey toward London came to this City, the Dukes understanding
the same: Vere.
pursued the^ with all speed, and at this City joined battle and fought with
them, but the Marquis and the Earl trusting better to their feet then to their
hands: Delapole.
did preuily flee away into Scotland, and from thence into flanders where they
dyed.

9 It was also in great troubles in the time of King Edward the fourth, Lord
Dinham.
for in the x. year of his reign. Anno. 1469. when the states of King Henry the
vj. and King Edward the fourth were doutful. The Duchess of Clarence, the
Lord Dinham, Lord Fitzvvarren.
the Lord Fitzvvarren and the Baron of Carewe with others, who took part with
Henry the vj. came to this City accompanied with a thousand fighting men, the
Duches being great with child, Baron of Carevve.
and lodged in the Bishops place. But Sir Hugh Courtney Knight, who favored and
was of the part of King Edward, hearing of this: raised an army of his
friends and Allies, besieged the City, brake down the Bridges, and stopped
all the ways coming toward the same, by means whereof no Victualles could
come to the market. And being encamped about the City, sent unto the Mayor
requiring him either to open the Gates: or to deliver the gentlemen which were
within.

The gentlemen which were within, they of their parties either mistrusting the
Mayor or Commons, or not willing to be ruled under his government: requied the
keys of the gates to be delivered into their custody, and all things to be
done as at their appointment.

In which perplexity and doutful estate: the Mayor and his brethern
consulting, did resolve and determine neither to yield to the request of them
which were without nor yet to satisfy their requests which were within, but
pacifying both parties with such honest and quiet means as they might, did
conclude to keep the City and them selves, as to their allegiance appertained
to the use of the Crown, wherefore forthwith they rampred the Gates, fortified
the Walls, and armed their Soldiers and set all things in good order, leaving
nothing undone, which might be for the preservation of the state and commonwealth of the City. But in small process of time, the provision waxed short,
and victualles began to be scant, where of it was feared a famine would ensue,
the same being so hard a thing, as so great a number of people would not
endure and abide. Yet notwithstanding partly by ye good peswasions of the
Magistrates, and having a regard of their own duties and estates, and hoping
this troublesome time would not long endure: did continewe firm and trusty in
their cause, until at length by way of entreaty and mediation of certain
Chanons of the Close, Duke of Clarence,
the siege was after xij. days removed and raised, whereupon very shortly did
ensue the feeld at Edgecourt, where the Duke of Clarence, and the Earl of
Warwick (be^^ng put to the worst) did flee to this City, Neuel earl of
VVarvvick.
entering in the third of April, lying in the Bishops Pallaice for a few days,
until they provided Ships at Dartmouth fit for their passage to Calleys.

The King having understanding which ways his enemies were gone: followed and
pursewed them with an army of xl. thousand men, and came to this City the
xiiij. of April. Anno. 147^. but he came to late the Duke and the Earl being
gone to the Seaes before his coming, wherefore the King after he had reposed
him self here three days: returned.

10 It was likewise in great trouble, king Henry.
being besieged the x^j. year of the reign of King Henry the vij. Anno 1498.
by one Parkin VVarbeck, who in the beginning of September came to this City
and encamped it, with Ordinance battred the walls, fired the gates,
undermined the walls and sealed the same, but by the noble courage of the
Citizens: he had small success, being manfully resisted until such time as
the King advertised thereof: did send the Lord Edward Courtney Earl of Deuon,
and the Lord William his Son, with other Noble men, who reskewed the City
and delivered it from the enemy.

11 Finally and last of all it was besieged in the third year of King Edward
the sixth. King Edward.
Anno. 1549. by the Commons of Deuon and Cornwall, who not contenting them
selves with the state of Religion then established: clustered them selves in
companyes, appointed to them selves Captains, and minded by their force to
undo that which the Prince by Law and Act of Parliament had established,
wherefore to redeem all such places of force, wealth, and defense, into their
own hands, which might in any respect, serve for their aid and defense: came
to this City the second of July. 1549. and encamped them selves about the
same in great numbers, during the time of their abode and besieging: great
troubles arose, so^etimes assaults made, sometimes ye gates fired, so^etimes
ye walls undermined, some times skirmishes made and some great laromes to
defend ye walls against scaling, finally nothing was left undone, which the
enemies might devise for ye obteining of their purpose. And albeit there wa^ted
not lusty stomakes of the Citizens to withstand this outward force, yet in
process of time such scarcity of Vitualles did increase, and Bread wared so
scant: that the people began to wax weary and loathe to abide the extremity
thereof, which was so extreme, that it was feared either that the people must
yield to the enemy: or perish with famine. How beit the Magistrates (though
sorry in such destesse) yet having a special regard of their duty toward the
Prince, and their charge to the commonwealth, left no means unsought to quiet
the people and stay them in their deutye and obidience. Wherefore comforting the
people with fair promises, and liberal releeuing their necessities: did in
such sort and order handle the matter, that every body with one assent was
resolved in hope of some speedy releef to abide the end, and in no wise to give
place to the ^^^mye: but to continue faithful to the Prince, and trusty to
their commonwealth. And yet in the mean while the governors left no devises
and provisions which might be for the relief and comfort of the poor hungrye
bellyes, wherefore the corn and Meal consumed: they caused of course and old
refused Bran, bread to be molded up in clothes, for otherwise it would not
stick together. Also they caused some excurtions to be made out of the City,
for the praying and taking of such Cattle as were near about the walls, which
being taken: was distributed among the poor. Likewise the Prisoners in
captivity were contented to be fatisfied with such victualles, as could be
provided, and albeit man's nature can scarcely abide to feed upon the flesh of
a Horse: yet these poor men were fed therewith and well contented.

The noble King and Council advertised of this distress: did at length
after.xxxv. days, send the honorable S. John Russel Knight, Lord Russel, Lord
privy Seal, and afterward Earl of Bedford, with a company and band of
Soldiers, who after sundry conflicts had with the enemies: came to this City
the vj. of August, reskewing and delivering the same from the enemy, and set
them at liberty. For the which as God was most worthy of all praise and
glory: so is the same his deliverance at this present had in perpetual memory
the vj. of August being a holy day in the remembrance thereof.

Thus this little City which in antiquity is not inferior to other: has
from time to time felt the smartes and chau^ges of all times, and endured great
troubles, dangers, extremities and perilles, and yet God regarding their faith
and obedience to their Prince and commonwealth before all other sacrifices:
has defended an preserved them always rewarding them with immortal Fame, for
which his great benefits, his name be praised for ever and ever.

The sundry and several names of the Ci^^. of Excester, and the interpretation
of the same.
COrinea or Corinia, is the first and eldest name of this City, and so named
by Corineus who ariuing with Brutus into this la^d, and seasing or taking la^d
upon these west partees: was (by brutus) Lord of the same. And he then building
City (as is thought) called it by his own name Corinia which being so:
then is this City one of the first Towns or Cittyes builded by the Brittons
in this land.

Cayrpenhuelgoite, is compounded of four words. Cayr is a Fortress or a
walled Town, pen is a head or the cheef of any thing, hovvel is good luck,
prosperity or knowledge, goyed is wood, a forest or timber woork, now these
put together after the English phrase: is the prosperouse cheef Town in the
wood.

Penhaltcayr is compounded of three words, Pen is the head or cheef, halt is
high, a top of hill, or the brim or edge of a thing. cayr is a Town walled or a
Fortress, these put together, do signify the head Town or City upon the Hill.

Pencayr is compounded of two words, of Pen and Cayr, which signify the cheef
City.

Cayrruthe, Cayrrith, is compounded of Cair and Rith, Rith is tawnish or a dark
red, and so it signifies the red town, City or Fort.

Cayrriske is likewise a compound of two words, Iske signifies a fresh water,
also a quil or a wing, but in this place: it is the name of the River which
fleeteth by the City, and so (...) signifies the City of Iske.

Isca was also the name of the Town, and Isaca the name of the River which
fleeteth by it, as Ptolomeus and certain latter writers following him: do
suppose and write, though it should seem rather the City to be called Isaca,
and the River Isca.

Muncketon was so called by the Saxons, but upon what reason: it does not
appeer, others the^ that they did at their coming change and alter the names
of all or most part of places in this land, giving new names either of Towns
or places of the Country from whence they came, or of their own devise: or else
King Etheldred or King Edgar when they had builded each of them a Monastery for
Muncks: did give that name.

Exeter was the name which King Adelstane gave unto it when he soiourned in
this Town calling it so of the river Exe, and then it is to say Exeterra the
town or soil of Exe.

Exancestre is thought to be so called by the Saxons, who commonly and for the
most part named such Fortes and holds as they builded by this word Cestria,
as Cicestria, Dorcestria, Osestria and many other like, for Cestir in the Saxon
tung is a Forte, a Town or a City.

Excestrum or Excestre is the name most now in use, and so named (as some
write) of the River, which they write to be named Excestrum,


