AN INTRODVCTION TO vvysedome, made by Ludouicus Viues, and translated in to
English by Richard Morysine.

To the right worshypfull master Gregory Crumwell, son to the right
honorable lord Crumwell, lord privy seal, Richard Morisyne wissheth much
wealth, with continual encreace of verine.
WHO SO WELL feleth the duties, that belong to an honest heart, and is any
thing acqueintid with those three ladies, which wonderfully maintain the
joyful society of man's life, callid among the Grecians Charites, among the
latins Gratiae, he can not most gentle master Crumwel, but se infinite
causes, why I ought with all force of body, al strength of mind, all alacrity
and chierefull promptenes of courage, study to gratify you, study to make you
bear with oone, that fayue would, and never can be able to come out of debte.
The first of these three dames, is Bountyfull beneficence, a lady of lovely
countenance, and noble stomach, one that always longs, still having that she
longs for, always with child, and still delivered, always profytynge, and
still lustynge to profit, always helping some, and still desyrefull to helppe
mo. The greeks name her sometime Eurydomene, which signifies a large and a
plentiful gyuer, some time Aglaia, which sounds among us gladness,
teaching men even by her name, that of duty, benefittes ought to be given
chierefully. The second lady is Thankefulnes of mind, never forgetting
benefyttes received, her name is Thalia, which sygnifieth fresshenes or
greenenesse, because duty and honesty woll, all pleasures, all benefits
still to be fresshe in memory, still to be green, never to wyther, never to
faade, all time to floryshe. The third lady is Euphrosyne, much like her
sister Aglaia, a damsel full of solace, full of delectation, continually
deuisyng, by what means she may do pleasure for pleasure, recompense kyndnes
with kyndnes. Authors of great name and much wisdom, make these three, to go
all hand in hand, the first lokyng still forward, not ones casting her eye
back, never imbraydyng benefits given and paste. The second and the third
ever more beholding the first, with amiable countenance, with feithfull eye of
remembrance, and full intent of recompense, as far, as power, fordred with
most desire may or can. Under such clouds, sage and grave writers, are
wont darckly to insinuate things of great weight, things very necessary for
the quiet and honest leadyng of man's life, things worthy to be of all men
enbraced, worthy to be set fixed and engrafted in all men's hearts. They
perceived, that moral precepts plesantly set out in feate colors of wyttie
fantasies, both crepe faster into out bosoms, and also tarry there with much
more delectation and profit, than they would, being plainly spoken. wherefore
as you now see, what they mente by those three ladies, so you must also
needs see, how I am bound, to owe you my heart, my service, with all that they
both may do for you. For how can I, my lord your father, being so far in
amors, with that lovely lady Eurydomene, leave mine attendance upon the other
two damoisels, before life leave me? How can I, being enuyronned with so
many and ample his benefits, not desire Thalia and Euphrosyne, that they both
report me, to lack power, but no good will, I trust they both shall have good
cause, so to do. Certes, if I had seen, where either my lyttel wit, or poor
heart might better have served his lordeshyp, then in opening unto you, his
dear and entierly beloved son, such precepts of virtue, as may make you
most like your noble father, there are no peynes that could have kept me
from doing of it. Assure your self, master Crumwell, if labor, and heart may
pay the tribute, that love owes, you shall never need to areste me. This book,
was gathered by Ludouicus Uiues, a man greatly conversant in all good authors,
and excellently well seen in all kinds of learning. The book has undoubtedly,
much more lieng in his bosom, than the title promyseth in the forehed. It is
not only an Introduction to wisdom, but if ye goo as it leads you, it
introduces wisdom into you, rootyng the love and desire of virtue in your
heart, extyrping from it al manner of vice, and all uncleanness, furnishing you
with general precepts, for all kinds of life, for all ages, for all degrees
and conditions, which precepts, if you harbor in your breaste, must needs
be a great stay, help and comfort unto your te^dre age. They shall bring to
pass many things in your life time, with great pleasure, and no pain at
all, which otherwise experience often times poudred with bitter repentance,
should sease at length teach you. It is as wise Socrates says: Precepts of
learning were invented at the first, as a needful stay and succor unto man's
mind, wanting knowledge and experience: even as a staff is given of
necessity, to stay up a feeble body. Assuredly, I know no one book
untranslated, that has half so many wholesome documentes as this has, none
that may so well lead you the right way to true honor, none where ye may
either with more delight, or more hope of your game, trace true nobility.
Follow your leader, go on with your guide, you shall find all the steps and
grices, whereby not only my lord your father, honorably has climmed to
nobility, but al other, that in deed are or were at any time noble. You shall
find many things here that may be to men in wealth and worship an ornament,
many that are to men assauted with the surges of sower fortune, sure
cou^sailours, bringyng with them, besides right and honest consolation, much
delectable doctrine: finally, many that are a sovereign medicine al most for all diseases. The book is now youres, I trust as the Jewels, which it
offers unto you, be great, rare, and preciouse, that so ye wol se them laid
up in place mete for such riches. Lock them fast in the cheste of your
heart, give the keye to remembrance, that she may let them out, and carye them
home again, at such times as ye shall think convenient. If ye make these
precepts yours, by use of them speaking as they teach you, working as they
advise you, who shall have more cause to rejoice of it, than you your self?
wherein can you more plese my lord your fathers mind? what thing can more
satisfye his desire? what greater comfort can come to his lordshyp, then to se
you most like him in conditions? What greater worship to you, then to tread in
his steps? what higher pleasure to all them that love both? your country
knows, what noble feats my lord your father has wrought by wisdom, lady
governor of all virtues? who knows not, how honesty may rejoice, how
truth and religion may hold up their hands to heaven, that god has sent to
so gratiouse so prudent and wise a prince, so good so wise and so faythefull a
counselor? to so noble a master, so deligente a minister, to so high
couragiouse and virtuous a king, a subject of so noble an heart and
stomach? I must leave of, I am entered iuto to long a matter for a short
epistle. Wherefore I can no more, but with all heart, desire god, that it may
please him, long to preserve noble HENRY the VIII. still in all wealth, in
all honor to reygne over us, to the setting forth, of goddis honor, to the
spredyng abroad of his glory, to the magnifieng of his name in all places,
long to preserve my lord, to the furtherance of the same. Finally, that ye may
be heir of his lordeshyps qualities and virtues, as well as of his honor and
worldely dignity. And thus our lord send you ever well to fare.

AN INTRODVCTION TO WISDOM.
TRVE AND VERY wisdom is, corrupt affection set a side, trewely to judge of
things, and that we esteem every thing to be as it is, neither couetyng the
vile, as though they were preciouse, another refusing preciouse, as though they
were of no price nor gyuing dispraise to things worthy praise, ne yet
commendyng things worthy discommendation. For, from this spring, all error
rounneth into men's minds.

There is nothing more hurteful in man's life, tha^ this corrupt judgment,
this I say, where every thing is not esteemed as it ought to be, and at such
price, as it is worth.

The opinions and common persuasions of the people, are pernitiouse: because
for the most part they judge of all things most fondely.

Certes the vulgar people is a great schole master of great errors

There is nothing that we ought to seek for with more study, than to bring him,
that gives him self to knoweledge and wisdom, from the judgment of the
rude multitude.

First let him suspecte as many things, as the multitude, with great assente,
and consent, does approve, until he has examyned them after those men's
rule, which make virtue a measure to try all matters by.

Let every man, even from his child hode, use to have right opinions of all
things, which shall grow and increase, like as his age does.

Let every man desire upright things, and flee the crooked: chose the good, and
refuse the evil, this use and custom shall turn well doing almost into
nature, and so work, that none, but such as are compelled, and such as are in
strife, found the weaker, shall be brought to do evil.

The best kind of life is (as soon as thou canste) to be chose^: Custom shall
make this, as it is best for y^, so with in a short space, to be most
pleasant.

All the rest of our life ha^geth upon our bringing up, when we be children.

Wherefore the first gryce, that men clymme unto wisdom by, is that that so
many ancient writers speak of, Se ipsu^ nosce, Every man to know him self.

A division of such thyuges, as are perteinyng unto men
MAN is constituted and made of body and mind: the body we have of the earth,
and those elements that we se and touch, like unto the bodies of beasts.

The mind we have given us from heaven, like unto angels, like to god him
self: by this part man is esteemed man, and as great wise men think, they
alone are to be taken for men, yt in this have their just porcio^.

There be in the body, as belonging unto it, beauty, health, integrite of
members, strength, lightness, delectation, and their contraries, as deformity.
sickness, lack of lymmes, weakness, slouthe, sorrow, and other, as well
commodities of the body, as incommodities of the mind, as learning and virtue,
and their co^traries, rudeness and vice.

There be certain things not given to all men, but chauncynge to a few, and
these be called things, Extra hominem, besides the nature of man, as riches,
power, nobility, honor, dignity, glory, favor, and their co^traries,
poverty, nedinesse, ignobility, vile estimation, shame, obscurenes, hatred.

A dyuisyon of things and their price.
THE queen and princess of all things most highest, is Virtue, unto whom all
other serve, as hand maids their maistresses, if they do as by duty, they
are bounden. I call Virtue a reverent love toward god and man, a right
service and worshipping of god, a right love toward man, love I say, not
ending in words, but joined with an ernest will to do good. Other things, if
they be referred to this Virtue, that is, if they be sought, kept, and spent
for her sake, and at her commandment, they can not seem evil. Neither they
that call riches, and other things like, goodis, thought so of them, as now
the rude people does, which has so corrupted the true and native
significations of things, that many of them have lost their right estimation,
and are changed up set down. For we must understand, where, when, and how
far these things be good.

We may not esteem richesse above their value, or judge, that preciouse stones,
metalles, royal places, or gorgiouse implementes of house, are richesse, or
they rich, that have these: but rather riches is not to want such things,
as are necessarily required to man's life.

True glory, is to be well spoken of, for virtues sake.

True honor is to be had in veneration for some great virtue.

The grace that men obtein of princis or other people, should be favor borne
to them for their amiable virtues, and qualities, love worthy.

Dignity is either a right opinion, which one man has of an other for
virtues sake, orels a certain beauty of some inward virtue, outwardely
expressed before men's eyes.

Power and reygne is, to have many, whom thou may succor and aid in right
and honesty.

He is to be reckened noble, that is known by some excellent act, to be
noble, orels comes of an ancient stock and shows him self to be in
virtue and worthy qualities, like unto his parents.

A right gentle man is he, whom nature has fashyoned and set, as it were in
a standing for the recepte of virtue.

Health is a temperat habytude of the body, whereby the mind both keeps
her strength, and exercyseth her power.

Beauty stands in such liniamentes, shape, and portrature of the body as
do show a beautiful mind to dwell therein.

Strength and valiantness is, to suffice and accomplish the exercises of
virtue without werines.

Pleasure is a pure, sound, hole, and continual delectation, which is taken
only of those things, that belong unto the mind.

If a man do discuss and reason these things before rehearsed, otherwise, that
is, after the mind and judgment of the ignorant people, he shall find them, to
be things unmeet for men, things vain, and also very hurtefull.

First, al outward things be either referred unto the body, or to the mind,
as richesse are to the mayntenance of our life, honor to bear witness of our
virtue, and well doing.

The body it self is nothing else but a couerture, and a thing bound to serve
the soul, whereunto both nature, reason, and comlynes co^mande the said body
to be subject as a thing brute, to that that dies never, a thing earthly, to
that that has a portion of divine nature in it.

Furthermore, learning is sought for, and lodged in the mind for this intent,
that we may thereby both know sin, and eschew the same, and know virtue,
and atteyne to it.

If learning do not this in him that has it, she leaves her hoole duty
undone.

What other thing is our life, but a certain peregrination, besette on every
side with so many dangerous chances, that the end thereof, is every hour
hangyng over it, which often times falls upon most light occasions? Wherefore
it is a great folly to do any thing that is foul or fylthy, for the love of
uncertain life, as who should say, thou were sure to live long, after thy
naughty doing.

As it is in a journey, so is it in man's life, the lighter and less burdein
a man carries, the easier and pleasanter his journey is.

Moreover, the nature of man is such, and so ordained, that it nedethe very
few things. In so much, that if a man woll more nerelyer behold this thing,
doubteles he can not but utterly condemn them, as mad folk, which so
gredely and so carefully accumulate goods upon goods where as so little
suffiseth. His saying was pretty and quick, that thus expressed riches: Sunt
breuis vitae longum viaticum, that is: They are great and long purueiance for
a little and short life.

Wherefore richesse, possessions, and apparel ought to be prepared only for
our necessary use, is not helped by unmeasurable richesse, but rather
oppressed, as ships ouerladen with to great a frayte.

Gold it self if thou use it not, differs very little from claye, sauinge
that the custody thereof does put the to more unquietness, causyng the, by
reason thy mind is only set thereon, to neglecte such things as ought above
all other, to be regarded.

Money brings men into a kind of idolatry, as often as for it those other
things, are set aside (I mean godly reverence and cleannes) which are the
great, chief, and first in Nature. I let pass, how many deceytes, gynnes,
and traynes are leyed for riches, how many and sundry ways they come to
naught, and into how many vices they, when they tarry, drive men, draw men,
drown men.

What other thing is gay apparel, but instruments to strike up a dau^ce for
pride.

Necessity first invented the profitable garment, Riot and Riches found the
preciouse, which Vanity fasshioned unto her trycke. Great contention is in
variety of apparel, which has taught men many superfluous and hurtefulle
things, by reason that they seek to be honored even for that, which plainly
declares their infyrmytie, folly, and weakness.

Hereby it comes to pass, that this part of richesse, gorgyous buildings,
goodly householde stuff, precious stones, and other rich ornaments, be set
out rather for a brag and to serve other men's eyes, than for the use and
profytte of those that profess them.

What other thing is nobylity now but a chance, to be borne of this or y^
gentle blood, and an opinion grafte upon the foolishnes of rude and unlearned
people, which oftentimes is gotten by robbery and like ways.

True and perfect nobility, springs of virtue, wherefore it is great
madness for any man, to crake of his parents, being naught him self
dishonouring their noble acts, with his lewed doings.

Trewely we be all made of like elements, and have al one god, father to us
all, yet to contempne the birth or stock of any man, is under a color to
reprove god, which is the autour of every man's nativity.

What other thing is power, than a fair cumbraunce, wherein if man knew, what
troubles and cares lie hidden, how great a sea of euyls every day ouerrunneth
the small sweetness of it, there is no man so ambitious, no man so gredy of
honor, but he would fly it, as a grievous mysery, he would as that king said,
not stoop to take up a dyademe, if it lay before him on the ground.

How odiouse a thing is it, to govern evil men? how much more, if thou be
evil thy self?

Honor, if it it spryng not of virtue, is falsely given and wrongfully taken,
neither it can fully delight the, where as thy conscience denies the to setue
it. Again, if it do arise of virtue, virtue teaches the to refuse it. For
that ought not to be called or taken for virtue, which is done for desire of
honor. Honor must follow well doing, and is not to be craved of the well
doers.

How can dignities be called dignities, or worthiness, when they chance to most
unworthy persons, gotten by deceyte, by crauynge for money, and such other
naughty means, in especial where they be given by the arbitermente of the
rude multitude, a beast of many heads, which does nothing as reason and
right judgment would. And what other thing is glory, tha^ as he said, a vayn
blast, that fylleth fools ears? and as honor and dignity, are rather in him
that gives them, than in him, that is the receyuour, so glory brings little
or nothing to him, that it is given unto. Certes they both are uncertain,
wanderyng and sone gone, very like unto the multitude their parent, which in
the space of a day, highly prayseth, and depely disprayseth the same man. We se
therefore, that honor commonly fastest flies from him, that most seeks it,
and goes to them, that least regard it, agreyng in this point with the
nature and condition of the variable people, which often times fly from him,
whom they ought sonest to follow. I need not to say, that this honor and
dignity arise of causes sometime folyshe, some time very noughty. Often times he
comes up a pase, that can play well at tennysse, often times he waxes
honorable, that leaves honesty, spendyng his patrimony upon ionckettes
mynstrelles and scoffers.

But war, that is to say, robbery without punishment, is a great auauncer
of men to honor, such is the madness of folyshe people.

Let every man descend down into himself, and there secretly think well
upon this matter, and than he shall find, how little comes to him, by fame,
by rumoures, by worship, by such honor, as the people gives him, wherein many
now much glory.

What difference is between the highest king that is, and the lowest slave,
when they be both a sleep?

What is beauty in the body, truly a well colored skin? if the inward
parties could be seen, what fylthynesse should be espied, even in the most
beautiful body?

The fairest body is nothing else but a dunghyl covered in white and purple.

What does beauty or pretty feature of body avail, if the mind be
unclean? and if there be as the greek writer says, In hospicio pulchro,
hospes deformis, that is to say, a foul gueste in a fair hostrie.

For what purpose serves strength of body, wha^ things most greatest, and
merest for man, be not gotten by strength of body, but by the gifts of wit.
Our strength, be it never so great, can in no wise be equal with the strength
of a bull, or an elephant, it is reason, it is wit, it is policy, whereby by
we overcome them.

I let pass, I need tell no man, that beauty, strength, agilitie, and othee
gifts of the body, shortly vanyshe a way, even as flowers.

And axes, a small fever alone brings oftentimes a very strong champyon to
deaths door, and sone shakes away his fresh color, his beauty, and his
strength.

And all though, sickness, or other myschaunce come not to them, yet all they
of necessity through age, which ever crepeth on, must needs decay.

No man therefore of right can count such outward things, as so suddenly depart
away from him, to othermen, to be his, no man can reckon things of the body,
to be his, which flee away so fast, and so sone depart.

What wol ye now say, when those things, which so many men do highly desire,
be occasions of great vices, as of insolent arrogance, of luskishenes, of
fiersenes, of envy, of privy hatred, of strife, of debate, of battle,
murder, and manslaughter?

The delectation of the body is vile and bestly, as the body it self is, and
beasts be more oftener moved, and have more pleasure, and longer also then
men, the which pleasure not only ouerwhelmeth the body with many diseases,
bryngyng great damage and loss of goods, but also wounds the mind with
sorrowful repentance, and dulleth the wit, which is much extenuated, abated,
and broken, through the delicate cherishyng of the body. Finally there follows
yrkesomnes of it self, and hatred of all virtue.

It is not lauful for any man, to use such pleasures openly. For as they much
mysebecome the noblenes of man's mind: so is there none so far past all grace,
but he bassheth to use them in presence of many witnesses. No, because they
engender ignominy and shame, such as use the^, are driven to seek darkness
and secret corners.

And furthermore, these flieng short and sone passing pleasures, may neither,
by any means be retained and kept, neither yet come they pure, but are with
some bytternes intermingled. Therefore judge not, after the consent of the
common people, the greatest evil to be, poverty, ignobilitie, imprisonment,
nakedness, worldly shame, deformity of body, sickness, and imbecillitie, but
rather think vices, and their affinities, as folyshnes ignorancy, amassed
dullness, and lack of brain, the greattest euyls: and their contraryes,
knoweledge, quyckenes of wit, and sobriety of mind, to be great virtues.

If thou have either gifts of fortune, or of body, they shall much profytte
the, if thou bestow them vertuousely, but if they help to set out vice, they
must needs do the much hurt. If thou have neither the one nor the other,
seek them not with the loss of honesty, for that were even to bye a little
claye with a great sum of gold, or to change health, for peynfull syckenes.

There can be no greatter vantage to the soul, then is the increase of
godliness, no greatter gains to the body, than to know how to use the state
present, and to be content with it, how simple so ever it be.

And all be it we ought to do nothing, to the intent, that we would men should
tickle us with fond praises, yet we must labor, to keep our good name always
unspotted, for the regard thereof keeps us often times, from much naughtynes,
and also is a good example to stir other to well doing.

And hereof comes that old precept of great wise men: Thou shalt none evil
do, nor any thing that longs thereto. If we can not attain to this, well,
we must be content, that in our conscience, we feel our selves void of
secret gruge and unquietness. For when men's judgments, be so corrupt, that
they count virtue to be vice, than we must be content, that god alone aproue
our inward and outward acts, though men allow ner another.

It is easy, to turn either the incommodities of the body, or mischaunces of
fortune, to our profit, and of euyls, to make them good, if thou suffer them
patiently, and the les that they serve the, the more end uourest to follow
virtue. Uertues, often times have been excedingly increased by hurtes of body, and
loss of goods.

Of the body.
ANd for as much, as in this our pylgremage, we bear a soul, enclosed within
our body, great treasure in brickle vessels, we may not utterly refuse, and
cast away al regard and respect to the body. Yet we must so entreat, and
order the same, that it may not take it self, to be a master or a fellow, but
rather a seruannte, and that, Body is not fed for his own sake, but for
Soulles sake.

The more cherisshyng that the carcass has, the less is the soul looked upon,
the more delicately the body is handled, the more stubbornelye it wrestleth
ageynste the mind, and does cast it of, as an horse to well cherished, uses
to cast his ryder. The heuye burden of the body soore oppresses the mind,
fatnes, and over much cherisshynge of the bealy, diminishes and dulleth the
quicknes of wit.

Meat, sleep, al manner of exercise, and all the hole governance of the body,
must be used for the health thereof, and must not be set upon pleasure, and
delycacye. Thus it may the better serve the mind, and not wax wanton,
through to much pamparyng, nor yet fall in decay, for lack of strength, not
noryshed.

There is nothing, that does so much debilitate the lively power, the
quycke vigor of the mind, and also the strength of the body, as does
voluptuousenes, for as all the strength of the body and mind is establyshed,
and made galliarde with exercise, and moderate labor, so by idelenesse and
wanton pleasures, their powers are weakened, their strengthes wax faynte, and
fall away.

Clean keeping of the body (delicate nisenes of meats and drynkes leyed
aparte) does greatly both maintain the health of the body, and much comfort
wit.

Thou shall wash thy hands, and thy face, often times with cold water, and
dry them ageyn with a fair towell.

Thou shalt often cleanse those places of thy body, out of the which, filthiness
comes from thy inward parties, as thy hedde, thy ears, thy nosethrylles, thy
eyes, thy arm holes, and thy other secret places, that nature hides, and
honesty scase would have named. Let thy feet be kept clean and warm.

Among all the parts of thy body, keep the nape of thy neck from cold.

Eat not by and by, after thou risest, eat little before dinner, break fast
is given to swage the gnawing and complaints of a young stomach or to comfort
nature, and not to fyl the bealy, therefore.iii. or.iiii. morseles of bread, be
sufficient, without and drink, or with a little and that very small. For
such is no less wholesome unto the wit, than to the body.

Accustom thy self at dinner and supper, to feed but of one manner of meat,
and if thy substance will suffer the, let it be such, as is most wholesome,
fine, and of least grosnes. Eat but of one, though there be many dysshes, and
if thou be at thine own table, suffer not many to come upon it. Uarietie of
meats is very hurtful, yet the diversity of sauces is much worse.

Clean and pure diet, agreeable to temperate and chaste minds, is a great
sauer in a household, and that alone shows us, how few things we have need
of.

Let us do no notable offense, either in hope of luker, or in trust thereby to
replenishe our bealyes with deynty delicates, and far sought dishes.

We shall do well, if we not only content our selves with such things, as we
have, but also do depart with some of them, to such as have need of relyefe.

Our lord him self gives us an example of this, which after he had feasted
a multitude of people, suffered not such bread and fish as was left, to be
lost.

Nature teaches us things necessary, which be but few, and sone prepared:
foolishenes has invented things superfluouse, which are without number, and
hard to come by. If thou give necessaryes unto nature, she is delyted and made
strong as with things fytte for her, but if thou give her superfluouse, she
is weakened and afflicted, as with gobbettes not agreynge unto her diete.

As necessaries do not suffice, where foolyshenes craves, so superfluous
things ouerwhelme, rather than satysfie where appetites are to be served.

Thy drink shall be that natural liquour, prepared of god indifferent to all
living creatures, which is pure and clean water, or else syngle biere, or
wine alayde with the said water.

There is nothing that can more hurt the bodies of young men, than hot
meats and hot drynkes, for they inflame their lyuers, and set on fire their
intrayles: And hereby men's minds are made hot, angry, proud, impudent, and
are thens so carried with rashenesse, that like as they were mad, they seek
to accomplish al their lusts, be they never so fylthy.

Drink not after supper, or if thirste move the, take some moist or cold
thing, or a littell quantytie of drink, and that of the smallest.

Between that and thy going to bed, let it be at the least half an hour.

When you wolle refreshe your mind with any pastaunce, look you consider,
how short time is given to man's life, think it vulaufull, to spend this
time, in games, in feastyng, or in any other childishe toys, folies, if ye
right name them.

The course of our life is but short, I say although it were every whyt
bestowed in deckyng and adornynge the mind.

Think not, that we be made of god, to gaming, to trifelles, but rather sent
to be occupied in sage matters, as to atteyne unto moderation, modesty,
temperance, religion, and al other kinds of virtue.

Heal not the sickness of your body, with the diseases of mind. Better it
is, that that be sick, then this not hole.

Exercises of body shall not be to greatte, but used with a certain regard of
health, wherein we must follow the counsels of expert and counnyng physicians,
so far as they shall not transcend the limittes of honesty neither bid us do
any fylthy thing against goodis law.

Also in pastymes and refresshynge of the mind, see there be some remembrance
of virtue always.

Banyshe al arrogancy, contention quarellinges, envy, and covetousness, for
what reason, or rather folishenes is it, to inquiete thy mind, whiles thou
studiest, to delight it? You do as wisely as they that put gal into that honey,
which they would have most swetest.

Sleep must be taken as a certain medicine, and so much only, as is
sufficient to refreshe the body, for immoderate sleep brings the body to
many hurtefull humors, and much hyndreth the quyckenesse of the mind.

The time that is spentte in sleep, is scase to be counted any part of life.
Vita enim vigilia est, Life is a watch or a wakyng.

Of the mind.
THERE be two parts in the soul, the one that understands, remembers, and
sauereth things as they are, using reason, judgment, and wit, and is
called Men's, that is, the Mind, the superior part, by which alone we are
known to be men, made like unto god, far passing all other living
creatures.

The other part, which is called will, is void of reason, brute, fires,
cruel, more lyker a beast, than a man, wherein dwells these motions which
be named either affections, or perturbations, arrogance, envy, malice, ire,
fear, sorrow, desire never satyfyed, and vain joy. This is called the
inferior and vyler part, whereby we little or nothing, do differ from
beasts, at the least, we goo far from god, which is without all sickness
and all affections.

This is the order of nature, that wisdom govern all things and that all
creatures, which we see, obey unto manne, and that in man, the body be
obedient to the soul, and the soul unto god.

At any thing break this order, it offends.

As it is therefore a point of treason that such lewed perturbations, as are
before rehearsed, should rage rebel and take upon them the rule of the hole
man, contemtuously despisyng the authority of the mind, so it is extreme folly
for ye mind, to be slave unto fond affections, and to serve at a beck, the
vile carkeys, neither the dygnitie of nature, neither the express law of god,
any thing regarded.

Therefore, as strength of intellygence is given to the mind, to way every
thing, and to know what is good to be done, and what to be left undone, so is
will of so great power that there is nothing in the mind, but it is forced
to obey will, if she stand at strife, and will, yield no part of her right to her
adversary.

Wytis exercysed with many and diverse feats, much sharpened and instructed
with long experiences of sundry matters, whereby it may exactly know ye natures
and values of all things, and so teach man's will, what is good to be followed,
and what contrarywyse, is to be eschewed, such crafts must therefore be
shonned that fight against virtue, all crafts, that work by vain
conjectures, as palmestrie, pyromance, nicromancie, hydromancie, astrology,
wherein much pestilent vanity lies hid, invented of the devil, our
deceytfull enemy: for they entreat and profess those things, which god
has reserved unto him self alone, that is to say, the knowledge of things to
come. We may not seek to know the majesty and secreates of god, being far
from our knowledge, and such as god would not man to meddle withal.

He that sercheth the greatness of goddis majesty, shall be oppressed and
overwhelmed with his exuperant glory. Wherefore Paul bids us, to be no wyser
than it becomes us, but moderately to be wise, saying: that he saw things
not to be spoken, that no man can utter. Also Solomon says: Thou shalt not
inquire of things above thy capacity, neither of things above thy strength
but content thy self with the knoweledge of those, that god has commanded
the: think always upon them, never being to curyouse in searching of his
works.

All arts invented by the devil, must be refused and forsaken of us, with
whom, as with the enemies of god, we may in no wise be conversant, or have
any thing to do. It is not expedient for us, to know the opinions, either of
phisophers, or heretics, contrary to our profession, less that subtle and
crafty merchant, the devil, cast some scrupulous doubt in to our hearts, which
may much toss us, and perchance bring us into destruction.

Authors that write wantonlye, whereby may spring occasion of hurt, must not
be touched, lest any filthiness remain in the mind through the redyng of
them.

Evil communication often corrupts good manners.

Other erudition is sincere and fruitful, so that it be applied to his right
mark, that is, to Virtue and well doing.

There is a divine knowledge given of god, wherein al treasures of science and
wisdom at laid up, and this is the very and true light of man's mind.

All other lernynges, compared unto this, be very darkness and chyldishe
trifles.

Yet they be read for this intent, that our light, by comparynge of the one
with the other, may shine and appear more bryghter. Further more, that we may
use the said lerninges, as testimonies of men against them, which can little
better abide the dyuine scripture, than soore eyes can the bryghtnes of the
son. And where as we shall see such excellent Uertues in Gentyls, we may well
be put in remembrance, how much, becomes a true disciple of our master
CHRIST, which is by reason he knows this Light, charged upon no small
bond, to live accordyngly unto goddis commandment. Beside those things, they
give us much knowledge, how we should live here together in this world, the
experience whereof we lack often times.

We be framed and fasshioned by these.iii. things, Knowledge, Wit, and Memory,
and the diligence, which we use to the atteyninge of them, is called Study.

Wit is quyckened by exercise and Memory increased, by diligent tyllyng and
occupieng thereof: delycate handelynge weakeneth them both: Good health
confyrmeth and makes them strong: Idelues and daily Ease, puts them to
flight: Use and Exercise sets them at hand, and ever in a redynesse.

Whether thou read or here any thing do it with attention and effectuousely,
let not thy mind wander, but constrayne it, to be there, and to do that
thing, which is in hand, and none other.

If it go a stray, or swerve a side, call it again, as it were with a little
hist, differ al cogitations, that may bring the from that, that thou have in
hand differ them until some other time, remembering with thy self, that thou
lesest both time and labor if thou be not attent upon such things as thou
do read and here.

Be not abashed to learn and ask such things, as thou know not, for as
much as noble clerks, and greatte men, have not ben ashamed thereof, but
rather blusshe, because thou art ignorant, and not wylling to learn.

Bost not thy self, to have knoweledge of those things, wherein thou art
ignorant, but rather inquere and learn of such persons, as thou do suppose,
do understand them.

If thou wolte betaken for a learned man, endeavor thy self, that thou so be,
for there is none other way more compendiouse or nearer there unto: As thou
canste by none other means, more easily obtain, to be esteemed an honest man,
than if thou so be in very deed. Finally, labor always, to be even such a
one in deed, as thou desire to appear unto men, else thou desire it all
in vain.

False things, faynte and fall away by process of time, and time
strengthens the truth.

Simulation lasts not long.

Follow thy master always, run not thou at any time before him, believe him,
resyst him not.

Love him, and take him as thy father, thinking every thing, what so ever he
sayethe, to be very true and sure.

Beware thou offend not in that, wherein thou being culpable, wast twyse or
thrice reformed, fall not the fourth time, that thine amendment and
reformation may seem to have profyted the.

It becomes the chiefly, to have those things in remembrance, that have in
times paste deceived the, lest thou be in like manner by them seduced again.

It is naturally given to all men, to err, but to no man to persevere and
continue therein, except he be unwise and a very naughty person.

Learn and understand, that there is no sense, whereby we be better, or more
spedyly instruct, and taught than by herynge, and as there is nothing more
easy, than to here many things, so there is nothing more profitable.

Here not light tryfles, things to be laughed at, but rather ernest, wise, and
weyghty.

They be both learned with like pain and labor, all be it the commodity,
that ryseth of the one, is far unlike the other.

Seek not to speak many words, to make a long answer, but rather see thou
spend thy words in time, and set them in their place.

Adioyne such company to the at dinner and supper, as can both make the merry
with their pleasant and learned communycation, and also make the rise wiser
than thou set down.

Suffer not such as be skoffers, smell feasts, folysshe and filthy talkers,
triflers, bybbers, filthy and shameless lurkers, bealy guts, and such other,
apt either by their words or deeds, to cause lewede laughter, to sytte at
thy table, neither have any delight in them, but rather seek thy pastime of
such, as can with feate, wyttye, and learned talk make the merye. Keep not
only thy mouth from foul and impudente communication, but also thine ears
being as a man should say, windows of the mind, remembryng ever that old
saying of the Apostle, Naughty communication often times corrupts good manners.

Give dyligent ear, what every man says, whether it be at the table, or any
other where, for so doing, thou shalt learn of the wise, to make thy self
better, and of the folyshe, to be more ware, and circumspecte, following always
that, that the wise approve, eschewynge that the folyshe commend. And if thou
perceive any thing taken of the wise sort, to be spoken quyckely, gravely,
lernedlye, wyttilye, comely, bear it in mind, that thou may, when thou
shalt have occasion, use the same.

Thou shall have always at hand a paper book, wherein thou shalt write such
not able things, as thou redest thy self, or herest of other men worthy to be
noted, be it other feate sentence, or word, mete for familier speech, that thou
may have in a redynes, when time requires.

Study not so much to gather words, as to understand the propre
sygnifycations of them, rehersynge and teaching such things, as thou haste
read or heard, partly to thy scholars in latin, partly in vulgar tongue, to
other unlearned persons. Pou^dynge always, that thou do rehearse and teach them
with no less grace, than thou haste hard and read the same before, for thus
doing, thou shall exercise both thy wit and thy tongue.

Thy style must also be exercysed, which is the best master of clean and
eloquent speech.

Write, and write again, making every second day, or at the least every
third day, an epistle unto some man, that knows how to answer thereunto
again. How be it, thou shalt show it first unto thy master, there to be
reformed, before thou presume to send the same, notynge and bearyng well in
mind such fautes, as he shall correct, that thou may not mysse in them, or
any like in time to come.

After meat, as when thou haste dyned or supte, brethe for a space, before
thou go to thy study, and sytte down in sum place, where thou may talk
and here sum pleasant communication, or play at sum such game, whereby
thou may not chafe or much comber thy body.

After supper, walk with some merry company, that is learned, which may make
the merier with his communication, and whose words and sentences thou may
with honesty follow,

Between supper and bed, drink not in any wise, for there is nothing more
pernitiouse, both to the body, the memory, and also the wit. Wherefore, if
thyrst shall at any time constrain the to drink, goo not to rest under the
space of half an hour after, at the least.

Thou shalt not neglecte thy Memory, nor suffer it to decay through
ydelnesse: for it rejoices above all thing, to be set a work, and
increases not a little thereby. Exercise it therefore daily with some worthy
business.

The more often thou committest things to her custodye, the more better and
faithfuller wolle she keep them. And contrarylye, the more selde, the more
untrusty thou shall find her.

When thou haste put any thing to her kepinge, suffer it to rest in her
hands for a season, and within a while after require it of her ageine as a
thing left for a time in her custody.

If thou will learn any thing perfectely, read it with attention four or five
times over night, and so to bed, and when thou risyst the nerte morning,
ask a reckenynge, of thy memory, for that thing thou did deliver to her
custody the euenyng before.

Thou must beware of surfettes of rawnes in the stomach, and specially of cold
in thy neck.

As to much wine weakeneth the sinews in a man, so it kylleth his memory.

It should be very well done, and if thou would a little before thou goeste
to rest, call to thy remembrance, all such things as thou haste seen,
read, heard, or done all the day before.

And if thou have behaved thy self worthily to thy commendation, thou should
rejoice, and knowledge it to come of god, purposynge to continue in like
goodness: on the other side, if thou haste done any thing filthily,
outragiousely, chyldysshely, fondly, worthy rebuke, forgette not, to ascribe it
to thine own lewdenes, and to be sorry therefore, never willing to do any like
trespass again.

If thou haste herd or read any feate, grave, or godly sentence, forgette it
not.

And if thou have seen any commendable thing, follow it: and shonne the
contrary. Let no day escape the, but thou read, here, or write somewhat, that
may increase, either thy knowledge, thy judgment, or thy living.

When thou prepareste thy self to bed, read or here some thing, worthy
memory, and let it be such that thou dreamyng of it, may take both pleasure
and profitte, that even by night visions, thou may learn to amend thy life.

There is no end appointed unto the study of wisdom in this world, but it
must be ended together with life.

It behooves man to rehearse these three things with him self, all the time of
his life, that is to say, how he may think well, say well, and do well.

All arrogancy must be secluded from studies. For all that, that he knows,
which is even the best learned man a live, is very little or nothing, in
comparyson of the infinite things, which he is ignorant in.

The knowledge of man is sclender a meruaylous small thing, and that very
obscure, and uncertain: our minds being tied and bound in the prison of
this body, be oppressed with great darkness, in so much that hard it is, for
our wits to enter even in to a mean knowledge of things.

Furthermore, Arrogance, much encombereth the profit of studyes, for many
might have come to wisdom, if they had not thought them selfs there all ready.

Also, Contention, Emulation, Bacbirynge, vain desire of Glory, must be
eschewed. For we follow studies for this cause in special, that we may, by
their help, be delivered from ye cruel dominion of the said vices.

Nothing can be imagined more pleasant, than the knowledge of many things,
few or none moore fruytefull, than the intelligence of Virtue.

Studies be of such efficacy and strength, that they temper Prosperity, they
mytigate Adversity, they keep under the hasty and rash motions of youth, they
delight and comfort crooked and peynefull age, being with us at home: abroad, in
public and private business, when we are alone, when we be accompanied in
idelues, in labors, never absent, but always ready to help and aid us.

As Erudition, is the rightest and most wholesome food of the mind, so is it a
thing vumete, that the body should have his nouryshment, the soul being
kept hungery, from whense springs out plentuously all delectation and
perfect pleasures, and as among these, the one brings in an other, and those
that be present, do renew them past, so they never depart, ne make any man
weary, wha^ he has most of them.

Of virtue and affection.
VERTVE, the most high and excellent treasure, surmountynge all worldely
riches, is not given by man, but comes only from god. wherefore we must desire
it of god with meke and humble heart.

The highest among all lyberall arts, is that philosophy, which brings
remedy and health for the great and peynefull diseases of the mind.

Much dilygent labor is taken, to cherysshe the body, much more ought to
be given to the soul, for as much as the diseases thereof, be more privy, more
greuouse, and also more perilous.

These dyseases be named, and not without a cause, Sharp storms, grievous
torments, scourges, bro^des and the furyes of man's mind, which bring with
them much calamity and intolerable corsies, if they be suffered to reygn'e,
and contraryly, most pleasant tranquillity, if they be conquered and kept
down. And to the easy accomplishement of this, such documentes serve much,
as have been of most excellent wits, for the furtherance of good life, and
mayntenaunce of manners, prescribed.

This is the great reward, and the very fruit, that learned men take of their
long and peynefull study, not to gather many things for men to wonder at, or
else such as he him self may crake of, but rather, to have gotten, whereby he
may help al men, and most chiefly him self, and not to let them lie, as in
a box of ointmentes, where out is taken salues, to help other men, the box
there with all, never a deal the better.

Christen Religion looks for nothing so much, as that a clean and a pure
conscience may exhylarate the mind, and that affections, being ones stayed,
and setteled, we may be like unto god and his angels in continual quietness,
and tranquillity of mind.

Remedies for such dyseases be gotten, either of outward things either of
our selves, or of god, orels of the law and life of Christ.

The nature of things is such, that as they be all uncertain, short,
chaungeable, and vile, the soul only excepted, which is in deed very man, or
at the least, the most preciouse part of man: so all other things be
translated from one to an other, lest men should call any thing theyrs, beside
their soul.

Let no man think those things, which he has in his possession, to be
given him, but rather to be lent him for a season.

Wherefore it is great madness, to run in to any sin, worthy greuouse
punysshement, for any worldely tryfles.

Let no man auaunce him self, because the gifts of Fortune or of Body, have
chanced unto him, saying all such trashe, shortly vadeth away, as being
uncertain, and not propre unto us. No no, as they be granted us, so they
shall be required again, at the uttermost when death comes: and often times
even while we be alive.

Neither we ought to mourn, if that thing, which was lent us, and as a man
would say, given us to keep, be asked ageyn, but it rather becomes us, to
render thanks, for because we have so long enjoyed the same.

It is to much unkindness, to think, if thou had a long season a
benefytte, that thou takeste wrong, if it do not always continue. Thou do
rather wrong, not to consider, what thou haste had, and how long, then still
to think what thou haste not had, or how long thou haste not had it.

Thou ought not, to much to rejoice, when things taken from thy ennemies,
come to the or thy friends for such is the speed of Fortune, and such
doubtfulnes is in all things, that bitter wailing often times follows vain
mirth.

Let not thy heart fail the, although fortune turn her face: for merry
euentydes do often times follow careful mornings.

Now, what condition be our bodies in, what life can we look for which be
made of so vile, and so brickle a metal, our lives being with so many
perils, besieged on every side? And although it seem sure for a time, yet it
will not long endure. Therefore, what have we, whereupon we should (chiefly in
such uncertainty of life) be high minded or fierce of heart?

And for as much, as this life is none other thing, but a certain
pylgremage, whereby we still be entering in to an other life eternal, and
saying also, we need very few things, for the performance of the said
journey, what has this world worthy long suite? What folly, to seek such
things by peynfull servitude, as we see tossed and turned in a moment hither
and thither.

For what eude or purpose should we serve out never satisfied desire and
appetyte, when things to come be uncertain, and we at this present need very
few things?

He is a very free man, which desires only those things, as be in his own
hands. On the other side he a bondsman and slave, that does the contrary.

Now I pray you, what other thing is it, to be replenysshed with the gifts
of Fortune, than a foot man to be combred with diverse and many fardelles.

There is no man so dulle, no such lack wit, but he rather prepares and
fytteth him self for the city, where he purposes to dwell, than stylle
seeks things for his journey.

Sythens this our life is of nature droupyng and fleinge, the most part
thereof, and almost al, is spente in perturbation, in troubles, in fantasies: we
can not say, we live all the while, that we be tossed with affections, and in
especial, when the fear of death troubles us. And where as death may come to
us, by an infinite sort of ways. It is great folly, to fear, that it should
come this way or that way: and seeing that it shall of necessity come, we may
not commit any great mischief or wickedness, to avoid it, nor we ought to
mourn, though it chance.

Our life being oppressed with so many diverse myseries, what need we to keep
it with such anxietie? to set so much by it, saying also we go to an other,
which is a life everlasting? Let us so order our selves that we have ready
passage to that life, which is replenyshed with all goodness, full of joy
eternal, full of mirth everlasting.

Our errors oppress us, rather than things them self: where as we often times
think them to be great euyls, that are none in deed and great goods, that of
truth are worth naught.

The nature, condition, and true value of things be those, which I have
reherced in the beginning, whereby it may be plainly gathered that there is
nothing fair, nothing of price, finally nothing to be accounted ours, but
only virtue.

Where as delyberation is taken, we being in doubt, to which part we may
most inclyne, the love of our body, and the desire of things here in this
life, that is to say, the love of our self, is chief counselor, and one
that we all together follow.

This weakeneth the strength and manhod of our minds, so much that nothing
can be so little, but it is easily able to penetrate them, nothing so sklender
or small, but it may be able to disturb them.

This blyndeth the eyes of the mind, and when affections have ones gotten the
upper hand, we flatter, we yield, we obey them, as our lords and rulers.

Thus we hold things with tothe and nail, that are alien from us, as they
were ours: and if they be with drawn from us, we lament, tourmentynge our
selves, as though we had great loss.

We neglecte our own, as none of ours, and do shonne things profitable, as
very hurtefull to us, enbrasynge things hurtful, as very profitable.

The harms of the folks seem small, but we think our own, being northynge
so great as theyrs, intolerable: neither content with that we wyshe our
selves, nor yet pleased if we might obtain that that other men much desire.
We like not our selves, this world, the condition and estate thereof, does not
satisfy us: we would have the natures of al things turned, such is the
impaciencie, that grows of deyntie fantasies.

What punyshement may be compared with these? trewely the torments among
damned spirits be none other. The dyuels them selves have none other
punyshement, than that they be vexed with envy, hatred and wroth.

A man may se the counteuaunce of them, that be inquieted with these
affections, how variable, how careful, how pantyng, how cruel, how
fearful they be, and in like trade be their minds racked and tourmented
within them.

ANGER, which is the sorest of al other perturbations, and worst of al other,
becomes not a man, for it turns his nature into a cruel beast, and
although every trouble does obscure and darken the judgment of the mind,
yet most of all Ire, ouerwhelmeth it with darkness so sore, that it sees
neither Truth, profytte, or comlynes. It eats up the heart, and drynketh up
the wholesome blood of the body, constraining man to do that thing, whereof
Repentance shortly ensues.

How shameful a change is there in the face, what sodeyn tempests arise
there, what burning eyes, what snuffynge of the nose, what grennyng of the
tethe, what foming of the mouth, what palenes, what stuttynge of tongue,
finally, what terryble and uncomely cryinges be there in him, that is inflamed
with this fury? Truly such, that some, which have in their anger beholden
them self in a glass, have not known themhselfe.

The angry man, for his grymine countenance, his sharp words, and cruel
deeds, often times loses much of his authority, much beneuolencie is taken
from him, his friends forsake him, no man will mete him, he is left al alone,
al men hate and abhor him, wherefore, great wise men never eschewed thing
more, or cloked thing with greatter diligence, than they did Ire, and the
works of Ire. In so much, that they not only wrasteled against their own
nature, but in spite of her beard gave her the fall.

What is more worthy to be skorned, than so little and so weak an anymall,
to rage and stere up so great and so fierce tragedies, for vile trifles, and
things of no value? as sometime for the gifts of the body, or of fortune, yea
and sometime, wisely a gods name, for one little word.

Thou shalt sone subdue anger, if thou hold and fasten this thing in thy
mind, that is to say: No injury to be done, except when the mind takes
hurt, which no man can corrupt, but only he that possesses it, and that by
defylynge it with sin.

We have spoken hitherto of things coming from man to man, we woll now
talk of higher matters, as coming of god. How be it those things also
before reherred, were of god: but these that follow, come some what more
expressly and properly from him.

Of religion.
THERE could nothing be given unto mankind more greatter, or better than
Religion, which is knowledge, love, and veneration of the prince and maker of
the world.

GOD is so beneficial to no man, as he is to them, whom he techeth, how they
shall trewely worship him. Therefore David the prophet reherseth this among
the greatte gifts of god, showed to the people of Israel: Qui annuntiat
verbum suum Jacob. etc. that is, which shows his word unto Jacob: his
justice and judgments to Israel. He has not so done to all nations, nor has
he opened his judgments unto all men.

God is known by religion, and being known, he must needs be believed and
worshypped.

Only god is prince, maker, and lord of all things, which alone is able to
do all things, and knows how to do all things.

This world, is in manner as it were an house, or a temple of god, which of
naught be brought forth in to this shappe and ornacy, that it now is in.
Therefore it has received this name Cosmos, among the Greeks, and is called
Mundus, of the Latins, which both are as much to say, as a comely
Ornament, a beautiful thing: which he so rules and governs, that we may
no less wonder at the conseruatio^, than at the creation of it.

And like as in the house of a most prudent governor, nothing is done without
his commandment, so in this world is there nothing done, without his will or
bidding: the which as he can all things do, so he knows how to do all
things.

Angels, dyuelles, men, and beasts, trees, stocks, and stones, the heavens,
the elements, and to be short, all things are governed by him, and obey him.

There is nothing made, nothing that moves, nothing that chances, another
stock nor straw, may be lift from the ground, neither flock ne fether,
may flee further, than his prescripte or commandment is.

In this law stands the universal world, neither is there in things any
other chance, fortune, or lotte.

He does al things with his equity and wisdom, not withstandyng by ways to
us unknown.

What so ever happens to any man, that same toutnethe to his profytte, if he
be good: but not to profytte of wretched money, or of worldely things
transitory, but of eternal felicity.

What so ever things therefore chance in this world, they must be patiently
taken and allowed, as coming of god the author, lest we in our fond
affection and folishe judgment, seem to condemn and improve the will of that
most righttuous and wise governor of al things, God.

And because we be not able to compass, for what purpose he does such
things: We, as children and ignorant, what is best for us, do lament, that
things most hurteful be not given us, taking them as most profitable: on
the other side, abhorryng things most profitable, as most hurtful. In so
much, that oftetymes our ennemie can wish no more hurt, than that we may
have our own desires. And saying we be drowned in so great darkness of
ignorance, goddis will is, that we avoid all that is blame worthy, and
commytte all the rest to his governance.

We must execute, whether we will or no, that thing, which the governor of
this so great a work has appointed us to. What madness is it therefore, rather
to be drawn against our will, with weeping and waylyng, than to be led merrily
and willing to that we are called to.

Truly, every friend of god, will gladly obey the laws and will of god, his
friend.

This is the chief manner of loving god, as CHRIST says, You shall be my
friends, if you will do that I command you.

Of Christ.
THE atonement and the reconciler of Mankind with GOD, and the author of our
salvation, is JESUS CHRIST, God and man, the only son of god almighty, whom
the father sent for the same purpose, when it pleased him to take pytie upon
Mankind, which had made him self, to his own great hynderaunce, an ennemy
unto god.

There can be no greater hurt, than by syn to be separated from god, the
fountain of all goodness, and to be turned to most hurtful myserie, to be
taken from a most sweet life, and left to a most bitter death.

FOR this purpose, among other things, Christ came, that he might teach us
the true and straight way, wherein we might steadfastly stand, and take our
journey to god ward: not swaruyng from it, the breadth of an hear. He has
showed this way, both by words, and also by example of his holy life.

All humayne wisdom, compared with Christ's religion, is but durte, and very
folyshnes.

What soever grave, prudent, wise, pure, holy, or religious thing is with
admiration, with exclamation, with clappyng of hands, in the books of the
gentylles red, commended, learned by heart, praised above the moon all this is
found, more purely, more rightly, more openly, more easyly in our religion.

Perfect wisdom is, to know this Religion: and to live according to it, is
perfect Virtue. For no man knows it in very deed, except he live thereafter.

Christ's life witnesses his perfect humanity, his miracles declare the
infinite power of his deytie, his law shows his heavenly wisdom: so that of
his perfect goodness of living, we have example to follow him of his power and
auctority, strength to obey him: of his wisdom, faith to believe him,

Let his goodness provoke the to love him, his majesty to worship him, his
wisdom to believe him.

If a man do well consider those things, which Christ commands, he shall
find al done for our profit, in so much, that who so feleth him self, to
believe tyghtly, shall perceive it is to his own great profit, goodness, and
comfort.

As there is nothing more pleasant to man, than to be believed, so it is even to
god, for no man can think well of him, to whom he commits him self, afraid
of hurt.

The foundation of our salvation is to believe god, to be father, and Jesus
Christ his only son, to be our law maker, and the holy ghost to be breathed
out of both, without whom, we do nothing, we think nothing, that can profit
us.

The true worshyppyng of god, is to cleanse and purify the soul from all
diseases and unclean lusts, and to be turned as nere to his similytude as we
may, so that we be, as he him self is, clean and holy, and that we hate no
man, but rather study, by all means to profit al men.

The more thou transposest thy self from things corporal, unto things
incorporate, the more godly life shall thou lead.

Thus shall it be brought to pass, that god may acknowledge our nature, as of
kyn, and like unto him, and may delight in it, making it his true and right
temple, much more acceptable to him, than churches made of lyme and stone.

The temple of god is holy, which are you, as wytnes saint Paul. So noble, so
worthy a guest, must with all care, dilygence, and tenderness be retained.

He may not, through ye foul stink of sins, be driven to change his
lodgyng.

Bodily works be unsavory, except they have sauce from the heart.

Know, that thou have god in the most secret part of thy heart, as witness and
judge of all thy thoughts, in so much, that if thou fear his presence, thou
wolt not only avoid all naughtynes outwardly, but also thou wolt not suffer
unclean thoughts to enter into thy mind.

Love toward god, ought to be such, that thou esteem him above all things,
and that his glory and honor be derer unto the, then all this life, all
honor, and commodities thereof.

And as when one friend reme^breth an other, he is moved with a friendly and
honest joy, so let all divine things seem friendly unto the, that is most
acceptable and pleasant and be thou co^uersant in them most gladly.

As often as thou herest God named se that a greatter, and a more excellent
thing stryke thy remembrance and mind, than man's knowledge can atteyne to.

Here the sayenges, that be spoken of him, and of his saints, not as thou
herest vain fables, but with great admiration of mind.

Judge nothing rashely, nor pronounce thou any thing of god, and his works,
but thou do it with reverence and fear.

It is wickedness, to ieste upon holy things, or to use the sayings of holy
scripture, as folish toys and trife lyng tales, and skoffynges, even as a man
should sprinkle dirt in a medicine, adorned for recovery of health. But to apply
it to fylthy communication or bawdry, is a thing abominable, and in no wise to
be suffered.

It becomes all things there, to ve maruayled at, and to be received with
worthy reverence in to our hearts.

Be present at redynge and preaching of goddis word, and all that holy is: and
understand, that what so ever thou either see or herest there, is most pure,
most holy, and apperteyneth unto goddis majesty, which as we may easily
worship and adore so we can comprehend it by no means. So that thou may
always judge more higher things to be hyd in that dyuyne wisdom, than the
strength of man's wit is able to aspire unto.

We reverence the saienges of wise men, yea although we do not well understand
them, how much more than does it beseme us, to give condign reverence unto
godly saienges?

As often as thou herest Jesus Christ named, remember thou his inestimable love,
toward the, and let the rehersall of his name be unto the full of swetenes and
veneration.

When thou herest any title, or proper name given unto Christ, lift up thy
self unto the contemplacion thereof, and pray unto him, that he will show him
self, even such a one toward the. As wha^ thou herest him called merciful,
mehe or gentil, pray that thou may prove him the same unto the: when he is
called almighty, desire, that he may show it, in the making the, of the most
wretched sinner, a good liver, of an ennemy, his son, of nothing, some thing:
when thou herest him called terryble, entreat him, to feate them, of whom thou
art feared: When thou call him lord, look that thou serve him: When thou
call him father, se thou love him, and se thou show thy self a child,
worthy to have so noble a Father.

There is nothing in all the world, whose original, whose beginning, whose
power and virtue, if thou behold, but it may give the matter, hyghly to
praise, heartily to worship god, the author of all together.

Begin nothing, but thou first call for the help of god. For God in whose
power are all things, gives prosperous furtheraunce and fynysshyng unto such
acts, as we do begin in his name.

What so ever thou shall go about, ever have an eye to the end thereof, and
when thou have taken good counsel, be not careful, but put thy trust in him,
in whose hand restith the luck of all things.

All holiness remains in the secret parts of the hearts, labor therefore to
understand, what thou prayest, that thou may lose no time in lyppe labor.
And when thou praiest: let thy heart, thy mind, thy tongue, and all thy gesture
agree together, that all thy hole action may most excellently agree in it self.
Dyuine scripture accurseth him, that does the works of god negligently.

If it be shame for a Mynstrell, to sing one thing, and play an other, not
consonaunt to that he syngeth, it is much more shame for us, to say one thing
with our mouth, and think an other in our heart. Let our desires be sober, and
of such sort, as be worthy to be axed, and mete to be given of god, lest our
unmeet and fond desires offend him.

When thou go to meat, remember the infinite power of god, which made al
thing of naught: remember also his wisdom and benignity, which susteyneth
the same: and finally call unto mind, his mekenes, and clemency, which
fedith yea his extreme ennemies.

Ponder and way, how great a thing it is to prepare diverse add sufficient
vitailes, to so many mouths as be in the would, what a thing it is, to conserve
all things, and keep the^ from destruction, whether they fast how, of their
inclination.

No wisdom of man, nor yet of aungel, were able in any wise to perform this
thing, no nor yet ones understand how it is brought to pass.

Seeing therefore, that thou lyuest of his gifts, consider, what cursed
unkindness, and what dampnable rashenes it is, to be so bold, to fall at debate
with him, by whose benefit and will, thou haste thy being, and longer should
thou not be, if he would not.

At thy table, let al thing be chaste, pure, wise, holy, even as he is, whose
gifts thou art now in hand with. Let all bakbytyng, bitter words, fierce,
and cruel speking, be secluded from thy table, where thou felest the incredible
swetenes and clemency of god toward the.

Wherefore, it is more intolerable, that thou should contaminate that place
with sharpnes, and hatred against thy brother, where thou fyndest much favor
and gentle softenes toward the.

This thing the Gentylles well perceived, which for the same skyll named all
things, dedicate and belongyng to the table, with names of plesantnes, and
myrthe, as feasts, iunkettes, and gawdes, where it was counted a greuouse
offense, any sad, heavy, or heinous thing, either to be done or said.

Seeing therefore, thou have god to thy governor, which is most in might,
wisdom, and liberality, put away the inordynate regard of thy self, wherein
thou semest, to mystrust his goodness, and labor only, how thou may please
and content him. It is a great folyshnes, to say, or do any thing amysse, a
madness, to dysplease him, for the contention of thy table, from whom all
nourishementes comes, a madness, to get his displeasure, of whom thou
labourest to obtain a benefyt, namely for as much as the life is not
preserved by meat, but by the will and pleasure of god: according to the saying
of scripture, Not in Bread only lives man, But in every word of god.

We have by indenture of Jesus lord of all, in heaven and earth, that they shall
lack nothing, which seek accordingly the kingdom of god, and righteousness
allowed before him.

Seeing therefore, that god is so bou^teful toward the, in his gifts be not
thou unkind to thy brother, accompting him no less to be the son of god, than
thou thy self: and that god is no more bound to the, than to him: and that he
has only made the a minister of his gifts, of whom next unto god, thy
brother should ask relyefe.

Neither is there any thing more truly given to Christ, then that that is
bestowed upon the poor.

When thou have with meats and drinks refresshed thy self, consider whose
providence and power it is, to sustain the life with such things as thou
have received, and give thanks therefore to god, not as thou would to him,
which has prepared sustenance for the, with his money, but such thanks as
are mete for him, which has made both the, and also the meat susteining the
life not by the strength of the said meat, but by his divine power, and
inestymable goodness.

At thy down lyenge and vprysynge, remember the benefittes of god, not only
toward the, but toward all mankind: yea and all the hole world.

Consider, in what dangers man is, while he lies like a dead carkas, having
no power of him self. Wherefore Christ must so much the more instantly be
sought upon, that he may vouchsafe to defend us sylly wretches.

Head ought to be taken, that we provoke not him to wroth, and anger, by any
our sin, seeing he is our keeper, and our governor.

Arm thy forhead and thy breaste with the sign of the cross, and the secret
part of thy heart with devout prayers, and holy meditations.

And when thou shalt go to thy bed, look that thou think every day resembles
ye hole life of man, whom the night succedeth, and sleep a very express token
of death.

We must therefore pray unto Christ, that he vouchesafe, to be with us ever
favorable, both in time of life and death, and that he vouchesafe to grant
that to be pleasant and quiet unto us.

We must pray him, that strange dreams fear us not, but that even sleaping,
we may have him in mind: and that refreshed with his comfort we may rise merrily
in the morning, remembering his blessed death, ye price whereby he redeemed mankind.

Thou shall keep thy bed chaste and pure, so that thy enemy, the author and
head of al fylthynes, may have no claim ne right therein.

And with the sign of the cross, and Invocation of the name of God, but
specially through holy thoughts, cogitations, and steadfast purpose, never
after to offend, shalt thou drive all the power of the feend from it.

When thou rysest in the morning, commit thy self to Christ, rendryng thanks
unto him, that he has preserved the, that night, through his help and
tuition, from the deceytes and envy of that cruel ennemy.

As thou have first slept the night time, and are now risen again: so
remember, that our bodies shall first sleep by death, and after be restored to
life by Christ, when he shall appear, and come to judge both quick and dead.

Beseech him, that it may be his will, and that he cause the to spend the day
following in his service, so that thou may another hurt, nor yet be hurt of any
man, and that thou so compassed on every side, and defended with christian
godlynes, may safely escape the nets and snates, which the devil, most
deceytfull ennemy, never ceasseth to lay for mankind.

Worship Mary the blessed mother of God, and other holy saints, the dear
beloved friends of Christ dwelling with him in life everlasting.

Read and here often times the life and acts of them, that thou may follow
the same.

Let thy thought and report of them be, not as of men, but as of persons, that
by the goodness of god, have transcended all nature and humayne excellency, and
now nygh conjoined with god.

Where as there is so great likeness of men, both in body and mind, they being
al brought in to this world by one right and title, made and appointed to a
certain communion and society of life, to the preservation whereof, nature
has proclaimed this law, Let no man to an other do, that that he would not
have done to him self He that restored nature decayed, has professed this one
doctrine to be his, but yet expressyng the same more at larg, and setting it
out more plainly, for to make the nature of man perfect in every condition,
and as like unto god as it may be, he commanded us, not only to love one an
other, but also to love our ennemies, that we may be like the father of heaven,
which syncerely loved his enemies, as he declares by his great benefittes
showed unto them.

And how is it to be marked, that the nature of man is such, that we would
them to be our friends whom we our selfs can in no wise love.

Of Charity.
THis most wise master and guide of our life, has given us this one
document, to rule our life by, that is, to love one an other: knowing, that by
this only rule we might lead a blessed life, without need of any mo laws.

There is not a more blessed thing than to love. And therefore god and his
angels, be most blessed, as they that love all things.

Nothing is more wretched, than to hate, by the which affect, the deuyls be
most miserable.

True love weyeth all a like: where true love reygneth, no man seeks
preferment, no man steleth from his well beloved, accompting al such things, to
be with him self, which are with his friend.

Love contendeth not with his dear brother, nor thinks not, that he does him
any injury at any time, and therefore he neither remembers displeasure, ne
enuyeth him because he loves him, no man reioyseth in the misfortunes of his
friend, neither is grieved at his prosperity, but contrary wise, he ioyeth with
them that rejoice, and wepeth with them that weep, according to the saying of
the apostell. And this does he not faintly, but with all his heart, for as much
as he estemeth those things, which apperteine to him, whom he loves, as his
own.

The most sure, sound, and true example of this manner of living, are the acts
of Christ, set before our eyes.

For the son of god came down from heaven, to teach us the right trade of
living, not only in word, but also by example of life, that we might, our
hearts being illuminate by that his clear son beam of verity discern the
truth of every thing.

First he being exercised in all kinds of paciencie, what moderation of
mind did he show, notwithstanding his infynyte power and might? and al be it
he was assauted with so many and grievous injuries, yet never gave he any evil
word again, teaching all only the way of god, and abhorring the contrary.

He suffered him self to be bound, which might have ouertourned the hole
world with a beck. How patiently suffered he, his false accusers.

Finally, he so behaved him self, that no man might perceive, he had any
power, but al only to help other.

The king and lord of al, by whom ye father made this world, how lowly suffered
he him self, to be made equal with the vilest sort of men, having another
house for him self, nor sustenaunce for his beloved ministers.

The maker and governor of nature, was partaker, and felt all the miseries of
the same: he hungered, he thrysted, he was weryed, and often did mourn. Why
suffered he these infirmities, but only for our instruction? So greatly loved
he Peace, Concord, and Charity, that he pursued no sin, more than pride,
arrogance, ambition, contention, stryues, and privy hatredes, which spring
out of the said pride, showing, that there is nothing, why a man should take
any thing upon him arrogantly, by reason of these outward, or else bodily
gifts, seeing they are coming and going not of our own nature, neither are
these things derived from the inward powers of man, or of virtue, but given
and taken away by god: because no man should auaunce him self for such gifts,
or forget from whence they come, neglectyng those men, for whose relief he
received the^ of god.

AND to subdue this syn of pride, and that no man should stand in his own
conceyt, though he had been obedyent in all points of relygyon, and fully
observed the law of the gospel, Christ says these words: when ye have done
all that I have commanded you, say that ye are But unprofitable servants.

How great therefore is their folyshnes, which glory, as perfect Christians,
preferring them selfs as concerning the observation of the law, before al
other, where as often times, he whom thou think very naughty, in comparison
of thy self, is much richer in virtue than thou, and destinate to salvation,
when thou shalt be appointed to eternal myseries?

GOD, that has taken all judgment of men from man, because the one is blind
and ignorant in the secrets of an others heart, reseruyng the knowledge of
hearts only to him self.

The outward things, which the eye of man only beholds, are but weak and
uncertain tokens of the inward secrets.

Wherefore it is not lawful to give full sentence of any man's virtue, vice or
disposition, because ye have twice or thrice ben in his company. Ye can give no
sentence of him, though ye have been with him a hundred times. No, though ye
have been of longest familiarity together.

Uery deep and dark are the dens of man's heart, and what man's sight is so
quick, to perse through so great a miste of darkness.

And seeing, that god has redeemed all mankind, and that with so great a price,
from the servitude of the devil, let no man be so bold to contemn or deceive
his own soul, which god so intyerly beloved, that he shronke not, to give
his life therefore.

The lord was crucified for us all, and for each one of us.

Think not, that thou can please god, if thou hate him, whom god loves.
For he requires none other thanks, but that we do love and show our selves
friendly to our fellow servants, as he being our lord, loved us, when we were
leude and noughty, and deserved much evil.

Here began he the mutual bond of love between man and man, and men toward
god, that is to say, here he laid the foundation of man's felycytie, and
fynyssheth the same in heaven.

This is the life, and grace of Christ wisdom excedyng man's capacity,
agreing in equity to them, that have understanding and alluryng al men to
goodness.

Let no man think him self a right Christian, or to be in the favor of
god, if he hate any person seeing that Christ has commended all men to our love
and frendshyp.

Be friendly to man, when god wills the to favor: if he be worthy, love him
for his worthiness: if he be unworthy, yet love him, because god is worthy to be
obeyed.

Neither fastings, nor yet great richesse bestowed among pore folks make a
man acceptable to god. Only Charity toward man brings this to pass, as the
apostel has taught us.

Thou ought to love every man as thy natural brother, rejoicing of his
prosperiie, and sorowyng for his adversity, being always ready to help him to
thy power.

Let neither nation, city, nor kynred, let not profession, state, ne condition
of living, let not wit dimynishe this affecte of love: for there is one father
of all, God, whom thou art taught of Christ, to call father daily, which woll
acknowledge the to be his child, if thou in like manner knowledge all his
children to be thy brethren.

Be not ashamed, to take him for thy brother, whom Christ disdaineth not to
take for his son.

GOD brought peace, concord, and love into the world: the devil, as most
expert artificer, invented partakinges, quarelling, private profit,
dissentions, debate and war.

GOD, willing our salvation, sprinkeleth among us benevolence: the devil,
willing our destruction, sows hatred and enmity.

Small substance increases, where concord reigns: by discord, great
things are scattered, and come to naught.

They that study, to make peace and concord between man and man, stablysshyng
the same with all their might, shall be called the children of god: and they that
do the contrary, the children of the devil, as Christ him self plainly
testifies.

The highest point, wherein a man passes the fyercenesse of all wild beasts,
is battle, a thing more agreing to beasts unreasonable, than to man, which
is weldeclared by the name, that the latins have given it.

How much does nature her self abhor from war, which brought forth man
in to this world, naked without armure, shapynge him to meekness, and lovely
society of life? God also abhors the same, which wol and commands mutual
love between man and man.

One of us may not war with annother, ne hurt one the other, without grievous
offense.

If thou suspecte any man, to bear grudge or displeasure in his mind toward
the, labor with hand and foot, to reconcile and pacify him spare thou not in
this behalf to pray to flatter, and to bestow thy goods so that thou may
thereby obtain the favor of all men, for this is the most ready and compendious
way, to come to goddis favor.

Thou shall scorn no man, remembering, that what so ever chances to one, may
hap to an other. No rather give thanks to god, that he has kept the from
such danger, and pray partly, that no like thing may fortune to the, partly
for remedy unto him, that is thus afflycted, or at the least, that god will
give him grace, to take it thankefully, and help him, if thy power will extend
thereto.

It is a token of a dogged heart, to rejoice in an other man's misfortune, and
not to pity the common course of nature.

Be merciful to man, and GOD woll have mercy upon the.

The fortune and chance, that follows mankind, is common to every man,
thretnyng daily all men, and hanging over every man's head.

Think it not possible, that thou can do any thing more agreing to this
love, dew unto man, than if thou bring them to the greatest good of this
world, Virtue.

Ageine thou can do nothing more repugnaunt to love, than to bring any man
to evil counsel, example, or otherwise, unto sin.

The chyefest and happyest of all other things, is for a man to love, yea
although he be not loved ageine, yet that not withstandyng to be loved, is the
swetest and the surest thing.

No treasure is of so great certaynty, as perfect love, and amytie, no guard so
strong, as faithful friends.

He takes the son out of the world that takes love from life.

True love, sure and stable frendshyp rests in the^ only that be good and
virtuous, among whom, love lightly increases.

Evil men are so far from loving the good, that they can not one love an
other.

The redyest way to be loved, is first to love. For love is allured by nothing
so much as by love.

Love is gotten also by Virtue, which of her self is so amiable, that often
times she inuiteth, and in manner constrains men to love her, which never
knew her.

Love is also allured by tokens of virtue, as by demure softness, by comely
shamefastnes, by humanity, by gentle and fair speech, specially if thou
neither say ne do any thing, that sauereth of arrogance, insolency, or malopert
uncleanness. Let al thy acts be sweet, soft, gentle, and pure.

The venom of love and amity is, to love thy friend so, that thou yeldest
upon occasion to hate him, or so to take him thy friend, that thou think he
may be thyn ennemy.

This saying is godly, I hate, as one ready to love.

Let no remembrance of displeasure be, where love is, another think, that he,
whom thou take for thy friend, can be thy ennemy, for else shall thy love be
very weak and brickle.

In frendshyp must be such faith, constancy, and symplicitie, that in no wise,
thou have any suspicion in thy friend, or give ear unto them that suspecte
him, or shall evil report him.

Life is no life, to such as live in suspicion or fear, but rather such life
is a continual death.

Be not inquisitiue, how other men live: for they that pass to much of other
men's affairs, often times look upon their own busynes but sklenderly. It is a
point of great folly, well to know other men, and not to know thy self.

Of this thing rise many pryuy grudges, and such as use these things, be
most commonly they, which can spy a small mote in an other man's eye, and not
see a great beam in their own. It is great folyshnes, to know other men so
well, and to know them self never a deal.

Thou may not alonely love men, but also reverence such as becomes, the
honestly behauyng thy self among them, wherein consists the office and duty
of our hole life. To the better accomplishment whereof, thy part is, diligently
to mark, where when, and with whom thou do or speak any thing.

When thou art in presence of men, so order all the parts of thy body, and in
especial thy eyes and countenance, that there may be no token of disdain or
contempt perceived.

Use no wanton gesture, but let quietness and pleasant serenitie, tokens of a
quiet and clear mind, always temper thy countenance.

The fair and most favorable couerture of man's face is modesty and
shamefastness, which so set forth man's countenance, that without the same,
it seems a thing very deformed and detestable.

Al hope of recovery is paste in him which now is no more ashamed of evil
doing.

Show not to much severity or grimnesse in thy countenance. For thereby men
conjecture, the mind to be cruel and unruly.

Laugh not to often, nor out of mesure, laugh not to loud, nor that thy body
shake withal, lest thou be mocked and laughed to scorn for such thy folyshe
laughter.

There may be a cause of laughter, but there can be no cause of scornful
laughter.

To scorn good things is wickedness, to mock, evil cruelty, and to jest
at other mean things, great folyshnes: to scorn good men, wickedness, leude
men cruelnes, familiarly acquainted, immanitie, unknown men, madness: to be
short, a man to scorn a man inhumanitie.

Let thy eyes be quiet and stedy, play not with thy fyngers as iuglers use to
do.

Accustom not thy self to strike, for often times after a fyllyp follows a
blow, and from blows men come to clubbes and swords.

Give only good men true and right honor, which comes from the reverence of
the mind. Honor such as be in office and authority, and be obedient unto
them, although they command grievous and peinfull things, for god wills it
so to be, for a public quietness.

Give place unto rich men, lest they stered to anger, hurt both the and
other good men to.

Arise unto age, and reverence it, as in whom consysteth often times great
experience, and knowledge of godly living and worldly policy.

Be not only even with them that honor the, but according to the apostels
precepte, prevent them when thou may.

It is an argument of great rudenes, not to salute him, that saluteth the, a
great point of barbarousnes, not to wish well ageine to him, that wishes well
to the.

How small things, and of how light cost are salutation, fair spech,
gentelnes, reverence? And yet how great frendshyp engender they, if they be
used? what amities do they dissolve, if ye omyt them?

What perverse ignorance is it, not to reconcile and get again the good will
of many, when ye may have it with so small a trifle?

The more gentle man, and the better a man is brought up, the more lowly and
curteisly he behaueth him self: the more vilayne, the more disdeynfull and
fierce. Some time these vices come of dulnes and lack of knowledge, and for
this cause, good lerning is called humanity.

If thou salute, and be not saluted again, ascribe it to negligence rather
than to contempt. If thou be spoken to unmannerly, attribute it to lack of
good manners, or to nature, and not to malice or hatred, be not so light, to be
moved with the breath of a man's mouth.

By such and other like wholesome interpretations, thou shalt lead an holy and
pleasant life, for so shall thou love every man, and not think thy self
offended or hurt of any person. It is an old proverb, Vt verax ne suspicax,
that thou be true, be not suspicious, these words may be new, ye sentence is
old Vt quietus ne suspicax, that thou be quiet, be not suspicious.

Look that thou show not thy self to contemn any man in countenance, in
gesture, word, or deed. If thou being of low degree, despise such as be thy
superiors, how shall thy inferiors obey the.

If thou be the greater, thou by thy proud contemning of him, tournest thine
inferiors heart from the.

Contempt is a thing intolerable, for as much as no man can think him self
so vile, that he ought to be despised.

Many labor, to deliver them selves from contempt, but mo study to be
revenged thereof.

There is no man so great, but fortune may drive him to need the help of the
porest, and seek succor of the symplest.

Besides all this, there is no man, whom god is content to take for his son,
that can justly be contemned, except thou also in him contemn goddis judgment.

Use no doggishe eloquence, seek not praise of cunnyng by contumeliouse speech
against thy brother, as touching whose reproach, better it were for the to be
tongue tied.

Often times men unknown and despised, are after found worthy much reverence.

Of speech and communication.
GOD gave man a tongue, to be an instrument, to set forward, keep, and preserve
the socyetie of man's life, for the mayntena^ce whereof, nature binds man to
man.

This tongue is cause of many commodities, if thou use it well, cause of many
mischiefs, if thou misuse it. Therefore James the Apostle does resemble it very
well to the stern of a ship. Tongue must be brideled and kept in, that she
neither hurt her self, nor any other.

Syn is wrought by no instrument so easily, ne so often, as by the tongue.

Thou shall not rail, curse, ne hurt any man: thou shall say nothing, either
to the loss of his goods or good name.

Thou shalt not dishonestly, proudely, or malopertely rage against any man,
thou shalt immoderately inuey against no man, although thou be thereto
provoked, for so doing, thou shall more hurt thy self before god, and men of
wisdom, then him, against whom thou raylest.

To give one evil word for an other, is as much as to wype away one durte
with an other.

To threten, is a point of naughtye packes, of dwellers on the other side of
the water. Be not of so weak a mind, of so tender an heart, that a few
words be able to wound the.

Be not to curiouse, in reprehending other men, but rather labor, that they
may not find in the any thing reprouable.

And if thou chance, to rebuke any person worthyly, yet use no cruelty in
thy words, but myngle thy sharp checkes with some mylde co^municatio^, that if
you make any wound, it may be swaged thereby, but euertaking head, yt the fruit
of reprehension be not lost whiles that thou studiest over much to mitigate
the matter.

Beware thou slide not into flattery.

Assentation is a foul vice, and brings the sayer to dishonestie, and the
herer to great hurt.

Think nothing so preciouse, that thou ought for it, to swerue from right
and treuth.

Let neither riches, ne frendshyp, neither entreaty, ne threteninges, let no
fear of death obtain this of the.

Thus doing, thou shalt be regarded and trusted, al thy saienges shall be as
gospelles, if thou do contrary wise, thou shall nothing be esteemed, ne thought
worthy to be heard.

Let thy communication be sobre, civil, gentyl, and nothing rough, rusticall,
or rude, nor yet ever our curiouse, lest he should have need of an
interpretour, that would understand the, use no contumeliouse nor obstinate
language, use not to flatter with nyse and mynced words.

There is a certain mean, which neither leseth his own dignity, nor takes
away an other man's. wanton uncleanness, is as well to be refused in our talk,
as is poison in our meat.

Be not hasty, when thou speak, let not thy tongue go before thy wit, make no
answer, before thou perfectly understand, what the matter means.

This saying, what so ever first comes to the tounges end, which Cicero
spoke unto Titus of Athenes, ought selde or never to be admytted, for as much
as nothing ought to be spoken among friends, whereby amity might be appeired.

How foul, how perilous, a thing is Lingua quo uadis? Tongue whether go
thou?

CHRIST our lord, knowing how many and diverse mischiefs sprang of vain
communication, as quarellinges, discordes, and privy hatredes, to the intent
he would, that men should be circumspecte in their speech, thretened all men,
that they have to make a count of every ydell word at the day of judgment.

Therefore each prophet says, Set thou a watch unto my mouth, and adoore
before my lyppes.

Be not to busy in talkyng, or to full of words: have not all thy
communication alone. There is a certain order and course in talkyng, al though
thou common with most unlearned and vilest persons. And yet draw not thy
words so that thou may seem to harken to thy self, and to do so, because
every word that comes from the, seems a rose.

It is more better for the, among wise men, to harken, than to speak: yet
sometime it is no less fault, for a man to hold his peace, than it is at an
other time to speak, when it behooves him not.

There is no pleasure to be compared to the communication of a man, that is
wise and well learned.

Be never to inquisitiue, for it is peynefull, and causes hatred. Thou
know, what Horace says, Eschew a busy demaunder, For the same is commonly
a babbler.

Be not contentious or obstinate in reasonynge, but when thou hereste truth,
reverence it with silence, and arise up thereat, as to a dyuyne and godly thing.

If thou here no such thing, yet take it friendly, and that namely, if there be
nothing said, whereby honesty, manners, and good living may be hyndered.

Contention is naught worth, where is no hope of amendment.

Men can hardly bear arrogance, pride, or disdaynefull auctority, no not in men
of great power, and all praise worthy.

Brag not in words, but show in deed, what thy counnyng is, think not other
men delyted in all thing, that thou take pleasure of in thy talk.

Beware always, that thou do nothing, that may disquiet the, except it be
closely kept. How be it, if by chance thou have done any such thing,
disclose it to no man, or at the least, if thou do utter it, take good head to
whom.

When thou committest any thing of counsel to thy friend, which thou would
have secretly kept, beware thou use therein no manner of bornyng, lest he at some
time having a mind to ieste, as thou dyddest reuele and open the same.

Keep the secret counsel committed unto the more warely, than the money that
is committed unto thy custody.

Nothing should be safe and sure in man's life, if secret counsel should want
faith.

If thou promise any thing, perform the same, although it be very hard, and
dangerous, and though it were but for this only cause, to discharge thy faith
and promise.

If any thing be promised the, exact it not, being always streyghter in
judgment to thy self, than to other men.

Thou must consider, that men have wit, reason, and judgment, think not, that
thou can persuade them, to take evil deeds, for things well done, or to be
deceived by things cou^terfaited, cloked, or colored, which at length be wray
them selves, and the more craftelyer they were hyd, the more foul and hateful
they are.

Truly a man's mind aryseth sore against those things, wherewith he has been
deceived.

Therefore it is better, that all things be open, plain, vncloked, and simple.

For although Ueritie sometimes at the first displeases, yet at the length it
is very amyable and lovely accepted.

The Truth may well be peyned, it will not be oppressed. It may be blamed, it will
not be shamed.

As the profyt gotten by lyeng, is nothing sound nor durable, even so the
damage that comes by truth tellyng, hinders not long.

Abstain from lieng, as from a common rot. For there is no viler thing in man,
which thereby seperateth him self from god, and becomes the dyuels bondsman.
And come the lie out yarly or late, Shameful ignominy is sure the liars part.

What is counted more vile? what worse tha^ a lier? If men know the for a
liar, no man will believe the, although thou speak never so truly.

Contrary wise, if thou be true of word, thy beck shall be better believed,
than other men's holy oaths and great swearyng.

If thou speak nothing repugnaunt, and if thy words agree one with an
another, thou greatly nedest neither force of memory, nor any other art, but
always to say that thou think truth.

Truth ever consents to truth, falsehode neither with truth, nor yet with
falsehode.

But if thou wylt thine opinion to be true, believe nothing lightly, but things
approved, orels things that have great likelihode of verity.

He is in misery, and very miserable, which has so entangled him self, that
he can not be losed, but by a leasyng.

Accustom not thy self in swearing. For the wise man says, That he, which
swereth much, is replenysshed with wickedness, and the plage of vengeance shall
not belong from his house.

CHRIST in his gospel utterly forbids us swering, and teaching us to
affirm all that truth is, with yea yea, and to deny all that falls is with, nay
nay.

Our reverence to god ought to be great, we ought not to call him to witness in
every place for every trifle

No, we ought to call him to record never, but against our wylles, and when we
are compelled.

He that swereth in serious matters, will also swear in board for his
pleasure. And he that wol swear for a ieste, will not stick for an oath, when
he lies.

They that believe the, wol as well trust the without an oath, as with all thy
swearyng, and they that wol not believe the, the more thou swearest, the more
they mistrust the.

How men ought to be used.
THERE IS a certain dyfference to be had, between man and man. For some of
them be of householde, some only of acqueintaunce, and some be strangers
unknown.

I call them of householde, that be of kyn, or of affinity, or with whom we
live together in one family.

Thou must love al men, and so behave thy self toward them; that even they,
whom thou know not may perceive the to be a friend universally to all
mankind, and to will and wish well unto al men.

And yet thou shall not, as a white line upon a white stone, show thy self a
like toward all men: but some thou shalt admyr to counsel, to some be
obedient, and some thou shalt reverence, and to some thou shalt render
thanks, if thou have received any benefyt at their hands, forgettyng not
those, whose dylygence and faythefull service, thou haste used to thy
commodytie or profytte.

Where as a man's good will is to be taken and reputed for the deed, there he
seems to deserve not much less thanks, which endeavors him self to do
pleasure, than he that has done in deed.

And he that has used a man's friendship or labor after this manner, is no
less bound to recompense him, tha^ if he had borrowed money of him: think him
no less thank worthy, which has to his power, with sincere heart, bestowed
his labor, than he that lends his money. Thyncke him I say, so much more
thanks worthy, as is the body dearer to a man than his money, or any outward
thing.

Tarry not, while thy familiar friend open his poverty and necessities to the,
but harke^ rather, and smell them out thy self, helping him of thy own
accord, tarry not, but arise and meet a ryghtuouse petycyon in the teethe,
that thou be entreated before thou be axed.

Thou shalt not only love thy parents, but also honor them next unto god,
and shall be obedient unto their commandments, even as at gods own
bidding, thoroughly persuaded, that they be in gods stead unto the here in
earth, and that no man loves the more intierly, nor more regards thy wealth.

Next unto these be schole masters, bryngers up of children, tutours, finally
al such as have taught the any good manners, which are of so great value, that
man can have nothing more precious.

Love these men, and have them in reverence as thy second parents, and lowly
obey them, cou^tyng, what so ever they do, that they do it not for their own
commodity, but for thine. And seeing the matter is so, thou should make
sklender recompense, if for such kyndnesse, thou would obstinately disobey
them.

Think not, but he loves the tenderly, that reprehendeth the friendly: he
seldom hurts, that reproves the, although he be thy ennemie, for if he say
trewthe, he shows the, in what thou ought to reform thy self, if he ley
falls things against the, he teaches the, what thou may eschew: so that
other he makes ye better, or at the least more circumspecte.

Search first the manners and conditions of them, whom thou do purpose to
make thy familiers, and enquire, how they have ordered them selves with their
other friends, lest it may after repent the of such acqueyntance.

Refuse the acquaintance of him, whose familiarity thou see honest men to
eschew.

Also shonne them, whom thou perceiuest to love thy good is better than thy
self, as smell feasts, or such, by whose conversation thou may either
wexe worse or fall into danger and peril.

Shonne all such, as can not suffer their friends to have better fortune than
they have. Chose no such friends, as little pass, to ieste of thy life, to
board at such things, as thou would have kept secret, but most of all,
avoid them, that for a thing of naught, woll be at utter defyance with their
best freende, reuengynge them self moore upon such, as they have loved
before, than upon those, whom they always hated: barbarousely persuading them
self, the injury done of a friend, less to be forborne, then the injury
done of their ennemie, wherein they plainly declare, that they never loved, for
if they had, they would not so sone have been offended. It were better to have
such persons for ennemies, than for friends.

Be slow in receyuyng a friend, be constant in reteyning him.

Chose a friend, that will not only please the, but also profit the. Avoid
him, that speaks all for favor: and enbrace thou him, that will truly and
plainly admonyshe the of thy fault.

If thou take delight, to here them that flatter the, thou shall never here the
truth.

Among the wild beasts, there is none more pernitiouse then envy: among the
tame, none so hurtefull as flattery.

As wisdom and virtue be much worthy all men's love, so is assentation to
be cursed, hated, abhorred, which lets us to come to the said virtue and
wisdom, by reason it persuades, that we have now already obtained it.

Moreover, plain admonition does not a littell profit, which brings a man
to virtue, by teaching him, what remains yet behynd, and how it must be
brought to pass.

If it grieve the, to be reproved, do nothing reproach worthy.

He is in a very miserable case, that nedyng a friend to warn him, has none.

Flee from the company of evil men, as from men infected with the pestilence.
For contagion is to be feared no less at the one, then at the other: Except
thou think thy self able to bring them to goodness.

And yet thou must not trust thy self herein to much, still remembryng, that
as our nature of it self is prone to vice, that so the gate and passage to
Virtue, is very high, and with much travail and dyfficultye fynyshed.

Also search, of what degree and condition thou art, what place fortune has
set the in: and think, what so ever estate thou be in, no mo things be
lefull for the, than for other men.

No, the more custom makes leful, the less let lust long for, lust stayed by
moderation.

Be gentle to thy inferiors, lowely to thy betters, easy and tractable to thy
peers, and companions:

But yet so, that thou be always hard, styffe, and inexorable to them, that
intise the to vice.

Disdain not, to be contempned of thy superiors, but think that thing, to
come by course of fortune, rather than by the fault of the man.

If any thing be done unto the of thy inferior, which displeseth the, think
it not forthwith, to be done of contumely, but rather of a certain liberty:
reckening also, that thou art very delicate and impacient, if thou count small
tickelinges, great wounds. Thou must not suppose thy self a man, and other
men beasts, and that it is not lefull for them so much as to speak.

Thou art a man, live under like law, as other men do.

And if thou have more wisdom, or be a better liver, than other men be, show
thy self favorable unto them, as to men unlearned and weke. Pardone not vice
in thy self, whom wisdom and virtue has so enstrengthened.

If thou excel not in virtue, why requirest thou to be better esteemed than an
other? if thou pass other, why moderatest thou thine affections no better,
than the common sort of people.

It is better, to take wrong, than to do wrong, better to be deceived, than to
deceive, which thing natural wisdom taught many, as Socrates, Plato,
Aristoteles, Cicero, Seneca, and such other.

Remember, it is a point of humain embecillitie, to be deceived and wander in
blyndnes. Let not therefore other men's offenses, and chiefly such as be done
against thy self, over much offend the.

It is a token of a gentle and noble heart, to forgive: of a cruel, fierce,
unnatural, and vile stomach, to retayn anger, which thing even very nature
shows in dombe beasts.

And seeing, god is ready to do nothing more often, or more gladly, than to
forgive, who is so mad, to deny, but that the same thing is both most godly
and most excellent, by which we so much resemble the nature of that high and
mighty god?

Deal thou with other men, as thou would Christ should deal with the.

And truly, it is mere, that thou grant like forgiveness to thy neighbor, as
thou nedest at goddis hand, either for the same, or other like offenses.

There is no prayer more acceptable, or of more efficacy before god, than that
his son Jesus Christ, our lord, has taught us, which is therefore named, Our
lords prayer: Now, thou can not say that prayer with a pure mind, except
thou utterly and with all thy heart, forgive thy brother, what so ever thou
would god to forgive the. A great fault is forgyuen us, under this condition,
that we forgive a light offense.

What so ever one man offends an other in, it is nothing, in comparison of
that, wherein we all offend god every hour: which is to be esteemed and wayed
even so much the greuouser, as god is great and higher than man.

If thou be discontent with any man, follow the counsel of the Apostels
saying: Let not the son go down upon thy wroth. when thou ghost to bed, cast
out of thy mind, all debate, all anger, all displeasures, all desires and
pensiuenes, that thy mind being quiet and settled, thou may address thy
self to quiet sleep.

Let him, whom thou have ones forgyuen, perceive by some token that thou have
forgyuen him unfeignedly, that both he may see, thou have forgotten injuries
past, and find the friendly, where thou may help or do him pleasure.

Beware, when thou art moved, that thou avenge not thine own quarrel, either
by thy self, or any other person. For thou haste none authority over an other
man's servant, much less in thy fellow servant. Thou art injurious to thy
lord, if thou leave not the correction of thy fellow unto him.

God is lord over all men, we all his servants, be thou content to have
complained to him, yea complain not at all: for the eye of god sees all
thing, and as scripture testyfyeth, he knows both him that does the wrong,
and him that suffers it. Therefore gives he this commandment, Leave the
reuengeme^t of thine enemies to me, and I will se them paid. For seeing the
injury is in the heart, and not in the deed, only god knows, what thy heart
was, and what belongs thereto.

It behooves the, not only to love thy self, but also to show thy self
worthy to be had in reverence, so that thou may be ashamed of thy self when
thou go about to do any thing ungodly, wyckedly, fylthyly, impudently,
folyshly.

We often take that for an injury, which in very deed is none, following in
such wise our partial affections, that we can by no means ritely examine the
truth of matters, but are driven to give such sentence, and judgment, as they
will.

What a man's Behavior ought to be toward him self.
EXteme and believe more the judgment of thine own Conscience, than the
gloryouse report of the multitude, which commonly is both rude and ignorant,
and unadvisedly both approves and condemns things unknown.

A troublesome conscience tourmenteth the mind, a quiet conscience is high
felicity passing al worldly treasure and dygnitie.

This is it, that god promises in ye gospel unto his well beloved children that
they shall receive, even in this life, much more pleasure, than they have
forsaken for his sake.

Fame shall neither profyt the wicked person, ne infamy hurt the good. What
profyt shall thou have more of thy great fame, when thou art ones departed
hens, tha^ the pre^sed picture of Apelles, or the horse that has the victory
in Olympia?

The said fame lyttel profits any man in his life time, it that he know it
not, and if he know it, what profit I pray you, brings it? a wise man will
despise it, and it causes foles more to enbrace folly.

The witness of Conscience, is true sound, and permanent, and shall be of great
auctority, when God shall sit in that his dreadful judgment, and is a maistres
of great governance, even in this life. This Conscience is, as the poet
feately names it, a brason wall, to stand betwixt us and al dangers of this
world, neither is there any thing so terrible, that can shake him, whom this
wall defe^deth, being couplyd and knyt unto god with heart and mind, puttyng
his trust in him only, knowing that he has taken the peculyar charge of him,
to whom al things obey.

It is great shame for the, to be better known of other men, than of the self.

It is not enough for the, to be known of thy self and of god?

They that cast away the regard of god, and lie still without fear in
synfulnes, are twyse to be condemned: because they regard neither god nor man.
All such are iniuryous to their own conscience, deridyng and deluding the
same, as though they had therefore despised the fame of the world, because they
would the more freely frame and fashion them self unto their own conscience,
which now runs at large in sinfulnes, because it is not bridled with fear.

He loves him self, that with all his endeavor and fervent prayer, desires
of god, that he vouchsafe to garnish the mind, the most excellent part of man,
with her true and natural ornaments, that is to wite, with Religion and
godliness.

He loves not him self, which sets his mind upon riches, honors, and
worldly pleasures or any other bodily thing: for so much as the most precious
part of man, is the mind.

Neither loves he him self, which for lack of knowledge of his own misery,
deceyueth him self, or suffers other to deceive him: being glad as having
those gifts, whereof in very deed, he has none at all.

Such love in a man is not to be counted the love of him self, but a blind,
beastly, and inordinate love of the body, hurtful both to him self, and to
other. The which love Socrates complained, to be the original beginning of al
mischeues. For in deed this takes away frendshyp between man and man, whereby
arise all misery, all mischiefs among men, he that ouermoch loves him self
after this manner, he loves no man, and no man him.

The proud man agrees not with the meek, and much less with men of his
own disease.

Our savior, by his heavenly wisdom briefly declares unto us, both what it
is, a man to love, and what it is, a man to hate him self, saying after this
manner: he that hates his soul, and does not suffer it to be entangled with
the pleasant intisementes of the world, he truly loves his soul, and
wills it to be saved. Contrary wise, he that loves his soul, setting it
upon voluptuousenes, the same hates his soul, and wol it come to naught.

Who, except he be mad, well refuse labor and peynes, to obtain the reward
eternal in heaven, seeing that these wretched and transitory things, without
great labor and peines can not be obtained.

The law of Adams children is to live in labor, and ye curse due be longyng
to babes borne of Eve, is to suffer afflictions and trouble.

Therefore we must needs labor, what way so ever we turn us.

How much better than is it, to endeavor with all our power, to have for our
labor an ample reward, as eternal joy, than to have a selender and a vile
recompense, y^ shortly vanishes, sorrow everlasting? What also, that it is an
easier surer quieter and so much more plesanter, a lighter thing to do well,
tha^ to do evil, wherein is so much fear sorrow and care.

Syn is the death of man, so that he may well seem to slay him self, which
falls to sin, for he withdraws him self from god, our life, and from the
quietness of conscience, a thing most blessed, most full of comfort and joy.

Thou shall wasshe away the spots of syn with tears, with repentance, and
by the invocation of the mercy of god, cleauyng and holly trustyng to it.

Let all manner of occasions of sins be cut away, and eschewed with all
diligence, For the wise man says: he that loneth peril, shall perish therein.

And the devil always wayteth upon all occasions, that we can never be
careless. We must war with him still: man's life upon earth is, as Job truly
says, a contynuall warfare.

And for as much as our ennemy is so mighty, so strong, so subtle, so crafty,
and of so great experience, having so many polycyes of war against us, that
we can by no means, craft, ne power, match him: let us, castyng away all
affiance of out own nature and power fle unto god for succor. For this cause,
our lord often commands his disciples to pray, and desire their holy father
with pure heart and mind, that they may not be led into temptation, that is to
say, into fight, into hand gripes with their adversary.

And in the prayer, that he taught us, this is the last point, which knytteth
up all together, Ne nos inducas in tentatione^, Lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from our adversary, that still lies in wait for us.

Let us therefore always do as men armed in war, keeping dilligent watch and
ward, not lettyng occasions slyp away by sleep, and sluggishnes.

And where as this life flees so fast away, being of such uncertainty, that no
man living to day, can make sure promise of to morrow, it is a great point of
folyshnes, and very dangerouse, in hope of long life, not to prepare us, to our
final journey, seeing that we are called upon every hour, and yet know
nothing of the time, when we shall be compelled to this journey, whither we
woll or no. Let us therefore haste, to prepare us treasure unto the life to
come, being always ready with diligent attendaunce, that when we shall be called,
we be not found unready, oppressed with heavy and dull sluggishnes, that we
depart not sad and sorowefull, but as men being full satisfied, and weary of
this world, reioising in hope through faith in Christ: whereby we know God,
and as far forth as the power of man may, we imitate, follow, and find him:
without this thing, what is a man, but a beast immortal?

As one day of man's life is worthy to be preferred, before the longest age of
Rauyn or Heart: so one day, spent after the example of Christ, is better than
to live eternally not following right religion.

This is eternal life says Christ our lord, to know the father and whom
he sent among us, Jesus Christ his son.

This is the course of most absolute wisdom, whereof the first step is, to
know thy self, and the last of all, to know God. To the immortal and
invisible king of the world, to God only, be all honor and glory.

AMEN.
FINIS.
FOR THE FYLLYNG OF VOID PAGES here following, we have inserted certain flowers
of most notable sentences of wise men, gathered together by Erasmus of
Roterodam, and translated in to English.
Thales.
BE obedient to thy prince. Prove thy freende or thou have need,

Abstein from wicked deeds.

Specially love peace. Do so, that thou may be commended of all folk.

If thou have a tale bearer in thy house, avoid him out.

It that thou art ashamed to do before an other, thou should not be so hardy
to do alone, as though thy self than were witness.

If thou purpose to do a thing keep it secret, lest any should let the.

He augmenteth his grefe, that fears that that can not be eschewed.

Better it is to be rebuked of a foe, thau falsely praised of a friend.

To much is naught, for measure in all things is best.

Solon.
Honor god.

Worship thy father and mother

Socour thy friends.

Maynteyne truth.

Be obedient to the laws.

Brydell thine anger.

Envy no person.

Mind that is rightuous.

Commend virtue.

None is lucky, but he that dies welthfully.

Most sure amity is, that rests between equalles.

The guerdon of virtue, is very honor, not the reward of fortune.

Commend thy friend openly, but when he erreth correct him secretly.

More clear is the nobleues, which thou through thine own virtues do
obtain, than that that happeth unto the by the images of thy forefathers.

If desteny can not be avoided, what profyteth to know it? If it be
uncertain: it is folyshenes to fear, when thou know not whether it will
come or not.

Chilo.
Know thy self.

Use temperance.

Get thy good truly.

Let thy manners be alowable.

With such skele the life should be moderate, that thy inferiors dread the not,
which is tirannie: Nor thy superiors despise the, which is a cast a side.

Live clean and pure, as thou should dye this day. Give thy self to honest
studies, as thou should live ever.

Bost not thy good deeds, but let other commend them.

Flowring old age, is most like unto youth.

Wayward youth, is most like unto old age.

Pitacus.
THose things that thou purposest to do, crake not of before, if thou can not
bring the^ to pass, thou shalt be laughed to scorn.

The things that can not be done, look thou desire not greatly.

It is no less craft to keep syleuce, than to speak.

It forces not how many, but what they be that praise the: for to be praised
of yuell persons is disprayse.

It is folyshnesse to be grieved with the felicity of them that be iuell, as
though wealth rested in goods vulgar.

As folishe it is to rejoice to se them that be iuell in calamity, as though
before they were not vnwealthy.

That thou ordeynest other to do, observe thy self.

In time of prosperity thou shalt have many friends.

But in adversity few friends remain, but they be true.

Bias.
Behold thy self in a myrrour, if thou appear beautyfull, do that besemeth
thy fayrenes. If thou be disformed, that that wants in thy vysage,
accomplish with beauty of good manners.

Here much and speak little.

Get or apply the in youth to sobrenes, and in age to wisdom.

He is not rich that much possesses, but he that is content with that he
has. Every covetous man is pore who has not that he has.

A woman without dowry, is enough endowed if she be chaste.

The property of a prudent man is, not to be revenged when he might.

An iuel man although he can not, yet he desires to hurt.

Cleobulus.
THat thou hate thou should not do to an other.

Thretten no man, for that is a womanly tatche.

Sooner viset thiue iufortunate, than fortunate friends.

False detraction hurts the life.

All that be prudent and wise, hate liars.

The more mighty thou art, the more beware thou sin not. And the more men
for thy principality or tule permyt the to do, the less take upon the.

wealth iuel gotten dureth not long.

Be mylde to other to thine own self roughe.

The preyse of the forefathers, goth not by inheritance to them that come
after.

But yet often times the children are blamed for the faults of the parents.

Periander.
Nothing is profitable that is not honest.

The richer one is, the more careful he lives.

He is a wretch who for werines of his life desires death, but he is more
wretched, that dredeth death.

It that must of necessity be done make as thou dyddest it gladly.

He that is drad of many, must needs fear many.

Though fortune be favorable, be never the higher minded.

Though thou have adversity, have a valiant mind.

Aristippus.
Seek the such riches which if the ship break may swim forth together
with the owner.

The goods of fortune be taken away by sundry casualties, but the goods of
the mind which be only the true goods can be taken away neither by fire
nor by shypwrake.

Learn when thou art a child such things, as shall be profitable to the when
thou art a man.

Theophrastus.
TIme is the most precious cost that a man can bestow.

Antisthenes.
IT is given to a king, though he do never so well yet to be evil spoken of.

It is better of the tweyne, to fall among a sort of ravens, than among
flatterers. The ravens eat a man when he is dead, but the flat terers eat
him quycke.

That ruste does to iron, that does envy to man.

The concord of brethren is surer than any stone wall.

The chyeffest lernyng is to vulerne vices.

Diogenes.
A Good man is the image of god.

Love is the busynes of loyterers.

Nedy age is a thing most miserable.

There be two which byte most deadly, of wild beasts the backebyter, and of
tame the flatterer.

A flattering speech is a honey sweet snare.

They that speak gloriousely, but do nothing thereafter them self, be like to
a harp which makes a sound to other, but it self neither hears nor
perceives.

He lives vaynly which has no care to live well.

A goodly person that speaks ungodly words, draws forth a leaden sword
out of an yuery scaberd.

Bond men be thrall to their masters, and wicked me^ to their lusts.

Lernyng is to young men a sovernes, to old men a solace, to poor men riches,
to rich men a garnyshment.

Nobility, glory, riches be the clokes of naughtynes.

Socrates.
THe things that be above us, perteyne naught unto us.

This one thing I know said Socrates that I know nothing.

Crates.
LIke as in every pome granate there is some keruyl rotten: so there is no man
found thoroughly clean from vice.

Zeno.
IT follows not, that whosoever is great is forthwith good, but whosouer is
good, the same is also great.

Nature has given man therefore two ears and but one mouth, that we should be
redyer to here than to speak.

Men ought to be drawn rather by the ears than by the gown, that is to say,
rather by perswation than by vyolence.

Themistocles.
It is better to have men wantyng money, then money wantyng men.

Pericles.
A man may be a friend, but he must go no further with his friend then till he
come to the aultare, that is, he may not offend god for his friends cause.

Lamachus.
It is not lauful in battle to make a fault twyse.

Iphicrates.
It is an uncomely saying for a wise man to say, I would not have thought it, or
I would not have looked that it should have come so to pass.

M. Curious.
It is far better for a man to bear a rule upon men having gold, then to have
gold him self.

Cato senior.
It is marvel that that city can be safe, in which an ox is sold for less
price, than a fish is sold for.

Musonius.
If through labor thou shalt work any worship, the labor vanyssheth, and
the worship tarieth. But if through pleasure thou shalt work any shame, the
pleasure vanysheth and the shame tarieth.

Anacharsis.
OF a craft can no man judge but the crafts man.

By other men's vices learn how foul thine own be.

FINIS.
LONDINI in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XLIIII.


