

A Pamphlet of the Offices, and duties of every particular sworn Officer, of
the City of Excester:

Collected by John Vowell alias Hoker, Gentleman and Chamberlain of the same.

Numb. 30. Who so ever swears an oath to bind him self, he shall not break
his promise. Imprinted at London by Henry Denham. 1584.

Psalm. Cxxvij. verse. 2. Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh
but in vain.
Exeter's coat of arms

To the Right worshipful the Mayor, Bailiffes, Recorder, Aldermen, and all
others, the sworn officers of the City of Excester.
IT is most truly written by the ancient father Lactantius (Right
worshipful) that God made man for two causes: the one that he should
acknowledge and confess him, to be the true and immortal God, and to honor
him in all holiness and righteousness. The other was for man's own sake, that
each one should love and defend the other. For if, of one man whom God made,
all others had their offspring: then are all they brethren, and of one and the
same blood. But for brethren to be divided and not to love each one the other,
it is most unnatural and execrable before God and man. And for as much as such
is the state and condition of man, that he was neither borne for him self
alone, nor yet can live by himself alone, it is most necessary, that he do
endeavor himself unto those ends for which he was made and created. That is,
that he do first and cheestie serve and honor the eternal God (for whose
honor he was made) in all holiness and righteousness: and then to yield unto
man (to whose comfort he was borne) those offices of humanity whereby man's
society is conserved: which do stand and consist in this, that every one do
prosecute another, in all benevolence, beneficence, gratefulnes and humanity.
For who so is not thus affected, does degenerate from the true nature of man
in his first creation, and is become worse than the brute beast. Wherefore in
the former ages, not only the children of God, and the professors of his
word, have been careful herein: but the Gentiles also, and the nations which
knew not God, have been earnest to maintain the common society, and to
perform one to the other all offices of humanity. For as Cicero says, Nihil
magis ad humanae vitae societatem tuendam, and ad amicitias conciliandas and
confirmandas adiuuat: Nothing does more nourish love, and preserve common
society, than good will performed in the offices of humanity. Who so then is
careless herein and breaks the bonds hereof, he is as the godly father
says, Nefarius, parricida, and omnium pessimus.

This is so excellent a virtue, so much tending to the honor of God, so
agreeable to nature, and so most necessary for man: as it had his beginning and
was ingraffed in man, even in his first creation, so has it had his effect
among good men in all ages, and in all well governed Cities and common wealths,
even among the very nations: whereof to recite many examples which are to be
drawn from the Israelites, Persians, Assyrians, Grecians, Romans, and sundry
other nations, it were too long and almost an infinite discourse. And therefore
leaving all them I will come to this realm of England, our own native
country, which though it be the remotest Island in all the Ocean seas, and
taken as it were for a new world of itself: yet is it not inferior to any
nation or people whatsoever, either in true religion toward God, or in
dutifulnes to the Prince and Magistrates, or in any action tending to the
conservation of the common society, and the nourishing of good will among men.
And besides that, this land has these things in common with others: yet, it
has also certain particular branches and vsages of benevolence, love and good
will, among private men peculiar to themselves, and which in other countries is
not used. Among many others, I do note and observe the old and ancient manner
of giving of new years gifts. I know the Persians of certain times did with
great reverence offer presents unto their kings. And the Parthians would never
come empty handed before their Princes. And likewise the Roman soldiers
would at the beginning of every year, present their Emperors with some one
thing or other: even as the noble men of England for ever from time out of
mind have done, and yet upon new years day do humbly present to the Kings
and Princes of the same, some strene or present, dutiefullie witnessing a
bounden duty of their part, as also the Princes by a like gift returned, do
testify their good will of the other part. But the like course of courtesy,
beneficence, and benevolence to be used among the common people, and the
inferior sort among themselves: I take it to be proper and only used within
this Realm of England. For besides the yearly harvest dinners, and other
like meetings, unto which one neighbor conuiteth an other: the tenants also to
their landlordes, the servants to their Masters, and one neighbor to an
other, fail not at new years tide to congratulate a good success of the
year past, and wish the like of the year to come, with some present or gift:
but among none is it more firmly observed, than by the babes or little
children, named godchildren, who at that time make their repair to their
Compatres, named godfathers and godmothers: before whom they do humbly kneel
down, and by the name of a blessing, do as it were, give thanks, because
they were witnesses to their baptism, and do crave their helps for their
increase and continuance in that faith which they promised for them. And
therewith do present unto their said godfathers and godmothers some one thing
or other, in token of their thankfulness, which gifts in the elder ages were
for the most part Akornes, Nattes and Apples.

Of this manner and usage ensued many and great commodities both common and
private, which turned to the benefit of the common wealth, and to the increase
of the society of man: for the Akornes, nuttes, and the kernels of apples were
then used to be cast and sowed in the ground, whereof in course of time did
grow and increase the great abundance of timber, and the plenty of fruits,
which their posterity could not lack, and the common wealth cold not want:
further it bred such a love between the godfathers and the children, as next
unto the natural parents could not be a firmer. The one always reuerencing,
and other loving each other. The parents also being as it were alied by this
kind of courtesy do call one the other gossop, as who says, Gods helpers,
they loving as brethren each one the other, most sincerely and friendly. And
their children and offsprings treading the trace of their parents, are
affected one to the other as brethren of one and the same family. These and
such other like things when I had considered, it came to my mind and
remembrance, how that I my self have been sometimes a foster child to this
City and commonwealth, being a free citizen borne, and descended of parents,
who in their times sat in the cheifest seat and chair of government: and was
by them in my tender years and minority committed and commended to the credit
and government of the Magistrates of this city. Wherefore as unto dear
parents I thought it my part not only as a foster child, but rather as a
natural son to yield some remembrance of duty unto you. And therefore
taking the opportunity of the time present, and the occasion of some things
otherwise offered, I have thought good by way of a strene or new years gift
to offer and present unto you this little Pamphelet. Which in outward apperance
is slender as the hasell nut; but as by breaking the shell you shall find a
kernel, so if you open this book you shall learn the things most expedient
and necessary for you to know. It is the abridgment or summarie of such
special points, as be incident to every of your particular officers: which
you ought not only to know and to understand, but also to see to be done and
exequuted. You have in an open assembly given your oath, and sworn by the name
of the Almighty and eternal God, and protested by the great Jehovah so to
do: wherefore to be remiss, negligent or careless therein, you shall not
only offend against the common wealth, but most grieuouslie sin against the
divine Majesty, whose name by your sollies is dishonored, and which so great a
sin cannot of his justice be unpunished nor unrevenged. And for as much as
the Magistrates are Gods Ministers, substitutes and vicars upon earth, and from
whom all power and authority is ordained; I am here upon some occasion, to
advertise and remember you, that there be two special things required at your
hands. The one is concerning God and his service in religion, the other
concerning your selves and your office in politic government. The latter
depends upon the first, and cannot have any good success where the first is
not kept and regarded: for as a learned man at the common laws says, Seeing
that laws must be obeyed for God, it follows of necessity that he which will
have them to be obeyed rightly, must first learn to honor God truly: or else
where this foundation fails (even as a house builded upon sand) the other
falls. It is therefore and ought to be your most chief and special care,
that not only you your selves, but all and every such as be under your
government, do honor and serve the everlasting God in true religion, and
according to his prescripts and commandments, and then of consequence your
politic government must and shall prosper and have success. And that you are
thus bounden to do, read the volumes of Moses, who was Magistrate under God of
the Israelites, and he did both deliver them laws how they should honor the
true God of Israel, as also set down punishments for the breakers thereof. The
like after him, did Joshua, and the Judges over Israel, and the kings over
Iehuda: as in the books of the Judges and in the Chronicles of the Kings does
appear.

For all things to be well done must take their beginning from religion, as
the godly divine says, Nulla politia feliciter constitui potest, nisi prima
curapietatis sit. Preposterous then is the judgment of those who would have
that religion should perteine only to the bishops and clergy, and that the
civil Magistrate should deal only in matters of policy: but the law of
Moses, and the law of the Gospel does determine the contrary, and charge
the civil Magistrate with both, making the same to be his talent, for which he
must as a good Steward make his account. If this be true as it is most true,
how careful and vigilant ought the Magistrates of this city to be, that the
people committed to their government, should not thus in the light of the
Gospel walk in darkness, and live most dissolutelie and looselie? I know the
Gospel is preached most sincerely, and the Sacraments ministered most purelie,
and yet small is the number which embrace the same sincerely, and live
thereunto accordingly. For look you upon the face of this common wealth, and
you shall find it in as bad or worse state, than was the state of the common
wealth of the Israelites in the time of Ezechiel, or rather worse concerning
religion. For Atheistes. Papists, and blasphemers of Gods holy name, swarm
as thick as butter flies, without check or controlment. The Sabbath of the
Lord appointed to be kept holy, and we commanded to sanctify the same, and to
give our selves to the exercise of good works, to be diligent in prayers, and
to be attentive to the hearing of Sermons, is of all other days most
licentiously spent in sin and wickedness, the same being counted so much the
more holy, as it is spent most idelie and wickedlie. For be the Preachers
never so godly and earnest to call, let all the great belles of S. Peter's ring
out never so loud, there will not be half so many gained into the Church: as
one with a pipe and a whistle shall gain into the streets to see vain and
foolish spectacles. For let there be a bear baiting, a bull baiting, an
interlude, or any such vanity, every man is in have to run headlong to it,
and the time never too long to have there fill thereof. And yet if there be no
such plays or games, they will rather sit idle in the streets, than be well
occupied in the churches.

Even as it was said merrily of a preacher, that when he saw the people to
depart out of the church from the Sermon, spoke unto his auditorie: saying,
Good people, it is said there is a man in the Moon, but believe it not, for
there is no such thing, but if you will goo forth into the Churchyard, you
shall find twenty knaves in the sun. And this is most true: for whenever
there is any Sermon, send you one out into the streets, and there shall you
find the greatest number, some to knock there heels against the stalles, some
to walk up and down the streets, some sitting at the tavern gulping and
drinking, some at gaming and plaieng, some piping and daunsing, and finally
none well occupied. This is most true, the matter is apparent, the fault is
known, a redress is wished, but nothing is done, which thing is much
bewailed by the good and godly. It has been oftentimes moved by some one
man of great honor, calling, and authority; it has been advised and
persuaded by most learned and godly preachers, and it is wished by all good
and godly men, that some one good and learned preacher were appointed in this
City, who upon the Sabbath days might catechize the children, teach the old,
and instruct the people, whereby they might be reclaimed to God, nurtered in
religion, and amended in life. But Durus est hic sermo, this is a hard saying,
and who can abide it? And therefore many be the devises to stop so good a
course. Some altogether being like to the Aspis, who stops both her ears
against the voice of the enchanter, alleging that there is too much preaching.
And of their opinion am I, that preaching is to much, but to no other than too
the lost sheep of Israel, and to the children of condemnation: for as S. Paul
says, If our Gospel be hid, Iis qui pereunt est absconditum, it is hid to
them that are lost. The bread of the Angels was unsavory, but to those only
who were to perish whiles the flesh which they lusted was in their teeth. Some
do like very well to have the catechizing, so that they might be no
contributors, and so would shift it over unto the church men, as though it were
their only duty to do it, and these show themselves to be the children of
the corrupted Adam, who being reproved for his transgression, charge his
wife with it, and she shuffleth it over to the devil: and so in this, every
man so thrusts it one from another, that nothing is done. And what will be the
end thereof, it is easily to be known, if men would either believe the book
of God, or consider and call to remembrance what has befallen in the like in
times past. The Poets among their many gods, have devised and imagined, that
one of them has two faces, the one before looking foreward, and the other
behind looking backwards, and this god they call Ianus, of whom the month of
January takes his name, and the first day of the same is called Newyeeres
day. By this is means and moralized a man of great wisdom, knowledge, and
experience, and who looking to the times past and observing the events thereof,
does forecast the sequel of the like to come. If you then as every wise
Magistrate ought to do, would as a Ianus look back into the old world, and
read the books and histories of that age, shall find that Noah the preacher of
righteousness, did teach and persuade the people to repentance almost one
hundredth years together, but because they were werie of his preaching, and
would no more thereof, God sends the great deluge and drowned the whole
world. Sodoma would not listen to the counsel of Loath, wherefore God with fire
and brimstone from heaven consumed them to ashes. The foolish Israelites not
contented with such incenses and manner of religion as God by Moses had
ordained, would needs have another of their own devise, and in offering the
same, the earth opened and swallowed them up all alive. The same people were
fed with Manna, the food of Angels, which God from heaven provided for them,
and they waxed werie thereof, and would needs have change of meats (as we of
religion) but the meat was no sooner in their mouths, than was Gods vengeance
upon them, and stroke them with a great plague.

The foolish Israelite neglecting the observing of the Lords Sabbath, would
needs follow his worldly causes and gather wood, had his reward, and was
stoned to death. The whole nation of the Jews were called by the Lord Jesus to
the doctrine of the Gospel, but they would not understand nor accept the time
of their visitation, wherefore they felt the heavy hand of God, and were
utterly consumed with famine, pestilence and the sword, and the city and
temple (whereof they made a great aduante) was not one stone thereof left upon
an other. The cities of Capernaum, which reached up even unto the heavens,
Ephesus, Corinth, Antiochia, and sundry others among whom the Apostles had
planted the Gospel, when they lothed it and waxed weary thereof, the Lord
lothed and waxed weary of them, and all they some by earthquakes, some by
fire, and many by the enemies were utterly wasted and consumed. And as he
has thus done with cities, towns, and countries, so has he showed the like
power upon mighty Princes and Monarchs, which have not harkened unto his
voice nor obeyed his commandments. Nabuchadnezer, Pharo, Herod, Nero,
Caligula, Domitianus, Traianus, Hadrianus, and a number of other Atheistes, who
denied the Lord God, his Christ and his Gospel, he tormented them with such
plagues, torments and troubles, that of their miserable lives they made most
miserable ends. If then the Lord God has thus dealed with all the nations of
the world, and with his own peculiar people, if he have not spared the
children of his own family, nor favored the vineyard of his own planting,
nor yet regarded his own country, nor accounted of his own city, what shall
it be thought he will do with this ungrateful city of Excester, which have
tasted of infinite his blessings, and have a long time been fed with his
heavenly Manna, and yet have and do daily contemn his laws, cast away his
commandments, and be weary of his doctrine: what is it, that we can justly
claim or challenge for ourselves, why the Lord should not shorten his hand, and
be no longer favorable unto us? Is it our antiquity? Be it that this city is
very ancient, and was builded at the first coming of Brutus into this land,
about two thousand five hundred years past, before or when London was: yet the
cities of Enoch, Nineue, Babylon, Corinth, Athens, Troia, and Carthage were
long before it.

Is it for religion? I grant, that the Gospel is truly preached, and the
Sacraments sincerely ministered. And so was it at Jerusalem, Antiochia,
Corinth, Ephesus, and many other places. Is it because it is pleasantly
seated, and stands upon the top of a hill, in the open prospect of the world,
and near the seas? So was Jerusalem, Capernaum, Tyrus, and sundry other
cities. Is it because it is rich and inhabited with rich merchants and
occupiers? So was Tyrus and Sydon, and others. Is it for the fertility of the
soil, and the abundance of all things, wherewith God has blessed it? So was
the whole land of Palestina, who for the great blessings of God in nature, was
said to be a land to flow with milk and honey. And yet all these peoples,
nations and countries, lothing his word, for their unthankfulness and not
serving God in true religion were utterly destroyed by the mighty hand of
God, and now remains scarce any sign or memorial of them.

And shall this city of Excester which is but a sower grape, a wild Olive, and
is of his good mercy ingrafted in the place of the natural branch, and yet
has done the like or worse transgressions, shall she I say be free from
the like punishments? No, no: although God in mercy have long and oftentimes
borne and winked at the sins of this city, yet he will not so do forever.
It is an old saying: Go the pot never so often to the water, yet at length it
comes home broken. Sundry and many times (like unto the city of
Jerusalem) has it been in great perils by the Brytons, Romans, Saxons, and
Danes, and many times hard assailed with intestine wars, and the Lord has
always from time to time delivered it, but they still continuing or rather
increasing in sin, have and do daily grieve the Lord, and do accoler at
his heavy hand. Be you but indifferent viewers of your present state, and be
you your own Judges, and you shall not deny (unless you be like unto the
Fairies, called Lamiae, whose nature is that being within their own house,
they be blind and cannot look upon their own faults, but being abroad can see
every other man's doings. But that pride, covetousness, whoredom, malice,
envy, excess, gluttony, drunkenes, usury, extortion, dissimulation and
hypocrisy, and almost all kinds of sins does swim and abound in every
place of this city, and shall it not be revenged? The Prophet condemned Sodoma
but for four special sins, pride, fulness of bread, idleness, and carelesnes
of the poor, but look into Excester, and you shall find forty times four,
and yet we can lie snorting and sleeping in our sins, as though it were Omnia
been. The more is our security and carelesnes, the greater will be our plagues
in the day of vengeance, and so much the more, because against our knowledge
and profession we do offend God: for as Christ says, If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they should not have sinned, but now they have no cloak for
their sin, unless we do the sooner convert and amend.

Well you are Gods ministers, and he has appointed you to be his Moses unto
us, and therefore you must in this dangerous case, stand before him between
him and the people, and likewise to stand in the middle of the people between
the living and the dead, wherebie is meant, that you are not only to present
yourselues before the Lord in a perfect and a pure religion, but also must
procure and provide your Aarons and godly preachers, who having in their breast
plate Vrim and Thumim, do catechize, teach and instruct your citizens to know
God and the grounds of Christian religion, wherebie they may be a holy people
unto the Lord. And then also you yourselues must be men of courage, fearing God,
dealing truly, and hating covetousness, and so to stand in the middle of the
people, between the quick and the dead; that when the people do come unto
you, you do exequute justice, and judge vprightlie in punishing the offender,
and acquiting the innocent. For your direction in these two points you have
for the first, Gods holy word and Testament, which the Lord has commanded,
should never depart out of your mouths, and continual meditations: for the
other you have sundry good and politic constitutions, and ancient ordinances
of this your city, out whereof I have drawn this little Pamphlet and strene,
referring you for your further instructions to the great Ledger or black book,
wherein at large I have set down whatsoever concerns the state of this
city, and the government of the same.

Which good courses if you will follow, notwithstanding the ship of your common
wealth being ouerladen with sin and iniquity, is in great danger of
shipwreck, and to be overwhelmed, yet Christ will be in readiness to calm the
seas, and to save both you and your ship, if you shall awake him, and convert
unto him. And then this your ancient city which has continued for these many
hundreds of years, shall as the mount Syon be firm and never be moved, but
God shall save keep and defend it, that you and your posterity may still
dwell in it and have it in possession, and you yourselues when you are called
to an account shall for the well imploieng of your talent, be rewarded, and
enter into the joy of your Lord. And thus commending my self and this my
strene unto your good acceptance, I do take my leave.

Exon the last of the old year, and the beginning of the New, 1583. Your
Chamberlain and assured in the Lord, John Hoker.

POST MORTEM VITA
blazon or coat of arms

The office and duty of a Freeman.
THe Freeman is the cheifest and principallest member of the common wealth of
the City: and as it were out of his loins do proceed all such as be
officers, and have any government or charge in the same. And albeit there be
three degrees of freemen, yet they do all enioie the same and the like
privileges; and none can use nor exercise any trade, art, calling, or office in
the City, unless he be first sworn to the libertiee of the City. Many are
the points wherewith the freeman is charged, and is bound to observe; but the
most special are these.

FIrst he is to be true and faithful to the Queens Majesty, her heirs and
successors, and under her to be obedient to the Mayor, bailife, and commonaltie.

Also he is to keep the peace, and defend the liberties of the city.

Also he is to come before the Mayor and common counsel, whenever he shall
be thereunto required.

Also he shall not sue nor implead any franchised man of the city, but only
in the courts of the city, in all matters determinable in the same, except for
lack of justice.

Also he shall not be a reteiner, nor wear the cloth, liuerie, badge, nor
cognizance of any person, being not a franchised person.

Also he is to be justifiable and guildhable to all scots and lots, taxes and
tallages, and all other contributions.

Also he may not color any man's evil doings, nor any forreners goods,
whereby any hurt or prejudice may turn to the Queens Majesty, or to the
magistrates and state of the city.

Also he must come yearly to the election of the Mayor and officers, and then
and there to give his voice, if he have no reasonable cause of absence.

Also he must be always loiable, and of good behavior, and no longer shall he
be a franchised man than he is so, neither shall he enioie the liberties of the
city than when he is resiant and dwelling within the same, or the franchises
thereof. Sundry other articles are incident to his charge, which partly in
the oath of a freeman, and partly in the general lieger of the city are
contained.

The office of the Mayor of the city of Excester.
THe office of the Mayor is the highest and cheifest in the city, and is named
in the Latin, Mayor, and in the Saxon Mayer, both which importe one, and the
same thing; namely one more excellent and above the rest. And as he is in
authority above all others, so much the more is he in godliness, wisdom and
knowledge to excel and exceed them. He is the eye and the head of the whole
commonweal, and therefore must he see and understand all things incident and
apperteining both to the common government of the city, and to the
preservation of the public state. His office consists in many branches, of
which some in particularitie are as follows.

FIrst he is not only to be godly and religious in his own person, but also
to have care, that all others under his government be the like. If therefore
there be any inhabitant, that do maintain any false religion or heresy, or
do not resort to his church, at or upon the sabbath days, he is to punish
him, or to take order with him according to the laws.

Also he is upon sundaies and holy days, to send abroad his officers, to see
if any be sitting upon the stalles, walking the streates, or sitting in
tauernes, or using any gaming at the time of preaching and prayers: and to
compel them either to go to the church, or commit them to ward, or to take
further order with them, as shall be thought good.

Also he must upon the first fridaie after he has taken his oath, cause to be
proclaimed his general proclamation, for and concerning the government of the
city.

Also when any proclamation is to be made for her Majesty, or otherwise, it
is to be done in decent manner, namely in the open market and assembly of the
people, the sword bearer with the sword, and the sargeants with their maces,
standing before him and his brethren.

Also he is with the bailiffes, upon every mondaie through the whole year, to
keep the Queens court, in the open Guildhall, and then and there, vprightlie
to minister justice, and to give true judgments in all matters depending
before them, and to see true records to be kept.

Also he is to see the peace and common tranquillity to be kept and observed,
and the offenders punished.

Also he and his officers is to attend weekelie the markets, for all manner
corn and victuals, that the same be wholesome and good, and at reasonable
prices.

Also that no victuals nor wares be forestalled, engrossed, or regrated,
contrary to the laws.

Also that he do from time to time, as occasion shall serve, take the view and
search of all manner of measures, weights, and vessels, whether they be
according to the statute; and being defective to reform the same.

Also upon every mondaie to give to the bakers the assise of bread, and
weekelie to examine and weigh their bread, whether the same be according to the
assise given or not.

Also that he give to the brewers the assise of their drink, and to set
reasonable prices for and upon the same.

Also he shall command his stewards, constables, and other his officers to make
search every month once; in all and every suspect place, for plaiers at
games unlawful, keepers of ill rule, night-watchers, vagarant, naughty, and
suspect persons, and such strangers, as who cannot give account for their
honest life, and them to commit to ward, to be kept or be punished, according
to their offense, and by order of the laws.

Also he shall take bonds and sufficient suerties of every innekeeper, tipler,
and for keeping of good rule in their houses.

Also he is yearly to keep law courts, and cause inquisition to be taken of
all things concerning the state of the city, and liberties of the same.

Also he is to see the nightwatches in the times appointed, to be kept.

Also he shall yearly make his perambulations round about the city, and
about the limits and bounds of the same; and shall also cause the like
perambulations to be made every rogation week, about the limits and bounds of
the county.

Also he shall twice in the year at Michelmas and Easter, visit the
almeshouses of the cities, and examine whether the same be ordered as it
apperteineth.

Also he shall yearly call to account all the collectors for the poor in
every parish, and to see that the poor be provided for, according to the
statute.

Also the Mayor being the eschetor of the city, and warden in socage, is from
time to time to cause at every mondais court, presentment to be made of the
death of every citizen and inhabitant, what heirs and orphans he left behind
him, and that there upon he do take order for the preservation of the
orphans, and of all such goods and rents as do grow unto them, as also not
to admit any person to the freedom of the city, but that he be sworn unto
the order of the orphans.

Also he is at all time and times convenient, to call and assemble the common
counsel of the xxiiij, unto the counsel chamber, when matter and occasion
shall require; and then and there to determine what by their devise and
counsel is to be determined.

Also he is then and there to see and command every one of the said xxiiij,
and all other persons, coming there, to behave and use themselves modestly,
soberlie, and in all good manner: according to the orders of the said house: and
whosoever shall offend therein, to be punished accordingly.

Also he is to appoint six of the forsaid xxiiij, to be auditors as well of
the account of the general receiver, as of all other accounts, for and
concerning any of the cities rents, receipts, or revenues.

Also he may not be absent from out of the city any night, except it be for
some necessary and urgent cause; and in his absence he is to appoint his
lieutenant in writing under his hand seal.

Diverse other things do belong to his office, which more at large are to be
seen in the great lieger book.

The office of the Stewards.
THe Stewards are very ancient officers of this city, and were in the time of
the Saxons, named in Latin Praepositi, and in the Saxon tongue Portegreues, that
is to say; The wise, grave governors of the city or town: after the
conquest they were named Praefecti, which in the Normand and French tongue, are
called Prouorstes: the name of the person is worn out, but the court of their
jurisdiction reteineth his former name, being called the prouorst court; after
this in respect of the courts kept before them, they were called Senescalli,
that is to say stewards; and not long after, because they or some one of them
was put in trust for collecting of the cities revenues, they were called
Balliui, bailiffes. These two latter names are still retained and indifferently
used at these presents. Their offices consist in many points, whereof some in
particular as follows.

FIrst they al, or two at the least of them, are to be attendant, present and
sitting, as well with the Mayor upon every mondaie, in the court of the
Guildhall, as also in their own court, called the Prouorst court, which they
may adiourne and keep, from day to day, at their own will and pleasure.

Also they are to see true records to be kept, true justice to be ministered,
and true judgments to be given in all causes, depending in either of the
courts before them.

Also they are to attend the Mayor, at his going to the sermons at S. Peter's,
upon the sondaies at the forenoone, and at his going and returning, at the
Guildhall court, upon every mondaie, and at the markets and proclamations: and
upon every saturdaie, at the shambles, and at all other times, whenever they
shall be called and required.

Also forasmuch as they are clerks of the market, they are to execute and do,
what does apperteine to the clarke of the market, that is to say; That corn
and victualles brought to the market, be good and wholesome, and sold at prices
reasonable. That no victualles or wares brought to the city, or in market, be
forestalled, engrossed, nor regrated. That all vessels, weights and measures,
be veiwed and searched, and being found defective, to be redressed according to
the laws. That bakers do keep their assise, and brewers do sell according
to the price appointed unto them. With many other articles belonging to the
clarke of the market.

Also that they do monethlie, and as often as need shall require, make search
throughout the city, for all lewd, idle, and vagarant persons, for all plaiers
at unlawful games, for nightwatchers, and suspected persons, and for all
manner of misdemeanors, whatsoever.

Also that they do see the peace and tranquillity to be kept, and that every
inhabitant have in readiness, some sufficient weapon in his house, for keeping
of the same, and restraining of the distoiall and unruly persons.

Also that they do see and cause, all annoiances, which they know of
themselnes, or which be presented of others, to be removed and amended.

Also that at all times, when night watches be appointed, they or some one of
them, be at the Guildhall, and to give the charge to the watchmen.

Also that they nor any of them, be absent any one night out of the city,
without license of the Mayor, and that at all times, two at the least, be still
continuing within the city. The residue of their charge, is contained in the
black lieger.

The office of the Receiver.
THe Receiver is always one of the four bailiffes, and has the like and the
same charge, as every of them has: but the office of the Receiver is
particular to himself, and none is chosen thereunto, except he be one of the
number of the common counsel, or xiiij. And concerning this office, these are
the things which are specially required of him.

FIrst that he do collect and gather all such sum or sums of money, rents,
revenues, issues, and profits, belonging to the city, as well ordinary as
extraordinary, and incident unto his office and charge.

Also he is to disburse, desraie and pay, all such sum and sums of money
ordinary and extraordinary: for charges, expenses, fees, rents, annuities
whatsoever, due and paiable by the chamber of the city: so that in
extraordinary charges, he have a sufficient warrant for the same.

Also he is to have a special care to the edifices, howsings, buildings,
walls, water conduicts, and all other works of the city, and to see the same
to be builded, repaired, and sustained, in all things needful and necessary,
saving that in any new work, he shall not bestow therein above forty
shillings, without the consent of the Mayor and the xxiiij.

Also he shall attend or cause to be attended, all the laborers and workmen
in all the cities works, and so see them to be weekelie paid and satisfied of
their wages, and thereof to keep a true book of account.

Also he shall receive into his custody by in nentorie all the powder, shot,
ordinances, armor, and artillery, and all other things belonging to the
city, and safely and in good order to keep the same, and at the years end,
to deliver the same up, or a just account thereof.

Also he shall keep the keys of the counsel chamber, and keep in safety,
the records, immunities, evidences, and all other things there kept, and to be
kept, without disclosing of any secrets thereof.

Also he shall, after the end of his year and office, yield, and deliver, and
make a true and perfect account, before the auditors appointed, of all his
receipts, and paiments, and that the same be fully concluded and determined,
before the election of a new Mayor and officers. And what he shall be found to
owe upon his account, the same to be forthwith paid.

Also he shall attend the common counsel, at all time and times, whenever
they shall assemble and meet, for, and about, any of the cities affairs, and
not to be absent without some special cause.

The office of the Recorder.
THe Recorder is an officer of the best credit, and in cheifest place next to
the Mayor, and chosen there unto for his wisdom, knowledge, and learning,
that thereby the government of the city in each degree and estate, should well
and orderly be directed. His name is derived out of the Latin tongue,
Recordator, which signifies a rememberer, or aduiser: that is to put every
man in remembrance of his duty, both according to the course and order of the
laws, and according to the orders and customs of the city, and to see all
things in government, to be directed accordingly. And because the use of his
service was continually necessary, therefore in times past he was ever
resident and dwelling within the city, or very near to it, whereby access
at all times presently was had unto him, for his advise and counsel in all
matters of weight. His office consists chiefly in these points following.

FIrst he is to aid, attend and assist the Mayor and bailiffes, in all their
courts, and to direct the same according to the course and order of the laws,
and that justice be vprightlie ministered.

Also he is to see that the records of the court be made and entered truly,
and that they be safely kept and preserved.

Also he is at the end of every year, to see the records of the year past,
and all rolls of accounts, to be brought into the counsel chamber of the
city, and there to be laid up in the treasury and place appointed, safely to
be conserved.

Also he is to attend the Mayor and common counsel, from time to time, and at
all times, whenever he shall be called: as also to be at the yearly
elections of the Mayor and officers.

Also he is to attend and be, at every quarter sessions, and jail delivery,
if he have not some urgent and necessary let, and that then he is to appoint
some other wise and grave man in his stead.

Also he is to defend and maintain the orphans and the liberties, franchisies
and privileges of the city.

Sundry other articles be incident to his charge, which more at large are
contained and set down in the black book or leiger.

The office of the xxiiij. of the common counsel, and of every of them.
THe common counsel of the city, named the xxiiij. is a selected and a chosen
company, of the most wise and grauest citizens of the city, and who have
been tried, and borne the office of one of the baliffes of the same. They were
sometimes xxxvj. in number, and of which the Mayor then was none: but since,
the kings of this realm have reduced them, to the number of xxiiij. and there
of the Mayor is always one. They have no authority nor jurisdiction in any
matters judicial, be it civil or criminal, other than to advise, aid and
assist the Mayor and bailiffes: but they are to maintain, devise, order, and
establish all good acts, orders, and ordinances, as be most convenient and
good, for the preservation of the body of the common wealth, and of ancient
customs, liberties and orders of the same, and of the rents and revenues of
the city. The particular and most special points incident to their charges
and offices, are as follows.

FIrst they are upon reasonable summons, to come and to appear at the counsel
chamber of the said city, as well yerelie at the times appointed and
accustomed, for the election of the Mayor and officers, as at all other time
and times, when they shall be summoned upon pain of such penalties, as by the
orders of this city are limited, unless he have a lawful cause of absence.

Also when they are assembled and come together at the time appointed, they
shall then and there take their proper place appointed, and in all modesty,
wisdom, and sobriety, behave and use themselves, and not to depart from
thence, during the times of their counsel and consultations, unless they be
licenced, upon pain of the penalties already ordered, and assessed.

Also when any matter is proposed, then every one who is to speak his mind,
shall stand up, in all reverence and butifull manner: and then to speak, and
declare his opinion vprightlie, without any manner of affection, and as shall
be for the best behoof of the common wealth.

Also whatsoever shall be there concluded, and determined, they are to see the
same to be set down, and registered, in their book of acts, and before their
departure, to hear the same read openly unto them.

Also they shall not discover, nor disclose any of their secrets, or counsels,
to any person or persons, to the hurt or prejudice of the city, upon the
pains which be limited: and as by the said Mayor, and common counsel, shall
be further ordered, and set down.

Also they shall not let, set, demise, sell, nor allenate, any parts of the
cities lands, rents, reuonewes, or other commodities, but to and for the best
advantage, benefit, and commodity of the city, and common wealth of the same.

Also there shall no assembly be made to pass, do or conclude any thing,
under the number of twelve persons at the least, and what shall be agreed upon
and concluded by the said whole assembly, or the more part of them being
present, to be of effect; and for a perfect order. Provided, that if in any
matter proposed, the voices be equal and of like number, then the Mayor shall
give his double voice, and so the matter to be determined.

Also none of xxiiij. shall misuse or misname one the other in word or deed,
upon pain of such penalties as be for such offenses provided.

Also the said xxiiij. shall attend and accompany the Mayor upon the festival
days, and upon the election days, and to bring him home to his house from S.
Peter's, and from the guildhall.

Also they shall have a special care and regard to the preservation of all the
liberties, privileges, and orders of the city, and especially to the charter
of the orphans, according to the statute and ordinance therefore prouides.

Also they shall yearly attend the Mayor, for the viewing of the limits,
bounds, and walls of the city.

The office of an Alderman.
THe Alderman, is a very ancient officer, in all cities and towns, and in
great estimation and credit, in the times of the Saxons and Brittons. They were
always the most ancient, grave, and wisest men, and thereof they took their
name, as who says Elder men; not altogether in respect of age, but for their
wisdom, gravity, and good counsels: they have been officers, in all the
best common wealths in all ages, as in Room, where they were called Senators,
in Athens, where they were called Areopagitae, and in Sparta, and there named
Ephori, and so the like in all other good cities; their offices were rather
inquisitiue than judicial, that is, to make inquiry and search, whether that
all things were in good order, and what were the abuses to be amended, which
being known and understood, then by their advise and counsels, and according
to the laws, reformation insued. The order and manner of their inquisitions, is
the like, or the same, as in times past was used in this city, and at these
presents is kept and observed in the city of London, and there called by the
name of the wardemotes inquest. The special points whereof be as follows.

FIrst they are every month, to make a search throughout their wards; and
twice in the year, to make inquiry by the oaths of a iewrie, whether that the
peace be kept, and whether every inhabitant have a club, sword, or some other
sufficient weapon in readiness, for keeping the peace, and also whether every
man be assistant, and in readiness, to help and succor the officer therein.

Also whether any stranger, or new come, be received into any house, and
there harbored above a convenient time.

Also whether any vndertenants be admitted, without license of the alderman of
the quarter.

Also what iournimen, and apprentises, every artificer has, and in what order.

Also whether there be any outlawes, felons, riotars, barrators,
night-watchers, bawdes, whoores, or any misliuing, or suspect persons in the
ward.

Also whether the Majors Proclamation be observed and kept.

Also whether any person do break any the orders to be enquired by the
clerks of the market: that is, for forestalling, engrossing and regrating:
Whether victuals be good and whoalesome, and sold at prices reasonable:
Whether vessels, weightes, and measures, be sealed, marked, and true.

Also whether the Bakers do keep the assise appointed, and whether every one
have his mark upon his bread.

Also whether any hostler or Innekeeper do bake his bread within his house and
sell it.

Also whether the brewers do brewe according to the Majors price, and his
vessels do contain their just contents, and be marked.

Also whether there be any noisance or purpestures in the City, as by setting
of pales, wales, stales, bulkes, porches, windows, and such like, whereby any
incroching is used: or any timber, stones, doonghils, or heaps of dirt, or
any other thing be cast and laid in the streets to the letting or hindering of
any way, or to the anoisance of any person.

Also whether any do keep slaughtering within the City, or do keep and
feed any hogs, duckes, or any other filthy beast.

Also whether the streets be kept clean, and swept twice in the week atleast.

Also whether any house be ruinous, and stand dangerously, and whether any
chimney, oven, or furnace, or backs, or heathes for fire do stand dangerously
and in peril of fire, and the same not presented by the scauenger.

Also whether there be crookes, ladders, and buckets in readiness to serve if
need should be in peril of fire: and whether every man have in a readiness a
vessel of water at his door when any house is adventured with fire, and not
advertised by the scauengers.

Also whether any leprosy or sick person, vagabonds or beggars do go abroad
a begging within the City, other than such as be licenced, and be not brought
to the cage or other prison.

Also whether every officer do attend his office and do his duty, and whether
any do use any extortion, briberie, or any inordinate means by way of
corruption.

The office of the Chamberlain.
THe Chamberlain is an officer of a late erection, and was made and ordered by
act of Parleament. His office chiefly and especially concerns the orphans,
and then consequently in all things concerning the government and the state
of the common wealth: and therefore it is very requisite that he be wise,
learned, and well acquainted in all the orders, ordinances, customs, and the
whole estate of the common wealth. The chiefest points incident and
apperteining to his office in particularitie are as follows.

FIrst he is to attend the Mayor and common counsel at all times, being
lawfully summoned, and according to his knowledge to advise, instruct, and
inform them in all things concerning the government, vsages, customs,
liberties, and privileges of the City.

Also he if he be thereunto required, in the absence of the towneclearke, shall
sit down and write all such acts, orders, and determinations, as by the Mayor
and common counsel shall be concluded and agreed upon.

Also he shall not discover nor open the secrets and counsels of the Mayor and
common counsel to the hurt of them, or of the common wealth.

Also he shall see that all the records, charters, miniments, evidences, and
other writings of the chamber shall be safely kept in the treasury of the
counsel chamber, and shall not deliver, carry out, nor show them, or any of
them out of that place, to any person or persons without the consent of the
Mayor, or some necessary and urgent cause.

Also he shall be present and attendant at all and every the Cities audits,
and all the accounts to be heard and passed before the auditors, he shall see
and cause to be put up in the treasury of the counsel chamber.

Also he shall from time to time survey and take the view of all the cities,
manors, lordships, woods, lands, and housings, and to see that no part thereof
be impaired, imbecilled, or lost, and the same or any part being ruinous or in
decaie, to be in time convenient repaired and amended.

Also he shall aid, help, and instruct the receiver, and all other officers
in all things to their office apperteining, as well for any thing concerning
the cities works, as for the ouerseeing of the workmen, and providing all
things necessary for the same.

Also he shall have a special care to the defending and preservation of the
common wealth, and of all the privileges of the same, and especially of the
orders of the orphans according to the charter, orders, and ordinances of the
same.

The office of the Towneclarke.
THe Towneclarke was an officer even as old as the oldest, and in times past he
was yearly chosen as other officers, and most commonly he was one of the
stewardes or bailiffes: of which number one was always learned and of good
experience and knowledge in the laws, vsages, customs, and orders of the
city: but in the end for sundry reasons and considerations, this office was
altogether cast upon one man, who being once chosen, did continue therein so
long and until he died, or for some reasonable cause was removed. The office
is of great credit and importance, for he is not only to write and truly to
set down both in records and in books what is done by the Mayor and bailiffes
in their courts, and by their offices, and by the common counsel in their
assemblies, but also to inform and instruct them what is to be done, and what
every of them ought to do: and therefore his service is so requisite and
necessary, that he can at no time be absent, or elong himself from out of the
city without specall license. The chiefest points of his office are these.

FIrst he must be honest, wise, and learned, and well acquainted in the
knowledge of the charters, records, customs, liberties and orders of the
city, which he shall defend.

Also he must attend the Mayor and bailiffes at and in all their courts, and at
and in doing their offices at all time and times, and is to instruct and
inform them how they are to proceed in the execution thereof.

Also he may not lie out or be absent out of the city any one night, without
special leave and license.

Also he is to make true entries, and to keep true records of all the whole
process of the Mayor and bailiffes courts, and the same to engrosse weekelie
in parchment, and at the years end to deliver them into the treasury.

Also he is to attend the Mayor and common counsel, and to give them his best
advise in all their doings, and whatsoever by them or the more part of them
shall be determined, shall register and write in their book of acts: these
nor any other the secrets of the city shall he not disclose to the hurt or
prejudice of them or of the city.

Also he shall aid and assist, instruct and inform all and every officer and
officers for the true doing of their offices and duties.

Also he shall attend to keep the audites of the city, and all the accounts
he shall ingrosse in parchment.

Also he must maintain and defend all the liberties and privileges of the
city, and the right of the orphans to his uttermost.

Also he is to attend the markets and the waying of bread, furing of weights
and measures, making of proclamations, and finally, whatsoever else
apperteineth to be done for and concerning the government of the city. Many
other things are required to be done by him, and which are incident to his
charge, and which are more at large set down in the black book.

The office of the Sergeants.
THe Sergeants are very ancient officers, and had their beginning when the
magistrate had. First they were called Subballiui, because under the head
bailiffs they were wont to collect and gather the issues of the city, and to
execute their precepts and commandments: after this, they were called
Ministricuriae, because their greatest service then was to attend the court,
and to execute services thereunto apperteining. And lastly, they were and are
yet called Seruientes ad clauam. And according to the special point of their
service they take their several names Sergeants at the mace: for that is
chiefly required of them, to summon, attach, and arrest all such persons as
against whom any action or suite is commenced in any of the courts within
this city, and by their mace which is their warrant, they are known to be the
ministers to that end. They are also the general seruitures in all or the most
part of all the affairs in the common weal, and in whose services rests the
performance and execution of all things to be done, wherein, if they should be
corrupted, slothful, careless, and negligent, then should all the travels of
the magistrates, the government of the common wealth, and the execution of all
laws and orders be frustrate and come to small effect. It is requisite
therefore that they be of good name, credit, and honesty, void and free from
all corruption and briberie, and also diligent and careful to execute and
perform what to their offices apperteineth and belongs. Many are the things
and sundry which are incident and apperteining to their ministeries and
services, and all which were too long to be set down in these presents, but of
many, these few here following may suffice.

FIrst that they be men of honest fame and of good credit and behavior, and
sworn to the liberties of the city, that they be loiall and obedient to the
magistrates and governors, and careful to keep and maintain the common peace
and quietness, and ready to do and perform all such things as to them shall
be commanded and inioined by the Mayor and magistrates.

Also they must serve and attend the Mayor at all time and times convenient,
namely, to bring him upon sundaies and festival days to the churches at
divine services and preachings: at the Guild hall upon every mondaie to and
from the court: at the markets upon wednesdaies and fridaies, and at the
shambles upon saturdaies, at making of proclamations, etc.

Also some one of them by course is specially to attend the Mayor himself,
and not to be absent from him nor his house.

Also they are to attend the bailiffes at the prouorst court, and at the
markets, and in all things to be done at their commandments.

Also they are to summon, attach, and arrest all and every such person and
persons as are to be summoned, attached, and arrested by action or
commandment, and all such as be so summoned, attached, or arrested, to carry
and bring to the counter or place appointed for ward, unless he or they do put
in sufficient bail, if the matter be baileable.

Also they shall impanell indifferent inquests between party and party, and
shall certify the same to the court, before the same be returned.

Also they shall levy and execute all manner of distresses, condemnations,
judgments, and executions awarded in any of the courts: they shall likewise
do and execute all manner of commandments and precepts of the Mayor and common
counsel, justices, and Aldermen.

Also they shall from time to time give summons to every inhabitant for their
watchmen and marketmen when their turn comes.

Also they shall not take any bribes, nor be corrupted to do any thing for and
concerning the executing of their office.

Also they shall upon every mondaie at the court present all breakers of the
peace, all manner of misdemeanors which they know to have been done the week
before.

Also they, or one of them at the least, shall attend the auditors of the
city, at the time when the audits shall be kept.

Also they shall not lie out of the city any one night without special
license.

Also they shall not, so long as they shall be sergeants, wear the liuerie, or
serve any man in any office or otherwise.

Also they shall not discover nor disclose the counsels or secrets of the city
to any person or persons, to the hurt of the city.

Also what service soever is to be done concerning the city and government of
the same, they are, and must be at all commandments, and in readiness to
execute the same.

Also they shall upon every mondaie present the death of every inhabitant of
the city, which leaves any heir or orphans behind him.

The rest of their charge and offices are written in the black book.

The office of the Constables.
THe office of a Constable is very ancient, and in times past the chiefest
within ye realm for conservation of the peace, and thereof takes his name
Constabularius, quasi cuncta stabiliens, one that establishes and sets all
things in peace, good order and quietness. What constables by law may do, and
in times past were wont to do, it is needelesse now to set down, because a
great part of their office is shortened and committed by statute to the justices
of the peace: and unto whom and to whose commandments they are now seruitors
and to attend, yet many things are incident and belonging to their charge, of
which, these which follow, are the chiefest to be kept by such as are within
cities and towns.

FIrst they must keep, and see to be kept the Queens peace, and the common
tranquillity of the city and county.

Also they must take and apprehend, all malefactors, peacebreakers, rowters,
and rioters, all men going armed, or carieng any pistols, and wearing any
privy coat, all traitors, felons, murderers, and every other person or
persons, offending against the peace, and the crown, and them to commit, and
bring to the ward, to be safely kept, until he be brought before the Mayor
and Justices.

Also they are to take, and arest all such persons as live idelie, and
suspiciouslie, night-watchers, dronkards plaiers at unlawful games, roges,
vagabonds, whores, and bawds, and all such as cannot give good account, how and
in what vocation they do live.

Also they are from time to time, to search, both by day and by night, all
suspected houses, and all innehouses, for all suspected persons, and strangers,
and such as have lien above iij. days and iij. nights, in any inn, or other
house, having no sufficient business, or other cause so to do, and them they
are to commit and send to ward, there to remain, until they be further
examined.

Also they are to search and view, whether every inhabitant, and housekeeper,
have in his house, and in readiness, a club, or some sufficient weapon, for
defense of himself, and for keeping of the peace.

Also they must upon Sundaies and holiedaies, at the time of prayers and
preachings, walk the streets, to see and search, whether any person and
persons, be sitting or standing idelie in the streets, or be at any alehouse,
or tippling house, or be at any game or games, and without just cause be absent
from the sermons, preachings, and prayers, and these either to commit to ward,
or send to the church.

Also they are upon Sundaies and holidaies, upon the court days, and quarter
session days, to attend the Mayor, from thence to his house.

Also they are to attend the Mayor and Justices, to do and obeie their
commandments, for all things concerning their offices, and by them to be done.

Also they are upon every mondaie, to present the death of every free
citizen, for that week past, leaving any heir or orphane behind him, or
having any lands, or tenths, and who is his next heir.

Also they are to join with the scauengers, and other expert men, whenever
any question is between the Lord, and the tenant, or occupier of any house,
for and concerning paiments, of rents, reparations, ammisances, remoouing of
implements, etc.

Also to view and search, whether any brewer, baker, or other person, have
their ouens, fornaces, chimneis, or backs, ruinous and in danger and peril of
fire.

Finally they are to attend in all matters touching the Queens service, the
keeping of the peace, the repressing of malefactors, and of the commandments
of the Mayor, the justices and the aldermen.

Also they are specially to attend the Mayor, as well upon sundaies to and
from S. Peter's at the sermons, as upon mondaies to and from the court of the
Guildhall, as at all other times convenient and being thereunto required.

For other things concerning their offices, look in the black book.

The office of the Scauengers.
THe Scauingers are necessary officers, and who cannot be wanting in any well
governed city or town; because by them and their service, all things noisome
to the health of man, and hurtful to the state of the body of the common
wealth, are advertised unto the magistrate, and so they be a means of the
redress thereof. And therefore they be called scauengers, as who says,
shewers or aduertisers, for so the word sounds. The speciallest points
incident to their offices, are these.

FIrst they are to see the peace and common tranquillity of the city to be
kept.

Item that the streets be well paued, and meet for all passages of man,
horse, and cart, and that they be weekelie swept and made clean, and the
sweeping carried away: and that none lay timber, stones, or any like thing
in the streets, but during the time of building.

Item that there be no slaughter of cattle or beast, kept within the walls:
that no pigges or filthy beast be kept within the same: no doong hills, nor
any noisome thing kept, whereby the air be corrupted, or the people annoied.

Item that there be no houses, peutises, chimneis, nor walls, nor any other
thing, hanging or standing dangerously, to the peril and danger of such as
shall pass thereby.

Item that they do make view and search, whether every inhabitant, do
yearly and from time to time, as occasion shall require, cleanse and sweep
their chimnies, and that all ouens, fornaces, mantels, backs, and such like,
be kept in such order, as thereby no peril of fire may happen.

Item that when any house is adventured with fire, that then they do take
order as well for voiding of the press of people, as to see and to bring
ladders, crookes, water, and all things necessary in place for quenching of
the fire.

Item that every householder have at all time and times in the summer and hot
and dry weather, a tub or some other vessel full of water in readiness, at or
near their foredore, for the quenching of fire if any house should happen to
be adventured, and for cleansing of the streets.

Item that the common conduites be clean and orderly kept, and the pipes
which conuaie the water from the spring to the said conduits be well repaired
and maintained from time to time, and that no private person do incroch the
common commodity of the waters therein for brewing, washing, or any such like
use, other than for dressing of their meats and such like.

Item that no manner of person do incroch any part of the streets or ways to
his private use, nor do build nor set any porch, boulke, stall, windows,
wall, chimneie, or any other edifices upon the said streets or soil, or any
part thereof, before a composition be made with the Mayor and common counsel.

Item that whenever any controversy does happen between lord and tenant,
for and concerning the orderly paiments of rents, or removing of implements, or
other buildings, that they call unto them the constables and other expert
artificers and men of knowledge, and then according to the truth and customs of
the city, to decide the same.

Item that they weekelie upon every mondaie at the court do present all
breaches of peace, misorders, and all other defaults appertaining to their
office.

Item that they do upon every sundaie, festival day, and mondaie, attend the
Mayor to and from his house to the court, and to the church at S. Peter's at the
sermons.

Item that they be attendant to the Mayor, bailiffes, and all other officers at
all time and times whenever they shall be required concerning any service of
the prince and common wealth.

The rest of their charge is contained in the black book.

The office of the Swordbearer.
THe office of the Swordbearer is of a late erection, and had his beginning
when King Henry the vij. in the xiij. year of his reign came to this city
for the resisting of Perkin Warbecke, at which time, for the good service of
the Mayor and citizens, he gave his own sword from his waste unto the Mayor,
with the privilege that the same and the hat of maintenance should for ever at
all times convenient be borne before him, and for the doing of this service,
the swordbearer was then chosen, the points of whose office are these, and such
like as follows.

FIrst he is to attend the Mayor for bearing the sword before him upon sundaies
and festival days, when he goes to S. Peter's to the sermons, upon mondaies
and session days when he goes to the hall, and upon and at all other times
and days when any proclamation shall be made, or he thereto required.

Also he shall attend the Mayor at the markets, and at the waying of the
assizes of the bakers bread, and all other like services.

Also he is to attend the Mayor at his table, and at all other convenient times
when he shall be thereunto required.

Also he shall keep the common peace, apprehend malefactors, and preserve the
state and privileges of the city as much as in him lies.

Also he shall not discover nor disclose any secrets or counsels of the city
to the prejudice of the same, nor consent to any hurt to be done against the
said city or any officer, but shall discover it to such officer or officers
as it shall appertain.

Also as being a sergeant at arms he shall attend the causes of the orphans,
as well at the court of the orphans, as at all other times, and in all other
things pertaining to the behoof of orphans, according to the orders of the
same, that is to say, he shall upon every mondaie present the name of every
inhabitant of the city dead, and leaving any orphans: he shall call for the
testament and inventory of every such decessed man, he shall call the
praisers appointed before the Alderman of the quarter to be sworn, he shall
sequester the goods, and execute the writs of Scire facias and fieri facias,
and all process to him directed for the behoof of the orphans: he shall
summon the courts for orphans as to him shall be commanded. Sundry like
things are incident to his charge, and which at large are set down in the
book of orders for orphans.

The office of the wardens of the Magdalen and of the poor.
THese officers are of trust, and committed to such as should take a special
care for the poor, as well for the good ordering of them in persons, as for
the preservation of such lands and goods as are provided for their sustenance
and maintenance.

FIrst therefore the warden of the Magdelen is to govern and to see to be
governed all such Lazar people, as shall be received for sick persons into the
Magdelen house, according to the orders of the said house, and according to the
direction of the Mayor and common counsel.

Also that they be weekelie paid of such salaries and stipends as to them is
and shall be assigned by the Mayor and common counsel.

Also the wardens proctor shall provide and see to be proinded meat, drink,
washing, cleansing, and all other things necessary for them.

Also the said warden shall see their church, houses, and buildings from time
to time to be repaired.

Also he shall be careful to save, keep, and preserve the lands, rents and
profits whatsoever, appointed and allowed for the maintenance of the said
hospital.

Also they shall not admit any person or persons to be one of the said
hospital, without the consent of the Mayor and common counsel, and that the
same be a sick person in the disease of the leprosy.

Also they shall not set, let, nor demise any the lands belonging to the said
hospital, without the consent and agreement of the Mayor and xxiiij.

Also they shall yearly yield up and make a true account before the auditors
of the city of all their receipts and paiments, and upon the determination of
the said account, shall discharge, pay, and satisfy what shall be found
remaining in their hands, and to be due by them.

The like is required of every warden of the poor, and for every almeshouse,
and of every collector for the same.

The office of the wardens of the bridges.
THe wardens of the bridges, commonly called by the names of the wardens of
Exbridge, are very ancient officers, and of great credit, and in times past
great circumspection was had in the choice of them, and for the most part they
were most grave citizens. They were always two in number, the one being the
elder, and the other the younger. The things which are incident to their
offices, are as follows.

FIrst they both jointly are to have the care to view and search from time to
time the two bridges, which belong to the cities reparations, as namely,
Exbridge, and Cowleighbridge, and the banks next adioining on every side of
saint Leonards wear, and what defaults soever they shall find and see to be
amended, or be advertised thereof by the Receiver or Chamberlain of the city,
that they do cause the same to be repaired and amended.

The head warden is to collect, receive, and gather all the rents, revenues,
profits and issues belonging to the bridges, and shall after the end of his
year, at the time appointed, make a true and perfect account of all his
receipts and paiments, before the auditors of the city, asking no allowance,
but as shall be just and true.

Also he shall procure and provide from time to time, by the advice and
direction of the chamberlain of the city, all things meet and necessary, as
well for the reparations of the houses belonging to the bridge, as for the
bridges themselves, and all things thereunto apperteining.

Also he shall provide and procure by the advice aforesaid, meet and
convenient workmen and laborers, for and about all the aforesaid buildings
and reparations, and to see them weekelie and from time to time to be paid for
their salaries and wages.

Also he shall see and command the bridge called Exbridge, to be cleansed and
swept from time to time, and that no doonghils, nor heaps of dirt do lie upon
the same.

Also the young warden, is to attend and take the oversight of the workmen,
that they do keep their times and work, and that nothing do want them being
necessary.

Also he is to keep account of the number of the workmen, and to see that
there be no wast or spoil, either of the work, or of any thing provided for
the work.

Also they are to attend the Mayor upon sundaies and feastiuall days, to and
from S. Peter's church, as other officers do, and are bound to do.

The office of the wardens of the Shambles.
THe office of the wardens of the Shambles, are very ancient, and chosen
yearly by the Mayor and common counsel, when other officers are, and their
office is specially to attend all things as be necessary, for and concerning
flesh victuals, and the good ordering of the same, and of the Shambles. The
special points are these.

FIrst they are upon every saturdaie, except it be some holy day, or
festival day, at or about one of the clock, in the afternoon, to come to
the Majors house, and to bring him to and from the shambles.

Also they are to see, then and at all other times, the shambles to be
furnished with meat, good, wholesome, and sufficient for the city.

Also that no slaughters be kept in any place, within the walls of the city.

Also that no pigs be nourished, nor doonghilles, nor any corrupt thing
breeding a corrupt air, be kept within the walls of the city.

Also that no bull vnbaited, nor sow brenning, nor yew tupping, nor any beast
unseasonable be slaughtered, nor flesh blown, foistered, salted, or
unreasonable, be set to sale.

Also that no butcher do ingrosse, forestale, nor regrate, any victuals, nor
do sell the same, but at reasonable prices.

Also that every butcher, upon every market day, do bring with the carcass,
the fell or skin, of every beast slaughtered.

Also that they do attend upon every sundaie, and festival days, the Mayor
to the church, and upon every mondaie, to the guildhall court, as other
officers are bound to do, and that upon every mondaie, at the court, they do
present all such faults, as have the week before been committed, and ought to
be presented.

Item that none of the butchers do keep any market or open shop, upon the
sundaies.

The office and duty of the Porters.
THe Porters, are officers of good trust, and unto whose credit is committed
the safety of the city: for when every man takes his rest, and thinks to
be in safety, it is their office, that the gates be not at commandment, of
such as by whom their restes, and sleeps be disturbed, nor unquieted, by
receiving any person or persons into the gates, nor in doing of any act,
which may be hurtful to the city, or inhabitants of the same.

FIrst therefore, they must every night, shut and make fast the cities gates,
at the times and hours appointed, and accustomed, that is, at ten of the clock
at night, in the summer, and at nine of the clock in the winter, and likewise
must open the said gates, at the times accustomed, that is, at four of the
clock in the morning in the summer, and at five of the clock in the winter.

Also in the times of wars, commotions, and rebellions, they are to deliver
up the keys, into the custody of the Mayor.

Also at no time in the night, after the gates be shut, they shall suffer any
person, or persons, to come or go in and out, but such as they do know to be
honest, and of good credit, and conversation.

Also at all time and times, if any post happen to come, they shall open the
gates to receive him, and to bring him to the Mayor, and to his lodging.

Also if ante hew and cry shall happen to be, they shall open the gates, to
receive and follow the same.

Also if any tumults, vprores, escapes of prisoners, fiering of houses, or
any such like things shall happen, they shall forthwith, close and make fast
the gates, and so keep the same shut until all be appeased, and order given
for the opening of them.

Also they shall attend the Mayor, upon every sundaie, and festival days, to
and from S. Peter's church, and upon every mondaie, to the guildhall court, as
other officers do, and are bound to do; and shall at the said court, present
all bloudsheds, fraies, and breaches of the peace, and whatsoever else by them
is and ought to be presented.

The office of the Bull ring keeper, named commonly the Mayor of the Bull ring.
THe Mayor of the Bull ring, is an office of countenance, and appointed for the
keeping of a good order in such things as be committed to his trust and office.

FIrst when any bull or bear baiting be appointed, he is first to make the
Mayor privy thereof, and no baiting to be used within the city, but that the
said Mayor be present or give leave thereunto.

Also he shall see all things to be well and orderly used at such pastimes.

Also he shall not see or suffer any pigges, poulterie, or duckes, to rainge
abroad the streets.

Also upon every market day he shall not suffer any horse to stand in the
streets in the market place, but shall cause them to be carried out of the
market.

Also if any straiers come, he shall cause them to be brought to the place of
the high conduct upon the market days, and there to be tied to the ring, and
to be proclaimed in the market, and from market day to market day, during
three markets, to keep them in pound, or in some place safely.

Also if the said beasts be chained and challenged, he shall upon proof made
before the Mayor and bailiffes, redeliuer to the owners, taking his fees, and
for the reasonable keeping of such beasts in the mean time.

Also if the said beasts, at or within three courts, be not challenged, then he
shall bring them at the Guildhall, the next mondaie then following, and there
to be praised.

Also he shall attend the Mayor upon sundaies to the church, and upon mondaies
to the court, as other officers do, and ought to do.

The office of the VVatchemen and Wardens.
THe Watchmen are officers of trust, for the safe custody and preservation of
the city, as well in times of troubles and wars, as in the days of peace,
when ordinary night watches by the laws of the realm are kept.

FIrst the watchmen, are householders, who by course are to watch themselves in
person, or to appoint some meet and convenient persons in their place, and
which are to be well and sufficienrlie armed with harness and weapon.

Also they are to repair in the summer in the evening, immediately upon the
sun set, unto the Guildhall, and there to take their oath, to hear their
charge, and to receive their watchword.

Also they are then to depart hence in good order, and to go to every of the
gates, and to see them to be shut and made fast, and then to come all to
Corfoixe or the great conduit: and there to divide themselves into their
several quarters, by order of such as be appointed captains over them, and
the same several quarters they shall guard and keep.

Also they shall all night be watchful and walking abroad in their divisions,
leaving always some one at the least at the gate.

Also they shall view and look whether all things be quiet and in good order,
and if they find any candle light in any house late and out of season, they
shall cause the same to be put out, unless some cause be to the contrary, and
if they find any fires perilous, or houses adventured, they shall rowse and
call up the scauengers and constables, and other the officers for quenching
thereof.

Also if they find any night watchers, plaiers, quarellers, dronkeards,
suspect persons, whatsoever, they shall apprehend them, and bring them, either
to the ward or to some convenient place, as where the parties may be forth
coming before the magistrate the next morning.

Also if any post or stranger come, they shall receive him, if his arrant and
coming be honest, and shall bring him to his lodging, or present him to the
magistrate, according as his cause shall require.

Also they shall attend the Mayor upon every mondaie at the Guildhall court,
and then and there to present what faults have been done and committed in the
nights of their watches.

Also that in their watches they do ball and kill all such dogs as they
shall find balling or ranging in the streets, or lieng out of any man's house.

There be other officers which are sworn also: as the justices of the peace,
the shiriffes, the clarke of the peace, the vndershiriffes, etc. But for so
much as their offices are limited by statutes, and at large therein expressed,
I will refer them to the same.

FINIS.

