A BOOK OF COOKRYE. Very necessary for all such as delight therein.

Gathered by A. W.

And now newlye enlarged with the serving in of the Table. With the proper
Sauces to each of them convenient.

AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde. 1591.

The order how Meats should be served to the Table, with their sauces.
The first course.
POtage or stewed broth. boiled meat or stewed meat. Chickins and Bacon.
Powdered Beef. Pyes, Gooce, Pigge. Roasted Beef. Roasted Veale. Custard.
The second course.
Roasted Lamb. Roasted Capons, Chickins. Pehennes. Bakte Venison, Tart.
The service ar Supper.
POtage or Sew. A Sallet. A Pigges petitoe. Powdered Beef sliced. A shoulder of
mutton or a breast. Vele, Lamb, Custard.
The second course.
CApons roasted. Cunnies roasted. Chickins roasted. A Pie of Pigions or Chickins.
Baked Venison, Tarte.
The service at Dinner.
BRawne and Mustard. Capons stewed in white broth. A Pestell of Venison upon
brewes. A chine of Beef and a breast of mutton boild. Chewets or Pyes of fine
mutton. Three green geese in a dish, sorrel sauce. For a stubble goose,
mustard and vinagre. After Alhalowen day a Swan, sauce Chaudron. A Pigge. A
dubble Rib of Beef roasted, sauce Pepper and Vinagre. A loyne of Veale or breast,
sauce Orenges. Half a Lamb or a Kid. Two Capons roasted, sauce wine and salt,
Ale and Salt except it be upon sops. Two Pasties of falow Deer in a Dish. A
Custard. A Dish of Leash.
The second course.
IElly. Pecock, sauce wine and Salt, Two Cunnies or half a dosen of rabbets.
sauce Mustard and Sugar. Half a dosen of chickins upon sorrel sops. Half a
dozen of Pigions. Mallard. Teale. Gulles. Storke.
Sauce Mustard and Vinagre. Hernsew. Crane. Curlew. Bittur. Bustard.
Sauce Gallentine. Fesand, sauce water and salt with Onions sliced. Half a
dozen of Woodcocks, sauce Mustard and Sugar. Half a dosen of Partriges. Half a
dosen Railes sauced as the Fesand. A dosen of Quails. A dish of Larkes. A
pasty of red Dear. Tarte, Ginger bread, Fritters.
Service for Fish days.
BVtter. A Sallet with hard Eggs. Potage of sand Eeles and Lamprons. Red
Hering green broiled sugar strewed upon. White Hering. Ling. Haburdine.
Sauce Mustard. Salt salmon minced, sauce mustard and Vinagre and a little
Sugar. Powdered Cunger. Shad. Mackrel.
Sauce Vinagre. Whiting, sauce with liver and mustard. Plaice, sauce sarrel, or
Wine and Salt, or Vinagre. Thorn back, sauce Liver and Mustard, Pepper and
Salt strewed upon it after it is bruised. Fresh Cod, sauce Greensauce. Bace,
Mullet. Eeles upon Sops. Roches upon Sops. Perch. Pike in Pike sauce. Trout
upon Sops. Tench in Gelly or in Grissel. Custard.
The Second course.
Flounders in Pike sauce. Fresh Salmon. Fresh Cunher. Brit. Turbut. Holibut.
Sauce Vinagre. Bream upon sops. Carp upon sops. Soles or any other fish fried,
sauce the dripping. Roasted Lampruns. Roasted Porpos.
Sauce galentine. Fresh Sturgion. Creuice. Crab. Shrimps.
Sauce Vinagre. Baked Lamprye. Tart. Figs. Apples.
Cheese. Raisins. Pears.
Almonds blanched.
To make sauce for capons or Turkey Fowls
TAke Onions and slice them thin, and boil them in fair water till they be
boiled dry, and put some of the grauie unto them and pepper groce beaten.

Sauce for a roasted Stock Dove.
TAke Onions and mince them not too small, and boil them in a little claret
Wine, and when they be boiled almost dry, put thereto Vinagre. Sugar, Pepper
and some of the grauy of the Stockdoue.

To make sauce for a capon an other way.
TAke Claret Wine, Rosewater, sliced Orenges, Sinamon and ginger, and lay it
upon Sops, and lay your Capon upon it.

Sauce for capons, Phesant, Partriges or Woodcocks.
ONions sliced very thin, fair water and pepper groce beaten.

Chauldron for a Swan.
TAKE white Bread and lay it in soke in some of the broth that the Giblets be
sod in, and strain it with some of the blood of the Swan, a little piece of
the Liver and red Wine, and make it somewhat thin, and put to it Sinamon and
ginger, pepper, Salt and Sugar, and boil it until it be somewhat thick, and
put in two spoonful of the grauye of the Swan, and so serve it in saucers
being warm.

Galandine for a crane or a Hearne or any other Foul that is black meat.
TOste Bread and lay it in soke in vinagre, and strain it with Vinagre and a
little Claret wine, boil it on a chasingdish of coals and put in it sugar,
Sinamon, and Ginger.

For Stewed and boiled Meats.
To stue a Capon.
TAke the best of the Broth of the pot, and put it in a pipkin, and put to it
Corance and great raisins, Dates quartered and onions fine minced, strayned
bread and time, and let them boil well together: when they be well boiled, put
in your prunes, season it with cloves, mace, pepper, and very little Salt, a
spoonful or two of Vergious, and let it not be too thick. And your Capon being
boiled in a pot by it self in fair water and salt to keep it fair, and thus
you may boil a Chicken, vele, beef or mutton after this sort.

To stue a Capon in Lemmons.
SLice your Lemmons and put them in a Platter, and put to them white Wine and
Rosewater, and so boil them and Sugar til they be tender. Then take the best
of the broth wherein your Capon is boiled, and put thereto whole Mace, whole
pepper and red Corance, barberies, a little time, and good store of Marow. Let
them boil well together til ye broth be almost boiled away that you have no
more then will wette your Sops. Then pour your Lemmons upon your Capon, and
season your broth with Vergious and Sugar, and put it upon your Capon also.

To boil a Capon in white broth.
Boil your Capon in fair licour and cover it to keep it white, but you must
boil none other meat with it, take the best of the broth, and as much vergious
as of the broth if your Vergious be not too sower, and put thereto whole mace
whole pepper, and a good handful of Endive, Letuce or borage, whether of them
ye will, small Raisins, Dates, Marow of marow bones a little stick of whole
Sinamon, the peele of an orange. Then put in a good piece of Sugar, and boil
them well together. Then take two or three yolks of eggs sodden, and strain
them, and thick it withal, and boil your prunes by themselves, and lay upon
your Capon pour your broth upon your Capon.

Thus may you boil any thing in white broth.

An other to boil a capon in white broth.
FIrst take Marow bones, break them and boil them and take out the marowe.
Then seethe your Capon in the same licoure. Then take the best of the licoure
in a small Pot to make your broth withal. Then take Corance, Dates and
prunes, and boil them in a pot by themselves till they be plum, then take them
up and put them into your brothe, then put whole Mace to them and a good
quantity of beaten Ginger and some Salt. Then put the Marow that you did take
from the bones, and strain the yolks of Eggs with Vinager, and put them into
your broth with a good piece of Sugar but after this it must not boil: the^
take bread and cut thereof thin sippits, and lay them in the bottom of a dish.
Then take sugar and scrape it about the sides of the dish and lay thereon your
Capon, and the fruit upon it and so serve it in.

To make Sops for a capon.
TAke Tostes of Bread, Butter, Claret wine and slices of Orenges, and lay them
upon the Tostes and Sinamon Sugar and Ginger.

To make Sops for chickins.
First take Butter and melt it upon a Chasingdishe with Coals, and lay in the
Dish thin Tostes of Bread, and make Sorrel sauce with Vergious and
Gooseberies, sees them with a little vergious and lay them upon.

To boil a capon in Brows.
YOu must boil your Capon with fat meat, then take the best of the broth and
put it in a pipkin, and put whole Mace to it, whole Pepper, some red Corance,
half as much white wine as you have of broth, good store of Marowe and Dates,
and scum them clean and keep your licour very clear, and season it with
Vergious and Sugar, and then lay your Capon upon brows finely cut, and so
pour your broth upon it.

To boil a Capon.
TAke your Capon and boil it tender, and take out a little of the broth and
put it in a little pipkin with whole mace and a good deal of ginger, and
quartered Dates, and boil your corance and prnnes in very fair water by
themselves, for making of your broth black and thicken your broth with yolks of
eggs and wine strained together or a little Vergious, and let your broth boil
no more when you have thickened it, for it will quail. Then cut sippits in a
platter, and lay in your Capon, and lay your fruit upon it, so doing serve
it out.

To boil a Capon with Orenges or Lemmons.
TAke your Capon and boil him tender and take a little of the broth when it is
boiled and put it into a pipkin with Mace and Sugar a good deal, and pare
three Orenges and pil them and put the^ in your pipkin, and boil them a little
among your broth, and thicken it with wine and yolks of eggs, and Sugar a
good deal, and salt but a little, and set your broth no more on the fire for
quailing, and serve it without sippets.

To boil a Cony with a Pudding in his Belly.
TAke your Cony and sley him, and leave on the ears and wash it fair, and
take grated Bread, sweet Suet minced fiine, corance and some fine herbs,
Peneriall; winter sauery; percely, Spinach or beets, sweet margerum, and chop
your herbs fine, and season it with Cloves, Mace and Sugar, a little cream
and salt and yolks of Eggs, and Dates minst fine. Then mingle all your stuf
together, and put it in your Rabets belly and sow it up with a thread, for ye
broth take mutton broth when it is boiled a little, and put it in a pot whereas
your Rabet may lie long ways in it, and let your broth boil or ever you put
it in, then put in Gooceberies or else Grapes, corance and sweet Butter,
Vergious, Salt, grated bread and Sugar a little, and when it is boiled, lay it
in a dish with Sops. And so serve it in.

To boil Chickins or Capons.
FIrst boil them in fair water til they be tender. Then take Bread and steep
it in the broth of them, and with the yolks of four or five Eggs, and
Vergious or white Wine strain it and therewith season your broth and your
Capon in it. Then take Butter, persly and other small herbs, and chop them into
it. And so serve them forth upon sops of Bread.

To sees chickins in Lettice.
TAke a neck of Mutton with a marow bone, and so let it seethe, and scum it
clean and let it boil well together, and when it is enough: then take out some
of it and strain it, and put in your Chickins. Then take a good many Letuce
and wash them clean and put them in. Then take a little white Bread and strain
it and put it into the pot to thick it withal. Then put a little whole mace to
season it with Pepper and Vergious, and a little sugar, and cut sops and lay
them on, and put on the marow and so serve them.

To boil chickins with herbs.
TAke your Chickins and scalde them and trusse the wings on, and put their
feet under the wings of your Chickins, and set them on in a little pot and
scum them fair, when they have boiled: put in Spinach or Letuice a good deal,
and Rosemary, sweet butter, vergious, salt and a little Sugar and strained
Bread, with a little wine, and cut sippets, and serve it out.

So may you boil Mutton, or Pigeons, or Conny.

To sees Hens and capons in Winter, in whitebroth.
TAke a neck of mutton and a marow bone, and let them boil with the Hens
together, then take Carret roots, and put the^ into the pot, and then strain a
little bread to thick the pot withal and not too thick, season it with Pepper
and vergious, and the^ cover them close and let them boil together, then cut
Sops and put the broth and the marrow above, and so serve them.

To stue capons.
TAke the best of your mutton broth and put thereto a little whole pepper, and a
little whole Mace, Parcely, and time, and boil the^. Then put in half a dish
of sweet Butter, Vergious, and a piece of Sugar. Then take a good quantity of
Gooseberies, and boil them by themselves in a little broth, and pour them
upon your chickins, put into your broth a spoonful of yest.

To stue Sparrowes.
TAke Ale and set it on the fire, and when it seetheth scum it, and then put in
your Sparrowes and small Raisins, Sugar and Sinamon, Ginger, and Dates, and let
the^ boil together, and then take marrowe or Butter, and a little vergious,
and keep it close. And when it is enough, make Sops in Platters and serve them
sorth.

To stue Sparrowes.
TAke good Ale a pottel, or after the quantities more or less by your
discretion, and set it over the fire to boil, and put in your Sparowes and
scum the broth, then put therein Onions, Percely, Time, Rosemary chopped small,
pepper and Saffron, with Cloves and Mace, a few. And make sippets as you do
for Fish, and lay the Sparrowes upon with the said broth, and in the seething
put in a piece of sweet Butter, and vergious if need be

For to stue Larkes.
FIrst take them and draw them clean, and cut off their feet, and then take
a good deal of wine in a platter, and take a good deal of marow, and put it
in ye Wine and set them on a Chafing dish, and let the^ stew there a good
while, then take a quantity of small Raisins, and wash them clean and put them
into the broth, and take a little sugar, and Sinamon, and a few crumbs of
manchet bread, and put them into the Larkes, and let them stue altogether, then
take and cut half a dosen Tostes, and lay them in a Platter, then put them in a
dish with broth, and serve them out.

To stue Sparrowes or Larkes.
TAke the best of Mutton broth, and put it in a Pipkin, and put to it a little
whole Mace, whole Pepper, Claret wine, Marigolde leaves, Barberies, Rosewater
Vergious, Sugar, and Marrowe: or else sweet Butter. Perboile the Larkes before
and then boil them in the same broth and lay them upon Sops.

To boil a Duck.
Sees the Duck with some good marow bones or Mutton, and take the best of the
broth, and put therein a few Cloves, a good many sliced onions, and let them
boil well together till the Onions be tender, and the^ season your broth with
Vergious, and a little sugar and salt, and a little bruised pepper, take up your
Duck and lay it upon sops and give it two slices upon ye breast, and stick it
full of cloves and pour ye broth upon it.

To stue a wild Mallard.
TAKE a wild Mallard, with a piece of Mutton, and set him on the fire, and let
him sees, and scum him clean, then strain a little bread and put it in,
stice half a dosen of Onions, and take whole pepper and put it in, and season
it well with Vergious, and cover it close and let it boil till it be enough,
Then put it in a platter and serve it without Sops.

To boil Stockdoues.
SEethe them with Beef or Mutton, take the best of the broth and put it in a
pipkin, and put thereunto Onions finelye minced, and a few Corance, and so
boil them till they be very tender, and season them with vergious, and a
little sweet butter, and pour them upon your Stockdoues when they be laid upon
the Sops.

To stue a hinflank of Beef without fruit.
Boil your flank of Beef very tender, till the broth be almost consumed, then
put the broth into a pipkin, and put to it Onions, Caret roots shred small,
being tender sodden before, and pepper groce beaten, vergious, and half a dish
of sweet butter, and to lay it upon.

To stue a Neares foot.
FIrst let your Neats foot be scalded and made clean. Then take Onions, slice
them and boil them well in fair water. Then take half water and half Wine,
so much as need to serve for the boiling of the Neats foot (which will be soon
enough) and put it in a pipkin, put therein some Cloves, and a little whole
pepper, and take the onions out of the water they were sodden in, and put them
into the same pipkin, and the Neats foot with them till it be almost enough.
Then take a little vergious, half a dish of sweet butter and a little sugar,
and let them boil a little together, and serve them in upon Sops.

An other to stue a Neats foot.
Boil the Onions in Muscadell: and put therinto a few Corance, whole pepper
and cloves: then put in your Neats foot and boil it tender and season it with
a good piece of butter, and when they be well boiled, lay them upon sops and
cast about your dish sides a little powder of Ginger.

To boil a Leg of Mutton with Lemmons.
When your mutton is half boiled, take it up, cut it in small pieces, put it
into a Pipkin and cover it close, and put thereto the best of the broth, as much
as shall cover your Mutton, your Lemmons being sliced very thin and quartered
and corance: put in pepper groce beaten, and so let them boil together, and
when they be well boiled, seson it with a little vergious, Sugar, Pepper groce
beaten, and a little sanders, so lay it in fine dishes upon sops, it will make
iij. mess for the table.

To boil Mutton with Endive, Borage, or Lettice, or any kind of herbs that
may serve thereunto.
When your Mutton is well boiled, take the best of the broth, and put it in a
Pipkin, and put thereto an handful of Endive, borage, or what herbs you list,
and cast thereto a few corance, and let them boil well, and put thereto a piece
of upper crust of white bread, season it with pepper groce beaten, and a little
Vergious, and a little sugar, and so pour it upon your meat.

To boil mutton for a sick body.
PVt your mutton into a Pipkin, sees it and scum it clean, and put thereto a
crust of Bread. Fennel roots, Percely roots, Corance, great Raisins, the
stones taken out, and herbs according as the patient is. If they be cold, hot
herbs may be borne: If they be hot cold herbs be best, as Endive, Sinamon,
violet leaves, and some Sorell: let them boil together. Then put in Prunes,
and a very little salt, this is broth for a sick body.

To make balls of Mutton.
TAke your Mutton and mince it very fine with Suet. Then season it with Sugar,
sinamon, Ginger, Cloves and Mace, Salt, and raw Eggs. Make it in round balls.
Let your broth sees ere you put the^ in. Make your broth with Corance, dates
quartered, whole Mace and salt. Thick it with yolks of Eggs, and Vergious,
and serve it upon Sops.

How to boil Pigges Petitoes.
TAke your Pigs feet, and the Liver and Lights, and cut them in small pieces,
then take a little mutton broth and apples sliced, Corance, sweet butter,
vergious and grated bread, put them altogether in a little pipkin with salt and
Pepper, perboyle your petitoes or ever you put the^ in your Pipkin, then when
they be ready, serve the^ upon sippets.

To still a cock for a weak body that is consumed.
TAke a red Cock that is not too old, and beat him to death, and when he is
dead, fley him and quarter him in small pieces, and bruise the bones every one
of them. Then take roots of Fenell, persely, and succory, Violet leaves, and a
good quantitye of Borage, put the Cock in an earthen pipkin and between every
quarter some roots, herbs, corance, whole mace, Anis seeds, being fine
rubbed, and Licorice being scraped and sliced, and so fill your pipkin with all
the quarters of the Cock, put in a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, a pint of
white wine, two or three Dates. If you put in a piece of gold, it will be the
better, and half a pound of prunes, and lay a cover upon it, and stop it with
dough, and set the pipkin in a pot of seething water, and so let it seethe
twelve hours with a fire under the brass pot that it stands in, and the pot
kept with licour twelve hours.

When it has sodden so many hours, then take out the pipkin, pull it open, and
put the broth fair into a pot, give it unto the weak person morning and
evening.

To make a Hodgepodge.
Boil a neck of Mutton or a fat rump of Beef, and when it is well boiled, take
the best of the broth and put it into a pipkin and put a good many onyons to
it, two handful of marigold flowers, and a handful of percely fine picked and
groce shredde and not too small, and so boil them in the broth and thick it
with strained bread, putting therein groce beaten pepper, and a spoonful of
Vinagre, and let it boil somewhat thick and so lay it upon your meat.

To make puddings of a Swine.
TAKE the blood of the Swine, and swing it, then put thereto minced onions
largely with Salt, and the Suet of the Hog minced. Then take the guts clean
washed, and stuff them with the aforesaid stuff: and so sees them, then
broile them upon the coals, and serve them forth.

To make white Puddings of the Hogs Liver.
YOu must perboile the Liver, and beat it in a mortar, and then strain it
with Cream, and put thereto six yolks of Eggs and the white of two Eggs, and
grate half a halfepeny loaf of light Bread, and put it thereto with small
Raisins, and Dates, Cloves, Mace, Sugar, Saffron, and the suet of Beef.

Eisands with Otemeale grotes.
TAke a pint of Cream and seethe it, and when it is hot, put thereto a pint
of Otemeale grotes, and let them soke in it all night, and put thereto viij.
yolks of eggs, and a little Pepper, Cloves, mace, and saffron, and a good deal
of Suet of beef, and small Raisins and Dates, and a little Sugar.

To make Liuerings of a Swine.
FIrst perboile the Liver, then stamp it in a Mortar, and when it is small
enough, put it in a vessel, and put to it suct, yolks of Eggs, pepper,
cloves, Mace, and Salt. Then take your Guts clean washed, and stuff them with
the foresaid stuff, then boil them, that done serve them forth.

How to make a Pudding in a Turnep root.
TAke your Turnep root, and wash it fair in warm water, and scrape it fair and
make it hollow as you do a Carret root, and make your stuff of grated bread,
and Apples chopped fine, then take Corance, and hard Eggs, and season it with
Sugar Sinamon, and Ginger, and yolks of hard eggs and so temper your stuff, and
put it into the Turnep, then take fair water, and set it on the fire, and let
it boil or ever you put in your Turnips, then put in a good piece of sweet
Butter, and Claret Wine, and a little Vinagre, and Rosemarye, and whole Mace,
Sugar, and Corance, and Dates quartered, and when they are boiled enough, then
will they be tender, then serve it in.

A Pudding in Eggs.
TAke and boil your Eggs hard, and blanch them, and cut off the Crown of
them, and take then of the yolks and chop them, Beetes boiled, and yolks of
hard eggs, grated Bread, and Corance, Salt Sugar, Sinamon, and Ginger, and
then put the yolks of raw Eggs, and mingle them altogether, then put in your
Eggs, then for your broth take a little Mutton broth, Corance, Dates, Sugar, a
little salt and butter, thicken it with yolks of Eggs, vergious and a little
sugar, so serve it in.

A Pudding in a Tench.
TAKE your Tenche and draw it very clean, and cut it not over low. Then take
beets boiled, or Spinach, and choppe it with yolks of hard Eggs, Corance,
grated Bread, salt, Pepper, Sugar and Sinamon, and yolks of raw Eggs, and
mingle it together, and put it in the Tenches bellye, then put it in a platter
with fair water and sweet butter, and turn it in ye Platter, and set it in the
Oven, and when it is enough, serve it in with sippits and pour the licour that
it was boiled in upon it.

To make a pudding in a Carret root.
TAke your Carret root and scrape it fair, then take a fine knife and cut out
all the meat that is within the root, and make it hollow, then make your
pudding stuff of the liver of a gooce or of a Pig, with grated bread, Corance,
Cloves and mace, Dates, Pepper, Salt and Sugar, chop your Liver very small, and
perboile it ere you chop it, so done, put it in your hollow root. As for the
broth, take mutton broth with corance, carets sliste, salt, whole Mace, sweet
Butter, Vergious and grated bread, and so serve it forth upon sippets.

A Pudding in a Cowcumber.
TAke your Cowcumber and cut out all the meat that is within it, then take a
Liver of a Lamb or Pigge, and Grapes or Gooceberies, and grated bread, pepper,
salt, Cloves and mace, and a little suet, and the yolks of three Eggs, and
mingle altogether and put in the Cowcumber, and let your broth boil or ever
you put it in: the broth must be made of Mutton broth, Vinagre, and Butter,
strained bread, and Salt, and so serve it out.

How to dress Neatstungs.
FIrst boil them till they be very tender, then make tostes of bread, and
toste the^ till they be very black, then wash the same tostes in fair water,
and put them in a fair earthen Vessel, and then put to them flesh broth,
Vinagre, red Wine, Sinamon and Ginger, and strain these altogether, so that it
be not too thick, and put thereto Sugar and salt, and boil all these together,
then cut your tungs in fair leshes, and so frye them in sweet Butter, and that
done, put the Leshes into your sauce, and then let them boil well together,
and so serve them with the same sauce.

A broth for a Neatstung.
TAke Claret wine, grated Bread, Corance, sweet Butter, Sugar, and Sinamon,
boil them altogether. Then take the Neats tung and slice it and so lay it in
your dish with sippets and serve it in.

A boiled Sallet.
TAke Spinach and boil it and chop it, and when it is chopped, pour it in a
little Pipkin, with Corance, sweet Butter, Vinagre, and Sugar, boil them
altogether, and when they are boiled put it in a dishe, and lay sippets round
about, and strew sugar upon them and serve them out.

For Fish.
To seethe a Pike.
Scour your Pike with bay Salt, and then open him on the back, fair wash
him, and then cast a little white Salt upon him. Set on fair water well
seasoned with Salt. When this licour seethesh, the^ put in your Pike and fair
scum it, the^ take the best of the broth when it is sodden, and put it in a
little Chafer or Pipkin, and put thereto parcely and a little Time, Rosemary,
whole Mace, good Yest, and half as much Vergious as you have licour, and boil
the^ together, and put in the Liver of the Pike, and the kell, being clean
scaled and washed, and let them boil well, then season your broth with pepper
groce beaten, with salt not too much, because your licour is Salt that your
Pike is boiled in, put therein a good piece of sweet Butter, and season it
with a little Sugar that it be neither too sharp nor too sweet. So take up
your pike and lay it upon Sops the skinny side upward, and so lay your broth
upon it.

A Pike sauce for a Pike, Bream, Perch, roch, Carp, Flounders, and all manner
of Brook fish.
TAke a posie of Rosemary and Time, and bind them together, and put in also a
quantity of Parcelye not bound, and put it into a Cauldron of water, salt, and
Yest, and the herbs, and let them boil a prittie while, then put in the
Fish, and a good quantity of Butter, and let them boil a good while, and you
shall have your Pyke Sauce. For all these Fishes above written if they must be
broyled: take sauce for them, Butter, Pepper and Vinagre, and boil it upon a
chafingdish, and then lay the broyled fish upon the dish, but for Eeles and
fresh Salmon nothing but pepper and Vinagre ouer-boyled, and also if you will
frye them, you must take a good quantity of Percely, after the Fish is fried,
put in the percelye into the Frying pan, and let it frye in the butter, then
take it up and put it on the fried Fish, as fried Plaice, Whiting, and such
other fish, except Eeles, fresh Salmon and Cunger, which be never fried, but
baked, broiled, roasted and sodden.

How to sees a Carpe.
CVt the throat of your Carp, and save the blood in a saucer, and take your
Carpe and scour him with Salt, take out the gal and the Guts, and leave the
Liver and the fat in the belly of the Carp, set on your licour, water and Salt
to sees him, and when your licour seethes, put in your carp or ever he be
dead, and take good heed for springing out of the Pan, for it is ever good to
seethe fish quick, for it makes the fish to eat hard.

Take the best of the broth and a little red Wine, good store of Vergious, new
yest, with the blood of the Carp strained, and so put it in a Pipkin with
Corance, whole Pepper, and boil them altogether, put thereto half a dish of
sweet butter, and a little time, and Barberies if you have them, and when they
be well boiled, season it not too sweet nor too sharp, and then pour it upon
your Carpe.

To sees Roches, Flounders, or Eeles.
MAke ye good broth with new yest, put therein vergious, salt, percely, a little
Time, and not much rosemary and pepper, so set it upon the fire and boil it,
and when it is well boiled put in the Roches, Flounders, Eeles and a little
sweet butter.

To sees a Gurnard.
OPen your Gurnard in ye back, and fair wash and sees it in water and Salt,
with the fishy side upward, and when it is well sod, take some of the best of
the broth if you will, or else a little fair water, and put to it new yest, a
little vergious, percely, rosemary, a little time, a piece of sweet butter, and
whole Mace, and let it boil in a pipkin by it self till it be well boiled, and
then when you serve in your Gurnard, pour the same broth upon it.

To sees a Dory or a Mullet.
Make your broth light with yest, somewhat sauery with salt, and put therein a
little Rosemary, and when it seethes put in your fish, and let it sees very
softly, take fair water and vergious a like much, and put thereto a little new
Yest, corance, whole pepper and a little Mace, and Dates shred very fine, and
boil them well together, and when they be well boiled, take the best of your
broth that your fish is sodden in, and put to it sttrawberyes, gooseberyes, or
barberyes, sweet Butter, some Sugar, and so season up your broth, and pour
upon your Dorry or Mullet.

To sees Turbut or Cunger.
SEt on water and salt, and season it well, if the Turbut be great quarter him
into four quarters, if he be small, cut him but in half, if it be a Burt,
seethe it whole after this sort. When your licour does sees, put in your sish
and let it sees very softly till it be sodden enough, and when it is sodden,
take it not up till the licour be cold. Then take half white Wine, with
Vinagre and the broth that it was sodden in, and lay the fish in it to souce,
Cungar, Sturgion, and all Fish that is to be souced, in like manner saving you
must seethe your Sturgion in water and Salt, and souce it with white Wine.

How to sees Shrimps.
TAke half water and half beer or Ale, and some salt good and sauery, and
set it on the fire and fair scum it, and when it seetheth a full wallop, put
in your Shrimpes fair washed, and seethe them with a quick fire, scum them
very clean, and let the^ have but two walmes, then take them up with a scummer,
and lay them upon a fair white cloth, and sprinckle a little white salt upon
them.

Bake Meats.
For fine Pyes of Veale or Mutton.
PErboyle your meat and shredde it fine, and shred your Suet by it self. When
your Suet is fine shred put it to your Mutton or Veale and mince them together,
put thereto half a dosen yolks of Eggs being hard sodden and fine minced,
small Corance, dates fine minced, season it with cloves and mace, Sinamon and
Ginger, a very little Pepper, a handful of Carowaies, Sugar and Vergious, and
some Salt, and so put it into your paste being Chewets or Trunk pyes.

For Pyes of Mutton or Beef.
SHred your meat and Suet together fine, season it with cloves, mace, Pepper,
and some Saffron, great Raisins, Corance and prunes, and so put it into your
Pyes.

To bake a Neats tung.
Sees your Neats tung very tender and slice it diamond slices, wash it with
vergious, season it with Pepper and salt, sinamon and ginger, then lay it into
your coffin with Corance, whole Mace, Onions being very small minced, with
Marow or else very sweet butter, some Sugar and some dates being very small
minced, and put therein some vergious.

To bake a Pigge.
TAke your Pig and flea it, and draw out all that clean which is in his bellye,
and wash him clean, and perboyle him, season it with Cloves, mace, nutmegs,
pepper and salt, and so lay him in the paste with good store of Butter, then
set it in the Oven till it be baked enough.

To bake a gammon of Bacon.
TAke your Bacon and boil it, and stuff it with Parcely and Sage, and yolks
of hard Eggs, and when it is boiled, stuff it and let it boil again, season
it with Pepper, cloves and mace, whole cloves stick fast in, so then lay it in
your paste with salt butter.

To bake Chickins.
SEason them with cloves, mace, sinamon ginger, and some pepper, so put them
into your coffin, and put thereto corance dates Prunes, and sweet Butter, or else
Marow, and when they be half baked, put in some sirup of vergious, and some
sugar, shake the^ together and set them into the oven again.

Bake Sparowes, Larkes, or any kind of small birds, claues feet or sheep
tunges after the same manner.

To make a Chicken Pie.
SCalde the Chickins, draw them, and pull out the breast bones, then season the^
with cloves and mace, Pepper and Salt, and if you have them grapes, or
gooseberies: when you have so deon, make paste of fine flower, and put in your
Chickins, and set them in the Oven, then boil four Eggs hard, then take the
yolks and strain them with vergious, and put Sugar thereto and put it into your
chicken pie when it is half baked, and when it is ready to be served in,
anoint it over with butter, Sugar and rosewater, then put it into the oven til
you serve them in.

To bake Chickins without fruit.
SEason your Chickins with cloves, mace and pepper, lay the^ into your paste
with sweet butter, gooseberies, sugar and whole mace. And when they be well
baked, put thereto vergious, yolks of eggs strained, shake them together and
set them into the Oven again.

To bake Pigeons.
SEason them with Pepper, salt, and vergious, and lay the^ in your paste, and
put to them sweet Butter, gooseberies, and two or three spoonful of vergious.

To bake Crane or Bustard.
FIrst take him and perboyle him a little, and then take sweet Lard and Lard
him withal, the^ put it into the Coffin, and take Pepper and salt, and season
them together and cast it upon it, and take butter, and put it into the Coffin,
and so let it bake ye space of four hours, and serve them forth.

To bake Geece or Capons.
SEason them with pepper and Salt, put Butter thereto, and prick your goose
with some Cloves,

To bake Turkey Fowls.
CLeue your Turkye foul on the back, and bruise all the bones. Season it with
Pepper groce beaten and salt, and put into it good store of Butter, he must
have five hours baking.

To bake Fesant or Partriges.
BAke your Fesant or Partridge as you do your capon with Pepper and Salt, and
draw them with Lard if you will, and put to them sweet Butter.

How to bake Sparrowes or other small birds.
MAke paste of fine flower, eggs, butter and fair water, thereof make Coffins
then season your birds with sugar and ginger, then take good cheese clean
scraped and small minced with a little Butter, and put them into your coffins,
and put thereto your birds, and close it till it be enough.

To bake Capons or Chickins.
TAke paste as is aforesaid, and season the Capon with ginger, salt and
Vergious. then take Lard and mince it meetlye small, and put that first into
the Coffin, then put your Capon unto it with the breast downward, so cover it
and bake it, when it is almost enough, put into it the yolks of three or four
Eggs strained through a strainer with a little vergious, and so let it stand
til it be enough.

To bake wild Ducks.
When they be fair dressed and perboiled, season them with Pepper and Salt, a
few whole cloves amongst the, and Onions small minced, and sweet butter,
vergious and a little sugar.

For to bake Mallards.
FIrst trusse them and perboyle them, and put them into the coffin, then take
pepper and Salt, and season them and four or five onions peeled and sliced,
and put them altogether with a good piece of sweet butter unto the Mallards,
and so let the^ bake two hours, and when they be baked, put in half a goblet
of Vergious for every Mallard, and so serve them.

How to bake pyes of Calves feet.
TAke Calves feet and wash them, boil and blanch the hair of them, season
the^ with cloves and mace, and a little pepper, vergious and sugar, dates,
prunes, corance, and sweet butter, then make your paste of fine flower with
yolks of Eggs, and raise the Coffin square, when it is half baked, then take
it out and put in Vergious and sugar with the yolks of hard Eggs strained.

How to bake Conies, Rabets, or Hares, with fruit or without fruit.
SEason them with Pepper and Salt, Cloves and mace, and so lay them into your
paste with Corance or Prunes, great Raisins and if you will: butter and a
little vergious.

To bake small meats.
TAke Eggs and seethe them hard, then take the yolks out of them and braye
them in a mortar, and temper them with Creme, and then strain them, and put to
the^ Pepper, Saffron, Cloves, Mace, small raisins, Almonds blanched and small
shred, and grated bread.

Take Pears also sodden in Ale, and bray and strain them with the same
Licour, and put thereto Bastard and Honny, and put it into a pan and stir it on
the fire til it be well sodden, then make little coffins and set the^ in the
Oven til they be hard, and then take them out again, and put the foresaid
licour into them and so serve them forth.

To make small bake meats of Sirup and Pears.
TAke Pears and seethe them in Ale, then bray them and strain them and put
Sanders to them and Ale, with the spices aforesaid, and the Coffins in
likewise ordered, and so put in the sirup.

How to bake Venison.
When it is perboiled, season it with Salt and Pepper somewhat groce beaten,
and a little Ginger, and good store of sweet Butter, and when the Venison is
tender baked, put to it half a dosen spoonful of Claret wine, and shake it
well together.

To bake Venison to eat hot.
CVt the Venison in fair pieces, in quantity as you will have your pasties,
and perboyle it, that done, stick the grain side full of Cloves, and Lard the
lean side with good lard, and season it with pepper, salt, and all manner of
spices, then put the grained side of the venison downwards into the coffin of
brown paste, and so close it and bake it, and when it is open turn the grain
side upward.

To bake Venison to eat cold.
TAke Venison and cut it as the grain goes, and cut it in quantity as ye will
have your Pasties, and perboile it in fair water, then take Lard and cut it in
length of your flesh, and therewith lard it as thick as you can, so that one
piece of the Larde touch not an other. Then take all manner of spices, salt,
and Vinagre, that done, put it into brown paste and bake it.

To bake Venison of red Dear.
Lay it in water, and then wash it very clean out of ye water, if it be clean
draw it with Larde, then take meal and sift it, and take fair licour and let
it boil, and make your paste with that, then take Beef suet, mince it and
beat it, drive out your paste very thick, close it and let it bake six hours
when it is half baked, take Cloves and mace and Vinagre, and so boil the^
together, put them into your read Dear, at a little hole made for that
purpose. And when you have so done, stop the hole with some of the same dough,
and then set it in again until it be enough.

To bake Venison of Fallow Dear.
LAy it in water and wash it very clean, then perboile it, if it be of the
side, raise the skin of it: if it be of the haunch, press it: season it with
pepper and salt, take good store of Ox Suet, and mince it very fine, when von
have minced it, beat it, the^ take Flower, butter and Eggs and make your paste
stiff, then drive it out, and then put in your suet and Venison and close it,
then take the yolk of an egg and a little beer, and wet it over, and let it
bake four hours, and then serve it in.

To bake the Vmbles of a Dear.
MInce them very small with Suet, and season them with Pepper, a little Ginger,
a little Sinamon and Corance, and put into your paste, and when your pie is
baked, put to it two spoonfuls of Claret wine, and shake it well together.

To bake a Pig like a Fawn.
FLey him when he is in the hair, season it with pepper and salt, Cloves and
mace, take Claret wine, Vergious, Rosewater, Sinamon, Ginger and Sugar, boil
them together, lay your Pig flat like a Fawn or a Kidde, and put your sirup
unto it and sweet butter, and so bake it leisurely.

To make Florentines.
TAke Vele and some of the Kidney of the Loyne, or cold Veale roasted, cold
capon or Phesant, which of them you will, and mince it very small with sweet
suet, put unto it two or three yolks of Eggs, being hard sod, Corance and dates
small shred, season it with a little sinamon and ginger, a very little cloves
and mace, with a little Salt and sugar, a little Time being finely shred. Make
your paste fine with butter and yolks of Eggs and Sugar, role it very thin and
so lay it in a platter with butter underneath: and so cut your cover and lay it
upon it.

A Florentine of Flesh.
TAKE the Kidneies of Veale and chop them very small with Corance, dates,
sinamon and Ginger, Sugar, salt, and the yolks of three Eggs, and mingle
altogether, and make a fine paste with yolks of eggs, and butter, and let
there be Butter in your dishe bottom, then drive them to small Cakes, and put
one in the dish bottom, and lay your meat in, then lay your other upon your
meat, and close them together, and cut the cover and it, when it is baked the^
strew Sugar and serve it out.

A Florentine of Fish.
TAke apples, grated bread, Corance, and chop your apples very fine, and
mingle your stuff with yolks of Eggs, and drive out your paste as you do the
other, put butter in your dish bottom and so serve it out.

To make Florentines with Eeles for Fish days.
TAKE great Eeles, fleye them and perboyle them a little, then take the fish
from ye bones, and mince it small with some Wardens amongst it, to make it to
mince small, and season it with cloves and mace, pepper, Corance and Dates, and
when you lay it into your paste, take a little fine Sugar and lay it upon
before you cover it, and when it is half baked or altogether, lay a piece of
sweet Butter upon the cover, and a little rosewater and sugar. After the same
manner, minced pyes of Eeles.

To make a Florentine.
TAke the Kidney of Veale and boil it a little, choppe it very fine. Then take
Cloves, Mace and Pepper, and season it withal, then take an ounce of Biskets,
and as much of Carowayes, and put into your stuff, make your paste of fine
flower, butter Eggs and Sugar, and drive your paste very thin, and lay a sheet
of paste in a dish and under it lay a little butter, and spread it abroad with
your thumb, the^ lay your meat aloft on it in the dishe, then make the other
sheet and cut it and lay it upon your meat. Then close it and cut it round
about like a Star, and set it in the Oven and let it abide a quarter of an
hour, then take it out and wet it over with Butter, then cast sugar wet with
rosewater upon it, then set it into the Oven again a little while, the^ take it
out and serve it in.

How to make Chuets.
TAKE Veale and perboyle it and chop it very fine, take beef Suet and mince it
fine, then take Prunes, Dates and Corance, wash them very clean and put the^
into your meat, then take Cloves, Mace, and pepper to season your meat withal
and a little quantity of salt, vergious and Sugar, two ounces of biskets, and
as many of Carowaies, this is the seasoning of your meat, then take fine
flower, yolks of Eggs, and butter, a little quantitye of rosewater and sugar,
then make little coffins for your Chewets and let them bake a quarter of an
hour, then wet them over with butter, then strewe on Sugar and wet the Sugar
with a little Rosewater, and set them into the Oven again, then take and serve
five in a dish.

How to bake Vaunts.
TAke the kidney of Veale and perboile it till it be tender, then take and chop
it small with the yolks of three or four Eggs, then season it with Dates small
cut, small raisins, Ginger, Sugar, Sinamon, Saffron and a little Salt, and for
the paste to lay it in. Take a dosen of Eggs both the white and the yolks, and
beat them well together, then take Butter and put it into a frying pan, and
fry them as thin as a pancake, then lay your stuff therein, and so frye them
together in a pan, then cast sugar and Ginger upon it, and so serve it forth.

How to make Pescods.
FIrst make short paste with yolks of eggs, butter and a little sugar. Then take
for the stuff, Marow, small raisins, dates, Sinamon, Sugar and Ginger, and
then frye them with sweet butter, and when you serve them, cast on Sugar and
Sinamon.

How to bake Eeles whole.
When they be fleyed and clean washed, season them with vergious, pepper, and
salt, Cloves and mace, and put to them corance, great Raisins and Prunes,
sweet butter and Vergious.

To bake Lamprons.
Fair scour them or fleye them, and season them with pepper and Salt, and put
to them some onions, vergious, butter and Oisters.

How to bake Lamprons fine.
PVt to them small Raisins and Onyons minced very fine, and dates minced fine,
a little whole Mace, some Prunes, if you will butter and vergious.

How to bake a Lamprey.
When you have fleied and washed it clean, season it with Pepper, and salt,
and make a light Gallandine and put to it good store of butter, and after this
sort you must make your gallandine. Take white bread tostes and lay them in
steep in Claret wine, or else in vergious, and so strain them with vinagre, and
make it somewhat thin, and put sugar, Sinamon and ginger, and boil it on a
Chafing dish of coals, this Galandine being not too thick, put it into your
pie of Lampreye, and after this sort shall you bake Porpos or Puffins.

To bake Carp, Bream, Mullet, Pike, Trout, Roche or any other kind of Fish.
SEason them with Cloves and Mace, and pepper, and bake them with small raisins,
sweet butter and Vergious, great raisins, and some prunes.

How to bake a Holybut head.
FIrst water it till it be fresh then cut it in small pieces like Culpines of
an Earl, and season it with pepper and Saffron, cloves and mace, small raisins
and great, and meddle al these well together, and also put thereto a good mess
of vergious, and so bake the same Fish.

How to bake Cunger.
SEason it with pepper and salt and make your pies but even meet for one
gubbin, and put to it sweet butter, and let it not dry.

To bake a Stockfish.
SEason your Stockfish with pepper and salt and lay it into ye paste, and put
good store of butter to it, and shred onions small, and percely, and cast it
upon the stockfish, and put a little vergious unto it, and bake it.

How to bake watered Herrings.
LEt your Herrings be well watered, and season them with Pepper and a little
Cloves and mace, and put unto them minced Onions, great raisins and small, a
little sweet butter, and a little sugar, and so bake them.

How to bake Custards.
TAke to every pint of Cream five Eggs, and put in no whites, and strain your
Cream and Eggs together, season it with Cloves and mace, and sugar, and when
your paste is well hardened in the Oven, having small raisins and dates, put in
your stuff, and let it not bake too much, for much baking will make your
Custard to quail, or else to fall. Doucets after the same sort.

How to bake Wardens.
COre your wardens and pare them, and perboyle them and lay them in your
paste, and put in every warden where you take out the Core a Cloue or twain,
put to them Sugar, Ginger, and Sinamon, more sinamon then ginger, make your
crust very fine and somewhat thick, and bake them leisurely.

How to bake Quinces.
TAke half a pound of Sugar, and a dosen of Quinces and pare them, take half an
ounce of Sinamon and Ginger, take fine flower, sweet butter, and Eggs, and
make your paste, then put in all your stuff and close it up.

Another to bake Quinces.
COre your Quinces and fair pare them, perboyle them in seething licour, Wine
or water, or half wine and half water, and season them with Sinamon and sugar,
and put half a dosen Cloves into your Pyes amongst them, and half a dosen
spoonful of rosewater, put in good store of sugar. If you will bake them a
slighter way, you may put in Muscadell to spare Sugar.

How to bake Orenges.
Fair peele your Orenges, and pick away all the white that is under the peele,
and so lay them in fine paste, and put into them Sugar, very little Sinamon or
none at all, but a little Ginger and bake them very leisurely.

Roast Meats.
To roast Venison.
FIrst perboile it, and then make it tender east it into cold water, then Lard
it and roste it, and for sauce take broth, Vinagre, Pepper, Cloves and mace,
with a little salt and boil these together and serve it upon your Venison.

How to roast a Hare.
VVAsh him in fair water, the^ perboile him, and lay him in cold water
again, then Larde him and roast him on a Broche, then to make sauce for him,
take red vinagre, Salt, Pepper, ginger, Cloves, Mace, and put the^ together,
then mince apples and onions, and fry them in a Pan, then put your sauce to
them with a little sugar, and let them boil well together, the^ baste it upon
your Hare, and so serve it.

To roast a Capon.
YOu must roste a Capon with his head off, his wings and Legs on whole.

Roste a Phesant.
As a Capon, and when you serve him in, stick one of his feathers upon his breast.

Partridge as a Phesant, but no Fether.

Roste a Quail.
With his legs broken and knit one within an other.

Roast a Crane.
With his legs turned up behind him, his wings cut of at ye joint next the
body, and then wind the neck about the broche, and put the bill into his
breast.

Heron, Curlew and Bitter, as a Crane: but the Bittures head must be of.

Roste a Plouer.
With his head off, and his Legs turned upward upon his back.

Roast a Snite.
With his Bill put into his breast, and his Legs turned upward upon his breast.

To roast Woodcocks.
FIrst pluck them, and draw out the guts, leave the Liver still in them, then
stuff them with lard chopped small, and Ienoper beryes, with his bill put into
his breast and his feet as the Snite, and so roast him on a spit, and set under
it a fair large pan with white wine in it, and chopped Percely, Vinagre, salt
and ginger, then make tostes of white bread, and toste the^ upon a grediron, so
that they be not brent, the^ put these tosts in a dish, and lay your woodcoks
upon them and put your sauce ye same broth upon the^, and so serve them forth.

To make Allows of Eeles.
TAke and splat an Eele by the back, and keep the belly whole, and so take out
the bone, then take onions, percely, Time, and Rosemary chopped together, and
put thereto pepper and salt, and a little Saffron, and so lay it upon the Eeles,
and the^ wrap it up in Culpines, and put them upon a spit and so roast them.

To make a Frycace of cold Mutton or Veale.
CHop flesh small and fry it in sweet butter, and then put thereto a little
white wine, Salt, and Ginger, and serve it forth in fair dishes.

To make a Fricace of Goose giblets or Hens, or Capons.
FIrst cut them in pretty pieces, and so boil them in water til they be tender,
the^ fry them in butter, and so serve the^ forth with powder of Ginger and Salt.

To make a Fricace of a good Haddock or Whiting.
First sees the fish and scum it, and pick out the bones, take Onions and chop
them small then fry them in Butter or Oil till they be enough, and put in your
Fish, and frye them till it be dry, that done: serve it forth with powder of
Ginger on it.

To fry Whitings.
FIrst flay them and wash them clean and scale them, that done, lap them in
flower and fry them in Butter and oil. Then to serve them, mince apples or
onions and fry them, then put the^ into a vessel with white wine, vergious,
salt, pepper, cloves and mace, and boil them together on the Coals, and serve
it upon the Whitings.

To fry a Cods head.
FIrst cleue it in pieces and wash it clean and fry it in Butter or Oil. Then
cut Onions in rundels and so frye them, that done put them in a vessel, and
put to them red wine or vinagre, salt, ginger, sinamon, cloves and mace, and
boil all these well together, and then serve it upon your cods head.

Tartes.
To make a Tarte of Cheese.
TAke good fine paste and drive it as thin as you can. Then take cheese, part
it, mince it, and braye it in a mortar with the yolks of Eggs til it be like
paste, then put it in a fair dish with clarified butter, and the^ put it
abroad into your paste and cover it with a fair cut cover, and so bake it:
that done, serve it forth.

To make a Tarte of Prunes.
TAke Prunes and wash them, then boil them with fair water, cut in half a
penny loaf of white bread, and take them out and strain them with Claret wine,
season it with sinamon, Ginger and Sugar, and a little Rosewater, make the
paste as fine as you can, and dry it, and fill it, and let it dry in the oven,
take it out and cast on it Biskets and Carawaies.

Tarts of Damsons without a cover.
SCalde your Damsons with rosewater in a Platter, and then strain them and
season them with sugar, sinamon, and ginger, and so make a Tart without a Cover.

Tartes of Damsons with a cover.
LAy in your Damson whole, and so season them with sugar, Sinamon and Ginger,
and so lay on a cover.

Tartes of Cherries.
PLuck off your stalks and lay your Cheries into your paste and season the^
with sugar, sinamon and ginger, and lay a cover upon them

Tartes of Gooseberies.
LAy your Gooseberies in your crust, and put to them sinamon and Ginger, Sugar
and a few small raisins put among the^, and cover them with a Cover.

Tartes of Apples with couers.
MInce your Apples very small, season them with Sugar, sinamon and ginger, and
lay thereon a fair cover, and dress your cover when it is half baked with
Rosewater and Sugar.

Tartes of Apples without couers.
Boil your Apples very tender in a little wine, or for lack of Wine Ale, and
then strain them with Sugar, sinamon and ginger. Make a tart of it without a
cover.

Tartes of Quinces without couers.
Strain your Quinces with some wine, when they be ^oiled tender, and an apple
with them, or two or three Wardens, strain them and season them with Sugar,
Sinamon and Ginger, and so make a tarte without a cover.

Tarte of Quinces with couers.
WHen your Quinces be very tender and cold, mince them with two or three
Wardens amongst them and season them with sugar, sinamon and ginger, and so the
paste being very fine, lay a cover upon the^.

How to make Tartes of Spinach.
Boil your Spinach very tender, and three or four apples with it, and when it
is very tender, strain it through a fair cloth, and then season it with the
yolk of an egg, Sugar, Sinamon, and Ginger.

Tartes of Borage after the same fashion.

Tartes of Eglentine berries.
TAke the berries and pick out al ye white within them, and boil them very
tender in fair water, and when they be almost sod dry, put therein wine, and
three or four Apples, and strain them, season them with sugar, sinamon and
ginger, so make a Tart without a cover.

Tarte of Strawberies.
SEson your Strawberyes with sugar, a very ltttle Sinamon, a little ginger, and
so cover them with a cover, and you must lay upon the cover a morsel of sweet
Butter, Rosewater and Sugar, you may Ice the cover if you will, you must make
your Ice with the white of an egg beaten, and Rosewater and Sugar.

How to make a Tart of Briar hips.
TAke Hippes and wash them, and boil them in Claret wine, and strain them
through a strainer, season them with Sinamon, ginger and Sugar, and make your
paste, and fill it with the same stuff.

To make a Tart of Cream.
TAke Cream and Eggs and stir them, together, and put them into a strainer till
the whay be come out, then strain it that it may be thick, season it with
Ginger, Sugar, and a little Saffron, and then make your paste with flower, and
dry your paste in the Oven, and then fill it, and set it into the Oven to dry,
and then take it out, and cast Sugar on it, and so serve it forth.

How to make a good Marchpaine.
FIrst take a pound of long small almonds and blanch them in cold water, and dry
them as dry as you can, then grind them small, and put no licour to them but
as you must needs to keep them from oyling, and that licour that you put in
must be rosewater, in manner as you shall think good, but wet your Pestel
therein, when ye have beaten them fine, take half a pound of Sugar and more,
and see that it be beaten small in powder, it must be fine sugar, then put it
to your Almonds and beat them altogether, when they be beaten, take your
wafers and cut them compass round, and of the bigness you will have your
Marchpaine, and then as soon as you can after the tempering of your stuff, let
it be put in your paste, and strike it abroad with a flat stick as even as you
can, and pinch ye very stuff as it were an edge set upon, and then put a paper
under it, and set it upon a fair board, and lay a lattin Basin over it the
bottom upward, and the^ lay burning coals upon the bottom of the basin. To
see how it baketh, if it happen to bren too fast in some place, sold papers as
broad as the place is and lay it upon that place, and thus with attending ye
shall bake it a little more then a quarter of an hour, and when it is well
baked, put on your gold and biskets, and stick in Comfits, and so you shall
make a good Marchpaine. Or ever that you bake it you must cast on it sine Sugar
and Rosewater that will make it look like Ice.

To make pottage of Cherries.
FRy white bread in butter til it be brown and so put it into a dish, then take
Cherries and take out the stones, and frye them where you fried the bread, then
put thereto Sugar, Ginger, and Sinamon, for lack of broth, take White or
Claret Wine, boil these together, and that done, serve them upon your Tostes.

To poche Eggs in broth.
TAke fair licour and as much vergious, and new Yest, and put therein Corance,
whole mace, sweet butter, and sugar, a good handful of white Beets, and so
boil them very tender, and so poche your Eggs in fair water seething, and lay
them upon sops, and pour the broth and herbs upon.

To boil young Peason or Beaues.
First shale them and seethe them in fair water, then take them out of the
water and put them into boiling milk, then take the yolks of Eggs with crumbs of
bread, and ginger, and strain them through a strainer with the said milk, then
take chopped percely, Saffron and Salt, and serve it forth for Pottage.

To make carbonados of Mutton.
CVt a Leg of Mutton in thin fillets, and to make it tender chop it on both the
sides with the back of a knife, so that they be not chopped through, then salt
them well and lay them on a grediron, and broil them till they be mough, and
with Vinagre and minced onions serve them forth.

To make a Haggas of Almain.
TAKE two Buts of Mutton, and try them well from Skins and senowes, and
mince it with suet as small as you can, then take Dates and mince them small,
the^ take these Spices which follow, one ounce of Corance clean washed, an
ounce of sinamon, a quarter of half an ounce of Ginger and as much of pepper,
and an ounce of Sugar with the yolks of eight or nine Eggs, clean fried from
the whites Take also fine fair light bread grated, with a little Salt, and a
portion of Saffron, and boil al these together, then row these Corance in Suet
of a Calfe or Sheep, then put them into a frying pan, and so set them into a
hot oven, and when they be brown turn them, and when they be baked, take them
out and serve three in a dish.

To dress Chickins upon Sorrel sops.
TAke sorrel and beat it in a mortar, and put in Vergious and strain it
through a strainer, then cut fine Sops of white bread and lay them in a dishe,
and put the sorrel sauce to the bread, put sinamon, ginger, and Sugar, with
butter to your sauce, the^ roste your Chickins and serve them forth.

How to make sops of Almain.
TAke white wine with Bare or Ale, and put crumbs of white bread, yolks of Eggs
sugar and sinamon, with Salt and saffron, strain these and boil them a little
together then cut white bread into your dishe, and put the pottage to it, and
so serve it forth.

How to make Tostes.
TAke the Kidneye of Vele when it is roasted, and chop it very fine, then take
and put it in a dish, put in the yolks of three eggs put in Sinamon, Ginger and
sugar, take a a little Rosewater and put to it, take white bread and cut it
like diamonds, and toste a little, set all your stuff on a Chasingdishe with
Coals, and stir it and spread it upon the Tostes, take the yolke of an Egg,
and with a fether baste them over, then bake them in a pan and set them in a
dishe, and cast Sugar on them.

To make Ielly.
TAke Calves feet and fley them, and fair wash them, and set them on to see
the in fair licour, and fair scum them, and when they be tender sod, fair
strain out the licour, and see your licour be very clear, and put your
licour into a pot, if there be a pottle of it, put a pottle of claret wine unto
it, and two pound Sugar, a quartern of sinamon, half a quartern of ginger, an
ounce of Nutmegs, an ounce of grains, some long Pepper, a few Cloves whole, a
few Coliander sads, a little salt. Isongl^sse being fair washed and laid in
water a day before, Turnsole being aired by the fire and du^ed, and when they
be well sod, let it run through a bag, and put two whites of Eggs in the bag.

To make an Apple Moise.
ROste your Apples very fair, and when you have so done, peele them and strain
them with the yolk of an Egg or twain, and Rosewater, and boil it on a
Chefingdish of Coals with a piece of sweet Butter, put in sugar and ginger, and
when you lay it in your dish, cast sinamon and Sugar on it.

To make a dish of Snow
TAke a pottle of sweet thick Cream, and the white of eight Eggs, and beat them
altogether with a spoone, then put them into your Creme with a dish full of
Rosewater, and a dish full of Sugar withal, then take a stick and make it
clean, and then cut it in the end four square, and therewith beat all the
aforesaid things together, and ever as it arises, take it off, and put it into
a Cullender, this done, take a platter and set an Apple in the midst of it, and
stick a thick bush of Rosemary in the Apple. Then cast your Snow upon the
Rosemary and fill your platter therewith, and if you have wafers, cast some
withal, and so serve them forth.

To make white Ginger bread.
TAke Gumma Dragagantis half an once, and steep it in rosewater two days, the^
put thereto a pound of Sugar beaten and finely serced, and beat them well
together, so that it may be wrought like paste, the^ role it thin into two
Cakes, then take a few Iordain almonds and blaunch them in cold water, then
dry them with a fair Cloth, and stamp them in a mortar very finelye, adding
thereto a little rosewater, beat finely also the whitest Sugar you can get and
searce it. Then take Ginger, pare it and beat it very small and serce it, then
put in sugar to the almonds and beat them together very well, then take it out
and work it at your pleasure, then lay it even upon one of your cakes, and
cover it with an other and when you put it in the molde, strewe fine ginger
both above and beneath, if you have not great store of Sugar, then take Rice
and beat it small and serce it, and put it into the Mortar and beat them
altogether.

To to make Bennets.
PVt butter and water over the fire in a fair pan, and when it boyleth put
thereto fine Flower and Salt, and so let them boil, but stir them well for
brenning, and when it is well thick, put it into an earthen pan, the^ break Eggs
into it and boil them so together, then boil a good quantitye of Butter
clarified over the fire, and with a spoone put in your other stuff and so frye
them till they be brown, and that done, serve them forth with Sugar on them.

How to make Pomages,
TAke a quart of red wine or sweet wine, and v. or vj. well watrishe Apples,
pare them and cut them in pieces and cast away the cores, then put the apples
with ye wine into a pot and boil the^ on the fire till they be tender, and
take a manchet lofe and cut it in thin pieces and cast it into the pot, the^
when the apples be tender, put to them a quarter of a pound of Sugar, but draw
the^ through a strainer before, and also an ounce of Sinamon, half a quarter
of an ounce of ginger, and boil al these together in a chafer or a pot, and
then take them out again, and put the^ into a fair basin or in acharger, then
make a dredge of sinamon, sugar and Ginger, but most of Sugar, and dress your
Pomages in fair dishes, then cast in your dredge and serve it out hot or cold.

To make Farts of Portingale.
TAke a quart of life Honey, and set it upon the fire and when it seetheth scum
it clean, and then put in a certain of fine Biskets well serced, and some
powder of Cloves, some Ginger, and powder of sinamon, Annis seeds and some
Sugar, and let all these be well stirred upon the fire, til it be as thick as
you think needful, and for the paste for them take Flower as finelye dressed
as may be, and a good piece of sweet Butter, and work all these same well
together, and not knead it.

A French Puffin.
TAke and make a very fine piece of paste with yolks of Eggs and sweet butter
and sugar: and drive your cakes very thin and fine, six or seven, and put
butter molten between every one of them, make your cakes little round ones,
and let there be a good deal of Butter in the dishe bottom, and then set them
in the Oven till they be baked enough, then strew on sugar upon it and serve it
out.

A buttered Loaf.
TAke very fine flower and yolks of Eggs, sweet butter, yest, cloves, mace,
sugar, sinamon, ginger, and woork it together and make them in little loves,
and when they are baked enough, set a good deal of sweet butter upon a
chafingdish and coals, the^ cut your loaf in three pieces and butter it, then
strew sugar betwixt every piece and serve it out.

For brenning meats.
TAke wine and good Ale, and fill the^ well together and they will then bren,
and this is good for Sewes or dish meats, and all other meats that a man will
have brenning.

To make Almond Butter.
BLanch two pound of Almonds and bray them small in a Mortar, but put no Licour
to the^ of a good while, but bray them as small as you can, and when they be
small enough, cast a little water to them into the Mortar, then draw them
through a Strainer as you can, then put it into a fair pot with a quarter of a
pound of sugar, and set it on the fire, but stir it well for burning, and put
in a little Salt, but not too much, and when it boyleth take it from the fire,
and put to it a good quantity of Damask water or rosewater with an eye of
saffron, but not too much, then take a fair Cloth of an elle long, and lay the
butter upon it, and let the cloth be held strait, and draw under the same cloth
with a Ladle, that the water may come clean from it, and the^ draw it above in
ye midst of the cloth, and knit the corners of the cloth together, and so hang
it up and let it dry, and then dress it into dishes, and print it as you do
butter, and plant it with kernels of Pomgranets, and so serve it forth.

To make Almond milk hot.
TAke blanched Almonds and bray them small, then with fair water draw them
through a strainer, and make them not too thin nor too thick, and then put them
into a pot with a quarter of a pound of sugar and let them boil over the fire,
and when they boil take them from the fire, then take a manchet loaf and cut
it in thin pieces, steep it in a pint of White wine, as Bastard, Tire, or
Maulmsie, then cast it into Almond Milk and dress it in fair dishes, and so
serve it forth.

To make Ipocras.
TAke a gallon of Wine, and an ounce of Sinamon, two ounces of Ginger, and a
pound of Sugar, twenty cloves bruised, and twenty corns of pepper groce beaten,
and let all those soke one night, and let it run through a bag.

To make Conserve of Quinces after the manner of Spain.
TAke six or seven pound of Quinces, and two gallons and a half of water, and
set your water on the fire till it be through warm, then put thereto the whites
of two Eggs, shells and all, and all to stir it with a stick, and then let it
stand upon the fire till it cast a great scum. Then take of the said scum, and
put thereto five pound of Sugar, and let it stand till it be molten, and a
little while after, and then take it from the fire, and let it run through a
woollen cloth of Cotton, and then put in your Quinces clean pared and the cores
clean taken out, and so set them upon the fire the space of an hour and a
half, and then take them of the fire, and strain them through a canuas cloth
water and al, and then set them upon the fire again and let them seethe the
space of two hours and a half, and all that time stir it with sticks with
broad ends, and to know when it is enough, lay it upon a box lid, and when it
comes up clean it is enough.

To make Conserve of Orenges.
TAke Orenges and pare them very thin the red of the out sides away and quarter
them in four, and take away the white of the inside, then sees them in fair
water softlye for breaking, often change them in warm water til they be soft: as
the yelownes does sees away, so wears away the bitterness, the^ take them
out of the water and lay them in a fair vessel that the water may run away
from them, then beat them small with a spoone, and put to every pound of
Orenges one pound of sugar, and half a pound of Rosewater, and boil them
together and box them.

To preserve Orenges.
TAke your Pills and water them two nights and one day, and dry them clean
again, and boil them with a soft fire the space of one hour, then take them
out to cool, and make your sirrop half with rosewater and half with that
liquor, and put double sugar to your Orenges, and when your sirup is half
sodden, then let your Orenges seethe one quarter of an hour more, then take
out your Orenges and let the sirop sees until it rope, and when all is cold,
then put your Orenges into ye sirrop: the white of an Egg and Sugar beaten
together, will make it to candie.

To make sirup of Violets.
FIrst gather a great quantitye of Violet flowers and pick them clean from
the stalks and set them on the fire, and put to them so much rosewater as you
think good then let them boil altogether until the color be forth of them,
then take the^ of the fire and strain them through a fine cloth, then put so
much Sugar to them as you think good, then set it again to the fire until it
be somewhat thick, and put it into a violl glass.

To make Cherries in confection.
TAke ripe and chosen cherries, cut of half the stalks and put them in a frying
pan over a soft fire, for every pound of Cheries strew upon them a pound of
good white sugar in powder, sees them so till ye third part be wasted, when
they are sod put in a little Rosewater with a few cloves, and sinamon beaten
together, then let them cool two or three hours, and then put them into your
pots.

To make Prunes in confection.
TAke Prunes of damask and do like with them as you did with cheries, save
that for every pound of Prunes take xij. ounces of sugar, and that there must
be wasted the fourth part of the sirrup away, and that the Cloves and Sinamon
must be but half bruised, or else both be a like.

Marmalade of Quinces or any other thing.
TAke the Quinces and quarter them, and cut out the Cores and pare them clean,
and sees them in fair water til they be very tender, then take them with
rosewater and strain them, and do as is aforesaid in every thing.

To preserve Quinces.
Fair core your Quinces and seethe Licour upon the fire, and put in the cores,
and sees them very well with two or three pieces of Quinces, and then put in
your Quinces, and let them boil very softlye till they be tender, then take up
your quinces, and set them fair upon a cloth, and let your Licour seethe a
great while till it be somewhat high colored of the Quinces, and then when the
licour is cold, and the Quinces be cold, then put in your Quinces again and
so fair cover them. These will serve to bake or make tartes all the year.

To preserve Orenges, Lemmons, and Pomecitrons.
FIrst shave your Orenges finely, and put them into water two days and two
nights, changing your water three times a day then perboyle the^ in three
several waters, the^ take so much water as you think convenient for ye
quantity of your orenges the^ put in for every pound of Orenges, one pound and
a half of sugar into the water, and put in two whites of Eggs and beat them
altogether, then set them on ye fire in a brass vessel, and when they boil,
scum them very clean, and cleanse them through a Iellye bag, then set it on the
fire and put in the orenges. Use walnuts in like manner, and use Lemmons and
Pomecitrons in like sort, but they must lie in water but one night.

To preserve all kind of fruits that they shall not break in the preserving.
TAke a Platter that is plain in the bottom and lay Sugar in the bottom, then
Cheries or any other fruit, and so between every row you lay, throw sugar and
set it upon a pots head, and cover it with a dish, and so let it boil.

FINIS.
The Table of the things contained in this Book.
THe order how meats should be served at the Table, both flesh and Fish, with
their sauces. Folio. 1. and 2. Sauce for Capons and Turkye Fowls. 3 Sauce for
roasted Stockdoues. 3 Another for a Capon. 3 For Capons, Fesant, Partriges or
Woodcocks. 3 Chaldron for a Swan. 4 Gallandine for a Crane, Heron, or any other
Foul that is black meat. 4
Stewed and Boiled Meats.
To stew a Capan. 4 To stew a Capon in Lemmons. 4 To boil a capon in white
broth. 5 Another to boil a capon in white broth. 5 To make sops for chickins.
6. To boil a capon in brows. 6. To boil a capon. 6. To boil a capon with
Orenges or Lemmons. 6. To boil a cunnye with a pudding in his belly. 7. To
boil chikins or capons. 7. To sees chickins in Letuce. 7. To boil chickins
with herbs. 7. To sees Hens or capons in winter in white broth. 8. To stue
capons. 8. To stew Sparrows. 8 To stew Larkes. 8 To stew Sparrowes or Larkes.
9. To boil a Duck. 9 To stue a wild mallard. 9 To boil stockdoues Fol. 9. To
stew a Hinflank of Beef. 9 To stew a Neates foot. 10 Another to stew a Neats
foot. 10 To boil a Leg of Mutton with Lemmons, 10. To boil Mutton with
Endive, borage Lettice, or any kind of herbs that may serve thereunto. 10.
To bake Mutton for a sick body. 10 To make balls of mutton. 11 How to boil
Pigs petitoes. 11 To still a Cock for a weak body that is consumed. 11 To
make a Hodgpodge. 12. To make puddinges of a swine. 12 To make white puddings
of Hogs Liver. 12 Eisands with otmeal grotes. 12. To make Liueringes of a
Swine. 12 How to make a pudding in a turnep root. 12 A pudding in Eggs. 13 A
Pudding in a tench. 13 To make a pudding in a carret root. 13 A pudding in a
cowcumber. 13 To dress Neates tungs. 14 A broth for a Neats tung. 14 A boiled
sallet. 14
For Fish.
To sees a Pike. 14 A Pike sauce for a Pike, Breame, Perch, Roch, Carps,
Flounders, and all manner of Brook Fish. 15 To sees a carp. 15 To seethe
Roches, flounders or Eeles. 16 To seethe a Gurnard. 16 To sees a Dorry or
Mullet. 16 To sees a Turbut or Cunger. 16 To sees shrimps. 16 To make
Florentines. 21 A Florentine of Flesh. 22 A Florentine of Fish. 22 To make
Florentins with Eeles. 22 To make a Florentine. 22 To bake Eeeles whole. 23 To
bake Lamprons. 23 To bake Lamprons fine. 23 To bake a Lamprey. 23. To bake a
Carpe, Breme, Mullet, Pike, trout, Roche, or any other kind of fish. 24 to bake
a Holibut head. 24 to bake cunger. 24 to bake Stockfish. 24 to bake watered
Herrings. 24 to make allows of Eeles. 26 To make a fricace of a good Haddock.
26 to fry Whitings. 27 to fry a codshed. 27
Bake Meats.
For fine pyes of Vele or Mutton. 17 For pyes of Mutton or Beef. 17 To bake a
Neats tung. 17 To bake a Pig. 17 To bake a gammon of Bacon. 17 To bake
chickins. 18 To make a chickin pie. 18 To bake Chickins without fruit. 18 To
bake pigions. 18 To bake a Crane or Bustard. 18 To bake Geece or capons. 18 To
bake Turkey Fowls. 18 To bake Fesantes or Partriges. 19 to bake Sparrows or
other small birds. 19 to bake a capon or chickins. 19 To bake Wild Ducks. 19
To bake Mallards. 18 To bake pyes of calves feet. 19 To bake Cunnies, Rabats or
Hares with fruit or without fruit. 19 To bake small meats. 20 To make small
bake meats of sirup and Pears. 20 To bake venison. 20 To bake Venison to eat
hot. 20 To bake Venison to eat cold. 20 To bake Venison of a red Dear. 20 To
bake Venison of a fallow deer. 21 To bake the vmbles of a Dear. 21 To bake a
Pig like a Fawn. 21 To make chuets. 22 to make Vaunts. 23 to make pescods. 23
to bake custards. 24 Doucets after the same manner. 24 to bake wardens. 24 to
bake Quinces, 25 Another to bake Quinces. 25 to bake Orenges. 25
Roste Meats.
Venison. 25. Hare. 25 capon. 25. Fesant. 25. Partridge. 25. Quail, crane,
heron, curlew Bittur, Plouer, snite, Woodcock. 26 A Fricase of cold mutton or
Vele. 26 A Fricase of Gooce giblets, Hens or capons. 26
Tartes.
Of cheese, of Prunes. of damsons without couers. 27 Of Damsons with couers, of
cheries. 27 Of Gooceberies, Of apples without couers, of quinces with out
couers, of Quinces with couers, Of Spinach, Of barage, Of Eglantine beries, Of
strawberies, Of briar Hips. 28 Of cream. 29
Diverse other banqueting Dishes.
A Marchpaine. 29 Potage of cheries. 29 poch eggs in broth, 30 Boil young peson.
30 Carbonados of mutton, Haggas of Almain, chickins upon sorell sops, Sops of
Almain, 30 Tostes, Ielly, Apple moise, Snow. 31 Ginger bread. 32 Bennets,
Pomages. 32 Fartes of Portingale. 33 French Puffin. 33 A buttered Loaf. 33
Brenning meats. 33 Almond butter. 33 almond milk hot. 34 Ipocras. 34 Conserve
of Quinces after the manner of Spain. 34 Conserve of Orenges. 34 To preserve
Orenges. 35 To make Sirrop of Violets. 35 Cherries in confection. 35 Prunes in
confection. 36 Marmalade of Quinces. 36 Preserve Quinces. 36 Preserve Orenges,
Lemmons, Pomecitrons. 36 To preserve all kind of fruit. 36
FINIS.

