VIRGIL'S Georgicks Englished. by Tho: May Esquire

Lo: printed for Tho. Walkley in Britains Burse R^ughan fecit 1628

To my truly judicious Friend, Christopher Gardener of Haleng, Esquire.
I Cannot make a fitter choice of any Name to stand prefixed before this Work,
than such a friends, who not only understands but loves endeavors of this
nature; one as far from pride as ignorance; and such a Reader, as I could wish
all, but cannot hope to find many. It is a Translation of such a Poet as in
our age is no less admired, than he was once honored in his Roman world. To
speak how learned the Poem is, how full of heights not improperly raised out
of a mean subject, were needless to you, who so well understand the original
of it, and the pattern of this original, the Poem of Hesiod. If there were any
thing in my pains, which might either offend an honest ear, or justly suffer
a great condemnation from a learned Censurer, I should be fearful to commend
it to you, whose Religion, Life, and Learning, are so well known unto me. This
Work may inform some, delight others, it can hurt none; it is no new thing,
(being a Translation) but an old Work of such a Poet, who in the Opinion of
his own times was an honest man, as well as an able writer. Whose Poem if I
have truly rendered, I think it better than publishing mine own fancies to
the World, especially in an Age so much cloyed with cob-webbe Inventions, and
vnprofitoble Poemes. How much I have failed in my undertaking, (as missing the
sense of Virgil, or not expressing of him highly and plainly enough) they
only are able Judges who can confer it; and such are you to whose judgment
I leave it, and rest

Your true Friend THOMAS MAY.

GEORGICON. The first BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
TIllage, in all her several parts, is shown,
Her favoring gods, her first invention,
Her various seasons, the celestial signs;
And how the Plow-mans providence divines
Of future weather: what presages be
From Beasts and Birds by wise antiquity
Drawn into rules insallible; from whence
The Plowman takes despair, or confidence.
It hat tools the industrious husband's works a^ veil*
Fro whence our Poet sadly does bewail
That crooked Sickles turned to Swords, so late
Had drunk the blood of Romes divided State*
And in few years with her unnatural wounds
Had twice manured Aemathiae^ fatal grounds.
What makes rich crops; what season most enclines
To plowing the earth, and marrying elms with vines?
What care of Neat, or Sheep is to be h^d;
Of frugall Bees what trials may be made
I sing, Mecoena^, here. You lights most clear,
Whose heavenly course directs the sliding year*
Bacchus, and fostring Ceres, if first you
Did for Chaonian Mast rich Corn bestow,
And tempered waters with invented (b) wine:
You tillage-favouring gods; ye (c) Fauns divine,
And virgin Dryades be present now:
I sing your bounties: and, great (d) Neptune, thou,
Whose tridents stroke did first from the earth produce
A warlike horse: thou that the woods do use,
Whose full three hundred snow-white Bullocks run
Grazing rich (e) Caeas pasture fields upon,
Sheep-ke^ping Pan, with favor present be
(If thy M^^nalian flocks be dear to thee)
Leaving Lycaeus, and fair Arcady:
Minerva foundresse of the Olive tree:
Thou (f) youth inventer of the crooked plow:
And thou that make the tender Cypress grow
Up from the root, (g) Silvanus: all that love
Tillage, both gods, and goddesses above,
That growing plants can foster without seed,
And them from heaven with rain sufficing feed:
And thou, great Caesar, whom it is yet not plain
What rank of gods shall one day entertain;
Whether the World thy deity shall fear,
As Lord of fruits, and seasons of the year,
Of lands and towns (with Venus myrtle tree
Crowning thy head) or thou the god wilt be
Of the vast Sea, and Thules farthest shore,
And thee alone the Saylors shall adore,
As Thetis sonne-in-law with all her Seas
Given for a Dower; or else that thou will please
To add one sign to the slow months, and be
Betwixt the balance, and (h) Erig^ne;
The fiery Scorpion will contract his space,
And leave for thee in heaven the greater place.
What ere thou wilt be (for hell despaires to gain
Thee for her King: nor thirst thou so for reign,
Though Greece so much the Elysian fields admire,
And sought Proserpin^ would not retire
Thence with her mother) view with gracious eyes,
And prosper this my ventrous enterprise.
Pity the Plow-mens errors, and mine too,
And use thy self to be inuoked now.
When first the spring dissolues the mountain snow
When the earth grows soft again, and west winds blow,
Then let your Oxen toil in furrows deep,
Let use from rusting your bright plowshares keep.
Those crops, which twice have felt the sun, and twice
The cold; will Plow-mens greediest wish suffice.
Harvests from thence the crowded barnes will fill.
But least the fields we ignorantly till,
To know how different lands and climates are,
All winds and seasons, let it be our care;
What every Region can, or cannot bear;
Here corn thrives best: vines best do prosper there;
Some Lands are best for fruit, for pasture some;
From Tmolus see how fragrant saffrons come:
Amongst the Sabaeans frankincense does grow;
Iron the naked Chalybes bestow:
India sends ivory, Pontus beavers stone,
Epire swift horse, that races often have won*
These several virtues on each land and clime,
Nature bestowed even from the point of time,
When stones in the empti'd world Deu^alion threw,
From whence the hard-harted race of mankind grew.
Therefore when first the year begins, do thou
Thy richest grounds most deep and strongly plow,
That Summers piercing Sun may ripen more,
And well digest the fallow gle^e; but poor,
And barren grounds about October plow
Not deep; in one, lest weeds, that rankly grow,
Spoil the rich crop: in the other, lest the dry
And sandy grounds quite without moisture ly.
And let thy ^ield each other year remain
Fallow, and eared, to gather heart again.
Or else thy corn thou there may safely sow
Where in full codds last year rich pease did grow,
Or else where tares, or lupines last were sown,
Lupines that sadness cause; (for it is well known
That oats, hemp, flax, and poppy causing sleep
Do burn the soil) but best it is to keep
The ground one year at rest; forget not than
With richest dung to hearten it again,
Or with unsifted ashes; so it is plain
That changing seeds gives rest unto a field;
And it is no loss to let it lie untilled.
Fires often are good on barren earshes made
With crackling flames to burn the stubble blade.
Whether the earth some hidden strength do gain
From thence, or wholesome nourishment obtain:
Or that those fires digest, or purge, or dry
All poisonous humors that in the earth did ly:
Or else that heat new pores, and caverns opes,
Through which good juice comes to the following crops*
Or else it knits the earths too open veins,
And makes them more compact, lest falling raines
Soake them too far, lest Boreas piercing cold,
Or Phoebus heat should dry the parched mold.
And wholesome husbandry it was ever found
Often to break and harrow barren ground,
And well rewarded still at Ceres hand.
Nor is 't unwholesome to subdue the Land
By often exercise: and where before
You broke the earth, again to plow it ore
Cross to the former. Let the Plow-mens prayer
Be for moist sol^^ices, and winters fair.
For winters dust does cheer the land, and draw
So great an harvest, that rich Maesia
For all her skill obtaines not greater store,
Nor Ida's hil^ do boast their plenty more.
What shall I say to him that sowes his Land
Immediately, scattering the barren Sand?
Then brings in watering streams that will suffice?
And when in scorched fields all Herbage dies:
Lo, he from higher bending hillocks draws
In furrows wate^s down, which gliding cause
Among the pebble stones a murmuring sound,
And with their streams refresh the thirsty ground*
Or him, that least rank ears should ouerlade,
And lodge the stem, he in the tender blade,
Eats off the rankenes? Or that draines his ground
With thirsty sand, when moisture does abound?
When in the Spring, or Autumn specially
(Unconstant seasons) rivers swelled too high
Have filled the drenched fields with slime, and yet
The draining trenches with warm moisture sweat.
Nor are these things (though they men's labors be
And beasts) not subject to the injury
Of ^^ose, Strymonian Cranes, the shade of Trees,
And growing bitter-rooted Suckoryes.
For Jove himself, loath that our lives should prove
Too easy, first caused men the ground to move,
Filled mortal hearts with cares, nor sufferd he
The world to fall into a Lethargy.
Before Jove's reign no Plow-men tilled the ground*
Nor was it lawful then their Lands to bound:
They lived in common all: and every thing
Did without labor from earths bosom spring.
Jove Venom first infused in Serpents fell,
Taught Wolves to prey, and stormy Seas to swell:
Robbed leaves of honey, and hid fire from men,
And banished wine, which run in rivers then,
That the arts by need might so in time be found;
Corn might be sought by tilling of the ground,
And hidden fire from flints hard veins be drawn.
Then Aldern boats first plowed the Ocean:
The Sailers numbered then, and named each star
The Pleiads, Hyads, and the Northren carre.
Deceiving bird-lime then they learned to make:
And beasts by hunting, or by toils to take:
Drag-nets were made to fish within the deep:
And casting nets did rivers bottomes sweep.
Then iron first, and sawes were understood;
For men before with wedges clef^ their wood.
Then the arts were found; for all things conquered be
By restless toil, and hard necessity.
First yellow Ceres taught the world to plow
When woods no longer could afford enough
Wild crabs and acorns, and Dodona lent
Her mast no more: then miseries were sent
To vex the art of tillage: blastings killed
The stalks, and fruitless thistles in the field
Prevailing, spoiled the corn: rough weeds did grow,
Of burs and br^mbles troubling it, and now
Within the fields among the harvest grain
Corne-v^xing darnell, and wild oats did reign.
That now unless thou exercise the soil,
Fright birds away, and with continual toil
Lop off the shadowing boughs, and pray for rain
Devoutly still, thou may behold in vain
Thy neighbors heap of corn with envious eyes
Laboring with mast thy hunger to suffice.
The hardy plow-mens tools must now be shown,
Without which corn can nor be reapt nor sown.
The flaile, fled, coulter, share, and crooked plow,
The iron harrow, Ceres wagons slow,
Celeus poor wicker household stuff, and than
Harrowes of wood, with Bacchus misticke Van.
All these before hand must be got by thee
If fame thou seek in noble husbandry.
Fetch from the woods a fitting elm, and bow
The same with skill, till of a crooked plow
It take the form; to that fasten a beam
Eight foot in length, two ears; not far from them
The wood that holds the share; but tile-tree take,
Or lofty beech the Oxens yokes to make,
And tails of plowes, which all the course do guide,
When smoke the goodness of the wood has tried*
Many of the ancients rules I here could show
Unless thou scorn to study Arts so low;
Let thy Barns floor be dug, and sodder'd than
With tuffest Clay, and then rolled hard again,
Lest it should turn to dust, or grass should grow.
Many mishaps may fall; the mouse below
Often makes her house, and garner under ground,
And there as often the blinde-borne moles are found:
There Toades, and many earth-bred Monsters ly:
There little Weeuills heaps of corn destroy,
And frugall Ants, that toil for times to come.
Consider thou, when Nut-trees fully bloome,
And with their fragrant blossoms bend the tree,
As those nuts thrive, so will thy harvests be,
And corn in great abundance gathered.
But if those trees in broad leaves only spread,
Then ears, though great, but little grain will yield.
Some I have seen, before they sow their field,
Their seeds with lees of oil, and nitre still
To macerate, which makes full grains, to fill
The flattering husks; or else their seeds to boil.
Seeds I have seen chosen, and picked with toil,
Yet grow ill corn, unless the man for fear
Cull with his hand the greatest every year.
So all things of themselves degenerate,
And change to worse even by the law of Fate;
No otherwise than when a man does row
Against a violent stream with much adoo,
If ere he chance from rowing to refrain,
His Boat is hurried down the stream again.
Plow-men had need each star as well to know
The Kids, the Dragon, and Arcturus too
As Sailors need, who in rough storms are wont
To pass the Oyster-breeding Hellespont.
When Libra first diuides the world, twixt light
And darkness, equalling the day and night,
Then exercise your teames, and barley sow
Till winter to extremity do grow.
While yet it is dry thy hemp, and poppie sow
Before the Winter too tempestuous grow.
Sow beans i'th'Spring, Claue grass in rotten soil,
And Willet, that requires a yearly toil,
When with his golden horns bright Taurus opes
The year, and downward the cross Dog Star stoops.
But if thou plow to sow more solid grain
A wheat or barley harvest to obtain,
First let the morning Pleiades be set,
And Ariadnes shining coronet,
Ere thou commit thy seed to ground, and there
Dare trust the hope of all the following year.
Some that before the fall of the Pleiades
Began to sow, deceived in the increase
Have reapt wild oats for wheat. But if that thou
Disdain not Fesels, or poor Vech to sow,
Or care to make Egyptian lentils thrive,
Falling Boots then to thee will give
Signs not obscure. Begin to sow, and till
The midst of winter hold on sowing still.
And therefore through twelve signs bright Phoebus guides
The world, and the earth in several climes divides.
Five zones divide the heavens, the torrid one
Still red, still heated by the burning sun.
On either side are two extremely cold,
Which ice, and frosts, and storms perpetual hold:
Twixt that and these, to comfort man's estate,
The gods have placed two zones more temperate
Twixt both these two, a line in the midst is put,
Which by the Zodiac is obliquoly cut.
And as the world is elevated to
The Scythian North, it does declining go
Down to the Libyan South. The North's still high
To us, the South under our feet does lie,
Seen by the ghosts, and balefull Styx below.
The mighty dragon there winds to and fro,
And like a crooked river does pass through
And compass round the great and lesser Bear,
Which to be dipped in the Ocean fear.
There (as they say) an ever silent night
Remains, and darkness never pierced by light,
Or else the morn returns to them, when gone
From us, and brings them day; when th'Eastern su^
Does in the morn salute our haemisphere,
Dark night compels them to light candles ther^.
Hence we in doubtful skies may storms foresee,
When a fit harvest or seed time will be;
Or when to plow the uncertain ^eas it is fit
With cares, or when to rig an armed fleet,
And when pine trees are seasonably felled.
Nor can this speculation vain be held,
How th'heavenly signs do rise and fall, and here
Into four seasons do divide the year.
When storms within doors keep the husbandman
They give him leisure to make ready than
What they would hasten in fair weather more,
To grind their plowshares dulled edge, to bor^
And hollow tree^ for boats; the husbandmen
Then measure corn, and mark their cattle then.
Some horned forkes prepare, some sharpen stakes,
Bonds for the limber vines another makes:
Panyers sometimes of Rubean twigs they make,
Sometimes they grind their corn, sometimes they bake:
For all divine and humane Laws allow
On greatest holy days some works to do,
To dig a dike, or fence about the corn;
To catch the harmefull birds, brambles to burn:
To wash the bleating flocks in rivers clear
By no Religion was forbidden ere.
Some drive their Asses to the market town
With oil and apples, who return anon
Laden with pitch and grinding stones again.
The Moon did not all days alike ordain
Happy for every work. The fifth Moon fly,
Then hell and furies first began to be.
Then did the earth an impious birth produce
Typhoeus, Caeus, and Iapetus,
That durst conspire the towers of heaven to raze.
Thrice they endeavored with strong hand to place
The mountain Ossa on high Pelion,
On that Olympus: thrice great Jove threw down
Their work with thunder. But the fourteenth day
Is best to plant your vineyards, and assay
Your new-tam'd Oxen. Then best spinning thriues;
The ninth is safe to travel, free from Thieves.
Some works by night are happiest brought to pass,
Or when the morning star bedeawes the grass.
By night your stubble and dry Meadows mow,
For night fair moisture does on them bestow.
Some sit up late at winter-fires, and fit
Their sharp edged tools; the while their wives do sit
Beside them carding Wool, and there make light
With songs the tedious labor of the night.
Or boil new wine from crudities, and skim
The bubbling froth off from the Caldrons brim.
But reap thy corn in the days heat and drought,
For dry-reap't corn will thresh more cleanly out.
In Summer naked plow thy ground, and sow:
Cold Winter rest on plowmen does bestow.
Then they enjoy what they before did gain,
And with glad feasts each other entertain.
The geniall Winter to free joy inuites
From care. Such are the Mariners delights,
When laden ships long absent from their home
Now decked with garlands to the haven come.
Besides the Winter is a season fit
To gather ackorns, and ripe berries get
Of bays, of olive trees, and myrtles red.
To catch wild cranes in sprindges, and to spread
Toiles for red Dear; the long-ear'd Hare to start,
And fallow Dear with a loop'd Spanish dart
Well thrown to kill, when with deep snow the ground
Is hid, and rivers with strong ice are bound.
The storms of Autumn why should I relate?
When days grow shorter, and more moderate
The heat? what care good husbands entertain?
Or when the show^ry spring does promise rain?
When all the fields with green eared corn are proud
And tender blades the swelling grain do shroud?
^oft have seen, when corn was ripe to mow,
And now in dry, and brittle straw did grow,
Winds from all quarters oppositely blow.
By whose dire force the full-ear'd blades were torn
Up by the roots, and into the air were born:
No otherwise than when black whirle winds rise,
And toss dry straw and stubble to the skies.
Often fall huge gusts of water from the sky.
And all the full-swell'd clouds whirle from on high
Black showers and storms about: the thunders noise
Even rends high heaven, and falling rain destroys
All crops, and all that the Oxens toil has done.
Dikes fill: with sound the swelled rivers run;
The seas with troubled agitations move.
In midst of that tempestuous night, great Jove
From a bright hand his winged thunder throws:
Which shakes the earth; beasts fly; sad terror goes
Through mortal breasts. His burning dart does aw
Rhodope, Athos, the high Ceraunia.
The showery South winds double now, and round
The woods do murmur, and beat shores resound.
For fear^ of this observe the months and signs:
Mark to what house Saturns cold star inclines:
And with what planet Mercury does join.
But first give worship to the powers divine:
Offer to (i) Ceres yearly sacrifice
With feasts upon the grass, when winter is
Quite spent, and now the spring does fresh appear.
Then lambs are fat, then wines are purged and clear:
The shady mountains then sweet sleeps afford.
Let her by all thy plowmen be adored:
Let honey, milk, and wine be offered
To her, and the happy sacrifice be led
About the new corn thrice, whilst every one
Follows with joyful acclamation,
Imploring Ceres favor; and let none
Presume to thrust a sickle into corn,
Unless with oaken wreathes he first adorn
His head, and dance unartificially
With hymns of praise to Ceres Deity.
And that by certain tokens we might know
When heat will come, when rain, when winds shall blow,
Great Jove ordained monthly what the Moon
Should teach, what signs foretell, when winds go down,
That husbandmen, marking what often befalls
Know when to keep their cattle in the stals.
Just ere the winds arise, the Sea swells high,
Great noise is heard from all the mountains nigh,
Then hollow murmurs through the woods you hear,
And all the shoares resounding far and near.
Then Seas are ill to Sailors evermore
When Cormorants fly crying to the shore
From the mid-sea, when Sea foul pastime make
Upon dry land, when Herns the ponds forsake,
And mounted on their wings do fly aloft.
You may discern, when winds are rising, often
The stars in heaven do seem to fall, and make
Through nights dark air a long and fiery tracke.
Often straw and withered leaves in the air fly up,
And feathers swim upon the waters top.
But when it lightens from the boistrous North,
And the East, and Western houses thunder forth,
The Lands oreflow'd, the Dikes filled every where,
And Mariners wet sails on the Ocean bear,
The storm can nere thee unawares surprise,
For from the Valleys, ere it thence arise,
The Cranes do fly, the Bullock upward throws
His head, and snuffs the air into his nose;
The subtle Swallow flies about the brook,
And querulous Frogs in muddy pooles do croke.
The industrious Ant through narrow paths does role
Her eggs along from out her little hole.
The Rainbow seems to drink the waves, and home
The Crows in mighty sholes from feeding come,
And clap their wings aloud; Sea-fowles, and those
That feed along where fair Cayster flows
Through the Asian meadows, you may often see
Bathing themselves in water greedily.
They often diue down, and swimming to and fro
A glad, though vain, desire of washing show.
Then with full throats the wicked Rooks call on
The rain, and wander on the shores alone,
Offering their heads to the approaching showers.
As maids in spinning spend the nights late hours,
Their burning lamps the storm ensuing show,
The oil sparkles, thieves about the snuff do grow.
By no less true, and certain signs may we
Fair days and sunshine in a storm foresee.
For then the stars aspects are clear to us,
Nor does the moon arise obnoxious
Unto her brothers rays, nor ore the sky
Do little clouds like woolly fleeces fly:
The Theus-lov'd Kings-fishers spread not then
Their wings against the sun; nor Hogs unclean
Prepare them heaps of straw to ly upon.
But to the lowest vales the clouds fall down.
The fatal owl high mounted at sun set
Does not the balefull evening song repeat.
Nisus his wings in the air aloft displayes,
And for his purple lock false Scylla pays.
Where ever Scylla through the air does fly,
Nisus, her fierce and cruel enemy,
With eager flight pursues; from thence where he
Appears, with fearful wing does Scylla fly.
The ravens with a loud, and strained throat
From their high nest do often repeat their note,
And amongst the leaves they croak together all
As taken with a joy unusual;
It does them good, the storm now spent, to see
Their nests of young ones, and dear progeny.
I do not think that all these creatures have
More wisdom than the fates to mankind gave;
But thus; as tempests, as the unconstant skies
Do change their course, as several winds arise
In the air, and do condense, or ra^ifie,
^ust so their natures alter instantly.
Their breasts receive impressions different;
As some by calmes, so some by storms are sent.
Hence that consent of joy or woe does slow
Which croaking ravens, foul, and cattle show.
But if that to the swiftly moving sun
Thou look for signs, or to the following moon,
The next days weather thou may know, nor be
Deceived by a fair evenings treachery.
Be sure great storms by sea and land ensue
When first the Moon does her wan'd light renew,
If then her dulled horns dark air embrace.
But if a redness hide her virgin face
It will be windy; that complexion
In her shows wind. But in the fourth new Moon
(For that is the certain'st author) if most clear,
And free from dimnesse her bright horns appear,
That day, and all the following days shall be
Till the months end, from rain and tempests free*
To Panopaea, Glancu^, Inoe^ boy
The saved Mariners shall pay with joy
Their vows upon the shore. But sur'st of all,
And best the Sun, when he does rise, or fall
Into the Ocean, does those rules bestow,
When he or yields to night, or morn does show.
When full of spots the rising Sun does seem,
Hid in a cloud, and in his middle dim,
Suspect great rain; the moist Southwinde is nigh
To cattle, corn, and trees an enemy.
Or when thick clouds the morning Sun do hide,
Yet ^ound about his shining rays are spi'de,
Or when Aurora with a countenance pale
Leaves Tithons rosy bed, then ill from hail,
Which leapes into all houses rattling hard,
Can thin vine leaves (alas) the clusters guard*
These signs more surely may observed be
About the setting Sun; for often we see
His face with various colors is orespred;
Azu^e betokens rain: a fiery red
Shows wind. But if that redness mixed appear
And full of little spots, then every where
Both wind and rain together shall be seen*
In such a night, when that sad sign has been,
Shall no persuasions make me venture ore
The Seas, or loose my Cables from the shore.
But when his Orb both even and morn is bright,
Then let no fear of storms thy mind a^fright.
The woods no winds but dry North winds shall move.
And last of all how all the night shall prove,
From whence dry clouds the north^e^ wind shall drive,
And what moist seasons the south winds shall give,
The Sun shall perfectly declare to thee,
And who dares tax the Sun of falsitie?
He often forewarnes us of blind tumults nigh,
Of growing wars, and secret treachery.
He pitying Rome, when Caesar murdered died,
In sable darkness his bright head did hide,
And night eternal threatened the impious age.
Then besides him did the earth and seas presage:
The Dogs and fatal birds sad signs did yield.
How often then into the Cyclop^ field
Did Aetna's burning caverne overflow,
And globes of fire, and melted stones did throw?
The trembling Alps did shake; ore all the sky
A noise of arms was heard in Germany.
In solitary groves were often heard
Affrighting voices, and pale ghosts appeared
When night began; the beasts against nature spoke;
Hoods stopped their courses; the cleft earth did make
Wide chinks; on statues, which our temples kept,
The brass did sweat, the mourning ivory wept.
Swelling Eriadnus the king of floods*
With violence orethrew the lofty woods,
And ore the fields both beasts and stals did bear.
Beasts entrails sad, and threatening did appear.
The Wels were filled with blood; in depth of night
The howling Wolves did greatest Towns affright*
Nere flew more lightning through a welkin fair,
Nor mo portentuous comets filled the air.
Therefore with equal ensigns once again
Two Roman hoasts fought on Philippi Plain.
The gods were pleased that our blood-dropping wounds
Should twice (k) manure Aemathiaes fatal grounds.
Rust eaten piles and swords in time to come,
When crooked plows dig up earth's fertile womb;
The husbandman shall often discover there,
And harrowes i^on teeth shall every where
Rake helmets up; plowmen in graves so old
Such large-siz'd bones shall wonder to behold.
Romulus, Ve^^a, and ye native gods
That keep by Tuscan Tyber your abodes,
And Romes high palaces, take not away
Young Caesa^, now the only aid and stay
Of this distressed age; enough have we
Already paid for Troyes old perjury.
The court of heaven already envies us
Caesar, for thee, that thou vouchsafest thus
Poor earthly triumphs to regard below.
For when such mischiefs, and dire wars did flow
Ore all the world, and right with wrong confound,
The plowes neglected lay, the fruitless ground
Ore-grown with weeds, for want of tillers mournd,
And crooked sickles into swords were turned.
Euphrates here, there Germany in arms
Was up; on the other side the loud alarms
F^ight neighboring cities; all accords are broke,
And all the world with impious war is shook.
So when swift charriots from the lists are gone,
Their furious have increases as they run.
In vain the charrioter their course would stay;
Th'ungovern'd horses hurry him away.
Finis libri primi.
Annotations upon the first BOOK.
IT is not unknown to any man, who is an able judge of this work, that
Virgil, though Prince of the Roman Poets (for that title his own age freely
affoorded him, and the judgment or modesty of succeeding times never detracted
from him) did help his invention by imitation of the Grecian Poets; and in this
work of his Georgicks, (to speak nothing of his Aeneids, or Bucolicks) he has
taken his subject from Ascraean Hesiod; as his own verse in the second book
modestly acknowledges.

Ascraeuinque cano Romana per oppida carmen. In this subject (though the
learning of Virgil must needs carry him upon other matters than Hesiod treated
of, and his own intent to honor his native Italy, which was then mistress of
the conquered world, and to whose climate and properties he especially
proportions this discourse of husbandry) he retains in many things the
Grecian way; be invokes their gods (men whose ancient worth had deis^ed them
to posterity) he builds upon many stories, which either the Gre^kes invented,
or the distance of time has made posterity not to credit them as truths, but
entitle them poetical stories. Some of these histories which are shortly
mentioned in this Werks, I have thought fitting to relate here for the ease or
delight of the English reader, ^^treating all Readers to pardon me for striving
only to please them: (for to me it can add nothing, since all men of
judgment can tell how easily, and where I find them.) I have not mentioned
them all; nor made a large comment upon the work to extend it to an
unnecessary bulk; but mentioned such only as I thought fitting.

(b) Staphylus the son of Sithneus, and chief Shepherd to Oeneus king of
Aetolia, had observed that one of his goats did often in feeding separat it
self from the rest of the flock, and by that feeding was grown fatter and
better in liking than all the rest. He upon a day resolved to watch this goat,
and found it feeding on a cluster of grapes: he gathered some of the grapes,
and wondering at the noveltie and rareness of the fruit, presented it to the
King his Master. The King tasted it, and wondrously pleased, and cheared with
the juice of it, began to esteem it of great value; insomuch as not long after
it so happened, that the great Bacchus returning from his Indian conquests, was
entertained at the court of this Oeneus; who presented to Bacchus his newfound
fruit. Bacchus, who before had learned the use of it, instructed the king how
to continue the race, and the manner how to dress, and perfect his vines; and
ordained withal that the wine in the Greek language should be called (...),
in honor of Oeneus, and the grape (...), after the name of Staphylus the kings
shepherd.

( c) These Faunt are accounted the country Gods, and are thought always to
inhabit in the woods. The first of them was Faunus king of the Aborigines, the
son of Picus, and grandchilde of Saturn, who first reduced the inhabitants of
Italy to a civil life: he built houses, and consecrated woods; in honor of
so great a merit as this, he was by his thankful posterity (as the custom
was of those times) consecrated a god, and his oracle with great devotion kept
in Abbunea an Italian wood. Of his name all Temples were afterward called
Fanes; he married his sister Fauna, whom the Romans in after times honored
with great devotion, and called her Bona; She gave Oracles to the women, as
her husband Faunus did unto the men.

( d) The Fable is thus; When the famous City of Athens was founded, and
Neptune and Minerva were in great contention who should have the honor of
naming the place, it pleased the gods to appoint it thus, that the honor
should accrue to that deity, who could bestow the greatest benefit upon
mankind. Upon which sentence Neptune with his trident striking the shore,
immediately a furious horse provided, and armed for the war, was created by
that stroke: Minerva casting her javelin from her, of that javelin produced an
Olive tree; which being a fruitful and good plant, and the emblem of peace,
was judged more useful and profiable to mankind. The cause why our Author
invoketh Neptune in this place, is, because he intends to speak of horses
in the third Book of this Work. Which had been else unfit in a discourse
concerning affairs of Land to have invoked a god of the Sea.

(c) Aristaeus, who is here invoked was reported the son of Apollo, and the
Nymph Cyrene: This Aristaeus the father of Actaeon, who transformed into a stag
(as Ovid's fable delivers it) was devoured by his dogs, grieved for his sons
death, departed from Thebes to the Island Caea, which was then destitute of
inhabitants by reason of a pestilence which had there happened: This Caea is an
Island in the Aegaean sea; from whence he sailed into Arcadia, and there ended
the residue of his life. In Arcadia he was honored as a god after his death
for teaching the people that strange mystery of making Bees.

( f) This youth here named the invent^r of the Plow, is by most thought to be
Osiris the King, and afterward god of the Egyptians. He was the first that
ever taught the Egyptians his countrymen the use of Oxen for p^owing of their
ground. He was honored by them as a god after his death for this great
benefit; and worshipped in the form of an Ox^, which was called Apis, in the
City of Memphis. And in memory of this also Isis the wife of that Osiris was
honored as a goddess, and had solemn sacrifices, in which an care of corn
was carried before the pomp, and all plowmen in harvest time sacrified to her
with the straw of wheat.

( g) The history of the birth, life, and deity of this god Sylvanus is thus
reported; A shepherd, whose name was Cratis, abused to his lust ash^e-Goat of
his flock: and when upon a time Cratis was sleeping by a river^ side; that
hee-Goat, which used the company of the shee-Goat, in a jealous fury, assaulted
Cratis with his horns, and tumbled him into the river; from whose name the
flood was afterward called Cratis. This monstrous issue of he Shepherd and
the Goat, when it was brought to light, resembled them both, and was a Goat in
the nether parts, but in the upper it carried the shape of a man. Being
afterward brought up and growing in the woods, the Shepherds astonished at so
strange a shape, began to honor and adore him for a god, calling him Sylvanus,
from the woods wherein he lived. This god Sylvanus was extremely enamoured on
a beauteous youth named Cyparissus, who with great care had brought up a tame
Dear; and when on a time the youth unhappily trying his Bow, had mist the
mark, and slain unawares his beloved Dear, out of extremity and impatience
of grief he dyed. Sylvanus lamenting the death of his minion Cyparissus, fell
down weeping upon the dead body, and vowed never to part from those embraces:
which he continued so long ^ntill the gods in pity to Sylvanus, transformed
the body of Cyparissus into a tree, called, from him, the Cypress tree, which
ever after was a tree of mourning, and garnished great men's houses at funerals,
as all the Poets mention; and Sylvanus is accounted the god protector of that
tree.

(h) Erigone the virgin was the daughter of Icarus an Athenian shepherd, whose
pie^ie to her father was much renowned: insomuch as that when her father was
slain (as shall be afterward declared) she never parted from the dead body,
but dyed with him; and by the pity of the gods, as Poets say, was taken up
into heaven, and made a sign in the Zodiac, called Virgo.

( i) The Husbandmen in ancient time sacrificed to Ceres the goddess of Corn.
They killed a fat Hog as the sacrifice it self, a creature whose rooting
endamages the corn. About this sacrifice the whole Chorus of the husbandmen
danced in a rude inartificiall manner (for such dances in Religion were
accepted) and sang songs in honor of the goddess Ceres, who first invented
Corn. They wore upon their heads branches of Oaken trees, in a thankful
remembrance of their old food: for before her bounti^ to mankind had taught
them the ways of tilling and harvest, the people lived upon Mast and Acorns.

( k) For twice in that country the Romans fought in civil war: first
Julius Caesar against Pompey the Great, afterward Octavius Caesar and Marcus
Antonius against Marcus Brutus and Caius Cassius.

FINIS.
GEORGICON. The second BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis Book the nature of all trees defines,
Of fat-rin'd Olives, of heart-cheering Vine^,
And other lesse-fam'd plants; to every tree
Its proper climate, growth, and quality
Assigns; and teaches how to propagate,
How to engraffe, transplant, enoculate.
With what rich fruit some happy lands are blessed,
Which others want: and here 'bove all the rest
Our Poet does infer the praises high
Of his own native f^uitfull Italy;
Her meadows, herds, fair towns, and rivers known
To all the world; her nations of renown,
And men of honored name. Last, it does show
The bliss of plowmen, if their bliss they knew.
THus much of tillage, and celestial signs;
Thee, Bacchus, now I Will sing; and with thy vines
Other wild Plants, and Olives slowly growing.
Hither, o Father (for thy gifts are flowing
Ore all things here; the vineyards by thy care
With rich Autumn all fruit full laden are,
And vinetages oreflow) o^ hither daine
To come, great Bacchus, and when thou have taken
Thy buskins off, oh then vouchsafe with me
In new sweet wine to dip thy bared thigh.
Nature on trees does different births bestow;
Some of themselves without man's aid do grow;
And round the fields, and crooked rivers come,
As limber Osiers, Poplars, tender broom,
And grey-leav'd Willowes; some from seed arise;
Such are the lofty Chest nuts, and those trees,
Which Jove his greatest holds, the high Aesculus,
And the Oak by Greeks esteemed oraculous.
Some from their own great roots make young ones rise
About them round, as Elmes and Cherry trees;
And young Parnas^ian bays do often so
Under their mothers shadow sheltered grow.
These ways of planting nature first did bring:
So trees, so herbs, and sacred woods did spring.
But other ways experience since has found.
Some plant young shoots cut off from trees in ground,
Some graffe young rooted stalks in deeper mould;
And sharp crosse-cloven stakes: some bow their old
Vines into ranges, propagating young,
Which thence in arches on both sides have sprung.
Some need no roots; the Pruner young slips cuts,
And them into the earth securely puts.
And (wondrous to be told) an Olive tree
Out from a dry cut trunk often springs we see.
And often are the branches of one tree
Into another grasfed prosperously;
So from an Apple stock ripe Pears do come,
And hard red cornoiles from a stock of Plumme,
Therefore be careful, husbandmen, to know
What art belongs to every tree, and how
To make wild trees by dressing better grow.
Keep no ground barren: Ismarus will please
Bacchus, Taburnus will bear Olive trees.
And thou, (a) Mecaenas, to whose grace I ow
My fame and glory, be propitious now;
Lend thy free favor to this subject plain.
I dare not hope this Poem should contain
All parts of it, had I an hundred tongues,
To them an hundred mouths, and iron lungs.
Want me from shore: the earth's description's plain.
Nor will I here, Maecenas, thee detain
With Poets fictions, nor oppress thine ear
With circumstance, and long exordiums here.
Those trees, which of themselves shoot up in the air,
Do grow unfruitfully, but strong and fair;
For in the soil their nature is; but these
If thou do take, and gra^fe in other trees,
Or else transplant them well, they will quite forsake
Their barren nature, and most aptly take
By dressing often, what form thou would bestow.
The like those trees, that spring from roots, will do,
If them to the open fields thou do remove;
But now their mothers leaves, and boughs above
Oreshadow them and make them barren trees.
But all those plants, which do from seeds arise,
Grow slow, and shade to our grandchildren give.
They still degenerate the more they live.
Good grapes turn birds meat, grown extremely bad,
And apples lose the first good juice they had.
They must be mended all, well dug, and dressed,
And by much labor tamed; the Olive best,
And Venus Myrtle set in trunks do live,
And Vines the best by propagation thrive.
From small slips set do Fil^erts grow, we see,
Jove's Oak, and great Alcides (b) Poplar tree,
The stately Ashes, lofty Palms, and Firs
Employed at sea by ventrous Mariners.
Rough arbute slips into a hazell bough
Are often ingraffed; and good Apples grow
Out of a Plain trees stock: the Chestnut bears
Ingraffed Beech: in tall wild Ashes Pears
Do flourish best; from Elmes Oak-acorns fall
To Hogs; nor are the ways alike in all
How to ingraffe, how to inoculate.
For where the tender rind opening of late
Shot forth a bud, just at that knot they cut
A little hole; into that hole they put
A budding shoot ^ane from another tree;
The rind then closing makes them prosperously
Together grow. But if the trunk be free
From knots, they cleave the trunk of such a tree
With wedges, putting fruitful slips therein;
Within short time the ingrafted slips begin
To grow to prosperous height; the the other tree
Wonders such stranger fruit, and leaves to see.
Nor are the ways alike in all of these,
In Willowes, Lotes, Idaean Cypresses,
And sturdy Elmes; nor in one manner do
All kinds of Olives, the long Radii grow,
Nor Olives orchites, or Pausia named,
Nor apples, nor Alcinous fruit so famed.
Nor must all shootes of pears alike be set,
Crustumian, Syrian pears, and wardens great.
Nor hang the vines upon our trees as do
Those that in Lesbian Methymna grow.
The Thasian vines in barren soil abound:
The Ma^^otike thrive in richer ground;
The Psithian grapes are best of all to dry.
Besides these, strong Lagaean wines there be,
Whose strength makes drunkards stagger, and does tie
Their tongues; ^ath-ripe, and purple grapes there be;
But in what verse shall ^ enough commend
The Rhetian grape? yet let it not contend
With the Tabernian. Aminean vines
There are besides, which bear the firmest wines.
Cilician, and Phanaean grapes there are,
And white grapes less than those; none may compare
With these for store of juice, and lasting long.
Nor will I pass thy vintage in my song
O Rhodes, for feasts and sacrifices famed;
Nor that great grape from a Cowes udder named.
But all the kinds, and names of grapes that are
It Is numberless and needless to declare.
Which he that seeks to do, as soon may know
How many Libyan sands the West winds blow;
Or when fierce Eurus against the Sailers rores,
How many waves roll to the Ionian shores.
Nor can all grounds bring forth all plants we see;
By rivers Willowes prosper: the Alder tree
O^ mo^ish grounds: on rocky mountains grow
Wild Ashes: Myrtles on the shores below;
Vines love warm open heights; the Northren cold
Makes Yew trees prosper. And again behold
The conquered worlds farthest inhabitants,
Eastern Arabians, painted Scythians.
See there all trees their proper countries know;
In India only does black Eben grow:
None but Sabaea boasts of Frankincense.
Why should I name that fragrant wood, from whence
Sweet Balsam sweats? the berries or the buds
Of Bears-foot ever green? those hoary woods
Of Aethiopia clothed with snowy wool?
Or how the Seres their rich fleeces pull
From leaves of trees? or those fair woods, which grow
Near to the Indian sea, whose highest bough
No Arrows flight can reach? none shoot so high,
Although that Nation no bad Archers be.
Slow-tasted Apples Media does produce,
And bitter too, but of a happy use;
Than which no surer Antidote is known,
TO expel a poyson-temper'd potion,
When cruel step-dames their sad cups have used,
With cha^ming words, and banefull herbs infused.
The tree is fair, just like a Laurel tree,
And were indeed a Laurel perfectly,
But that their smells far differ; no winds blast
Shakes off her leaves, her blossoms still stick fa^t.
With this the Mede short-winded old men eases,
And cures the lungs unsavory diseases.
But not the richest land, not Median woods,
Not golden Hermus, nor fair Ganges sloods
May ought for praise contend with (c) Italy,
Nor fair Panchaia famed for spice^y,
Bactia, nor India; no Bulls, that blow
Fire from their nostrels, did that Region plow:
No Dragons teeth therein were sowed, to bear
A crop of Soldiers armed with shield and spear.
Besides this land a spring perpetual sees,
Twice breeding Cattle, twice fruit-bea^ing trees.
And summers there in months unusual shine;
But no wild Tigers in that coast are seen,
No savage Lions breed, nor in that land
Do poisonous (c) herbs deceive the gatherers hand.
No huge and s^aly snake on those fair grounds
Makes fearful tracks, or twines in hideous rounds.
Add to all these so many structures fair
Of beauteous Cities, of strong Towns, that are
Fenced with rocks impregnable, and how
Under those Ancient walls great Rivers flow.
Shall I insist on those two seas that flow
'Bout Italy, above it and below?
Or her great lakes? thee mighty Larius?
Or thee tempestuous sea-like Benacus?
Or praise her havens? or the Lucrine lake?
Where the imprisoned Julian waters make
A loud and wrathful noise, through which the great
Sea-tides into Avernus lake are let?
Besides the land abounds with metals store,
With veins of ^ilver, gold and brazen ore;
It nurturs Nations bold, the Marsians,
The ^i^^ce Sabellians, dart-arm'd Vol^cians,
Hardy Ligurians; in particular
The Decii, Marii, those brave names of war,
The great Camilli, valiant Scipio's,
And thee, great Caesar, now victorious
In Asia's utmost bounds, whose conquering powers
From flying Indians guard the Roman towers.
Hail Saturns land in riches great, and great
In men; for thee I will presume to entreat
Of the ancient praised arts, open sacred springs,
And through Romes towns A^crean poems sing.
Now all soiles several natures let us see,
Their strengths, their colors, and fertility.
First barren hills, and hard unfruitful ground,
Where clay is scarce, and gravel does abound,
Is good for Pallas long-lived Olive tree.
For in such soiles we by experience see
Wild Olive trees do in abundance grow,
And all the fields with their wild Olives strew.
But ground more fertile, with sweet moisture filled,
Well clothed with grass, and fruitful to be tilled,
(Such as in valleys we do often espy,
Whither the waters flow from hills on high,
Leaving a fruitful slime) where South-winds blow,
And Brakes, great hinderers of all plowing, grow,
Will yield thee spreading vines, and full of juice,
And lusty wines, such as we sacrifice
In golden goblets to the gods, as soon
As the swollen Tuscan trumpeter has done
His sounding at the Altar, which we load
With reeking entrails brought in chargers broad.
But if thou rather Herds, or Calves would keep,
Or Goats, whose grazing burns the fields, or sheep;
Then seek Tarentums lawnes, and farthest coast,
Such fields as happlesse Mantua has lost,
Where snowy Swans feed in the meadows near
The rivers side; nor grass, nor water there
Thy Herds can want; what grass they eat by days,
The dewy night back to the field repayes.
But ground in color black, and fat below,
Putrid and loose (for such we wish to plow)
Is best for co^ne; for from no ground do come
Mo l^den wagons, and tired Oxen home.
Or where of late the plowman grubb'd up wood,
Which quiet there for many years had stood,
And birds old nests has from the roots orethrown;
They ^est of dwellings now from thence are flown;
The new-made ground once plowed most fruitful grows.
Course barren sand, and hilly scarce bestows
Casia, and ^lowers for Bees to feed upon,
Nor chaulk, nor that so soft though rugged stone
Eat by black snakes; no ground on snakes so good
Close holes bestows, nor such delicious food.
But that rich land, which does exhale like smoakes
Thin vapors up, that showrs of rain in soakes,
And when ^he lists returns them forth again,
Whose mould with ^ust the iron does not stain,
Which clothes herself in her own grassie greene^
That Land (as well in tillage may be seen)
Is good to pasture cattle good to plow,
There Vines and Olives prosperously grow.
Such Lands by Capua, by Vesuvius high,
And Clanius, that o^e^lowes Acerrae, ly.
^ How to discern each soil ^le teach thee now,
Which mould is thick and which is loose to know.
(For one ^^aeus, the other Ceres loves:
Vines love loose grounds, corn best in thickest proves)
Choose with thine eye that piece that is most plain;
There dig a pit, and then throw in again
The clods and earth, and tread them strongly in;
If they will not fill the pit, the soil is thin,
And best for Vineyards, and for pasture grass;
But if the clods do more than fill the place,
The earth is thick and solid; try that soil,
And plow it well, though hard and full of toil.
That earth that is salt, or bitter, bad for sowing,
(For that will never be made good by plowing,
Nor vines, nor apples planted there, abide
In their first generous taste) may thus be tried;
Take a thick-woven Osiar colander,
Through which the pressed wines are strained clear,
And put a piece of that bad earth into it
Well mixed with water, and then strain them through it,
You shall perceive the struggling water flow,
And in great drops will through the Osiars go,
But by the taste you may discern it plain;
The bitterness will make the taster strain
His countenance awry. So you may know
By handling, whether ground be fat or no;
Lean earth will crumble into du^t* but thick
Like pitch fat earth will to your fingers stick.
Moist land brings forth tall grass, and often is found
Too rich; oh give not me so rank a ground,
Nor let it co^ns young husks too richly raise.
Earth that is heavy her own weight betrays,
And so of light; our eyes do judge aright
The color of the land or black or white*
But to find out that cursed quality
Of cold in grounds, of all, will hardest be;
Yet that the trees, which prosper there, will show,
Pitch trees, black Ivy, and the balefull Yew.
These things considered well, remember thou
Long before hand in furrows deep to plow
And break the earth; then let it lie thus broke
Exposed to North-cast-windes and winters shock,
Before thou plant thy fruitful Vines therein,
For they thrive best in rotten ground, and thin.
The Winds and hoary Frosts, after the toil
Of digging (Husbandmen) will rot the soil.
But he, that thoroughly vigilant will be,
Must find a place out for a nurcerie
Just like the place he plants in, left a tree
Transplanted do not with the soil agree.
And he, to plant it as it was, must mark
The Heavens four quarters on the tender ba^ke,
To know how every tree did stand, which side
Endured the South, which did the North abide,
And let their former situation stand.
Consider then if Plain or mountain Land
Be best for Vines; if plain good ground thou choose
Then plant them thick; the Grapes can nothing loose
By their thick standing there; if on a Hill
Thou plant, with measure, and exactest skill,
Set them in rows by equal distance held;
As when an Army's ranged in the field,
And stand^ for trial of a mighty day;
In equal squadrons they themselves display
Ore the broad field, which seems with glittering arms
To move, before the battles fierce alarmes
Do ^ound, and Mars to both stands doubtful yet.
So trees at equal distance ranked set,
Not only to delight thy prospect there,
But cause the ground can no way else confer
To all an equal vigor, nor can they
Have room at large their branches to display.
Perchance how deep to dig thy furrows now
Thou Would learn. Thy Vines in shallow ones, will grow
But other trees more deeply dug must be;
Chiefly the Aesculean Oak, who still more high
He lifts his branches in the air, more low
His root does downward to Avernus go.
Therefore no winds, nor winter storms orethrow
Tho^^ Trees; for many years unmoved they grow,
And many ages of mankind outweare,
And sp(...)ing their fair branches here and there,
Themselves (...) do make a stately s^ade.
Let not thy Vineyards to the West be made,
Nor plant t^ou ^^asels amongst thy Vines, nor yet
Lop off their highest branches, which are beat
With winds, nor prune them with blunt knives, nor yet
Wild Olive trees amongst other Olives set.
For unawares fire often is scattered;
Which in the dry fat ^inde concealed, and fed
Seizes the tree, the leaves and branches takes,
And through the air a crackling noise it makes,
Till on the top it reign with victory
Involving all the wood in ^lames, and fly
Like a black pitchy cloud up to the sky,
Especially if stormy winds do ly
Upon the wood, the ^lames about to bear.
When this does chance, the Olives burned there
Spring from the root no more in their first state,
But to wild Olives do degenerate.
Let none persuade thee then, how wise so ere,
When Boreas blows, the hardened earth to stir;
Winter congeales the ground, and suffers not
The trees new set in the earth to spread their root.
But when the golden spring does first appear,
And that white bird is come, whom serpents fear,
Is the best time of all to plant thy vines:
The next is when the Autumnall cold begins;
When now the (...) short^ns the days, and done
The Summer is, yet winter not begun.
The Spring's the time that clothes the woods with leaves;
The earth then swells, and seed with joy receives.
The Jove Almighty down descends, and powers
Into the earths glad bosom fruitful showers,
And mixed with her great body, he does feed
All births of hers, and foster every seed.
Each bush with loudly chirping birds is graced;
Beasts at set times the joys of Venus taste:
The ground stirred up by Zephyres warmer wind
Opens her self, and brings forth fruit in kind.
Young blooming trees dare trust themselves unto
The Sun new mounted; the vine branches now
Fear not the rising Southren winds, nor yet
The North-East-winde, that causes tempests great.
But shoot their blossoms forth, and spread their leaf.
No other days but such (it is my belief)
When first the world beginning had, were known*
The earth had no other t^nor; Spring alone,
And that perpetual, the great world enjoyed;
No East-windes winter blasts that age annoyed,
When first all Cattle their beginning had,
When of the earth mankindes hard race was made,
When wild Beasts filled the woods, and stars the sky.
Nor could the tender creatures easily
Endure this change; but heaven to make amends
Twixt heat and cold this tempered season sends.
What plants so ere thou setst in the earth, be sure
Cover them well, and with fat dung manure;
Put shells, and sandy stones therein; twixt them
Moisture will flow, and thin exhalings steame;
From whence the plants will gather heart. Some lay
Great stones at top, and vessels of thick clay,
Which from all storms will guard and fence them sound,
This when the dog star cleaves the thirsty ground.
And when thou plantst thy Vines dig round about
To bring good store of earth to every root;
Or exercise thy struggling Steeres, to plow
The ground in surrowes deep twixt every row.
Then get light reeds, smooth wands, and ashen stakes
With horned forkes, whose supportation makes
Young Vines contemn the winds, and to the top
Of Elmes to clime by broad-spred branches up*
But when their leaves do first begin to be,
And new-growne branches from supporting free
Shoot loose into the Air; then spare to use
Thy pruning knife so soon, and rather choose
The leaves superfluous with thy hands to pull.
But when embracing Elmes with arms more full
And strong, they grow; then confidently pare
Their leaves and branches too; before they fear^
The p^uning knife; then do not spare the same;
But their superfluous growth with rigor tame.
Then make strong hedges to keep cattle out,
Young beasts especially, and yet unwrought.
Wild Bulls and greedy Goats more harm will do
Than scorching Summers, and cold Winters too.
There Sheep will browze, and feeding Heifers go.
The Winters hoary Frosts, and falling Snow,
And parching Suns that burn the hardest rocks,
Endammage Vines less than those greedy flock^^
Their browzing teeth do venom leave behind,
And killing scars upon the stock and rind.
No other fault there was, that (d) Goats did d^^
At Bacchus Altars, and the old Comaedie
Was celebrated, that the Athenian plays
In Villages, and all crosse-meeting ways
Were graced; and men, ore meadows in their po^^
Did dance about the anointed (e) skins of Goat^^
The Italian Nations also sprung from Troy
Singing Saturnian rythms with open joy
And laughter loose, horrid disguises wor^
Of hollowed barks of trees, and did adore
With hymns of mirth, Bacchus, thy power divine,
And virgins (f) statues on the lofty pine
Did hang. Then vineyards fruitfully did bear,
All vales, and lawnes were fertile every where,
Where ere the god his beauteous head do show.
Therefore let us these rites to Bacchus do
In our own mother language, offering
Full cups, and wafers; and to the altar bring
A guilty goat led by the horns, and his
Fat entrails roast on spits of cornoile trees.
Besides in dressing vines more pains is shown,
To which there never can enough be done;
For every year the ground must dug be
Three or four times, and plowed eternally;
The leaves must often be gathered; all the pain,
That husbandmen bestow, returns again;
His own steps back the circling year does tread.
And when the vines their leaves in Autumn shed,
And all the woods of clothing robbed are
By North-east-windes: even then the industrious care
Of th'husbandman unto the following year
Extends it self; then he begins to pare
The vine with Saturn's crooked hook, and right
By skillful pruning to refashion it.
First dig the ground: first burn the shreds cut off:
And lay thy rests up dry within thy roof;
Gather thy vintage last. Leaves twice oreshade
The vines, as twice the ranke-grown weeds invade
Young corn. Both which require great toil to mend.
Till thou a little farm, though thou commend
A great one. And besides sharp twigs of thorn
From woods, and reeds on banks of rivers born,
Thou for thy vines must cut, and careful be
For willow groves, which else neglected ly.
Now when the vines are bound, and pruned, and all:
And the husband sings about the vineyard wall;
Yet there remains a care, to dust them there,
And storms, even when the grapes are ripe, to fear.
Contrariwise unto the Olive tree
No dressing does belong, nor needs she
The crooked hook, nor harrow, when once fair
She stands in ground, and once has felt the air*
The earth it self, when furrowed by the plow,
Does food enough on her, and corn bestow.
Therefore the fat and fruitful Olive nourish.
So the Apple tree in a full stock does flourish,
And once full grown up to the sky she towers
By her own strength, and needs no help of ours
So of themselves wild Woods, and every Bush
Bear fruit, and with Vermilion berries blush;
Low shrubs are shorn bra^ds on high trees do grow,
That feed the nightly fire, and light bestow.
And doubt men yet to plant, and care bestow?
(To leave great trees) Willowes and Broom so low
Do cooling shades to Sheep and Shepherds give,
Hedges for corn, and food for Bees to live.
How pleasantly with Box Cytorus stowes?
With her Pitch trees how fair Maricia shows?
Oh how it pleases me those fields to see,
That need no plowes, nor humane industry!
Those barren Woods on Caucasus high hill,
Which strong East-windes do wave, and rattle still,
Have each their several use; Pines for the Seas;
For Houses Cypress, and tall Cedar trees.
From hence the Plowmen Spokes for wheels do taken
Covers for Waines, and Keeles for Ships they make.
Willowes do useful twigs afford, Elmes shade;
Of Cornoile trees, and Myrtles darts are made:
Yew trees, to make strong Parthian Bows, are bowed;
Tile trees, and pliant Box may be bestowed
Hollowed, or turned, in forms, and uses good;
Light alderne barks do swim the Po's rough flood;
In rotten-holme stocks, and the rindes of trees
You often may find the hony-combes of Bees.
What benefits like these come from the Vine?
That causes guilt. The Centaures filled with wine
Great Rhaetus, Pholus, and Hylaeus died,
When they with pots the Lapithees defied.
Oh too too happy, if their bliss they knew,
Plain Husbandmen; to whom the earth with true
And bounteous justice, free from bloody war
Returns an easy food; who, though they are
Not early waked in high-roof'd Palaces
When waiting Clients come; though they possess
No Poasts, which Indian shells adorn in state,
No gold embroidred clothes, Corinthian plate,
Nor rich Assyrian scarlet; nor abuse
With sweetest Casia the plain simple use
Of oil; yet rest secure, a harmless life
Enriched with several blessings, free from strife,
Cool caves, dark shady groves, and fountains clear,
Untroubled sleeps, and cattells lowing there,
And pleasant huntings want not; there they live
By labor and small wealth; honor they give
Unto their gods and parents; justice took
Her last step there, when she the earth forsook.
But let the sacred Muse, whose priest I am,
Me above all with her sweet love inflame;
Teach me each star, each heavenly motion,
The often eclipses of the Sun and Moon,
The cause of Earthquakes: why the swelling main
Rises, and falls into it self again:
Why Winter suns so soon have to the sea:
What makes the Summer nights so short to be.
But if dull blood, which 'bout my heart does flow,
These parts of nature will not let me know;
Then let me (famelesse) love the fields and woods,
The fruitful watered vales, and running floods.
Those plains, where clear Sperchius runs, that mount
Where Spartan Virgins to great Bacchus wont
To sacrifice, or shady vales that lie
Under high Haemus, let my dwelling be.
Happy is he that knows the cause of things!
That all his fears to due subjection brings,
Yea fare it self, and greedy Acheron!
Yea happy sure is he, who ere has known
The ^urall gods, Sylvanus, and great ^an,
And all the sister Nymphs! that happy man
Nor peoples voices, nor kings purple move:
Nor dire ambition sundring brothers love:
Nor the Istrian Dacians fierce conspiracies:
Nor Romes estate, nor falling monarchies.
He sees no poor, whose miserable state
He suffers for; he envies no man's fate;
He eats such fruits as of their own accord
The willing grounds, and laden trees afford;
He sees no wrangling courts, no laws undone
By sword, nor peoples forced election.
Some search the Seas hid paths, some rush to war,
In Courts of Kings others attendants are.
One would his country, and dear gods destroy,
That he himself might drink in gemmes, and ly
On purple beds; another hoards up gold,
And ever wakes his hidden wealth to hold.
The pleading bars another does admire,
And high applause from every seat desire
Plebeians, and Patritians; some for goods
Their guilty hands embrue in brothers bloods.
Some from their houses and dear countries rome
In banishment, to seek a foreign home:
Whilst the industrious husband plowes the soil,
And takes the profit of his yearly toil.
With which his house and country too he serves,
And feeds his Herds, and th'Oxe that well deserves*
No fruitless time; young Cattle still are bred,
Or Corn is reaped, or fruits are gathered,
Corn that the surrowes lades, and barnes does fill.
When Winter comes, Oil in the Olive mill
They make; and Porkers fat with Acorns grow;
The Woods yield Crabs but Autumn does bestow
All kinds of pleasant fruit; the grapes hang by
Hot sunny walls, and ripen perfectly.
Mean while his pretty children kissing cull
His neck: his house is chaste; with Vdders full
His Kine come home; and in the flowery Meades
His frisking Kids do butt with tender heads.
He feasts himself upon the grassie ground,
Whilst 'bout the fire carowling cups are crowned;
And Bacchus is invoked in sacrifice;
Then among his herdsmen makes a darting prize,
And s^ts the mark upon an Elm; or they
Prepared for wrestling, their hard lims display.
Such lives as this the ancient Sabines led,
And so were Romulus and Remus bred;
So grew renowned Tuscany to fame,
So Rome the greatest of all lands became,
And in one wall did seven great hills contain.
And thus before Dictaean love did reign,
And impious nations on slain cattle fed,
His life on earth the golden Saturn led*
No classicks sounded then, nor mortal blade
Of swords, the Smiths laborious anvile made.
But we enough have now produced our course,
And time it is to ease our wearyed horse.
FINIS.
Annotations upon the second BOOK.
Caius (a) Mecaenas, that famous cherisher of good learning, to whom our Poet
in this place acknowledges so much, was a Gentleman of Etruria, in high favor
with Augustas Caesar, and in great employment of State under him. He was in
his friendship with learned men, not only bountiful, but judicious in the
placing of his bounty, and above all others fortunate in the choice of the
men. Among all the Poets, in that wise age wherein he lived, Virgil and Horace
were the only two, which I can find, whose mean fortunes needed his
liberality, as well as their virtues deserved his acquaintance: how liberal
he was, their often acknowledgements in their Works, have testified to the
world: how judicious or fortunate he was in those men's acquaintance, no age of
the world has since been ignorant; his name having been generally used for
the love of learning, no less than Caesar's for Imperial dignity (though
there were, both in that and the following ages, as Iuvenal witnesses in his
seventh Satyr, other men of honorable name and esteem in Rome, who were
lovers of such things, as Fabius, Cotta, Proculeius, Lentulus, etc.) Those
Lords either failed in judgment in the choice of their friends, or the injury
of their times affoorded them not wits able enough to raise their fames; since
we find not any such manifest honor done to their memories as to this
Mecaenas. whose fortune it was, that Virgil and Horace should live in his time;
and in such estates, as to need his bounty for his own honor: which is not a
thing incident to every age, though witty Martial in an Epigram of his could
speak thus,

Sint Mecaenates, non deerunt, Flacce, Marones. yet the contrary by experience
has often been found. Maroes have been borne when no Mecaenases have lived to
cherish them (as Homer the wonder of posterity, in his own time little
esteemed) and Mecaenases have lived and wanted Maroes. What Monarch in the
world was ever more desirous of fame in that kind, and more able to requite
than Alexander the Great? He that so much honored the memory of Homer, and at
the sacking of Thebes spared all the posterity of the Poet Pindarus, found in
his own time no able Poet to celebrate his fame. There were in his time (as
Arianus witnesses in the life of Alexander) many Poets, who would have written
of him, and stirred up by the greatness of his actions, or moved with hopes
form his known bounty, had written in the praise of him; but such and so poor
were their inspirations, they neither deserved the acceptance of Alexander,
nor the sight of posterity.

( b) The Poplar is called the tree of Hercules for this reason, as the Poets
feign: When Hercules had entered into Hell, redeemed Theseus from prison there,
and returned victorious, leading out Cerberus in triumph after him; the first
tree that he espied was a Poplar tree, of which he made himself a Garland, and
crowned himself after his new conquest.

( c) Our Poet, after the description of those several trees of strange
natures, which enrich the several climates of the earth, takes an occasion, by
way of comparison, to extol in all kinds the fruitfulness, and withal the
happiness of his native Italy, the magnificence of the Italian Cities, the
multitude and bravery of her people: Of the populousness of Italy thus Plinius
at one place speaks. This is that Italy, which, when Lucius Aemilius Paulus
and Caius Attilius were Consuls upon the fame of the tumult of Gallia, armed
presently of her own forces, without the aid of any forreyners, and without
mustering of any Italians beyond the river of Po, thirty thousand horsemen, and
seventy thousand foot: and Diodorus Siculus speaking of Rome before the second
Carthaginian war, says that the Senate as it were foreseeing the coming of
Annibal with a war so bloody, took a general survey of themselves and their
tributaries, and found the number of men fit to bear arms, to be ten hundred
thousand. And speaking also of the populousness of the Island of Sicily,
esteemed then as a part of Italy (for it was all called magna Graecia) bids us
not wonder at those mighty armies of Ninus, Semiramis, Darius, or Xerxes, since
Dionysius the tyrant, out of Syracusae only, armed an hundred and twenty
thousand footmen, with twelve thousand horsemen, and a navy of four hundred
ships out of one haven.

( d) The sacrifices, which in ancient times were offered to the gods, were
always chosen either for likeness or contrariety: for likeness some were
offered, as to Pluto the King of the dark world a black sheep or steer were
offered in sacrifice. Others for contrariety and hatred; as a Sow, because she
rooteth up land and spoyleth corn, was offered unto Ceres: the Goat, because
he browzeth the Vines, was offered to Bacchus: the Goat was likewise offered to
Aesculapius the god of health, because the Goat is never without a fever.

( e) In those old plays which the Athenians instituted in the honor of
Bacchus, the people danced with wine bottles made of Goat-skinnes, to insult as
it were over the Goats after they were dead. Of these Goat-skinnes (...) in
Greek signifies a (...) up first the name of Tragaedies.

(^) These plays were instituted to Bacchus by the Athenians for this reason;
Bacchus bestowed a bottle of sweet wine upon Icarus an Athenian Shepherd. This
Icarus coming to the company of some other laboring people of the country, set
his bottle of wine before them. The plain laborers not knowing the quality of
the liquor, but delighted with the sweetness of it, drunk intemperately, and
feeling themselves much altered in their brains, and their whole bodies, they
killed Icarus, supposing that he had given them poison. The dog of Icarus
returning home to Erigone his daughter, conducted her, who followed the dog,
unto her fathers dead body. Erigone impatient of grief, hanged her self upon
a pine tree, and the dog parting not from the two bodies, starved himself:
for which piety both Erigone and the dog were taken and made signs in
heaven. But not long after, for these murders unrevenged, the Athenians were
visited with a great pestilence, and the virgins of Athens were possessed with
a strange frenzy, and in their fits hanged themselves. The Oracle, being asked
the cause of this pestilence, returned them answer, that it should cease when
they in devotion had interred the bodies of Icarus and Erigone, and revenged
their murders: this being done, the plague ceased, and the people in honor of
Bacchus celebrated yearly plays, and in remembrance of their former frenzy,
upon pines or other trees were hanged up the images of virgins.

FINIS.
GEORGICON. The third BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe art of grazing, with the different cares
Of different cattle, this third book declares;
Of warlike Horses, of the laboring Ox,
Shag-bearded Goats, and snow-white woolly flocks:
Their breeding, feeding, profitable use,
Last their diseases, and the cures it shows.
But by the way our Poet promising
This subject done, great Caesar's deeds to sing,
Makes present mention of them, and declares
His glorious triumphs, and late finished wars,
Which Nile, swift Tigris, and Euphrates saw,
And Crassus ensigns fetched from Parthia.
OF thee, great Pales, and Apollo now
Thou famed Amphrysian Shepherd, and of you
Arcadian woods and streams I Will sing. Those known
Old strains, that would have pleased light minds, are grown
Vulgar; who cannot of Eurysteus fell,
Or of Busiris blood-stained altars tell?
Who of Latonian Dele, or Hylas now,
Or ivory-shoulder'd Pelops does not know
For riding famed, or his (a) Hippodame?
Some new attempted strain must lift up me
From ground, and spread my fame to every ear.
I first, returning, to my country dear
Will from the Aonian mountain bring with me
The Muses (live^) and first honor thee
Mantua, with Idumaean Palms of praise;
A marble temple in the field I Will raise
Near to the stream where winding Minclus flow,
Clothing his banks with tender reeds, does flow.
In midst shall Caesar's altar stand; whose power
Shall guard the Fane; to him I Conqueror
Will on the shore, with Purple clothed in state,
Circensian Plays in chariots celebrate.
All Greece shall gladly celebrate our fames,
Leaving the Olympicke, and Nemaean games,
With racing and the whorlebat fight, whilst I
Crowned with a tender branch of Olive tree
My offerings bring; Oh how I long to see
The sacrificing pomp in order ranged
To th'Temple come, or how the Scene often changed
Varies her face: or how the (b) Britains raise
That purple Curtain which themselves displaies.
About the doors the Indian victory
Described in gold and polished ivory,
With great Quirinus (c) arms shall stand, there showing
Great Nile with (d) Wars, as well as Waters, flowing;
And navall Triumphs in brass Pillars cut;
The conquered Asian Cities there I Will put,
Niphates, and the Parthian (e) foes, that fight
Retiring, and direct their shafts in flight.
Two Trophies taken from The East and Western shore,
And both those Nations twice triumphed ore.
In Parian marble carved with cunning hand,
The race of great Assaracus shall stand,
And Tros, that from high Jove their birth derive,
And Phoebus too, who first did Troy contrive.
Those wretches, that shall envy this, shall fear
The Furies dire, Cocytus stood severe,
And Sisyphus still rolling stone, or feel
Ixion's wreathed Snakes, or racking Wheel.
Meanewhile let us follow the Woods, and Lands
Untouched; such are, Mecaenas, thy commands.
My breast, without thee, no high rapture fills;
Inspire me then without delay; the hills
Cythaeron high, of Dogs Taygeta proud,
And Epire famed for Horses, call aloud.
Whose noise the ecchoing Woods redoubled bring.
After of Caesar's glorious wars I Will sing,
And through as many ages spread his praise,
As have already past to ^esar's days.
Who ere in hope to win the Olympic prize
Would keep good Horses, or else exercise
Strong Steeres to plow; best choice from Dams it took.
That Cow proves best that has the roughest look,
Great head and neck, and down unto her knee
Her dangling dewlaps hang; sides long and high:
All must be great: yea even her feet; her ear
Under her crooked horns must rough appear.
I like the color spotted, partly white;
Loath to endure the yoke, and apt to fight;
In all most like the Bull; in stature tall,
Her sweeping tail down to the ground does fall.
Best age to go to bull, or calve, we hold,
Begins at four, and ends at ten year old.
All other ages nor for breeding fit,
Nor strong for plow; but in the mean time, whilst yet
The flocks have lusty youth, let the males go
Without restraint to Venery, and so
By timely broodes preserve a perfect kind.
Their first age best all wretched mortals find;
After diseases, and old age do come,
Labor, and deaths inexorable doom.
There still will be, whose bodies with thy will
Thou would wish changed. Therefore repair the^ still;
And lest thy kind quite lost thou find too late
Prevent the loss, and yearly propagate.
And such a choice you must in horses make;
But him, whom you for stallion mean to take,
As hope of all the race, elect with care
Even from a tender colt; such colts as are
Of generous race, straight, when they first are fol'd,
Walk proudly, their sost joints scarce knit, and bold
Da^e lead the way, into the rivers enter,
And dare themselves on unknown seas to venture.
Not frighted with vain noises; lofty neck'd,
Short headed slender bellied, and broad backed,
Broad and full breasted; let his color be
Bright bay, or gray; white proves not commonly
Nor flesh-colors. When Wa^s alarumes sound
His nostrils gather and breathe fire; no ground
Can hold his shaking ioyn^s; his care advances,
His thick shag'd mane on his right shoulder da^ces.
His back bones broad and strong, the hollowed ground
Trampled beneath his hard round hoof does sound.
Such was that horse, which Spartan (f) Pollux tamed
Fierce Cyllarus, and Mars his horses famed
By the old Greek Poets, or those two that drew
Achille^ chariot; such a shape and hew
At his wives coming, flying (g) Saturn took,
And all high Pelion with shrill neighings shook.
Yet when disease or age have brought to naught
This horses spirit, let him at home be wrought,
Nor spa^e his base old age. A Horse grown old
Though he in vain attempt it often; is cold
To Venery, and when he is brought to try
(Like that great strengthlesse fire in stubble dry)
In vain he rages; therefore first it is good
To mark his age, his courage and his brood
With other arts; how sad a horse will be
When overcome, how proud of victory.
Do thou not see, when through the field in speed
Two racing chariots from the lists are fled,
The young men's hearts all rise, as forth they start,
And fear with joy confounded strikes each heart?
They give their horse the reins, and lash them on,
Their hurryed wheels enflaming as they run;
Now low they go, now rise as they would fly
Through the empty air, and mount up to the sky:
No resting, no delay; a sandy cloud
Darkens the air; they on through shoutings loud
Of standers by, all sweat and some do fly,
So great's their love of praise and victory.
First (h) Erict^^onius chariots did invent,
And by four horses drawn in triumph went.
The (i) Peletronian Lapithes first found
The use of backing horses, taught them bound,
And run the ring; taught Riders to exercise
In martial ranks, both equal mysteries:
The masters of both these have equal need
To find out horse of courage, and good speed,
Though nere so nobly born, though often in game
They won the prize, and for their country claim
Epi^e, or famed Mycenae, or else took
Their birth at first from Neptune tridents stroke.
These things observed, at covering time, they care
To make their Stallion strongly fat and fair
The father of their brood; for him they mow
Choice grass, sweet streams, and corn to him allow,
Le^t he should fail his pleasant work to do,
And the young ones starvelings from his hunger grow.
But they of purpose keep the Femals light
And lean: and when they have an appetite
To Venerie, let them not drink nor eat,
And course them often, and tire them in the heat,
When in full Barnes the ripe Corn crowded lies,
And empty cha^fe before the West wind flies.
And this they do lest too much rankness make
The breeding soil, and fatted furrows take
Too dull a sense; but that they should draw in
Seed with desire, and lodge it safe within.
Now to the Dams our care comes from the Sires:
They great, when now their time almost expires,
Let no man yoke them then for work, nor make
Them leap a ditch, nor let them swimming take
Swift floods, nor cours'd about the meadows be.
But let them feed in empty fields, where free
The water is; the banks with moss are stored,
And rocky caves a cool sweet shade afford.
About Alburnus still with holly green,
And Sila^us high woods great Flies are seen
In Roman termed A^li anciently
Oestra in Greek, a fierce loud-buzzing Fly;
Whose terror makes the affrighted Cattle fly
As chased about the woods, and pierce the sky
With lowings loud; which through that country round
The woods, and banks of Tanager resound.
With this dire Monster once did Juno show
Her vengefull spite against lo then a Cow.
This ^ly (for most he stings in heat of day)
From Cattle great with young keep thou away,
Or bring them not abroad to feed alone
Unless at morn, or after sun is down.
After the breeding they use all their care
About the young ones; of what birth they are
Their marks discover; they design each one
His several use; one for a Stallion
Is kept, another ^or a Sacrifice,
A third for Plowing, from whose toil arise
The harvests fruits; the rest a grazing go
Upon the Verdant fields. But those whom thou
Intendst for Husbandry, begin to tame
Their courages while they are Calves, and frame
Them for the Plow betimes, while yet their rage
But tender is, and flexible their age.
Loose Collars first of tender branches make
For their soft necks; then, when they freely take
The Yoke by custom, yoke a pair, and so
Teach them in order and abreast to go.
And let them first draw empty Wheels, or rake
The ground but slightly, and small furrows make;
Then afterward under a deep-strook Plow
They Will learn to tug till the Axeltree do bow.
But to thy yet-untamed Calves allow
Not only grass, and sea-grasse, that does grow
In fenny grounds, with willow leaves; but still
Feed them with corn thy self: and do not fill
Thy milking pailes from the Vdders, as of yore,
But let them freely suck their mothers store.
But if thy mind thou more to war do give,
Or through Jove's wood would racing chariots drive,
And swiftly pass by Pisa's river side:
The first task is to make thy horse abide
To see the Soldiers arms, hear their loud voices,
The Trumpets sound, and rattling chariots noises,
And often within the stable let him hear
The clashing whip; he 'le more and more appear
To be delighted with his masters praise,
And when he strokes his neck, his courage raise.
When first he 's weaned from sucking let him hear
These things, and trembling be compelled to wear
Soft ^alters often about his head; but when
His life has seen four Summers, teach him then
To run the round, in order right to beat
The ground, and both ways skillfully curvet
As if he toiled; then let him with his speed
Challenge the wind, and from all curbing freed*
Scour ore the champion fields so swift, that there
The sands no print of his light hoof do bear.
So when the Scythian gusts and North-east-wind^
From their cold quarter fiercely blow, and bind
The dry clouds up: all ore the waving field
Corn bows with equal blasts; woods tops do yield
A murmuring noise: long waves roll to the shore.
Forth flies the wind, sweeps lands and waters ore*
Thy Horse thus ordered to the races end
All bloody foamed, victoriously will tend;
Or else his tamed neck will better bow
To draw the Belgian chariot; let him grow
Full fed, when once he 's broken well, nor fear
His growth; so fed before he 's broke, he will bear
Too great a stomach patiently to feel
The lashing whip, or chew the curbing steel.
But no one care does more their strength improve,
Than still to keep them from Venereall love,
(Whether in Horse or Bullocks be thy care)
Therefore their Bulls they send to Pastures far
To graze alone, where Rivers are between
Or Hills, or feed them at full Racks within.
For the fair Femals sight with secret fire
Consumes their strength, and lessens all desire
Of feeding in them; her temptations make
Two stubborn Bulls a combat undertake,
And with their Horns to try their utmost deeds.
In the great Wood the beauteous Heyfer feeds,
Whilst they contending with their utmost spite;
Their wounded bodies laid in blood, do fight.
Their Horns with fury meet, their bellowings round
Olympus great, and all nere woods resound.
Nor do they after both together feed,
Far into exile goes the vanquished,
And there alone in foreign fields bewailes
His sad disgrace, how his proud foe prevails,
He unrevenged forced to lose his love,
And from his native Country to remove.
Then he with care his strength does exercise;
Upon the hardest stones all night he lies;
On roughest leaves, and sharpest herbs he feeds,
Often tryes himself; with wrathful horns proceeds
Against the trunks of Trees with furious strokes,
And with his strength the wind it self provokes.
Each place beholds the Prologue to his sight.
But when his strength is recollected quite,
And well improved, he does with fury go
To meet again his not forgotten ^o.
As when a furious foaming billow rose
In the mid-sea, and thence with horror goe^
To be at the rocky shore, resounding straight,
And falls no less than with a mountains weight.
The Seas low'st part mixed with his highest fomes,
And belched black sand up from the bottom comes.
Even so all kinds on earth, led by desire,
Men, Beasts, Fish, painted Foul to this sweet fire
With fury run: Love is the same to all.
The ^urious Lioness no time at all
Forgetting young ones, through the fields does rore
And rage so much, nor ougly Bears do more
Black slaughters make, nor through the woods more wrack
Do cruel Bores and furious Tigers make.
In Libyan deserts it is ill wandering then.
See how the Horses joints all tremble, when
A Mare's known sent he through the air does feel.
No stripes, no strength of men, no bits of steel,
No Rocks, nor Dikes, nor Rivers in his way,
Which roll whole mountains, can his fury stay.
The stern Sabellian Bore in love does whet
His tusks, and dig the earth up with his feet:
Against a tree he rubs his lusty fide
Rowzing his bristles with a martial pride.
What dares the young man do, whom loves strong heat
Torments within? though storms be nere so great,
He ore the seas in midst of night dares swim,
Although the heavens shower down their spite on him,
And though the sea-beat rocks resound amain.
No ^eeping parents can his course restrain,
Nor that fair Maid whose death his death must prove.
Why should I speak of spotted ^^nxes love?
Of Dogs, and cruel Wolves? or show what war
Faint Deer in love will make? but strangest far
Is those Mares furious love, which Venus sent,
When they their Master (k) Glaucus peecemeal rent.
Love makes them mount ore lofty Gargarus,
And swim the streams of swift Ascanius.
And when Love's flame their greedy marrowes burns
Most in the spring (for heat then most returns
To th'bones) upon high rocks they take their places,
And to the Western wind all turn their faces,
^uck in the blasts, and (wondrous to be said)
Grow great with Fool without the Horses aid.
Then ore the rocks and valleys all they run,
Not to the North, nor to the rising Sun,
Nor Caurus quarter, nor the South, whence rise
Black showers, which darken and disturb the skies.
Hence flows thick poison from the groines of these,
Which Shepherds truly call Hippomanes,
Hippomanes, which often bad stepdames use,
And charming words, and banefull herbs infuse.
But Time irreparable flies away,
While we too much of every thing would say,
Let this suffice of Herds: our the other care
Shall woolly Sheep, and shaggy Goats declare.
This is a task: hence, Shepherds, hope to get
Your praise: nor am I ignorant how great
A pain twill be in words to hit it right,
And give such luster to a subject slight.
But me the sweet desire of fame does bear
Over Parnassus hardest ridges, there,
Where never path nor track before I saw
Of former Writers to Castalia.
Now hallowed Pales in a lofty strain
I Will sing; but first I counsel to contain
Your Sheep within soft stals to feed at home,
Whilst Winter lasts, till flowery Summer come:
Bundles of Straw, and B^akes upon the ground
Strew under them, lest the cold ice should wound
The tender Cattle, and bring scabs and rots.
This done, I counsel thee to feed thy Goats
With arbute trees and streams that freshly run;
And against the Wind, toward the Winter sun
Directly to the Meridian build thy Stals,
When now the long-chilling Aquarius falls,
And lends a moisture to the ending year.
Let these unto our care be no less dear,
Nor are they less of use; though nere so high
Milesian fleeces with the purple dye
Of Tire be sold. But Goats, if well they thrive,
Bring young ones ofter, and more Milk do give.
And still the more the milking Pailes are filled,
The more their swelling Vdders still will yield.
Besides the Beards, gray Skins, and bristly Hair
Of the Cyniphian Goats the owners sheare
To make their Tents, and cloth poor Mariners.
They feed on Woods and Mountains tops, on Briers,
Brambles, and Bushes of the greatest height.
And of their own accords come home at night,
Scarce able their swelled Vdders to get ore
The Threshold then. For this do thou the more
Guard them from Ice, and Winter wind (the less
Themselves perceive mortalities distress)
Bring them for food sweet Boughs and Osyars cut,
Nor all the Winter long thy hay-ricke shut.
But when fair Summer comes, when West winds blow
Let both thy ^locks to field a grazing go.
When first bright Lucifer appears, along
The yet cool pastures lead the^ forth, whilst young
The Morning is, whilst all the Grass is gray,
And mingled with sweet Dew; that Dew away
Ta^^ by the fourth hours thirsty Sun, when round
The fields with noise of Grasshoppers resound,
Lead down thy flocks unto the Rivers brink,
Or else in wooden Channels make them drink;
In the heat of day for shady Valleys look,
On which some stately, and far spreading Oak
Sacred to love, or Holly grove do grow,
Which dark, but sacred Shadows do bestow;
Then slightly water them again, and let
Them feed abroad again about Sunset,
When night to the air a cooler temper yields,
And dew refreshing on the Pasture fields
The Moon bestows, Kings-fishers play on shore,
And thistles tops are filled with Linnets store.
What need I sing of Libyan Shepherds, and
Their feeding countries, where few houses stand?
There often the flocks whole months, both night and day
Do without stals along the deserts stray.
The Libyan Shepherd carries with him ever
His arms, his Spartan Dog, his Cretan Quiver,
His House, and Victuals too; provided so
To Wars far off the Roman Soldiers go,
When they too heavy laden march, and yet
Before the Fo expect, encamped get.
But near Maeotis in cold Scythian lands,
Where Ister tumbles up his yellow sands,
Where Rhodope's extended to the North,
From Stals they never bring their Cattle forth.
No Herbage clothes those fields, no leaves appear^
Upon their naked trees, but far and near,
The hidden ground with hard frosts evermore,
And snow seven cubits deep is covered ore.
Cold North-west-winds still freezing blow, nor ere
Do ^hoe^us beams their pallid darkness clear,
Not when he rises to his height, nor when
His ruddy chariot falls in the Ocean.
The running streams so hard are freezed there
The waters back will Cart-wheeles iron'd bear;
In stead of Ships there Horse, and Wagons run;
Brass cleaves with cold asunder; Clothes put on
Freeze hard; whole Ponds by Frosts, which never thaw,
Are turned to solid Ice; they do not draw
But cut their Wine with Hatchets, and upon
Their Beards hang Isicl^s congealed down.
Mean time perpetual snowing fills the air;
The Cattle die, the Beeves most great and fair
Are starved in drifts of Snow; whole Herds of Deer
So far are hid that scarce their horns appear.
For these they spread no toiles, nor hunt they there
With Dogs, but kill them with a sword or spear,
While they in vain strive to remove away
Those hills of Snow, and pitifully bray;
And home with joyful shouts they bear them then;
For under ground in deep-digg'd Caves the men
Secure, and warmly dwell; the night they turn
To mirth, and sport, and at one fire do burn
Whole oaks and elmes; and in full bowls they please
Their tastes with fresh sour juice of services
In stead of wine; a people rough and bold
Like these, beneath the Northren Wagons cold
Do live, which beasts skins warmest furs do wear.
Bleake Eastern winds still beat upon them there.
If thou regard their Wool, let them not go
Where bushes are, where burs and thistles grow,
Nor in a grass too rich. Be sure to choose
Thy flocks with white soft fleeces, but refuse
That Ram (although the fleece upon his back
Be nere so white) whose only tongue is black,
Lest he do stain the fleeces of his Lambs
With spots, but choose another amongst the Rams.
So with a Snowy fleeced Ram (if we
Trust fame) did Pa^ the god of Arcady
Deceive thee (...), nor did thou disdain
Within the Woods to ease a Lovers pain.
But who so loves their Milk, to them must he store
With his own hands bring Claver, Trifoly,
And ^a^test grass, which makes them drink more
Than else they would, and swells their Vdders more,
And tastes of salt do in their milk remain.
Some from their Dams the tender Kids restrain,
And with sharp muzzles bar their sucking quite.
Their morning meal of milk they press at night:
That which they milk at night as Sun goes down,
The Shepherd carries to his market town
Next morn in Panyers, or with salt bestows,
And lays it up till Winter colder grows.
Nor let thy Dogs be thy last care, but feed
With fattest Whey, as well as Dogs of speed
Which Spa^ta sends, thy Mastives fierce, for nere
Whilst they do guard thy folds, needst thou to fear
The Wolves invasion, nor the Thief by night,
Nor Mountainers that do in stealth delight.
Thou often with Dogs may ore the Plains apace
Wild Asses, Dear, or Hares for pleasure chase,
Or ^ow^e with their loud yelps the chafed Bore
From out his rough, and desert Den, or ore
The lofty Mountains in delightful view
A lusty Stag into thy toiles pursue.
But learn to burn within thy sheltering rooms
Sweet Juniper, and with Galbanean gums
Drive Adders thence; for Vipers, that do fly
The light, often under unmoved Stals do ly,
Or Snakes, that use within the house for shade,
Securely lu^k, and like a plague invade
Thy Cattle with their venom; Shepherd take
A staff or stones with thee, and kill the Snake
Swellling, and hissing from his threatening throat.
For though his head into a hole be got,
His middle twines, his tail, and parts behind
Lie open, and slowly after the other wind.
As bad's that snake, which in Calabrian Lawns
Does live, and his proud neck aloft advance,
And rolling makes a long, and winding track.
His belly's spotted, sealed is his back.
Whom the spring, when showery Southwindes blow,
When grounds are moist, and rivers overflow
Lives upon ponds, and banks, and ravening still
With Frogs, and Fishes his black maw does fill.
But when all grounds, yea fens themselves are dry
And cleft with chinks, upon dry ground is he,
And rolling then his fiery eyes does threat
The fields, and rages, vexed with drought and heat.
Oh let not me then take sweet sleeps abroad,
Nor lie secure under the shady wood,
When he, his skin new cast, his youth renewing:
Lifts up his head, his tongue threeforked showing
In heat of day, and through the field does rome
His eggs or young ones having left at home.
He teach thee now the signs and causes all
Of each diseases; On sheep the scab will fall
When cold raw humors pierce them to the quick,
Or searching frosts, or sweat unwash'd off stick
Upon their new-shorne skins, or brambles tear
Their flesh; for that wise Shepherds every where
Do in sweet Rivers wash their new-shorn flocks:
The drenched Ram down the stream swimming sokes
His Fleece, and Skin Or else with oiles fat lees
They 'noint their new-shorn Sheep, and mix with these
^daean pitch, quick Sulphur, silvers spume,
Sea Onyon, Hellebore, and black Bitume.
No kind of cure's more full of present hope
Than with a knife to cut the Vl^^r open.
For else the hidden venom let alone
Both lives, and grows; whilst making of his moan
Unto the gods, the idle Shepherd stands,
And to the wound denies his lancing hands.
But when a Fever dry shall seize upon
Their loynts, and pierce into the inmost Bone,
^Tis best to keep them then from heat, and cut
That fall swell^d Vein at bottom of the foot.
As the Bisaltian Macedonians do,
And fierce Gelonians, when they ^ly unto
High Rodope, or the Getes farthest wood,
And drink their milk mingled with horses blood.
But where thou see one Sheep too often ly
In shade at rest, and crop too lazily
The tops of grass, or keep aloof from all,
Or ly along, to feed, or to the stall
Return home late alone, straight kill that sheep
Before th infection through the whole flock do creep.
No seas are subject to mo tempests still
Than sheep, are to diseases, which do kill
Not single ones, but the whole hopeful flock,
And at one blow rob thee of all they stock.
Then who has known the Alps, the Illyrian high
Castles, and Fields, that by Timavus lie,
May yet behold after so long, the land
Lie wast, and Shepherds dwellings empty stand.
Here by corruption of the air so strong
A plague arose, and raged all Autumn long,
That all wild Beasts, all Cattle perished,
All pasture fields, and ponds were poisoned.
Nor single was the way to death, but when
A thirsty fire burnt up their flesh, even then
Moist humors flowed again, and not at once,
But by degrees did melt away the bones.
An Ox that is for the gods service pressed
In all his trimmings, and white garlands dressed
Before the Altar dies, as there he stands
Preventing the slow sacrificers hands.
Or if that slain by the Priests hand ^e fall.
His entrails fired yield no flame at all,
Nor can the Prophets thence give answers good;
The Knives themselves are scarce distained with blood;
The sand below with black-filth darkened is.
Hence the young Calfe in richest pasture dies,
And at full racks his sweetest breath forsakes.
Kind fawning Dogs grow mad; strong coughing shakes
The sick short-winded, pursie Hogs, and pains
Their stubborn jaws; the conquering Horse disdaine^
The pleasant streams, and sick forgets quite
His food, and the honor of a race or fight.
Often with his hoofes he beats the earth, his ears
Hang down, his sweat uncertainly appears:
But cold before his death, his skin is dry,
And to the touch resisting ruggedly.
These signs of death you at the first may know:
But if by time the plague more cruel grow,
Their eyes are fiery then, their far-drawn breath
Is with a groan expressed; their flanks beneath
Stretched with often sobbing; a black blood does flow
From out their nostrels; their tongues rugged grow;
Their jaws grow close and hard; which helped has bin
By drenching the^ thorough a horn with wine
That drench sometimes has wrought a care alone.
Sometimes has brought a worse destruction.
For they refreshed, more fiercely mad have grown,
And with impatient fury torn their own
Flesh from their bared bones (so of their foes,
Of good men better, let the gods dispose)
The laboring Ox now sweating at the Plow
Falls down, and dies, and from his mouth does flow
Blood mixed with foame, yielding his latest groan.
The weeping Plowman the other Ox alone
Vnyokes, which wailes his fellows death, and now
Abroad in Field lies the forsaken Plow.
His mourning mind up shade of lofty woods.
No flowery meadows, nor clear Crystal floods
Which ore the rocks, and through green fields do glide,
Can comfort now; his bowels on each side
Consume; his settled eyes unmoved are grown,
And his unweildy neck hangs bending down.
What now availes his ^o^mer fruitful toil?
That he so often plowed the fertile soil?
Besides, no riotous, no costly feast,
No rich Campanian wine brought his unrest.
Green leaves and simple herbage was his food,
His drink clear water from the running flood.
No cares disturbed his sleep. That time (l) they say
Within those Regions Oxen wanted they
For Juno's sacrifice; her chariots than
By beasts unlike were to the temple drawn.
Therefore they dug their ground with much ado,
And with their hands thrust down the seed they sow.
And ore the lofry mountains not disdain,
For want of beasts themselves to draw the waine.
No wolves do now about the sheepfold spy
How to a^^ault the flock by treachery;
A greater sorrow tames the wolves; the Deer^
And fearful Hearts do wander every where
Amidst the Dogs, about the houses round.
The scaly Nation of the sea profound,
The Fishes, that all ponds and rivers store,
Float dead, like shipwrack'd bodies, to the shore:
Sea-calves unwonted to fresh rivers fly:
The water-snakes, with scales up-standing, die:
The Viper vainly fenced by his hole
Dies there: the air to every sort of Foul
Ungentle grows, who, whilst their flights they take
High in the air both flight and life forsake.
Nor does it boore them now to change their food;
All arts are hurtful, leaches do no good;
Not learned Chiron, nor Melampus sage.
The pale Tisiphone with all her rage
Is to the light from Stygian darkness sent;
Before her fears, and pale diseases went;
Her murderous head higher, and higher still
She daily lifts; each river, bank, and hill,
The blea^s of sheep, and bullocks lowings fill.
Now in whole flocks they fall, and heaped on high,
Even in the stals the carrion'd bodies lie,
Till men had learned t'interre them under ground
In dikes; for of their hides no use was found;
Nor could they roast their flesh, nor wash it clear,
Nor their disease-corrupted fleeces shear,
Nor touch the tainted webb; for who so ere
Durst once attempt those hated clothes to wear,
Hot Carbuncles did on their bodies grow,
And Lice-engendring sweat did overflow;
And ere long time in this infection past,
A red Saint Anthonies fire.
hot swelling all their limbs did wast,
Finis libri tertij.
Annotations upon the third BOOK.
HIppodamia (a) was daughter to Oenoma^s King of the cities of Elis and Pisa.
This Oenomaus had horses of wondrous speed (as being begotten by the winds) and
admitted suitors to his daughter Hippodamia, upon this condition, that they
should run a race in chariots with him: upon him that conquered, he would
bestow his daughter; but whom he vanquished, he would kill. When by this
cruel means he had killed many that came as suitors to her, and she at last
was fallen in love with Pelops, she corrupted Myrtilus her fathers charioter to
let Pelops win, promising him for that favor he should first enjoy her and
have her maydenhead. Myrtilus upon this promise put on false wheels upon the
chariot of Oenomaus; and when Pelops was conqueror, and obtained the Lady,
Myrtilus de^^^ding her promise from her, was by Pelops her husband tumbled
down headlong into the sea, which sea from his name has been since called
mare Myrtaeum.

(^) Augustus Caesar, after Brittany was vanquished, employed many of the
captiv^ Britains in servile offices about the Theater: he bestowed also upon
those Theaters diverse flags of rich price, in which were woven his victories
and triumphs. These flags were carried by the captive Britains, bearing the
history of their own conquest: but sure it is, the Poet in this place names
Britain for any other barbarous nation; for Augustus, though he had many
triumphs over several barbarous nations, yet never conquered nor triumphed
over Britain.

( c) By the name of Quirinus in this place the Poet means Augustus Caesar,
and that not far fetched, nor far from reason, but more for the Emperors
true honor; for Suetonius Tranquillus in the life of Augustus, speaks thus:
Three parties of the people by the Senats consent offered on a time three names
to Octavius; the names of Quirinus, Augustus and Caesar: he fearing lest if he
should choose one, he should displease the other two parties, accepted them
all: He was first called Quirinus, afterward Caesar, and last of all Augustus;
in which name he ever remamed; and Virgil gives him all those names.

( d) This great flow of war from Nil^ (...) Poet means when Marcus
Antonius, and Cleopatra came down from thence to encounter Augustus Caesar at
Actium; (...) which war they brought wonderful power: for Marcus Antonius
besides the aid of ten Kings, which served him at that time, and all the
strength of Cleopatra, had nineteen whole Roman legions, and twelve thousand
horsemen: his strength at sea was five hundred sail of fighting ships. In this
battle they were vanquished by Augustus Caesar.

( e) After the victory of Actium, Augustus Caesar marched with a great strength
toward diverse nations; who easily yielded unto him. The Indians and Scythians
(says Suetonius Tranquillus) hearing of his name only begged his favor. The
Parthians themselves yielded without resistance, and their king Phraartes did
homage to Augustus, gave him hostages, and delivered back all those Roman
ensigns which they before had taken in war from Marcus Crassus, and Marcus
Antonius the Triumvir.

( f) The horses here mentioned, and so famed in Poetry, were these: the horses
of Castor and Pollux called Xanthus and Cyllarus: the horses of Mars called
Dimos and Phobos: and the horses of Achilles, called Xanthus and Aethon.

( g) The fable is thus: Saturn was in love with Philyra the daughter of
Oceanus and Thetis: she, to avoid the rape, was transformed by her parents
into a Mare; upon which Saturn turned himself into a stately Courser, and so
enjoyed the Nymph: in which shape also he deceived his wife Ops, who came
thither of purpose to find him out, and discover the fact* of which con^^ction
of Saturn and Phylira, the Poets reported that Chiron the Centaure was borne.

( h) As the Thessalians were the first of all that ever invented the use of
riding on horseback; so Ericthonius was the first that taught posterity the
way of joining horses together in Chariots. This Ericthonius was the son of
Vulcan, a man of a goodly personage, but deformed only in his feet, which
were like the feet of a Serpent. He to hide this deformity, invented Chariots,
wherein he might ride, and nothing of him but his upper parts exposed to the
view.

( i) Peletronium is a town in Thessaly, where the use of taming and riding
horses was first found: for on a time when Thessalus the king of that country
was much displeased that his Bullocks ran (...) (for it should seem the
horse-fly had stung them) he commanded his men, which waited on him, to run
after them, and stop their flight: they being not able to overtake the
swiftness of the Bullocks, took up on the sudden a new invention; they mounted
themselves upon horses backs, and so with ease overtooke and turned them. These
men espied by some of the neighboring people, either as they rode swiftly by,
or else as their horses bowed down their heads to drink of the river Peneus,
gave way to that old fable of the Centaures: for the people near had an
opinion that they were half men and half horses. But the name of Centaure was
therefore given them, (...), because those men, when first they rods (...)
horses were driving of Bullocks.

( k) Potnia is the City, of which Glaucus was, who (as the Poets fained)
despised the sacrifices and service of Venus. The goddess angry with his
contempt, sent a madness to possess the Mares which drew his Chariot; who
turning upon their Master, tore him to pieces. The cause of this fiction that
Venus should send a madness into them, is this: Glaucus to make his Mares the
swifter and fuller of metal, kept them from venery, which made his Mares so
furious, that their ungoverned spirit turned to the destruction of their Master.

(l) Virgil speaking in this place of the plague among cattle, ingeniously
supposes that this was the same time, wherein that famous history of Herodotus
was verified. It was the custom for the Votaresse or Priest of Argos to ride
to the Temple of Juno, drawn by two Oxen upon fest^^all (...) But when it so
befell upon a solemn day that no Oxen could be found to draw her (the plague
having consumed the cattle in that country) her two sons Cleobis and Biton
put the yoakes upon their necks, and drew their mother to the temple. The
goddess Juno, moved with so great a piety in these two young men, offered
their mother that whatsoever she would pray for in her sons behalf, it
should be granted. The mother with a pious answer entreated the godd^sse that
whatsoever she knew the most happy for mortal men, she would be pleased to
grant unto her sons: the next morning the two young men were both found
dead; from whence it was generally concluded that nothing was so happy for a
man as to dye.

FINIS.
GEORGICON. The fourth BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis book describes the Bees industrious state;
By what chaste wondrous means they propagate
Their kind, and breed their common progeny.
Their age, their natures and strange industry;
Their wars and furious factions; and how they
By laws of justice govern, and obey
In their monarchike state. Their maladies,
And cures; and how to make a swarm of Bees
When all thy stock is quite consumed to nough^.
Sad Aristaeus by his mother taught
Binds fast shape-changing Proteus; who alone
Tells him what caused his Bees destruction.
Orpheus bewailes his wife; his musicks strain
Charms hell, and brings Eurydice again
From thence; again fond love looses her quite.
(...) in endless woe, by night
(...) torn in Bacchus sacrifice
By Thracian dames, whose beds he did despise,
Taught Aristaeus does to them ordain
A sacrifice, and finds his Bees again.
AEriall Honey next, a gift divine
I Will sing; Mecaenas, grace this piece of mine.
Admired spectacles of Creatures small,
Their valiant Captains, and in order all
Their Nations, Manners, Studies, People, Fight,
I will describe; nor think the Glory slight,
Though slight the Subject be, to him, whom ere
The invoked gods, and pleased Apollo hear.
First for your Hives a fitting station find
Sheltered from winds rough violence, for wind
Hinders their carriage; let no Sheep there play,
Nor frisking Kids the flowery meadows lay,
Nor wanton Heifers near the hiving place
Strike off the dew, nor tread the springing grass.
Let speckled Lizzards thence be far away,
The Woodpeckers, and other Birds of prey,
And Progne marked on her stained breast
With bloody hands; for she to feed her nes^
Seizes the flying Bees, and thither (...)
As sweetest food; but near pure (...)
Green mossie fountains still your Bee-hives place,
And streams that glide along the Verdant grass,
Shaded with palms, or spreading olive trees:
That when new kings draw out their swarming bees,
And from their combs dismissed in spring they play,
The neighboring banks may then invite their stay,
Cooling their heat, and trees so near the hive
A green, and shady coverture may give.
Into the poole, whether it stand, or flow,
Great stones acrosse, and Willow branches throw
As bridges for the Bees to stand upon,
And spread their wings against the Su^mer sun,
When strong Eastwindes by chance have scattered the^
In coming home, or drowned them in the stream,
Let beds of Violets, and wild Betony,
Green Cinnamon, and fragrant savory
Grow round about the spring. But whether you
To make your hives, trees barks together sow,
Or hives of limber Osyars woven get;
Make the mouth narrow, lest the summers heat
Dissolve the honey, or cold winter freeze;
For both extremes alike annoy the Bees.
Nor i^ in vain that they with all their powers
Daube up each chinck with wax, and fill with flowers
Each breathing hole, and to that end prepare
A glue more clammy than all birdlime far,
And Phrygian Ida's pitch; and under ground
(If fame speak truly) Bees have often been found
Breeding in dug caves, and often been known
In holes of trees, and hollow p^mice stone.
But daube thou up the chinky hives with clay,
To keep them warm, and leaves above them lay.
Near to the hives let no deep waters flow,
Nor crabs be dressed, nor poisonous yew-trees grow.
Or where mud standing stinkes, or eccho's bound
From hollow rocks with their reflected sound.
But when bright Sol has banished Winter chased
Under the earth, and Summer light has graced
The sky again; over the fields, and woods
They wander straight lightly the brinkes of floods
They sip and taste the purple flowers; from thence
(What sweetness ere it be that stir their sense)
Care for their bro^de, and progeny they take;
Thence work their wax, and honey clammy make.
Then when dismissed their hives, up to the sky
In Summer air thou see them swarming fly*
Wondering to view dark clouds (...) wind,
Then mark the^ well, they go sweet streams to (...),
And leavie bowers; upon this place do thou
Base honey-^uckles, and beaten mill-^oile strew:
And round about let tincking brass resound;
Th^i^ farther progress this charmd place wilbou^d.
There they will make their stand, or else desire
Back to their own known lodgings to retire.
But if they chance to sally out to wars
(As often two kings have caused mortal iars)
The common Bees affections straight are found,
And trembling hearts to fight: that martial sound
Of brass checks their delay, and then a voice
Is heard resembling tru^pets winding noise,
Then straight they muster, spread their glittering wings,
And with their beaks whet their dead-doing stings.
Then to the standard royal all repair
About their king, and loudly buzzing dare
Their foes to appear; in weather clear, and fair
They sally forth: their battles join in the air.
The Welkin's filled with noise; they grapple all,
And grappling so in clusters head long fall;
Hail from the winters sky falls not so fast,
Nor shaken oaks so thick do shed their mast.
In midst of th'armies with bright glorious wings,
And mighty spirits fly the daring kings
(Though bodies small) resolved not to yield,
Till one side vanquished have forsook the field.
Would thou this fight, and furious heat allay?
A little dust thrown up will part the fray.
But when both kings drawn home from battle be*
Kill him that seems the worst, lest thriftlesse he
Do hurt, and let the other reign alone.
(For of two sorts they are) one fairly known
By glittering specks of gold, and scales of bright
But ruddy hue. This fairest to the sight
Is best: by floth the other's nasty grown,
And hangs his large unweildy belly down.
Different, as are the kings, the subjects are.
Some foul and filthy, like the traveller,
That comes from dusty ways, and dirt does spit
From his dry throat: the other gold-like bright.
With well proportioned spots his limbs are decked
This is the better brood; from these expect
Honey at certain seasons of the year
Most sweet, and yet not sweet alone, but clear,
And such as Bacchus hardness will allay.
But when in the air the swarms (...) random play
Scorning their combs, forsaking their cold hive;
Do thou from this vain sport desire to drive
Their wa^dring thoughts? not toilsome is the pains,
Clip but the princes wings; whilst he remains
Within, no common Be will dare to make
High flight, nor th'ensignes from the camp to take.
Let Saffron gardens odoriferous,
Which the image of Lampsacian Priapus
Guards with his hook of willow to affright
Both Thieves, and hurtful Fowls, the Bees invite.
Let him himself, which fears his Bees to want,
Bring Thyme, and Pines down from the hills, to plant,
Wearing his hands with labor hard, and round
Bestow a friendly watering on the ground.
And did I not now near my labors end
Strike fail, and hasting to the harbor tend,
Perchance how fruitful gardens may be dressed
I Would teach, and sing of twice rose-bearing Pest:
How Succory by waters prospers well,
On grass how bending Cucumbers do swell,
And banks of Persley green: besides to show
How the late blooming Daffodils do grow
I would not fail, and twigs of Beares-foot slow,
Shore loving Myrtles, and pale Ivy too.
For where Tarentum's lofty Turrets stand,
Where slow Galesus soakes the fallow Land,
I saw an old Cilician, who possessed
Few akers of neglected ground undrest,
Not fit to pasture beasts, nor vines to bear:
Yet he among the bushes here, and there
Gathering few pot-hearbs, vervaine, li lies white,
And wholesome poppey, in his minds delight
Equaled the wealth of Kings, and coming still
Late home at night, with meat unbought, did fill
His laden board: he gathered first of all
Roses in spring, and apples in the fall.
And when sad winter with extremest cold
Cracked even the stones, and course of floods did hold
With bridling ice, he then plucked leaves of soft
Beares-foot, and checked the springs delayings often,
And Zephyres sloth. He therefore first was found
With fruitful Bees, and swarms still to abound,
And froathy honey from the combs could squeeze.
He still had fruitful vines, and linden trees.
And for each blossom, which first clothed the tree
An apple ripe in Autumn gathered he.
He could to order old grown Elmes transpose,
Old pear trees hard, and black thorn bearing sloes,
The plain tree too, that drinking shade bestows.
But too much straighten'd, I must now forsake (...)
This task for others afterward to take.
And now He show those natures, which on Bees
Great Jove himself bestowed: for what strange fees
Following a tinckling noise, and brazen ring
In Cretan caves they nourished heavens high King.
Bees only live in commonwealths, and Bees
Only in common hold their progenies:
Live by laws constant, and their own abodes
Certainly know, and certain household gods:
And mindful of ensuing winter, they
Labor in summer, and in public lay
Up their provision. Some for gathering foods
Are by the states commission sent abroad
To labor in the fields: some still at home
Lay the foundations of the honey comb
Of glue, tree-gumme, and fair Narcissus rear:
Then to the top they fasten every where
Their cla^my wax: care for their brood some take
(The nations hope): some purest honey make,
Till the honey comb with clearest Nectar swells.
Some lot appoints to stand as sentinels,
And to foresee the showers, and storms to come
They watch by turns: those that come laden home
Some case: or joining all their strengths in one
Far from the hive they chase the lazy Drone.
To work they fall: their fragrant honeyes hold
A sent of Thyme; as when the Cyclops mould
Jove's thunder from the hard-yeelding mass in have,
Some take and pay again the windy blast
From bull-hide bellows: others in the lakes
Do quench the hizzing irons; Aetna shakes
With weight of anviles: whilst their arms so strong
In order strike, and with hard-holding tongs
The iron turn; such inbred thrifty care
(If little things with great we may compare)
Each in his function Bees of Athens take.
The elder keep within the towns, and make
Daedalian fabrieks to adorn the comb;
But late return the younger weary home
Their thighs laden with Thyme: they feed upon
Wildings, green Willowes, Saffron, Cinnamon,
Pale Hyacinths, and fruitful Linden trees.
One time of work, and rest have all the Bees.
Forth in the morn they go, and when late night
Bids them leave gathering, home they take their slight,
And there refresh their bodies the^ a sound,
And buzzing's heard about th'hives confines round.
But when they all are lodged in silence deep
They rest, their weary senses charmed by sleep.
Nor stray they far when clouds orecast the skies,
Nor trust the weather when Eastwindes arise.
But near their Cities short excursions make,
And safely water, or small pebbles take
(As in rough seas with sand the Vessels light
Ballast themselves) to poize their wandering flight.
But at that wondrous way you must admire
By which Bees breed: they feel nor Venus fire,
Nor are dissolved in lust, nor yet endure
The pains of childing travel: but from pure
Sweet flowers, and Herbs their progeny they bring
Home in their mouths. They all elect their king,
And little nobles; their wax mansions
And courts they build; and often against hardest stones
They fret their wings, and spoil them as they fly,
And gladly under their sweet burdens die:
So great's their love of flowers, ambition too
They have of making Honey. Therefore though
Their lives be short (as not above the space
Of seven years) yet their immortal race
Remains; the fortunes of their houses hold;
For many years are grand-sires grand-sires told.
Besides not Egypt, nor rich Lydia more,
Nor Medes, nor Parthians do their kings adore;
Whilst he is alive, in concord all obey;
But when he dies, all leagues are broke, and they
Themselves destroy their gathered food at home,
And rend the fabric of their honey comb.
It Is he preserves their works; him all admire,
And guard his person with a strong desire:
They carry him, for him they hazard death,
And think in war they nobly lose their breath.
Noting these signs, and tokens, some define
The Bees partakers of a soul divine,
And heavenly spirit; for the godhead is
Diffused through earth, through seas, and lofty skies.
From hence all beasts, men, cattle, all that live,
All that are borne their subtle souls receive.
Hither again they are restored, not die,
But when dissolved, return, and gladly fly
Up to the stars; in heaven above they live.
But when thou would open the stately hive,
And rob their hoarded honey treasury,
Then first of all throw water silently,
And with thine hand send in pursuing smoke.
Twice in the year for honey harvests look:
First when Taygetes beauteous visage makes
Earth glad, and The Oceans scorned floods forsakes:
Again, when she the Southern fish does fly,
To winter seas descending heavily.
But Bees offended wondrous wrath conceive
Inspiring venom where they sting, and leave
Fixed to the veins their undiscerned spear
Within the wound, themseves expiring there.
But if thou fear a Winter hard, and make
Spare for the future time, or pity take
On their dejected spirits, and fallen estate:
Give them cut wax, and thyme suffumigate.
For often base Lizzards eat the honey comb,
And to the hives night-loving Beetles come;
And Drones, that freely fit at others meat;
Or with unequal strength fierce Hornets b^ate
The Bees: or Moths of a dire kind: or close
About the door her net-like cobwebs loose
The Pallas-hated Spider spins. The more
They thus are ruined to repair the store
Of their lost nation, all their utmost powers
Themselves do use, and fill their hives with flowers.
But if their bodies be diseased (as Bees
By life are subject to our meladies)
Which may by signs infallible be known;
The sick straight lose their color, and are grown
Deformed with leanenesse: they in woeful wise
Bear forth their dead with solemn obsequies.
Or cloistered else within their houses they
Sadly contain themselves, or lingering stay
About the door, in clusters taking hold,
Famished, and faint, and feeble by the cold.
Then a sad broken sound, and groaning's heard,
As winds do murmur in a Forest stirred,
As seas do roar, the tide by winds opposed,
Or raging fire within a furnace closed,
For this of gums a fumigation use,
And into the hive in pipes of reed infuse
Honey, to inuit them to a well-known food;
With these the taste of beaten galt is good;
Dried roses too, and thick decocted wine,
With loose hung clusters from the Psythian vine,
Cecropian Thyme, strong Centorie; withal
A flower, which Husbandmen Amello call,
Most easy to be found, in meadows grows,
For from one root he spreads a wood of boughs.
Whose many leaves, although the flower be gold,
Black Violets dim purple color hold.
Whence wreaths have often the gods hie altars decked.
Sharp-tasted in the mouth; shepherds collect
These flowers beside fair Mella's crooked stream,
On plain unwooded Valleys. Roots of them
Boil in sweet wine, and set provision store
In baskets full before the Bee-hive door.
But if that any his whole brood of Bees
Have on the sudden lost, and no way sees
To raise another stock, I Will now declare
The Arcadian master's old invention rare,
And from fames first beginning make it plain
From blood-corrupted of bruised Bullocks slain,
How Bees have often been born. For where from old
The happy people of Canopus hold,
Their Country covered with Niles fruitful flow,
And ore their lands in painted Frigots go,
Near to the bounds of quiver'd Persia,
Where Nile returned from black India,
With slime makes fruitful Egypts Verdant plain,
And in seven channels falls into the maine,
All that whole region in this art repose
A certain remedy. And first they choose
A little house, which to that end they build,
Closed in strong walls, guttur'd, and strongly til'd.
Against the four quarters of the wind they make
Four windows lending oblique light; then take
A tender horned Steer of two years old,
And stop his breath, his mouth, and nostrils hold,
Till struggling so with beating killed he fall,
Through his whole skin his bowels bruised all.
Then in that narrow room so closely shut
They leave the body, and beneath it put
Sweet Thyme, fresh Cinnamon, and other bought,
When Zephyre first upon the water blows:
Before the spring with flowers the meadows guild,
Or twittering Swallows on the rafters build.
Then the heated moisture in the tender bones
Does boil, and (wondrous to be seen) at once
So many animals together brings,
First without feet, after with feet, and wings,
And take the air more, and more, til like a shower,
Which down from Su^mer clouds does fiercely power,
Or like a storm of Shafts, which Parthians shoot
Against their Foes, a swarm of Bees break out.
What god, O Muse, to us this art has taught?
What act of man this new experience brought?
When Aristaeus sad from Tempe fled,
His Bees by hunger and diseases dead,
Beside the sacred spring of Peneus
Plaining he stood, and taxed his mother thus,
Mother Cyrene, Mother whose abodes
Are in this flood, why from the line of gods
(If Phoebus, as thou say, my Father be)
Broughst thou me forth abhorred by destiny?
Oh whither now is fled a mothers love?
Why did thou bid me hope for heaven above?
When lo those joys, which mortal life did bring,
Which Bees, and Corns industrious husbanding
With all my care could but procure, is gone
Though thou my Mother be. Nay, nay, go on,
With thine own hand fell off my growing woods,
My harvests blast, by fire consume my goods,
My barnes, and corn, my spreading vines cut down
If thou so envious of my praise be grown.
But from her bower his mother heard the sound
Under the flood; the Nymphs about her round
Spun green Milesian wool. Dishevelled hair
Adorned their ivorie necks, Drym^ the fair,
X^ntho, Ligaea, and Phyllodoce,
Nesae, Spio, and Cymodoce;
Cydippe, and bright Licorias, one a maid,
The other then first had felt Lucina's aid.
Clio, and Beroe sea-borne sisters both,
Both guirt with gold, in painted mantles both.
Ephyre, Opis, Deiopcia too
Of Asia, and Arethusa now
At last grown swift since she her quiver left.
To these did Climene tell the pleasing theft,
And slights of Mars, with Vulcans bootlesse fears,
And from the Chaos numbered do their ears
The loves of gods. Whilst pleased with what she told
The rocks of wool they on their spindles rolled.
Again the plaints of Arislaeu^ pierced
His mothers care; but Arethusa first
Of all the Nymphs above the water showed
Her beauteous head, and far off cried aloud
Sister, Cyrene, it was no causlesse fear
That sound procured; thine Aristaeus dear
Weeping beside old Peneus stream remains,
And of thy cruelty by name complains.
Struck with new fears his mother answered thus:
Bring him (quoth she) bring him along to us.
He may of right enter the roof of gods.
Then by command she straight divides the floods
To make him ^oome to pass: the swelling flood
Like a steep mountain round about him stood:
In that vast gulf received he was conveyed
Down under ground, and wondering there suruey'd
His mothers watery bower, lakes closely held
In cave^, and sounding woods, and there beheld
(Astonished to hear that horrid sound
That waters motion made) how under ground
In several places rivers did commence,
^hasis, and Lycus, and the spring, from whence
The deep Enipeus breaks, whence Tyber is,
Mysian Caicus, stony Hypanis,
And Annio, golden Eridanus
With bull-like horns; no stream more furious
Does run, nor falls more violent than he
Into the purple Adriaticke sea.
When to his mothers bower of pumice stone
He came, and she perceived his causlesse moan:
The Nymphs clear water, and fine towels bring
To cleanse his hands with, some replenishing
The cups, while some the feasting tables fill,
With frankincense the altars smoking still.
Here take these cups of wine (his mother said)
Let Us sacrifice to The Ocean; then she prayed
Unto Oceanus, father of all things,
And Nymphs her sisters, who the woods, and springs
By hundreds keep. Thrice on the fire she threw
Nectar: to the roof the flame thrice upward flew.
Confirmed with this Omen thus begun
Cyrene; in Carpathian seas, my son,
Great Neptune's Prophet (g) ^roteus abides,
Who ore the Maine in his blew chariot rides
By horse-fish drawn; who now again resorts
To his Pallene, and the Aemathian ports:
Him aged Nereus, and we Nymphs adore;
For he knows all things, things that heretofore
Have been, that are, and shall hereafter be.
For so to Neptune it seemed good, that he
His herds of fish might under water guide,
And great Sea-calves. He must in chains be ti'de
By thee, my son, to show the cause thy Bees
Are dead, and give thee prosperous remedies.
Without compulsion he will nothing tell,
Nor can entreaties move him; bind him well,
And hard, and all his tricks will vanish soon.
When ^ol is mounted to his height at noone,
When grass is d^y, and cattle seek the shade,
I Will bring thee thither, where thou shall invade
The aged Prophet, when his private sleep
He takes, ^etired weary from the deep.
But when thou bind'st him, to delude thine eyes,
In several shapes he will himself disguise,
A scaly Dragon, or fierce Tiger he,
Or Bore, or tawny Lioness will be,
Or take the noise, and show of fire to escape,
Or slide away in liquid waters shape.
But, son, the more in shapes he varyes still,
Be sure the harder hold thy cords, until
Changed from those figures, that first shape (h) he keep,
In which thou saw'^t him lying down to sleep.
This said, sh' annoints the body of her son,
With sweet Ambrosian odours; whence anon
An heavenly air exhaled from his head,
And able vigor through his limbs was spread.
Within an eaten Mountains hollow side
Is a vast cave, where water driven by tide
Does into turning guifes it self divide,
An harbor safe to storme-tost Mariners:
Within blew Pro^eus under stony bars
Shut up, and guarded lies. Here far from sight
In a dark nooke averted from the light
Cyrene placed her son; her self away
Vanished obscured in clouds. At noone of day,
When now the scorching dog star from the sky
The thirsty ^ndians burned, the grass was dry,
And the sunbeams as low as to the ground
Boiled lukewarm rivers, though the most profou^d.
Proteus from sea to this accustomed ground
Retires himself; the scaly Nation round
Playing about him, fa^ salt dew do throw;
The Calves on shore do severally bestow
Themselves to sleep, whilst he upon a rock
Amidst them fi^s, and numbers all the flock,
Like to an Heard, when from the mountains home
Unto their stals his Calves from feeding come,
And wolves are whetted with the lambs loud bleats.
When Aristaeus this occasion gets,
Scarce suffering the old Prophet to compose
His weary limbs, in with a shout he goes
Upon him straight, and binds him as he lies.
He not unmindefull of his old devise
All his strange shapes assumes in order ore,
A flaming fire, a flood, a tusked bore.
But when no cunning could procure his escape,
Vanquished at last, in his own humane shape
He speaks; Who sent thee hither to my cave
Thou bold young man? or here what would thou have?
Thou know my mind, Proteus thou know (quoth he)
Intend it not, thou c^nst not co^sen me.
Following the gods command, hither come I
For my lost goods to seek a remedy.
When thus he spoke, the Prophet much compelled,
Scowling with his green eyes, with anger swelled,
And cha^ing thus at last began prophecy:
The wrath of some great god does follow thee
For great misdeeds. To thee this punishment
(Though not so great as thou deseru'st) is sent
From wretched Orpheus, unless fares resist,
Who still in wrath for his dear wife persists.
When from thy lust she fled, the never spied
A water-snake, by whose fell s^ing she died,
Lurking upon the graslie bank: But all
The Dryades at her sad funeral
Wept on the mountains, high Pangaea, and
The Rodepeian tower^, and warlike land
Of Rhaesus, Hebrus, and the Getes for woe
Wept, and Athenian Orythia too.
But he himself his sick soul solacing,
Often to his warbling instrument would sing
Of thee, sweet wife; thou on the shore alone
Morning and night were subject his moan*
He through the dark, and fearful wood did venture,
(...), laws, and ^luto's cave to enter,
And to the Ghosts, and their grim king he went,
Hearts that to humane prayers did nere relent.
But from all parts of hell the ghosts, and throng
Of livelesse shadows moved by his song
Came forth, as many thousands, as a flight
Of little birds into the woods, whom night,
Or showers approaching thither drive in sholes,
The ghosts of men and women, the great souls
Of Heroes, Virgins, and of Boys were there,
And Youths, that tomb'd before their parents were*
Whom foul Cocytus reedlesse banks enclose,
And that black muddy poole, that never flows,
And Styx nine times about it rowles his waves.
But all hels in most vaults, and torturing caves
Amazed stood; the Eumenides forbear
To menace now with their blew snaky harie:
Three-mouthed Cerberus to bark refraines:
Ixion's racking wheel unmoved remains.
Now coming back all dangers past had he,
Behind him followed his Eurydice
Restored to life (for this condition
Proserpina had made) when lo anon
Forgetful love a sudden frenzy wrought,
Yet to be pardoned, could Fie^ds pardon ought.
Near to the light (alas) forgetful he
Love-sicke, looked back on his Eurydice.
That action frustrates all the pains he took,
The ruthlesse tyrant's covenant is broke,
And thrice Avernus horrid lake resounds.
Orpheus (quoth she) what madness thus confou^de
Thy wretched self, and me? stern fates surprie
Me back again; deaths slumbers close mine eyes.
Farewell; thus hurried in black night I go;
This said, her aerie hands she lifts, and so
As smoke sleetes into air, she vanished there
(Now his no more) and left him clasping the air*
Offering replies in vain: nor more alas
Would churlish Charon suffer him to pass.
What should he do his wife twice lost? how move
The Fiends with tears, with prayers the gods above^
His wife now cold was ferry'd thence away
In Charons boat. But he seven months (they say)
Weeping besides forsaken Strymons waves
Under the cold, and solitary caves
To ruthlesse rocks did his mishaps lament,
That trees were moved, and Tigers did re^ent.
As Phi^omel in shady Poplar tree
Wailing her young ones loss, whom cruelly
A watching Husbandman, ere fledge for flight,
Took from her nest. She spends in grief the night,
And from a bough sings forth her sorrow there
With sad complaints filling the places near.
No Venus now, nor Hymenaean rites
Could move his mind; wandering in woeful plights
Where on Riphaean fields frost ever lies,
Ore Scythian ice, and snowy Tanais,
He there complayn'd of Pluto's bootlesse Boon,
And how how again Eurydice was gone*
The Thracian Dames, whose beds he did despise,
Raging in Bacchus nightly sacrifice,
Scattered him peece-meale ore the fields abroad.
Yet then when swift Ocagrian Hebrus flood
Carried the head torn from the neck along,
Eurydice his cold, and dying tongue,
Ah poor Eurydice did still resound.
Eurydice the banks did Echo round.
Thus Proteus spoke, and leapt into the Maine,
And where he leapt, beneath his head again
The foaming waters rose in bubbles round.
Fearelesse Cyrene with this cheatfull sound
Comforts her son; Banish sad cares, my son:
This, this did cause thy Bees destruction:
For this the Nymphs, which in the woods did play.
And dance with her, have taken thy Bees away.
Bring thou thy offerings humbly, beg thy peace,
And there adore the easy Dryades;
For they will pardon, and their wrath remit.
I Will teach thee first what way of praying's fit:
Choo^e out four lusty Bulls well shaped, and fed,
Which on thy green Lycaeus top are bred,
As many Heifers, which nere yoke did bear;
To these four altars in the temple rear;
And from their throats let out the sacred blood,
And leave their bodies in the leavie wood
When the ninth morning after shall arise,
Let^aean poppy to Orph^us sacrifice,
Kill a black sheep, and the wood again go see.
With a slain Calfe appease Eurydice.
Without delay he does what ^he directs,
Comes to the temples, the altars there erects.
Four ^usty Bulls well shaped, and fed he took;
As many as Heyfers, that nere bare the yoke:
When the ninth morning after did arise,
To Orpheus he performed his sacrifice,
And came to the wood, when lo (strange to be told)
A ^udden wonder they did there behold:
Bees buzzed within the Bullocks putrifi'd
Bowels, and issued out their broken sides,
Making great clouds in the air, and taking trees
Like grapes in clusters, hung whole swarms of bee^
This I of Tillage, Trees, and Cattells care
Have sung, whilst mighty Caesar in his war,
Thundering by great Euphrates does impose
Laws on the conquered Parthians, and goes
The way to heaven. Then sweet Parthenope
Happy in peaceful stydies nourished me,
Who Shepherds lays, and, Tytirus, thee young
Under the broad beech covert boldly sung.
FINIS.
Annotations upon the fourth BOOK.
(1) VIrgil in this fourth Book, lest any business of a country life should
be wanting in his Georgicks, begins here the discourse of Bees; a subject
(though small) ^et, as one observes, written of by many the ablest Authors,
and in different manner. Aristotle first in his book entitled, De historia
animalium, had written with much subtletie, and depth concerning the Bees
nature. Amongst the Latins, Varro in a discourse wondrous for the brevity,
has written fully of them. Iunius Higinius with diligence, and walking, as it
were, in a spacious field has at large discoursed of the nature of Bees: he
omitteth nothing which the ancient Poets have pleasantly fabled of that
subject. Cornelius Celsus in an elegant and facetious style has made
illustration of it, Columella, moderately, and only (as himself confesses)
because it is a part of that subject, which he had before began; with no great
ardour has expressed it. And lest it should only be written in prose, our Poet
in this place in most elegant Verse, inferior to none that ever was, entreats
of this small subject.

( b) The King of the Bees (says one) it usually spotted more than the rest,
and of a form more fair and beautiful. He is twice as big as the common
Bees; his wings are shorter than theirs, but his legs are straighter and
longer; so that his walking up and down she h^^e is more lofty and full of
majesty. Upon his forehead is a bright spot glittering in manner of a d^ad^ me.
He wants a sting, armed with nothing but majesty, and a wondrous obedi^nce of
the other Bees to him. When ever he goes forth, the whole swarm ^aite about
him, guard him, and suffer him not to be seen. When the common Bees are (...)
their work, he walks to take survey of them, he himself only being free
from labor. About him still are his guards and officers, those strength he
uses in punishing the idle and sloathfull Bees. But others are of opini^n (who
deny the generation of bees without ^span) that this great Be, called the
King, (...) the only male in the hive, without whose company there can be no
generation at all: and therefore that all the other bees do per^etually
slocke, and throng about him, not ^ith respect as to a Prince, but desire as to
a Male.

( c) It was, as most know, an ancient fable, that Saturn the husband of Ops,
and father of Jupiter was accustomed to devour his own children when they were
brought forth (the reason of it, was, because Saturn was named the god of
time, and all times passing and returning revolve again into themselves) which
gave occasion to this history; when Jupiter was borne, his mother Ops fearing
the cruelty of her husband to him, concealed his birth, and the Cretans for
fear that Saturn should hear the childery, rung their brazen pans and
kettles; which noise the bees following came to the place where the ^nfant was,
and sed him there with honey: Jupiter for so great a benefit, bestowed on his
nurses for a reward this admirable g^ft, that they should have young ones, and
continue their kind without wasting themselves in Venery. Others report, that
Jupiter being much in love with a fair Nymph called Melissa, turned her into a
be, and for her sake bestowed privileges upon the bees.

(d) The place where bees first were, is doubted of; some report it was Crete,
where those were which nourished Jupiter; others say they were first seen in
Thessaly in the time of the reign of Aristaeus there; others make Hymetta, a
sweet hill near Athens, the place; others Hybla an hill in Sicily: all which
places are by Poets famed for nourishing of bees.

Mane ruunt (e) A most admirable discipline, if it may be credited: as soon
as morning appears, one be, whose office it is, goes about the hive, and with
three or four loud buzzes, in stead of a bell or trumpet, awakens them from
sleep; upon whose warning, they all arise, and fly abroad unto their labor of
gathering honey, or other employments; when evening returns again, and they
come home laden with honey; after some short respite, the same be, or some
other in his turn, with the like buzze commands them all to rest (after the
manner of Cities) except such as are appointed to watch and ward.

( f) This history of Aristaeus the son of Apollo, and the Nymph Cyrene (before
mentioned) the first finder of the use of bees, was not intended by the Poet to
be here inserted; this part of the book was all compiled in honor of
Cornelius Gallus a Roman Gentleman, the first Governor of Egypt under Augustus
Caesar (when Caesar after the death of Cleopatra had turned the kingdom of
Egypt into a Province). This Gallus was himself a famous Poet (though only
fragments remain of him) much beloved of the rest of the Poets, and honored
by Virgil in his Bucolickes. But when afterward he fell into a conspiracy
against Augustus, or, as some report it, accused for abusing the Province,
which he governed, he was condemned, and put to death; and Virgil by the
command of Caesar, altered the half of his fourth book, and from the praise
of Cornelius Gallus turned it to the history of Aristaeus. The story is plain,
as the Poet has here related it; Aristaeus in lust desiring to ravish Eurydice
the wife of Orpheus, and she in her flight from him, being stung with a
serpent, and so killed; Aristaeus for his offense was punished with the loss
of all his stock, in which he was richer than any of thosetimes, etc.

( g) In this fable of Proteus, Virgil imitateth Homer altogether; or rather
borrows, where in his Odysses Proteus gives Menelaus instruction: but the
history of Proteus is thus reported by Herodotus in his Euterpe; Proteus was
King of Egypt at that time when Paris having raped Helena, was driven with her
by a tempest into Egypt. (for when Troy was sacked Helena could not be found
there) But Menelaus after the wars of Troy sailed into Egypt, and there being
with great courtesy entertained by Proteus, he received his wife Helena
again. Some report, that Proteus being borne in Egypt fled from the tyranny of
cruel Busiris, and came into Thessalia: but others (of whose opinion it should
seem our Poet is) say, that he was borne at Pal^ene a City of Thessalia; and
sailing into Egypt lived for a time there; but afterward returned again into
Thessalia his native country.

( h) Of this fable that Proteus before he was bound, and barred from all his
deluding shapes, could never prophecy, some have made a physical
construction; for every man has in himself lust, folly, cruelty and deceit;
which, as long as they reign uncontrolled in him, his nobler part, which is
nearer to the divinity, that is his wisdom, does not appear, nor cannot
exercise her function, until all those are bound; that is, till a man be freed
from those vices. From whence he concludes, that this Priest could not
prophecy, nor receive the divinity into him, until all these, that is, his
fiery lust, his brutish cruelty, his wavering lightness of mind, (like
fleeting water) were all bound, and had ceased in him.

FINIS.

