A TRVE AND SINCERE declaration of the purpose and ends of the Plantation begun
in Virginia, of the degrees which it has received; and means by which it has
been advanced: and the resolution and conclusion of his Majesty's Council of
that Colony, for the constant and patient prosecution thereof, until by the
mercies of GOD it shall retribute a fruitful harvest to the kingdom of heaven,
and this Commonwealth.

Set forth by the authority of the Governors and Counselors established for
that Plantation.

A word spoken in due season, is like apples of Gold, with pictures of silver.
Prouer. 25. 11. Fear is nothing else, but a betraying of the succors which
reason offers. Wis. 17. 11. AT LONDON, Printed for I. Stepneth, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1610.

A true and sincere declaration of the purpose and ends of the Plantation begun
in Virginia; of the degrees which it has received; and means by which it has
been advanced: And the resolution and conclusion of his Majesty's Council of
that Colony, for the constant and patient prosecution thereof, until by the
mercies of God it shall retribute a fruitful harvest to the Kingdom of Heaven,
and to this Commonwealth.
IT IS RESERVED, AND only proper to Divine wisdom to foresee and ordain,
both the Ends and Ways of every action. In human prudence it is all can be
required, to propose Religious and Noble, and Feasible ends; and it can have no
absolute assurance, and infalliblenesse in the Ways and Means, which are
contingent, and various, perhaps equally reasonable, subject to vnpresent
circumstances, and doubtful events, which ever dignifie, or beetray the
Counsels, from whence they were derived. And the higher the quality, and
nature, and more removed from ordinary action (such as this is, of which we
discourse) the more perplexed and misty are the paths thereunto. Upon which
Grounds, we purpose to deliver roundly and clearly, our ends and Ways to the
hopeful Plantations begun in Virginia: and to examine the truth, and safety of
both, to redeem our selves and so Noble an action, from the imputations and
aspertions, with which ignorant rumor, virulent envy, or impious subtilty,
daily callumniateth our industries, and the success of it: wherein we doubt
not, not only to satisfy every modest and welaffected heart of this Kingdom;
but to excite and kindle the affections of the Incredulous, and lazy; and to
cool and assuage the curiosity of the jealous, and suspicious; and to temper
and convince, the malignity of the false, and treacherous. The Principal and
Maine Ends (out of which are easily derived to any mean understanding infinite
less, and yet great ones) wear first to preach, and baptize into Christian
Religion, and by propagation of that Gospel, to recover out of the arms of
the Devil, a number of poor and miserable souls, wrapped up unto death, in
almost invincible ignorance; to endeavor the fulfilling, and accomplishment of
the number of the elect, which shall be gathered from out all corners of the
earth; and to add our myte to the treasury of Heaven, that as we pray for the
coming of the kingdom of glory, so to express in our actions, the same
desire, if God have pleased, to use so weak instruments, to the ripening and
consummation thereof. Secondly, to provide and build up for the public Honor
and safety of our gracious King and his Estates (by the favor of our Superiors
even in that care) some small Rampire of our own, in this opportune and
general Summer of peace, by trans-planting the rancknesse and multitude of
increase in our people; of which there is left no vent, but age; and evident
danger that the number and infiniteness of them, will out-grow the matter,
whereon to work for their life, and sustentation, and shall one infest and
become a burden to another.

But by this provision they may be seated as a Bulwark of defense, in a place
of advantage, against a stranger enemy, who shall in great proportion grow
rich in treasure, which was exhausted to a low estate; and may well endure an
increase of his people long wasted with a continual war, and dispersed uses
and losses of them: Both which cannot choose but threaten us, if we consider,
and compare the ends, ambitions and practices, of our neighbor Countries, with
our own.

Lastly, the appearance and assurance of Private commodity to the particular
undertakers, by recovering and possessing to themselves a fruitful land, from
whence they may furnish and provide this Kingdom, with all such Copper, Iron.
Steel, Timber for ships, Yards, Masts. Cordage, Sope-ashes.
necessities, and defects under which we labor, and are now enforced to buy,
and receive at the courtesy of other Princes, under the burden of great
Customs, and heavy impositions, and at so high rates in trafique, by reason of
the great waste of them from whence they are now derived, which threatens
almost an impossibilty long to recover them, or at least such loss in
exchange, as both the kingdom and Merchant, will be weary of the deerenesse
and perrill. These being the true, and essential ends of this Plantation, and
corresponding to our first rule, of Religious, Noble, and Feaseable, two of
which are not questioned, the third easy, and demonstrable in the second
limme, when we shall examine the causes of some disaster and distemper in the
ways unto them: These being admitted of, for such as we pretend them to be,
and standing yet firm and safe in themselves, we hope easily to justify the
first part of our undertaking, and presume to auerre, that in this branche
there arises to no peaceable man, any scruple or doubt, to suspect the issue,
or to withdraw his affection and assistance, or to Callumniat the Project, or
our choice of it.

In discussion and examination of the second part, which is the ways, by which
we hope to arrive at these ends, and in which no human reason can so provide
but that many circumstances, and accidents, shall have as great a stroke in
the event, as any Council shall have; we must first briefly deliver the
course of this Plantation, from the Infancy thereof; and then let us equally
consider, whether from so small a root, it has not had a blessed and
unexpected growth: Next, we will call before us all the objections, and
confess ingenuously all the errors and discouragements, which seem to lie so
heavy, as almost to press to death this brave and hopeful action; and
relieve it, we doubt not, from that, which with reasonable men, can at most
be but a pause, and no entire desertion, and restore it to the Primarie
estate, life, and reputation.

In the year 1606. Captain Newport, with three ships, discovered the Bay of
Chessiopeock in the height of thirty seven degrees of Northerly latitude, and
landed a hundred persons of sundry qualities and Arts, in a River falling into
it; and left them under the Government of a President and Council, according
to the authority derived from, and limited by his Majesty's Letters Pattents.
His return gave us no hope of any extraordinary Consequence, yet only upon
report of the Nauigablenesse of the River, pleasure, fertility, and situation
of the land, to our proiected ends, we freshly and cheerfully sent in the
next year a like number: and yet also receiving nothing new, we had courage
and constancy to relieve them the third time, with one hundred more: at which
return experience of error in the equality of Governors, and some outrages,
and follies committed by them, had a little shaken so tender a body; after
Consultation and advise of all the inconveniences in these three supplies, and
finding them to arise out of two roots, the form of Government, and length
and danger of the passage, by the Southerly course of the Indyes: To encounter
the first, we did resolve and obtain, to renew our Letters Pattents, and to
procure to our selves, such ample and large privileges and powers, by which
we were at liberty to reform and correct those already discovered, and to
prevent such as in the future might thteaten us; and so, to set and furnish
out under the Conduct of one able and absolute Governor, a large supply of five
hundred men, with some number of families, of Wife, Children, and Servants, to
take fast hold and root in that land, and this resolution was with much
alacrity and confidence. And to meet the second Inconvenience, we did also
prepare to set out, one small shipp, for discovery of a shorter way, and to
make trial of the Fishing within our Bay, and River.

Hitherto, until the sending of this Auisall for experience, and Fleet for
settling the Government, appears no distaste, nor despair; for every supply in
some respect, was greater then other, and that in preparation greater then them
all in every respect, and must in reason hold Anologie and proportion with our
expectations and hopes at the dis-inboging of it.

So that what-so-euer wound or Palsy this Noble action has gotten, and the
sickness under which it seems to faint, must needs arise out of the success
of these two: which we will now examine apart with all equitye and
cleerenesse, and weigh, whither there be any such reason, to desist from the
prosecution thereof, in rectified judgment; or to fall so low in our
resolutions, and opinions of it, as rumor and ignorance does pretend we do,
or have cause to do.

For the Discovery, Captain Argoll received our Commission under our Seal,
with instruction (to avoid all danger of quarrel with the Subjects of the
King of Spain) not to touch upon any of his Dominions actually possessed, or
rightly entitled unto, and to shape his course free from the road of Pyrotts,
that hang upon all streights and skirts of lands; and to attempt a direct and
clear passage, by leaving the Canaries to the East, and from thence, to run
in a straight Western Course, or some point near thereunto. And so to make
an experience of the Winds and Currents which have affrighted all vnder-takers
by the North. By which discovery, there would grow to us much security, and
ease, and all occasion of offense removed, and we should husband and save a
moyetie of the charge in victual and freight, which was expended, and lost in
the South erne passage.

To these ends he set sail from Portsmouth the fifth day of May; and shaping
his course South-south-west to the height of thirty degrees, leaving the
Canaries a hundred leagues to the East, he found the winds large, and so
took his course direct West, and did never turn nearer the South: and being
in the longitude of the Barmudos he found the wind a little scant upon him,
yet so, that on the thirteenth of July he recovered our harbor: and in trial
found no current, nor any thing else which should deter us from this way.

He made his journey in nine weeks, and of that, was becalmed fourteen
days: whereupon he has diverse times since his return publicly auowed, and
undertaken to make this passage within seven weeks: and that the winds in
all this course, are as variable, as at other places, and no apparent
inconvenience in the way.

So that the maine end of this advise has succeeded almost beyond our hopes;
The second for fishing, proved so plentiful, especially of Sturgion, He that
went for that purpose dyed in the way.
of which sort he could have loaded many ships, if he had had, some man of
skill to pickell and prepare it for keeping, whereof he brought sufficient
testimony both of the flesh and Caueary, that no discreet man will question the
truth of it, so it appears clearly that from hence there can be derived no
cause to susspect or desist from our first ends, but so contrary, that in this
project both our purposes and ways were happy and successful even to our
desires. But from this Ship arises a rumor of the necessity and distress our
people were found in, for want of victual: of which, though the noise have
exceeded the truth, yet we do confess a great part of it; But can lay aside
the cause and fault from the dessigne, truly and home upon the misgouernment
of the Comma^ders, by dissension and ambition among themselves, and upon the
Idleness and bestiall sloth, of the common sort, who were active in nothing
but adhearing to factions and parts, even to their own ruin, like men almost
desperate of all supply, so conscious, and guilty they were to themselves of
their own demerit, and lasinesse. But so soon as Captain Argoll arrived
among them, whose presence and example gave new assurance of our cares, and new
life to their endeavors, by fishing only in few days, they were all
recovered, grown hearty, able, and ready to undertake every action: So that if
it be considered that without industry no land is sufficient to the
Inhabitants: and that the trade to which they trusted, betrayed them to loose
the opportunity of seed-time, and so to rust and wear out themselves: for the
Naturals withdrew from all commerce and traffic with them, cunningly making a
war upon them, which they felt not, who durst no other-way appear an enemy:
And they being at division among themselves, and without warrant from hence,
could not resolve to enforce that, which might have preserved them, and which
in such a necessity is most lawful to do, every thing returning from civil
Propryety to Natural, and Primary Community: Lastly if it be remembered, that
this Extremity in which they were now relieved, (which is as happy in the
presage of Gods future blessing as in his present providence and mercy) was but
an effect of that, we did foresee in the first Government, and for which the
form was changed, and the new in project, and therefore cannot be objected as
any just exception to the success of this, but a consequent Considered, and
digested in the former: It is then I say evident, that in all the progress of
this discovery, or any thing accidental to it, there cannot be racked nor
pressed out any confession, either of error in the ends, or miscarriadges in
the ways unto them.

To the establishment of a government, such as should meet with all the
revealed inconveniences; we gave our Commission to an able and worthy
Gentleman, Sr. Thomas Gates, whom we did nominat and appoint sole and absolute
Governor of that Colony, under diverse limitations, and instructions expressed
in writing: and with him we sent Sir George Summers Admiral, and Captain
Newport Vice Admiral of Virginia, and diverse other persons of rank and
quality, in seven ships, and two pinnaces, with several Commissions sealed,
successively to take place one after another, considering the mortality, and
uncertainty of human life, and these to be divided into several ships.

Our fleet weighed anchor from Falmouth the eight of June, the wind being
fair, they shaped a course for the height of the Canaries; within few days
sail, the Governor calling a Council of all the Captains, Masters and Pilots,
it was resolved, they should run southerly unto the Tropicque, and from
thence bear away West: (which error will take up all the objections of
sickness, the sun being then in it, was the cause of all the infection, and
disease of our men) At this consultation, was delivered an instruction under
seal, to every Master, with a provision what course should be taken, if the
fleet were separated; which was that if the winds scanted, or were contrary,
or that any lost sight of the Admiral, they should steer away for the West
Indies, and make the Baruada an Island to the North of Dominico, and there to
have their Rendevous, and to stay seven days one for another.

In this height and resolution, short of the West Indies 150. leagues, on S.
James day a terrible tempest ouer-took them, and lasted in extremity 48.
hours, which scattered the whole fleet, and wherein some of them spent their
masts, and others were much distressed: Within three days four of the fleet
met in consort, and hearing no news of their Admiral, and the winds
returning large for Virginia, and they wearied and beaten, it was resolved
among them, to bear right away for our Bay, and to decline their commission,
which within few days they made, and arrived in the Kings River, on the
eleventh of August: In this passage, fourteen degrees to the Southward of
Virginia, ran no current with them, which should hinder or make difficult that
in Proposition by the North-west. Within six days after came in one, and
within five, another of our fleet, the Masters of both having fallen upon the
same Council, by the opportunity of the wind, not to seek the Baruada, but
to steer away for our Harbor, which doubtless the Admiral himself did not
observe, but obeyed his own directions, and is the true or probable cause of
his being cast so far into suspicion; where perhapps bound in with wind,
perhaps enforced to stay the Masting or mending of some what in his ship, torn
or lost in this tempest, we doubt not, but by the mercy of God he is safe,
with the Pinnace which attended him, and shall both, or are by this time
arrived at our Colony.

Not long after these, another of our small Pinnaces, yet also vnaccounted for,
recovered the River alone; and now seven of our Fleet being in, they landed
in health near four hundred persons; who being put a shore without their
Governor, or any order from him, (all the Commissioners and principal persons
being aboard him,) no man would acknowledge a superior: nor could from this
headless and unbridled multitude, be any thing expected, but disorder and
ryott, nor any council prevent, or foresee, the success of these ways.

Now if we compare the disasters of this supply, with the maine ends, it will
appear they have weakened none of them, but that they still remain safe and
feasible, for any thing arises in objection out of them. For that these
accidents and contingencies, were ever to be expected, and a resolution was to
be put on at first, armed against the probability of them. Who can avoid the
hand of God, or dispute with him? Is he fit to undertake any great action,
whose courage is shaken and dissolved with one storm? Who knows, whither he
that disposed of our hearts to so good beginnings, be now pleased to try our
constancy and perseverance, and to discern between the ends of our desires,
whither Pyety or Covetousness carried us swifter? For if the first were the
principal scope, hence arises nothing to infirm or make that impossible: But
as it falls out in business of greatest consequence, sometime the noblest
ends, upon which we are most intense, are furthest removed from the first
stepps made unto them, and must by lesser and meaner be approached; so
Plantation of religion being the maine and chief purpose, admitts many things
of less and secondary consequence of necessity to be done before it: for an
error or miscarriage in one of which, to desist or staggar, were to betray our
principal end cowardly and faintly, and to draw upon our selves just scorn
and reprehension.

Whither we shall discourse out of reason, or example; that every action has
Proportional difficulties, to the greatness thereof, such as must necessarily
be admitted from the first conception, and such as even in the passage,
dignifie both the actors and the work, if with prudence they foresee all the
hazards, and with Patence and Constancy, meet and encounter them. It must
either be confessed, that it was folly from the Origin and first stepp, not to
have been prepared for such as these; or that it is none now, not to quitt it,
for them, but the greatest of all to say, who would have expected this? If we
cast our eye upon the Spanish Conquest of the Indyes, how abundant their
stories are of Fleets, Battles, and Armies lost: eighteen upon the attempt
of Guiana, and more then seventy in both the Indies, and yet with how
indefatigable industrye, and prosperous fate, they have pursued and vanquished
all these, their many Armies maintained in Europe, can witness, with too
lamentable an experience.

If we compare the beginnings, they were meaner then ours, and subject to all
the same, and much more uncertainty, If the Religion, which shall crown the
success, it admitts no Controversy nor Comparison, among those, to whom we
write: if the Commodities, they, which we have in assurance and knowledge, are
of more necessity, and those in hope equally rich and abundant.

But to come home to our purpose: that which seems to disharten or shake our
first grounds in this suppyle; arises from two principal sources, of which,
one was cause of the other; First, the Tempest: and can any man expect an
answer for that? next, the absence of the Governor, an effect of the former,
for the loss of him is in suspense, and much reason of his safetye against
some doubt; and the hand of GOD reaches all the Earth. Now if these two only
be the maine crosses, which staggar the feasablenesse, consider that of three
voyadges before, no man miscarried in the way, and that all other depend on
these, as the misgouernment of our men, their Idleness, their want, and the
empty return of out fleet, wherein if we recover and correct the Cause, we
vanquish al things consequent unto it, and yet in appearance, if with these we
compare the advantages which we have gotten, in the Shortness and security of
the passadge, in the intelligence of some of our Nation planted by Sir Water
Raleigh (yet a live) within fifty mile of our fort, who can open the womb and
bowels of this country: as is testefied by two of our colony sent out to seek
them, who, (though denied by the Slauages speech with them) found Crosses, and
Leters, the Characters and assured Testimonies of Christians newly cut in the
barks of trees: With every werowan or king, is buried al his wealth, for they
believe that he that dies ritchest lives in another world hapiest.
if we consider the assuredness of the commodities, Wines, Pitch, Sope-ashes,
Timber for all uses, Iron, Steel, Copper Dies, Cordage, Silke-grasse, Pearl,
which, (though discoulered and softened by fire, for want of skill in the
Naturalls to pierce them) was found in great abundance in the house of their
sepultures.

If we consider I say, and compare these certainties and truths, as less
ends to strengthen, and produce our first and principal, with those casual
and accidental misaduentures and errors, which have befalne us, before every
equal and resolved heart, they will vanish and become smoke and air, and not
only keep upright, but raise our spirits and affections, and reconcile our
reasons to our desires.

If any object the difficulty of keeping that we shall possess; if this
discourse could admit a disputation of it, it should easilye appear, that our
confidence against any enemy, is built upon solid and substantial reason: And
to give some taste thereof; Our enemies must be either the Natives, or
Strangers; Against the first the war would be as easy as the argument. For the
second; a few men may dispute the possession of any place wherein they are
fortified, where the enemy is so much a stranger, as that he must discover and
fight at once: upon al dis-aduantages of Streights, Foords, and Woods; and
where he can never march with horse, nor with ordinance without them; nor can
abide to stay many months, when all his relief must be had from his ships,
which cannot long supply a number competent to besiege: Neither is it possible
to block us up, by planting between us and the Sea, the Rivers beeinge so
broad, and so many out-lets from them into the Bay. Besides the protection and
privilege of Subjects to so Potent a King, whom any wise estate will be wary to
affront or provoke.

We doubt not, but by examination of what is said, our first ends are yet
safe, and the ways unto them in no sort so difficult, as should more affright
and deter us now, then at the first meditation of them. But if these be not
sufficient to satissie, and encourage, every honest affection we will not so
desist, but urge the necessity of a present supply, to redeem the defects, and
misaduentures of the last: that seeing all the dangers and sicknesses have
sprung from want of effecting our purpose of Sending an able Governor: we have
concluded and resolved to set forth the Right Honor: the Lord de la War by the
last of January, and to give him all the liberties and privileges, which we
have power to derive upon him, and to furnish him with all necessaries fit for
his quality, person, and the business which he shall undergo, and so by Gods
grace to persist until we have made perfect our good and happy beginnings.

If these shall not yet suffice to resolution, that a Baron and Peer of this
kingdom (whose Honor nor Fortune needs not any desperate medecin) one of so
approved courage, temper, and experience, shall expose himself for the
common-good to al these hazards and pains which we fear and safely talk off,
As a door turns upon his hinges, so does the sluggard upon his bed.
that sit idle at home; and bear a great part upon his own charge, and
revive and quicken the whole by his example, constancy, and resolution? If you
have no implicit faith nor trust in us, Prou 26. 14.
that govern this business; to whom there must be some advantage granted in
our practice, and intelligence (especially in this) above ordinary persons;
that we have no will nor intent, to betray our poor Countrymen, nor to
burden our own consciences, nor to draw so just scorn, and reproach upon
our reputations? If our knowledge and constant persuasion, of the fruitfulness
and wholesomnesse of this Land, and of the recompense it shall in time bring to
this Kingdom, and to every particular member of this plantation, be of no
authority? If this seem not to you some argument, that every man returned is
desirous to go back to that which they account and call their own home: and
do upon their lives justify, which else they wilfully betray; that if the
Government be settled, and a supply of victual for one year sent, so that
they may have a seed and Harvest before them, they will never need nor expect
to charge us with more expense, for any thing of necessity to man's life; but
they will have leisure and power, to retribute with infinite advantage all the
cost bestowed upon them: If all these be yet too weak to confirm the
doubtful, or awake the drousie, then let us come nearer, and arise, from their
reasons and affections to their Souls, and Consciences: remember that what was
at first but of Conueniency, and for Honor, is now become a case of necessity,
and piety: let them consider, that they have promised to adventure and not
performd it, that they have encouraged and exposed many of Honorable birth, and
which is of more consequence 600. of our Brethren by our common mother the
Church, Christians of one faith, and one Baptism to a miserable and
vn-euitable death, Let not any man flatter himself, that it concerns not him:
for he that forsakes another, whom he may safely relieve, is as guilty of his
death as he that can swim, and forsakes himself by refusing, is of his own.

Let every man look inward, and disperse that clowd of avarice, which
darkeneth his spiritual sight, and he will find there, that when he shall
appear before the Tribunal of Heaven, it shall be questioned him what he
has done? Has he fed and clothed the hungry and naked? It shall be required,
what he has done for the advancement of that Gospel which has saved him;
and for the relief of his makers Image, whom he was bound to save: O let
there be a virtuous emulation between us and the Church of Rome, in her own
Glory, and Treasury of good works! and let us turn all our contentions upon
the common enemy of the Name of CHRIST. How far has she sent out her
Apostles and thorough how glorious dangers? How is it become a mark of Honor
to her faith, to have converted Nations, and an obloquie cast upon us, that
we having the better Vine, should have worse dressers and husbanders of it?

If Piety, Honor, Easiness, Profit, nor Conscience, cannot prouoake, and
excite (for to all these we have applied our discourse.) Then let us turn
from hearts of Stone and Iron, and pray unto that merciful and tender God, who
is both easy and glad to be entreated, that it would please him to bless and
water these feeble beginnings, and that as he is wonderful in all his works,
so to nourish this grain of seed, that it may spread till all people of the
earth admire the greatness, and seek the shades and fruit thereof: That by
so faint and weak endeavors his great Councels may be brought forth, and his
secret purposes to light, to our endless comforts and the infinite Glory of
his Sacred Name. Amen.

TO render a more particular satisfaction and account of our care, in providing
to attend the Right Honorable the Lord de la War, in this concluded and
present supply, men of most use and necessity, to the foundation of a
Commonwealth; And to avoid both the scandal and peril, of accepting idle
and wicked persons; such as shame, or fear compels into this action; and such
as are the weeds and rancknesse of this land; who being the surfeit, of an
able, healthy, and composed body; must needs be the poison of one so tender,
feeble, and yet unformed: And to divulge and declare to all men, what kind of
persons, as well for their religion and conuersations, as Faculties, Arts, and
trades, we purpose to accept of: we have thought it convenient to pronounce
that for the first provision, we will receive no man, that cannot bring or
render some good testimony of his religion to God, and civil manners and
behavior to his neighbor, with whom he has lived; and for the second, we
have set down in a Table annexed, the proportion, and number we will
entertain in every necessary Art, upon proof and assurance, that every man
shall be able to perform that which he does undertake, whereby such as are
requisite to us, may have knowledge and preparation, to offer themselves, and
we shall be ready to give honest entertainment and content, and to recompense
with extraordinary reward, every sit and industrious person, respectively to
his pains and quality.

The Table of such as are required to this Plantation.
Four honest and learned Ministers. 2. Surgeons. 2. Druggists. 10. Iron men
for the Furnace and Hammer. 2. Armorers. 2. Gun-founders. 6. Black-smiths. 10.
Sawyers. 6. Carpenters. 6. Ship-wrights. 6. Gardeners. 4. Turners. 4.
Brick-makers. 2. Tile-makers. 10. Fishermen. 6. Fowlers. 4. Sturgion dressers,
and preseruers of the Caneary. 2. Salt-makers. 6. Coopers. 2. Coller-makers for
draught. 2. Plow-wrights. 4. Rope-makers. 6. Vine dressers. 2. Press makers.
2. Ioyners. 2. Sope-ashe makers. 4. Pitch Boylers. 2. Mineral men. 2. Planters
of Sugar Cane. 2. Silk dressers. 2. Pearl Drillers. 2. Bakers. 2. Brewers. 2.
Colliers.
FINIS.

