AN EPISTLE SENT BY MONSIEUR de VRILLAC, ADVOCATE IN THE PARLIAMENT of PARIS;
To MONSIEUR de VRILLAC his FATHER, upon the occasion of his Conversion.

Faithfully Translated into English, according to the French Copy; By C. C.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for WILLIAM SHEFFARD, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Star under St Peters-Church in Corne-hill, and in Pope's Head Alley,
1621.

AN EPISTLE SENT BY MONSIEUR de VRILLAC, ADVOCATE IN the Parliament of PARIS,
To Monsieur de Vrillac his Fa there, upon the occasion of his Conversion.
MOst dear, and my most honored Father and Mother, I say the truth in Christ
I lie not, my Conscience bearing me witness, that I have continual sorrow and
grief in my heart, that I must forsake you, as touching the world: my grief
being the more for that I know how much my estranging my self from you, will
breed you sorrow and affliction. But this hope have I in God, that your sorrow
shall be turned into joy, and your affliction into consolation, when your
wisdoms (void of passion, and worldly respects) shall consider, that the
voyage which separates me from you, is to bring me nearer to God, and to set my
Conscience at rest and quiet.

For I may no longer conceal it from you, that by the often reading and
serious meditation of the holy Scriptures, together with calling upon the name
of God, the Lord has showed me that mercy, to see on the one side the new
corrupt errors, superstitions, and heresies of the Roman Church, and on the
other side, the pure truth, taught in those Churches that are purged from the
nouelty of Popery, and reformed according to the true Antiquity of the
Apostles and Prophets.

Which knowledge I confess I have for some time held as captive under fear,
suffering my self unwisely to be carried away with their opinion, who think
it safest to sway with the time, to believe with the Doctors, and to live with
the multitude; to give the heart to God, and the body to the world. I was
dumb, and said nothing, I kept silence, Psalm. 39. 2. 3.
even from good: but my anguish increased, my heart waxed hot within me, and
the fire kindled in my meditation, wherefore I speak with my tongue.

For if heretofore the son of King Croesus began to speak, seeing his
Father in danger: Who will think it strange, to see my tongue loosed in a
subject, where it hastens to set forth the glory of God my eternal Father, and
the salvation of mine own soul?

For, With the heart we believe, but with the mouth Romans 10. ^^
we confess to salvation: for which cause Jesus Christ says, That whosoever
shall confess him before Mat. 10. 32. 33
men, he will confess him before his Father which is in heaven; But whosoever
shall deny him before men, him will he deny before his Father which is in
heaven. And the Apostle also says; Come out from amongst them 2 Cor. 6. 17.
(meaning from Idolaters) and separate your selves, and touch no unclean
thing. And the Spirit of God Apoc. 18. Go out of Babylon my people, left ye
partake of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

God will have no society with Satan, nor Communion with the world; he will
not with the harlot have his child divided; he will have all, or 1 King. 3. 26.
nothing. For what has righteousness to do with iniquity? And what
communion has light with 2 Cor. 6. 14.
darkness? Or what agreement has Christ with Belial? Or what portion has
the believer with the Infidel? Or the Temple of God with Idols?

And here I called that to mind which God heretofore said unto the Israelites,
by the mouth of the Prophet Eliah, How long halt ye between two 1 King. 18.
opinions? If God be God follow him, but if Baal, follow him. I have advisedly
considered of what great validity that Maxim, of our Savior is* That it is
Mat. 6. 24.
impossible to serve two masters; and have often called that to mind which we
read Mat. 11. That the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force.

I have often considered that God will have his children marked, not only with
an inward seal, Ephe. 1. 13.
but also with the mark of an outward profession, and that is the cause why in
the 1. book of Kings, 1 King. 19. 18.
Chapter 19. God says he had reserved to himself seven thousand men (not
only who had not believed in the Idolatries of Baal, but) who had not bowed
the knee to Baal, nor kissed him. And in the seventh Chapter of the Apocalypse,
v. 3. John Reu. 7. 3.
beheld in a Vision an Angel, having the seal of the living God, to mark the
servants of God in their foreheads: teaching us therein, that if we will be
reputed the servants of Jesus Christ, we must openly make profession of the
Truth, the which himself teaches us in S. John. If any one John 12. 26.
serves me, let him follow me. For he that is not with me, is against me, and
he that gathers not with me, Mat. 12. 30.
scatters.

I have also often thought with my self that the Devil demanded nothing of
Jesus Christ, but what the worldly wise give unto him. For the Devil having
showed Jesus Christ all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof,
says, All these Mat. 4. 8.
things will I give thee (not if thou believe in me, but) if thou shall fall
down and worship me. Nabuchadnezar required nothing of those three worthies
which were cast into the fiery Furnace, but Dan. 3. 15.
outwardly to worship his Image; and the greatest tyrants not being able to
discern the thoughts of the heart, content themselves with the body and the
tongue.

Yea, I thought, that if it sufficed to believe the truth, without making
profession of it, in vain should so many Martyrs have maintained it before
their Judges, and confessed it in the very flames, signed with their blood, and
sealed with their death.

And seeing the Church on earth, is like unto Israel in Egypt, and Daniel in
the Lions den, and that in the eyes of the world, it is nothing but weakness,
and as it were a few Lambs in the midst of a multitude of Wolves, if it should
conform it self to the times, there would never be any Church. And in
withdrawing our selves from the house of God, we shall not only run into the
Temples of Papists, but also into the Temples of Mahomet, saying by way of
excuse, yet I believe it not.

Reason it self has taught me, that it suffices not a child to have a good
conceit of his Father, unless he defend his quarrel, and that it is not
enough for a soldier to love his Captain, if he fight not under his ensign,
and that she is but a strumpet, who under pretense of keeping her heart to her
husband, prostitutes her body to strangers; as also that it is the property of
Bastard children to be afraid to call themselves by the name of their father:
we are unworthy the service of so great a King, if we be ashamed to wear his
Livery, for such a base servant can never serve so rich a master.

In a word, I have considered, that God punishes no sinners more severely in
his wrath, then Romans 1. 18.
such as withhold his truth in unrighteousness, and I have often trembled at the
hearing of these words spoken by Jesus Christ to the Church of Laodicea, Reu.
3. 15. 16.
I would thou were either cold or hot; but because thou art neither cold nor
hot, but lukewarm, I will spew thee out of my mouth. And thence it is, that I
have bin terrified with that horrible threat which God pronounces in Apoc. 21.
against such as fear man more then God, and the servant, rather then the
Master, for not only to unbelievers, abominable, murderers, whoremongers,
sorcerers, Idolaters, and all liars, But also unto the fearful, is reserved
that Reu. 21. 8.
lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Nay, were it that God
threatened us not at all with such terrible punishments, yet ought we to be
ashamed, having received so many mercies from him, to repay him with so
horrible ingratitude; it being monstrous, that such who make Conscience to
steal from other men their goods, should yet dare to defile themselves with
sacrilege.

For there is not a worse sacrilege, then to rob God of his glory, and he is
worthy to be branded for a double dealer, who denies unto God that just
defense of his cause which he owes unto him.

This is it then I have considered with my self: Jesus Christ is not ashamed
to call me his brother, Heb. 2. 11.
and should I be ashamed to confess my self to be his servant? He has not
spared to shed his blood for me, and should I spare to speak for his truth? He
died for my salvation, and should I not live to his glory?

I concluded then, that seeing he meant to glorify my soul and body in
heaven, it is just and reasonable, that in soul and body I glorify him on
earth: according to the exhortion of the Apostle* Ye are bought for a price,
glorify God then in 1 Cor. 6. 20.
your body, and in your spirit, for they are Gods. And yet I must tell you
that God has not settled me in this resolution, but through many conflicts. For
the flesh to weaken my says, was ready to rock Iud. 16. 15.
me asleep in her lap: and this flesh, a sworn enemy, that she might still
retain me in her bonds, and hinder me from ascending the mountain of
salvation, caused me to look back toward those Genesis 19. 2^.
worldly profits which I was to abandon: she told me that I should break the
neck of all my Fortunes (as they are wont now adays to speak) and should
imprison my self within the den of perpetual ignominy, and this objection I
confess somewhat the more daunted me, being now come to those years which
naturally long for delights and thirst after praises; the progress in my
studies also having raised me upon the steps which lead to honors, whereunto
the favor of my friends seemed to have made a way open for me.

But again I thought, that this was a sleight of the great Harlot, which to
retain me still in the filthiness of her abominations, meant (even like
Potiphars wife, who enticed Joseph to commit adultery with her) to hold me by
the cloak, through the consideration of earthly commodities; and therefore I
chose rather to leave my cloak with Joseph, then to forsake mine innocence, or
to make any breach in my Conscience.

I considered, that all the riches and honors of this world, are turned to
wormwood, to him that fears not God, and that all the pleasures of the flesh,
are but like to the Bees, which have honey in their mouth, but stings in their
tail: the beginning seems pleasing, but the end lamentable, for after a short
laughter, and a few fond delights in this life, follows eternal death, where
shall be endless weeping and gnashing of teeth.

I also considered, that God having created man, to be Lord of the whole world,
man should not yield himself as a vassal or slave to such vile creatures;
That the whole world is not a portion worthy of the children of this great
King: That God has not indewed me with an immortal soul to be entangled in
the things, which have but only the dignity to be mortal: That my soul
being of an heavenly nature, ought to mount above all these terrestrial things,
and to aspire to those things that are above.

In a word, I concluded that I should make but an ill match of it, to win the
whole world, if for Man. 8. 38.
it I should lose my soul, and that it would prove but a mean comfort to go
to hell, laden with many Tit^es.

For this cause I gave my self to meditate on the saying of Christ, Thou
carest and art troubled about Luke 10. 41.
many things, but one thing is needful: I gave heed likewise to the
exhortation of our Savior in S. Matthew, Chap. 6. First seek the kingdom of
God, Mat. 6. 33.
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. And that
of S. John, Labor not for John 6. 27.
the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to eternal life. I
tasted also the virtue of Paul's cordial words, 1 Timothy 6, Godliness with
contentment 2 Ti^. 6. 7.
is great gain. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we
shall carry nothing out. Therefore having food and raiment, let us therewith
be content.

And because Examples have often the force of instructions, I set before me the
Prophet Moses, Heb. 11. 24. 25. 26.
Who being come to age, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter:
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. Esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches,
then the treasures of Egypt, for he had an eye to the recompense of reward. I
mused on the writings of David, wherein he glories more, that he was Gods
servant, then that he was King of Israel, preferring the house of God, before
his Palace Royal. As also I thought on the saying of that excellent Prince,
the Emperor Theodosius, who preferred his being a Citizen in the house of God,
before all the glory of his Empire. But above all me thought I was wonderfully
ravished in considering the Apostle S. Paul, who had bin brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel, who understood the secret of Sciences, and spoke the
language of Angels; who had whereof to boast as concerning the flesh, having
all the advantages his Nation afforded, and yet he cries out, Phil. 3. That
which was Phil. 3. 7. ^.^.
gain unto me, I esteemed loss for Christ; Yea, I have counted all things to
be loss unto me for the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord. For whose
sake I have deprived my self of all things, and do judge them to be dung,
that I may win Christ. The like is said of all the Apostles, who use this
speech to Christ* We have lest all, and followed thee. Mat. 19. ^^.


And that which most comforted me, was the answer of our Savior, Verily I say
unto you, that whosoever has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother for my sake, and the Gospels, shall receive an hundred fold
as much, and shall inherit eternal life.

And therefore even as the Apostles forsook their Nets to follow Jesus Christ;
I also put from me these vain cares, and the deceitful hopes which entangled
my mind, and with the royal Prophet I concluded, O Lord, thou art my portion,
Psalm. 119. 55.
I have determined to keep thy law. And that as Christ says, Those are
blessed which hear the Luke 11. 28.
word of God and keep it; As also with Mary, I have chosen the good part,
which shall not be taken Luke 10. 42.
from me. I said in my self, what though I possess not great things here on
earth, yet shall I be rich in thee, and an inheritour of the kingdom, which
God has promised to those that love him; I shall possess that pearl of
inualuable price, to wit, the knowledge of the Gospel, and the graces of the
Spirit, I shall be adorned with Jesus Christ, the riches of Israel, and the
glory of our hope. And I shall obtain a treasure in heaven, where the moth
corrupts nor, and where thieves neither break Mat. 6. 20.
through, nor steal; If I lack honor among mortal men, God will single me
out as among his Mal. 3. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
most precious Jewels; I shall enter into the royal Priesthood, and I may
boast, that I am descended of the most ancient nobility that may be, seeing
the titles of Gods house and family are more ancient then heaven and earth:
and if I forsake worldly pleasures, I shall have spiritual gladness; I shall
rejoice in God my Savior, with a Joy unspeakable 1 Pet. 1. 8.
and glorious: and as David taking his flight into the Deserts, comforted
himself in the expectation of the kingdom which God had promised him; so,
will I comfort my self in looking for those eternal felicities, which God
has reserved for me among the Angels. To be short, if with Jesus Christ I have
not whereon to rest my head, I will rejoice that in Jesus Christ I have peace
of Conscience: that God is the portion of Psalm. 16. 5.
mine heritage, and of my Cup always. O Lord Psalm. 84. 1.
of hosts, how amiable are thy dwelling places! my foul cease not, greatly
to long, yea, even faints for the courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh
rejoice in the living God. For a day in thy Verse 10.
Courts, is better then a thousand elsewhere, I had rather be a doore-keeper
in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

Now if my flesh were loath to forsake her commodities, she thought it yet more
strange to betake her self unto such an unpleasing condition: she thought it
folly and madness to enter into a path all paued with thorns, and filled with
afflictions: she set before me the reproach of the Gospel, but especially in
these woeful times, in which piety is heresy, and wherein it is counted a
dishonor to serve Christ. But according to the Apostles example, I shook off
this Viper, without Act. 28.
taking any hurt, I believed that I ought to contemn this contempt, according
to the saying of the Apostle, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Romans 1. 1^.
Christ, seeing it is the power of God to salvation to all that believe. I
thought it better to share with Gods children in the words reproach, then to be
had in execration before God and his Angels, and willingly to be made the
ofscouring of the earth, seeing so I might be made heavens delight.

I thought it folly to imagine I should reap, before I had sowed, to overcome
without conflict, and to be crowned, before I had run my race to the end, and
that it is impossible to partake of the excellency of Christ's cross, without
feeling the weight of it, seeing the paschall Lamb was to be Exodus 12. 8.
eaten with sour herbs, and the bread of the Lord, like that of Boaz, must be
eaten with dipping it in Ruth. 2.
vinegar.

I consider, that seeing the kingdom of Jesus Christ is not of this world, it
were extreme folishnes in me, to seek the world in his kingdom, or to think
of rest in his kingdom, who is the enemy of our Father, or not to make
profession of the Gospel til persecutions be ended, or to set before us Jesus
Christ without his Cross, or a Gospel without reproach. To tarry till God had
traced out a new way to heaven, and till the world and Satan should cease to
be; for the enmity of the old Serpent, which began in the earthly Paradise,
Genesis 3.
will never have an end, till we become to the heavenly,

I also thought that there is no affliction for the Gospel which Jesus Christ
has not foretold, and that such as are enrolled for servants in his army,
must accept it upon condition, that whosoever will come Luke 9. 23.
after me, must deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. Jesus
Christ tells us that if we will enter Mat. 7. 23.
into life eternal, we must pass through the straight gate, and this is that
advantage which in this life he tells his Apostle he must take for his
patrimony, I will show him how many things he must suffer for my sake. A
lesson which the Apostle sets us Act. 9. 16.
al to take out, saying; By many afflictions we must enter Act. 14. 22.
into the kingdom of heaven, and 2. Tim. 3. All that 2 Timothy 3. 12.
will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.

I shake of delicacie, when I cast mine eyes upon Daniel, who chose rather to
be cast into the Lions den, then to give over lifting up his hands to heaven:
upon those three worthies, who chose rather to be exposed to the mercy of the
fiery furnace, then to bow before an Idol, and upon so many clouds of
witnesses, who were willing rather to shed their blood, then defile themselves
with Idolatry.

And above all I was astonished in beholding Jesus Heb. 12. 2.
Christ the author and finisher of our faith who for the joy that was set
before him endured the cross, and despised the shame: For, the servant is not
greater then his John 13. 16.
master, nor the Ambassader greater then he that sent him. Seeing our head was
crowned with thorns, and was offered vinegar to drink, all streaming over
with blood, what a vile shame is it for us his members, to desire the enjoying
of all our liberties here below in this corruptible world, or to lie sucking
at the breasts of the poysonful sweets there of yea, for as much as Jesus Christ
has suffered so much for our salvation, is it not just and equal that we
prepare our selves to suffer for his glory, according to that exhortation of
the Apostle let us Heb. 13. 13.
go forth out of the camp, bearing his reproach?

For I also thought, that to escape a thief in the way, I ought not to cast my
self headlong into infinite and inevitable miseries. For what corzie is more
sencible and intolerable, then that of an evil conscience? yea, all the
tortures in this life, are but light flea-bitings in respect of those eternal
punishments, wherewith God will punish those, who worship the beast and his
Image, and whosoever they Reu. 14. 9. 10.
be that receive the mark of the beast in their foreheads.

But that which did yet fortify me most of all, was the consolation which the
Apostle gives us, saying in his Epistle to the Romans: That all Romans 8. 28.
things work together for good to those that love God. That by afflictions,
we are made conformable to the Image Ver. 29.
of the Son of God: and that all our sufferings Romans 8. 18.
of this present life, being well weighed, are not worthy of the glory which
is to come, and shall in due time be revealed unto us, For our light
affliction which is but 2 Cor. 4. 17.
for a moment, works in us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory,
whilst we look upon, not the things which are seen, but on the things which
are not seen, which are eternal. For those who are come out of Reu. 7. 14.
great tribulation, and have washed their long robes, and made them white in
the blood of the Lamb, that stand Verse 15.
before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, shall
have no more hunger, nor thirst, 16.
the sun shall not light upon them, nor any heat, for the Lamb which is in
the midst of the throne, shall feed 17.
them, and lead them to the fountains of living waters, and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes. That was it which caused me to change my note,
and to think nothing sweeter then the waters of Mara, when Christ our true
Moses casts into them the wood of his Cross, assuring us of the m^rit of his
death and passion: yea, I dare say, that afflictions for the name of Christ do
bring with them more true joy and comfort to the faithful soul, then the
whole world furnished with all her contentments to a profane wretch. And
therefore Christ says, Blessed are they who are persecuted for Mat. 5. 10.
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when
men revile you, and persecute Verse 11.
you and shall say all manner of evil saying against you falsely, for my names
sake, rejoice and be glad, for great 12.
is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which were
before you. That is it which Saint James also says in his Epistle, My brethren
Iam. 1. 2.
think it perfect joy when you fall into diverse temptations. And that likewise
of S. Peter, rejoice in as 1 Pet. 4. 13.
much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall
appear, ye may be glad and rejoice: If ye be railed upon for the name of
Christ, blessed are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you.
Thence it is that the Apostles in the Acts went away rejoicing, that they Act.
5. 41.
were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Jesus Christ. And that
the Apostle Saint Paul who had been rapt up into the third heaven, and had
heard words which are inexpressible, which is not possible for man to utter,
chose yet rather to rejoice in his sufferings. The joy which he for a time
possessed among the Angels, being no let unto him to rejoice in the midst of
the Martyrs. I take pleasure (says he) in reproaches, in 2 Cor. 12. 10.
necessities, in persecutions, in anguishes for Christ, for when I am weak,
then I am strong. From thence it came, that out of the midst of his most
inward passions, he cries out, I am filled with consolation, 2 Cor. 7. 4.
I am full with joy more and more in all our affliction, for full well he knew,
that it is freely given us for Phil. 1. 29.
Christ, not only to bel^eue in him, but also to suffer for his sake.

And therefore according to Christ his exhortation, I believed that I ought not
to fear those Mat. 10. 28.
who having killed the body, can do no more, but to fear him rather, who can
destroy both body and soul in hell fire, and that, if the sufferings 2 Cor.
1. 5.
of Christ abound in us, the consolations of Christ shall abound in us also. If
we die with Christ, that 2 Timothy 2. 12.
we shall also live with him. That if we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him. And that if Mar. 8. 35.
any will save his life, he shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his life
for Christ's sake, and the Gospels, he shall save it.

And no marvel if neither the threats nor promises of the world prevailed
with me, to hinder me from giving glory to God, seeing the world can promise
nothing which is more excellent then the kingdom of heaven, nor threaten any
thing more terrible then the pains of hell: But as with a stedsast eye I
looked upon the world, which I now forsake, and the cross which I embrace:
soon the other side, when I come to cast mine eyes upon you (most honored
Father and Mother) and to set before me your tender affections, and paternall
loves; whilst I call to mind with what mildness you brought me up; what care
you had of my education, sparing no cost to instruct me in the knowledge of
good letters, framing my mind to the love of virtue: and then again, when I
thought how much affliction and discomfort my departing would bring unto you in
following a Religion, the excellency whereof you yet discern not.

All these things I say well weighed, so wrought upon mine affections, that it
has caused floods of tears to fall from mine eyes, and to be brought as it
were to nothing, for the truth is, my love toward you is so ardent and
respective, that if it were but to endure any temporal punishments, I had
rather suffer a thousand torments and tortures, then to breed you the lest
coffeehouse: yea, I ingenuously confess, that this consideration so far
prevailed with me, that it had in a manner stayed me from proceeding on in this
fair path, wherein I now walk, if God (having compassion of mine infirmity)
had not drawn me on by the hand of his grace, and strengthened my weakness,
to hearken to the words of our Savior; Who so loves father or mother more
then me, is Mat. 10. 37.
not worthy of me: As also to that answer which he made him which said, I
will follow thee Lord, Luke 9. 61.
but first give me leave to take leave of those that are at mine house; None
that puts his hand to the plough, Verse 6^.
and looks back, is fit for the kingdom of God.

Then I considered, that God called me to the same condition unto which he
called the Father of the faithful, Go out of the country, and from Genesis 12.
1.
thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, to go into a country which I will
show thee.

I thought that, if I was bound to respect the father of my body, I was much
more bound to respect the Father of my spirit, and that it was better to obey
God then men. Act. 4. 19.


And the better to alay this bitterness, I comforted my self the sweetness of
the gracious promises of my good God, I will receive you, and will be 2 Cor. 6.
18.
a father unto you, and you shall be my sons, and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty, 2. Cor. 6. Whence I came to conclude thus with my self, I forsake my
fathers house, but I enter into the house of God, I estrange my self from my
natural parents but I enter into that high and noble alliance and spiritual
kindred which is named in heaven and in earth, of which Jesus Christ is the
head. When Ephesians. 3. 15. Psalm. 27. 10.
my father and my mother forsake me, the Lord will gather me up. Add also, that
with this consolation I comforted my self thus, namely, that I entered not into
a Church which under pretense of piety teaches me to cast off the bands of
natural respects and duty, but which commands all Christians to nourish
within them the cordial affections of true Exodus 20.
charity instructing children to honor their father and mother in all things,
in the Lord. The Ephesians. 6.
honor and love which I owe you, are too fast engraued in my breast, to be
blotted out. The bands wherewith I am knit unto you, are too strong to be
broken, and my desire to acknowledge your favors shall never die in me, till I
die.

Now I nothing doubt but you will witness with me how blameless my conversation
was during the time I conuersed amongst you, I was also inflamed with a most
ardent affection to make it appear unto you, that it was neither rashness nor
lightness, which caused me to change Religion. But I only suffered my self to
be vanquished by the power of truth, and the motions of Gods holy Spirit: to
which purpose you know I endeavored my self in your presence to maintain this
truth agaiust such Doctors as you approved of, (which I often did in particular
conferences (having learned, that God perfects his praise by the mouth of babes
Mat. 11. 25.
and perfects his power in our weakness. For as God hides his secrets from
the wise and prudent, and reueales 2 Cor. 12. 9.
them unto little ones, So has the Truth greater Mat. 11. 25.
force in the mouth of a child, then a lie in the mouth of all the Doctors in
the world. But the miseries of these times not permitting me to enter into
such disputes, without exposing my person to manifest danger, and not minding
to enter into the Church of GOD through trouble: As also that disputations now
adays are rather loud then fruitful: because they dispute only to dispute,
striving rather for victory then truth, I thought it every way better, and more
to edification, to set down my reasons of this my alteration and change by
writing: to which the grace of God assisting me, I will without ceasing
endeavor, now that God of his mercy has given me to arrive in such a place,
where it is lawful both to speak and write the truth. For I hold my self
still bound to give you an account of my proceedings, and I should think my
self happy, if this little light which God has communicated unto me, might
something enlighten your darkness, then should I willingly yield my Spirit
to God that gave it, if I might see you with my self walking the way to life
and happiness.

In expectation whereof I beseech the great God and father of mercies, that he
will make us all mind one and the same thing in Christ, that he will replenish
you with the joys and comforts of his holy Spirit, granting us all the grace,
that after we have glorified him a little while here on earth, we may be
glorified with him for ever in heaven, even with that glory which he has
prepared for us before the foundation of the world.

So prays he who craves that you will always believe it, even unto the altar.

Your most humble, most affectionate, and most obedient Son, de VRILLAC.
From SEDAN, this 3. of August, 1621.

