INTRODVCtion to wisdom.

Banquet of sapience.

Precepts of Agapetus.

TO THE RIGHT, worshipful master Gregory Cr^mwell, son to he right
honorable lord Crumwell, lord privy seal, Richard Morisine wishes much
wealth, with continual encreace of virtue.
VUho sowel feleth the duties, that belong to an honest heart, and is any thing
aqueinted with those three ladies, which wonderfully maintein the joyful
society of man's life, called among the Grecians Charites, among the latins
Gratie, he can not most gentill master Crumwell, but se infinite causes, why
I ought with all force of body, all strength of mind, all alacritee and
cheerful promptness of courage, study to gratify you, study to make you
bear with one, that feign would, and never can be able to come out of debte.
The first of these three dames, is Bountiful beneficence, a lady of lovely
countenance, and noble stomach, one that always longs, still having that
she longs for, always with child, and still delivered, alwaie profityng,
and still lustyng to profit, alwaie helpyng some, and still desirefull to
help mo. The Greeks name her sometime Euridomene, which signifies a large
and a plentiful giver, sometime Aglaia, which sounds among us gladness,
teaching men even by her name, that of duty benefittes ought to be given
cherefullie. The second lady is Thankfulness of mind, never forgettyng
benefittes received, her name is Thalia, which signifies fresshenesse or
grenenesse, because duty and honesty woll, all pleasures, all benefits still
to be fresh in memory, still to be green, never to wyther, never to fade,
all time to florishe. The third lady is Euprosine, much like her sy^^er
Aglaia, a damoysell full of solace, full of delectacion, continually deuysyng,
by what means she may do pleasure for pleasure, recompense kyndnesse with
kyndnesse. Authors of great name and much wisdom, make these three, to go all
hand in hand, the first lokyng still forward, not once castyng her eye back,
never imbraydyng benefits given and past. The second and the third evermore
beholding the first, with amiable countenance, with faithful eye of
remembrance, and full intent of recompense, as far, as power furthered with
most desire may or can. Under such clouds, sage and grave writers ar wont
darkely to insinuate things of great weight, things very necessary for the
quiet and honest leadyng of man's life, things worthy to be of all men
imbraced^ worthy to be set fixed and engrafted in all men's hertes.

They perceived, that moral precepts pleasantly set out in feat colors of
witty fantasies, both crepe faster into our bosoms, and also tarry there with
much more delectacion and profit, than they would, being plainly spoken.
Wherefore as you now se, what they mente by those three ladies, so you must
also needs see, how I am bound, to owe you my heart, my service, with all
that they both may do for you.

For how can I, my lord your father, being so far in amors with that lovely
lady Euridomene, leave mine attendaunce upon the other two damoisels, before
life leave me? How can I, being enuyronned with so many and ample his
benefits not desire Thalia and Euphrosine that they both report me, to lack
power, but no good will, I trust they both shall have good cause so to do.
Certes, if I had seen, where either my littel wit, or poor heart might
better have served his lordship than in openyng unto you his dear and entierly
beloved son such precepts of virtue, as may make you most like your noble
father, there are no pei^e^ that could have kept me from doing of it. Assure
your self, master Crumwell, if labor and heart may pay the tribute, that
love owes, you shall never need to arrest me.

This book, was gathered by Ludouicus Uines, a man great lie conuersaunt in all
good authors, and excellently well seen in all kinds of learning. The book
has undoubtedly, much more liyng in his bosom, than the title promises in
the forehed. It is not only an Introduction to wisdom, but if ye go as it
leads you, it introduces wisdom into you, rootyng the love and desire of
virtue in your heart, extirpyng from it all manner of vice, and all uncleanness,
furnishyng you with general precepts, for all kinds of life, for all ages,
for all degrees and conditions, which precepts, if you harbou^ in your
breaste, must needs be a great slaie, help, and comfort unto your tender age.
They shall bring to pass many things in your life time, with great pleasure,
and no pain at all, which otherwise experience often times poudred with bitter
repentance, should scace at length teach you. It is as wise Socrates says,
Precepts of lerning were invented at the first as a needful stay and succor
unto man's mind, wantynge knowlage and experience: even as a staff is given of
necessity, to stay up a feeble body, assuredly, I know no one book
untranslated, that has half so many wholesome documentes, as this has, none
that may so well lead you the right way to true honor, none where ye may
either with more delight, or more hope of your game, trace true nobility.
Follow your leader, go on with your guide, you shall find all the steps and
grices, whereby not only my Lord your father, honorably has climed to
nobility, but all other, that in deed are or were at any time noble^ you shall
find many things here, that may be to men in wealth and worship an
ornamente, many that are to me^ assauted with the sur^^s of sower fortune, sure
cou^sailours, bringyng with them, besides right and honest consolacion,
much delectable doctrine^ finally, many that are a sovereign medicine
almost for all diseases. The book is now yours, I trust as the iewelles,
which it offers unto you, be great, rare, and preciouse, that so ye will
see them laid up in place mete for such richesse. Lock them fast in the
cheste of your heart, give the keie to remembrance, that she may let them
out, and carry them home again, at such times as ye shall think convenient.
If ye make these precepts yours, by use of them, speaking as they teach you,
workynge as they advise you, who shall have more cause to rejoice of it, tha^
you your self? Wherein can you more please my lord your fathers mind? What
thing can more satisfy his desire? What greatter comfort can come to his
Lordship, than to see you most like him in conditions? What greatter worship to
you, than to tread in his steps? What higher pleasure to al them that love
both? your country knows what noble feats my lord your father has wrought
by wisdom, lady governor of all vertues^ who knows not, how honesty may
rejoice, how truth and religion may hold up their hands to heaven, that god
has sent to so gracious, so prudent and wise a prince, so good so wise and so
faithefull a counsailour? to so noble a master, so diligente a mynister, to so
high courageous and virtuous a king, a subject of so noble an heart and
stomach? I must leave of, I am entered into to long a matter for a short
epistle. Wherefore I can no more, but with all heart, desire god, that it may
please him long to preserve noble Henry the.viii. still in all welthe, in all
honor to reign over us, to the setting forth of gods honor, to the
spreadynge abroad of his glory, to the magnifiyng of his name in all places,
long to preserve my lord to the furtherance of the same. Finally, that ye
may be heir of his Lordeshippes qualities and virtues, as well as of his
honor and wordelie dignity. And thus our Lord send you ever well to fare. ^

An introduction to wisdom.
TRVE AND veraie wisdom is, corrupt affection set aside, truly to judge of
things, and that we esteem every thing to be as it is, neither couetyng the
vile, as though they were preciouse, neither refusyng precious, as though
they were of no price: nor giuyng dispraise to things worthy praise, ne yet
commendyng things worthy discommendacion. For, from this spryng, all error
renneth into men's minds.

There is nothing more hurtful in man's life, than this corrupete judgment,
this I say, where every thing is not esteemed as it ought to be, and at such
price, as it is woorthe.

The opinions and common persuasions of the people are pernicious: because for
the most part they judge of all things most fondely.

Certes the vulgar people is a great school master of great errors.

There is nothing that we ought to seek for with more study, than to bring
him that gives him self to knowlage and wisdom, from the judgment of the
rude multiude.

First let him suspect as many things, as the multitude, with great assent,
and consent, does approve, until he has examined them after those men's rule,
which make virtue a measure to try all mattiers by.

Let every man, even from his childhode, use to have right opinions of all
things, which shall grow and increase, like as his age does.

Let every man desire upright things, and flee the crooked: chose the good, and
refuse the evil, this use and custom shall turn well doing almost into
nature, and so work, that none but such as ar compelled, and such as ^t in
strife, found the weaker, shall be brought to do evil.

The best kind of life is (as soon as thou can) to be chose^ Custom shall
make this, as it is best for the, so within a short space, to be most pleasant.

All the rest of our life hangs upon our bringyng vp^ when we be children.

Wherefore the first grice, that men clyme unto wysdom by, is that that so many
ancient writers speak of, Seipsum nosce^ Every man to know him selfe^

A division of such things, as ar perteignyng unto men.
MAn is constituted and made of body and mind: the body we have of the earth,
and those elements that we se and touch, like unto the bodies of beasts.

The mind we have given us from heaven, like unto angels, like to god him
self: by this part man is esteemed man, and as great wise men think, they
alone are to be taken for men, that in this have their just portion.

There be in the body, as belongyng unto it, beauty, health, integritee of
members, strength lightness, delectacion, and their contraries as deformitee,
sickness, lack of limbs, wekenes, sloth, sorrow, and other, as well
commoditees of the body, as inco^moditees of the mind, as learning and virtue,
and their contraries, rudeness and vice.

There be certain things not given to all men, but chansyng to a few, and
these be called things, Extra hominem, besides the nature of man, as riches
power nobilitee honor dignitee glory favor, and their contraries, pouertee,
nedinesse, ignobilitie, vile estimacio^^ shame, obscurenesse, hatred.

A division of things and their price.
THe queen and princess of all things most highest, is virtue, unto whom all
other serve, as handemaydes their maistresses, if they do as by duty they are
bounden, I call virtue a reverent love toward god and man, a right service
and woorshippynge of god, a right love toward man, love I say, not endyng in
words, but joined with an ernest will to do good. Other things, if they be
referred to this Uertu, that is if they be sought, kept, and spent for her
sake: and at her commandment, they can not seem evil. Neither they that call
riches, and other things like, godis, thought so of them, as now the rude
people do, the which has so corrupted the true and native significacions of
things, that many of them have lost their right estimacion, and ar changed up
set down. For we must understand where, when, and how far these things be
good.

We may not esteem richesse above their valu, or judge, that preciouse
stones, metals, royal places, or gorgiouse implementes of house, are richesse,
or they rich, that have these: but rather richesse is, not to want such
things, as are necessarily required to man's life.

True glory, is to be well spoken of, for virtues sake.

True honor is to be had in veneracion for some greatte virtue.

The grace that men obtain of princis or other people, should be favor borne
to them for their amiable virtues and qualitees, love worthy.

Dignitee is either a rihgt opinion, which one man has of an other for
virtues sake, or else a certain beauty of some inward virtue, outwardly
expressed before men's eyes.

Power and reign is, to have many, whom thou may succor and aid in right
and honesty.

He is to be reckened noble, that is known by some excellent act, to be
noble, orels comes of an anc^ent stock, and shows him self to be in
virtue and worthy qualitees like unto his parents.

A right gentilman is he, who^ nature has facioned and set, as it were in a
standing for the receipte of virtue.

Health is a temperate habitude of the body, whereby the mind both keeps her
strength^ and exerciseth^ her power.

Beauty stands in such ^^niamentes, shape, and portrature of the body, as
do show a beautiful mind to dwell therein.

Strength and valiantness is, to suffice and accomplisshe the exercises of
vertue^ without werinesse.

Pleasure is a pure, sound, hole, and continual delectacion, which is taken
only of those things that belong unto the mind.

If a man do discuss and reason these things before rehearsed, otherwise, that
is, after the mind and judgment of the ignorant people, he shall find them,
to be things unmeet for men, things vain, and also veraie hurtful.

First, all outward things be either referred unto the body, or to the mind,
as richesse ar to the maintenance of our life, honor to bear witness of our
virtue, and well doing.

The body it self is no thing else but a couerture, and a thing bound to serve
the soul, where unto both nature reason and comlines comnaunde the said body
to be subject as a thing brute, to that that dies never, a thing earthely,
to that that has a portion of divine Nature in it.

Furthermore, learning is sought for, and lodged in the mind for this
intent, that we may thereby both know sin, and eschew the same, and know
virtue, and atteine to it.

If learning do not this in him that has it, she leaves her holle duty
undone.

What other thing is our life but a certain peregrinacion, beset on every
side, with so many dangerous chances, that the end thereof, is every hour
hangyng over it, which often times falls upon most light occasions? Wherefore
it is a great folly to do any thing that is foul or filthy, for the love of
uncertain life, as who should say, thou were suer to live long after thy
naughty doing.

As it is in a journey, so is it in man's life, the lighter and les burdeine a
man carries, the easier and plesanter his journey is.

Moreover, the nature of man is such, and so ordained, that it needs very
few things. In so much, that if a man woll more nerely behold this thing,
doubteles he can not but utterly condemn them, as mad folk, which so
gredily and so carefully accumulate gooddes upon goods, where as so little
suffiseth: His saying was pretty and quick, that thus expresed richesse: Sunt
breuis vite longum viaticum, that is: They are great and long purueiance for a
littell and short life.

Wherefore richesse, possessions, and apparel ought to be prepared only for
our necessary use, which use is not helped by unmeasurable richesse, but rather
oppressed, as ships over laden with to great a fraighte.

Gold it self, if thou use it not, differs very little from claie, saving
that the custody thereof does put the to more unquietness, causing the, by
reason thy mind is only set thereon, to neglect such things as ought above
al other, to be regarded.

Money brings men into a kind of idolatry, as often as for it those other
things are set aside, I mean godly reverence and cleanness, which are the
great, chief, and first in nature. I let pass, how many deceites, gynnes,
and trains are laid for riches, how many and sundry ways they come to
naught, and into how many vices they, when they tarry, drive men, draw
men, drown men.

What other thing is gaie apparel, but instruments to strike up a dance for
pride.

Necessitee first invented the profitable garment, Riot and Richesse found
the preciouse, which Uanitee facioned unto her trick. Great contencion is in
varietee of apparel, which has taught men many superfluous and hurtefull
things, by reason that they seek to be honored even for that, which
plainly declares their infirmitee, folly, and weakness.

Hereby it comes to pass, that this part of riches, gorgious buildings,
goodly householde stuff, preciouse stones, and other rich ornaments, be set
out rather for a brag, and to serve other men's eyes, than for the use and
profit of those that possess them.

What other thing is nobilitee now but a chance, to be borne of this or that
gentille blood, and an opinion grafte upon the foolishenesse of rude and
unlearned people, which oftentimes is gotten by robbery and like ways.

True and perfect nobilitee springs of vertue^ wherefore it is great madness
for any man, to crake of his parents, being naught him self, dishonoryng
their noble acts with his le^de doings.

Truly we be all made of like elements, and have al one god Father to us all,
yet to contemn the birth or stock of any man, is under a color to reprove
god, which is the auctour of every man's natiuitee.

What other thing is power, than a fair cumbrance, wherein if man knew, what
troubles and cares lie hidden, how great a sea of evils every day ouerrenneth
the small sweetness of it, there is no man so ambicious, no man so gredy of
honor, but he would fly it, as a grievous mysery, he would as that king
said, not stoop to ta^^ up a diadem, if it lay before him on the ground.

How odiouse a thing is it to govern evil men? how much more, if thou be
evil thy self?

Honor, if it spryng not of Virtue, is falsely given and wrongefully taken,
neither it can fully delight the, where as thy conscience denies the to serve
it. Again, if it do arise of virtue, virtue teaches the to refuse it. For that
ought not to be called or taken for Virtue, which is done for desire of
honor. Honor must follow well dooyng, and is not to be craved of the well
doers.

How can dignitees be called dignities, or worthiness, when they chance to
most unworthy persons, gotten by deceyte, by crauyng for money, and such
other naughty means, in especial where they be given by the arbiterment of
the rude multitude, a beast of many heads, which does nothing as reason
and right judgment would. And what other thing is glory, than as he said, a
vain blast, that fills fools ears? And as honor and dignitee, are rather
in him that gives them, than in him, that is the receiuour, so glory
brings little or nothing to him, that it is given unto. Certes they both
are uncertain, wanderyng and soon gone, very like unto the multitude their
parent, which in the space of a day, hyghely praises, and depely dispraiseth
the same man. We see therefore that honor commonly faste^st fl^eth from him,
that most seeks it, and goes to them, that least regard it, agreyng in
this point with the nature and condition of the variable people, which
oftetymes flee from him, whom they ought soonest to follow. I need not to say,
that this honor and dignitee arise of causes sometime foolisshe, sometime very
noughty. Often times he comes up apace, that can play well at tenisse, often
times he waxes honorable, that leaves honesty, spendyng his patrimony upon
^unkettes, minstrels, and scoffesr.

But war, that is to say, robbery without punishment, is a great a^auncer of
men to honor, such is the madness of foolish people.

Let every man descend down into him self, and there secretly think well upon
this mattier, and than he shall find, how littell comes to him, by fame, by
rumors, by worship, by such honor, as the people gives him, wherein many
now much glory.

What difference is between the highest king that is, and the lowest slave,
when they be both a sleep?

What is beautee in the body? truly a well colored skin, if the inward
parties could be seen, what filthiness should be espied, even in the most
beautiful body?

The fairest body is nothing else but a dungehylle covered in white and purple.

What does beauty or pretty feature of body avail, if the mind be unclean?
and if there be, as the greek writer says: In hospitio pulchro, hospes de
formis, that is to say, a fowl^ geast in a fair hostry.

For what purpose seruet^ strength of body, when thynge^ most greattest, and
metest for man, be not gotten by strength of body, but by the gifts of wit.
Our strength, be it never so great, can in no wise be equal with the strength of
a bulle, or an elephant, it is reason, it is wit, it is policy, whereby we
overcome them.

I let pass, I need tell no man that beauty, strength, agilitie, and other
gifts of the body, shortly vanisshe away, even ^s flowers.

And axes, a small fever alone brings oftentimes a veraie strong champyon to
deaths ^ore, and soon shakes away his fresshe color, his beauty, and his
strength.

And although sickness, or other mischaunce come not to them, yet all they
of necessit^^^ through age, which ever cre^eth on, must needs decaie.

No man therefore of right can count such outward things, as so sodeinlie
depart awai^ from him, to other men, to be his, no man can reckon things of
the body, to be his, which flee away so fast, and so soon depart.

What will ye now say, when those things, which so many men do highly
desire, be occasions of great vices, as of insolent errogancie, of
luskishnesse, of fierceness, of envy, of privy hatrede, of strife, of
debate, of battle, murder, and manslauter?

The delectacion of the body is vile and beastly, as the body it self is, and
beasts be more oftener moved, and have more pleasure, and longer also than
men, the which pleasure not only over whelmeth the body with many diseases,
bringyng greatte damage and loss of gooddes, but also wounds the mind with
sorrowful repentance, and dulleth the wit, which is much extenuated,
abated, and broken through the delicate cherishyng of the body. Finally there
follows irkesomnes of it self, and hatred of all virtue.

It is not la^full for any man to use such pleasures openly. For as they
much misbecome the nobleness of man's mind: so is there none so far paste all
grace, but he bassheth to use them in presence of many witnesses. No because
they ingeuder ignominy and shame, such as use them, are driven to seek
darkness and secret corners.

And furthermore these fleing short and soon passing pleasures, may neither,
by any means be retained and kept, neither yet come they pure, but are with
some bitterness intermingled. Therefore judge not, after the consent of the
common people, the greattest evil to be, pouertee, ignobilitee, imprisonment,
nakedness, worldly shame deformitee of body, sickness, and imbecilitee, but
rather think vices, and their affinitees, as folisshenesse, ignorancie, amassed
dullness, and lack of brayn, the greattest evils: and their contraries,
knowlage, quickenesse of wit, and sobrietee of mind, to be great virtues.

If thou have either gifts of fortune or of body, they shall much profit
the, if thou bestow them vertuosely, but if they help to set out vice,
they must needs do the much hurt. If thou have neither the one nor the other,
seek them not with the loss of honesty, for that were even to bye a littell
claye, with a greatte sum of gold: or to change health, for peynfull
sickness.

There can be no greatter vantage to the soul, than is the increase of
godliness, no greater gaynes to the body, than to know how to use the state
present, and to ^ee content with it how simble so ever it be.

And all be it we ought to do nothing, to the intent, that we would men should
tickle us with fond preises, yet we must labor, to ke^pe our good nam^
always unspotted, for the regard thereof keeps us often times from much
naughtines, and also is a good exaumple to stir other to well doing.

And hereof comes that old precepte of greatte wise men:

Thou shalt none evil do, nor any thyn^e that longs thereto. If we can not
atteyne to this well, we must be content, that in our conscience, we feel our
selves void of secret grudge and unquietness. For when men's judgments be
so corrupt, that they count virtue to be vice, than we must be content, that
God alone approve our inward and outward a^^es, though men allow ner
another.

It is easy to turn either the incommodities of the body, or mischaunces of
fortune to our profit, and of evils to make them good, if thou suffer them
patiently, and the less that they serve the, the more endeuourest to follow
Virtue, Uertues, often times have been excedyngly increased by hurtes of body,
and loss of gooddes.

Of the body.
ANd for as much as in this our pilgrimage, we bear a soul enclosed within
our body, great treasure in brickle vessels, we may not utterly refuse and
cast away all regard and respect to the body. yet we must so entreat, and
order the same, that it may not take it self, to be a master or a fellow, but
rather a servant, and that, Body is not fed for his own sake, but for Souls
sake.

The more cherishyng that the carke^ has, the less is the soul looked upon,
the more delicately the body is handled: the more stubbornely it wrasteleth
against the mind, and doothe cast it of, as an horse to well cherished, uses
to cast his rider. The heavy burdein of the body, sore oppresses the mind,
fatness, and ouermuche cheryshyng of the bealy, diminishes and dulleth the
quickenesse of wit.

Meat, sleep, all manner of exercise, and all the whole governance of the body
must be used for the health thereof, and must not be set upon pleasure and
delicacie. Thus it may the better serve the mind, and not wax wanton, through
to much pamparyng: nor yet fall in decaie, for lack of strength, not
nourished.

There is nothing, that does so much debilitate the lively power, the quick
vigor of the mind, and also the strength of the body, as does
voluptuousness, for as all the strength of the body and mind is established,
and made galliarde with exercise, and moderade labor, so by ydelnesse and
wanton pleasures, their powers are wekened, their stre^gthes wax faint, and
fall away.

Clean keeping of the body delicate nicenes of meats and drinks laid
aparte) does greatly both maintain the health of the body, and much comfort
wit.

Thou shalt wasshe thy hands and thy face often times with cold water, and
dry them again with a fair towell.

Thou shalt oft^ cleanse those places of the body, out of the which
filthiness comes from thy inward parties, as thy hedde, thy ears, thy
nosethrilles, thy eyes, thy arm holes, and thy other secret places, that
nature hydeth, and hone^ie scace would have named.

Let thy fecte be kept clean and warm.

Among all the parts of thy body, keep the nape of thy neck from cold.

Eat not by and by, after thou ^iseste, eat littell before dinner, breakefaste
is given to swage the gnawyng and complaints of a young stomach, or to
comfort nature, and not to fill the bealy: therefore.iii. or iiii. morsels of
bread be sufficient, with out any drink, or with a littell and that very
small. For such is no less holsom unto the wit than to the body.

Accustom thy self at dinner and supper, to feed but of one manner of meat,
and if thy substance will suffer the, let it be such, as is most wholesome,
fine, and of least grossness. Eat but of one, though there be many disshes.
and if thou be at thine own table, suffer not many to come upon it. Uarietee
of meats is veraie hurtefull, yet the diuersitee of sauces is much wurse.

Clean and pure diete, agreeable to te^perate and chaste minds, is a great
sauer in a householde, and that alone shows us, how few things we have
need of.

Let us do no notable offense either in hope of lu^er, or in trust thereby to
r^plenisshe ou^ bealies with deyntee delicates, and far sought dishes.

We shall do well, if we not only content our selfs with such things, as
we have, but also do depart with some of them, to such as have need of
relief.

Our lord him self gives us an exaumple of this, which after he had fested
a multitude of people, suffered not such ^reade and fisshe as was left, to be
lo^^e.

Nature teaches us things necessary, which be but few, and soon prepared:
fa^^shenes has invented things superfluous, which are without number, and
hard to come by. If thou give necessaries unto nature, she is delited and made
strong as with things fytte for her, but if thou give her superfluouse, she
is weakened and afflicted, as with gobbettes, not agreeyng unto her diete.

As necessaries do not suffice, where foolishenesse craves, so superfluous
things over whelm rather than satisfy, where appetites are to be served.

Thy drink shall be that natural lyquour, prepared of God indifferently to
all living creatures, which is pure and clean water, or else single bear, or,
wine alayde with the said water.

There is nothing that can more hurt the bodies of young men, than hot meat^s
and hot drynkes, for they inflame their lyuers, and set on fire their
entrails: And hereby men's minds are made hot, angry, proud, impudent,
and ar thens so carried with rashenesse, that like as they were mad, they seek
to accomplish al their ^ustes, be they never so filthy.

Drink not after supper, or if thyrste move the, take some moiste or cold
thing, or a littell quantitee of drink, and that of the smallest.

Between that and thy going to bed, let it be at the least half an hour.

When you wol refreshe your mind, with any pastance, look you consider, how
short time is given to man's life, think it unlawful, to spend this time, in
games, in feastyng, or in any other childishe toies, folies, if ye right name
them.

The ^ourse of our life is but short, I say although it were every whitte
bestomed in deckyng and adornyng the mind.

Think not, that we be made of god, to gamyng, to tryfles, but rather sent, to
be occupied in sage matti^rs, as to atteyne unto moderacion, modestee,
temperaunce, religion, and all other kinds of virtue.

Heal not the syckenesse of your body, with diseases of mind. Better it is,
that that be sick, than this not hole.

Exercises of body shall not be to great, but used with a certain regard of
health, wherein we must follow the counsels of expert and counnyng phisicions,
so far as they shall not transcende the limittes of honesty neither bid us
do any filthy thing against gods law.

Also in pastimes and refresshynge of the mind, see there be some remembrance
of virtue always.

Banisshe all arrogan^^^, contencion, quarellinges, envy and covetousness: for
what reason or rather folishnes is it, to inquiete thy mynbe, whiles thou
studiest, to delight it? you do as wisely as they that put galle into that
honye, which they would have most swetest.

Sleep must be taken as a certain medicine, and so much only, as is
sufficient to refreshe the body^ for immoderate sleep bryngethe the body to
many hurtefull humors, and much hinders the quickenesse of the mind.

The time that is spente in sleep, is scace to be counted any part of life.
Uita en^^ vigilia est, Life is a watch or a wakyng.

Of the Mind.
THere be two parts in the soul, the one that understands, remembers and
sau^reth things as they are, vsyng reason, judgment, and wit, and is called
Men's, that is, the mind, the superior part, by which alone we are known to
be men, made like unto god, far passing all other living creatures.

The other part, which is called will, is void of reason, brute, fires,
cruel, more liker a beast, than a man, wherein dwells these mocions, which
be named either affections, or perturbacions, arrogance, envy, malice, ire,
fear, sorrow, desire never satisfied, and vain joy. This is called the
inferior and viler part, whereby we little or nothing do differ from beasts, at
the least, we go far from god, which is without all sickness and all
affections.

This is the order of nature, that wisedowe govern al things, and that al
creatures, which we see, obey unto man, and that in man, the body be obedient
to the soul, and the soul unto god.

If any thing break this order, it offends.

As it is therefore a point of treason, that such lewd perturbacions, as are
before rehearsed, should, rage rebel and take upon them the rule of the hole
man, contemtuously despisyng the auctoritee of the mind, so it is extreme folly
for the mind, to be slave unto fond offect^ons, and to serve at a beck, the
vile carkeis, neither the dignitee of Nature, neither the express law of god,
any thing regarded.

Therefore, as strength of intelligence is given to the mind, to way every
thing, and to know what is good to be done and what to be left undone: so is
Will of so greatte power, that there is nothig in the mind, but it is forced to
obey Will, if she stand at strife, and will yield no part of her right to hi^
^duersarie.

Wit is exercised with many and diverse feats, much sharpened and instructed
with long experien^es, of sundry matters, whereby it may exactely know the
natures and values of all things, and so teach man's will, what is good to
be followed, and what contrariwise, is to be eschued: such crafts must
therefore be shonned, that fight against virtue, al crafts that work by vain
coniectu^es, as palmestrie, pyromancy, nicromancie, hydromancie, astrology,
wherein much pestilent vanity lies hid, invented of the devil, our
deceytfull ennemie: for they entreat and profess those things, which God
has reserved unto him self alone, that is to say, the knowelage of things
to come. We may not seek to know the maiestee, and secrets of god, being
far from our knowlage, and such as God would not man to meddle withal.

He that sercheth the greatness of gods maiestee, shall be oppressed and
overwhelmed with his exuperant glory. Wherefore Paul bids us, to be no wiser
than it becomes us, but moderately to be wise, saying: that he saw things
not to be spoken, that no man can utter. Also Solomon says: Thou shalt not
inquire of things above thy capacitee, neither of things above thy strength,
but content thy self with the knowlage of those, that god has commanded the:
think always upon them, never being to curious in serchyng of his works.

All arts invented by the dyuell, must be refused and forsaken of us, with
whom, as with the enemies of god, we may in no wise be conversant, or have any
thing to do. It is not expedient for us, to know the opinions, either of
philosophers or hereti^es, contrary to our profession, least that subtle and
crafty merchant, the diuill, castsom scrupulous doubt i^to our hertes, which
may much toss us, and perchance bring us in to destruction.

Authors that write wantonly, whereby may spryng occasion of hurt, must not
be touched, least any filthiness remain in the mind thoronug the readyng of
them.

Evil communicacion often corrupts good manners.

Other erudicion is sincere and fruitful, so that it be applied to his right
mark, that is to Virtue and well doing.

There is a divine knowlage given of god, wherein all treasures of science and
wisdom ar laid up, and this is the very and true light of man's mind. All
other learnynges, compared unto this, be very darkness and childishe trifles.

Yet they be read for this intent, that our light, by comparyng of the one
with the other, may shine and appear more bryghter. Furthermore, that we may
use the said learnynges, as testimonies of men against them, which can
little better abide the divine scripture, than sore eyes can the brightness of
the son. And where as we shall see such excellent Uertues in Gentiles, we may
well be put in remembrance, how much becomes a tr^we disciple of our
master Christ, which is by reason he knows this light, charged upon no
small bond to live accordingli unto goddis commandment. Beside those
things, they give us much knowledge, how we should live here together in this
world, the experience whereof we lack often times.

We be framed and facioned by these three things, Knowlage, Wit, and
Memory, and the diligence, which we use to the atteynynge of them, is called
Study.

Wit is quickened by exercise, and Memory increased by diligent tylling and
occupiyng thereof: delicate handlyng weakeneth them both: Good health confirms
and makes them strong: Idelnesse and daiely Ease, puts them to flight:
Use an^ Exercise sets them at hand, and ever in a redines.

Whether thou read or here any thing, do it with attencion and effectiousely,
let not thy mind wander, but constrain it to be there, and to do that
thing, which is in hand, and none other.

If it go a straie, or swar^e a side, call it again, as it were with a little
hist, defer al cogitacions, that may bring the from that, that thou haste in
hand, defer them until some other time, remembering with thy self that thou
leesest both time and labor, if thou be not attent upon such things as thou
do read and here.

Be not abashed to learn and ask such things, as thou knomest not,
forasmuch as noble clerks, and greatte men, have not been asshamed thereof,
bu^ rather blushe, because thou ar^ ignorant, and not wyllyng to learn.

Bost not thy self, to have knowlage of those things, wherein thou art
ignorant, but rather inquere and learn of such persons, as thou do
suppose, do understand them.

If thou will be taken for a learned man, endeavor thy self, that thou so be:
for there is none other way more compendiouse or nerer thereunto: As thou can
by none other means more easily obtain, to be esteemed an honest man, than
if thou so be in veraie deed. Finally, labor alwaie, to be even such a one
in deed, as thou desire to appear unto men, else thou desire it all in
vain.

False things fainte and fall away by process of time, and time strengthens
the truth.

Simulacion lasts not long.

Follow thy master always, run not thou at any time before him, believe
him, resyste him not.

Love him, and take him as thy father, thinking eueri thing what so ever he
says, to be very true and sure.

Beware thou offend not in that, wherein thou being culpable, wast twice or
thrice reformed, fall not the fourth time, that thine amendment and
refourmacion may seem to have profited the.

It becomes the chiefly to have those things in remembrance, that have in
times past deceived the, lest thou be in like manner by them sedused again.

It is naturally given to all men to err, but to no man to perse^ere and
continue therein, except he be unwise, and a veraie naughty person.

Learn and understand, that there is no sense, whereby we be better, or more
spedylie instruct and taught, than by heryng, and as there is nothing more
easy, than to here many things, to there is nothing more profitable,

Here not light trifles, things to be laughed at, but rather ernest, wise, and
weighty.

They be both learned with like pain and labor, all be it the commoditee,
that rises of the one, is far vntike the other.

Seek not to speak many words, to make a long answer, but rather se
thou spend thy words in time, and set them in their place.

Adioine such company to the at dynner and supper, as can both make the merry
with their pleasant and learned communicacion, and also make the rise wyser,
than thou satteste down.

Suffer not such as be scoffers, smell feasts, foolish and filthy talkers,
triflers, bibbers, fylthy and shamlesse lurkers, bealy guts, and such other,
apt either by their words or deeds, to cause leude laughter, to sit at thy
table, neither have any delight in them, but rather seek thy pastyme of such,
as can with feate, witty, and lear^nd talk, make the merry. Keep not only thy
mouth from foul and impudent communicacion, but also thine ears, being as a
man should say, windows of the mind, remembrynge ever that old saiynge of
the Apostle, Naughty communicacion, often times corruptethe good manners.

Give delygente ^are, what every man saiethe, whether it be at the table, or
any other where, for so doing, thou shalt learn of the wise, to make thy
self better, and of the foolish, to be more ware and circumspecte, following
always that that the wise approve, eschewyng that, the foolysshe commend. And
if thou perceive any thing taken of the wise sort to be spoken quyckelie,
gravely, learnedly, wyttylie, comely, bear it in mind, that thou may,
when thou shalt have occasion, use the same.

Thou shalt have always at hand a paper book, wherein thou shalt write
such notable things, as thou redeste thy self, or hear of other men
worthy to be noted, be it other feate sentence, or word mete for familiar
speech, that thou may have in a redines, when time requires.

Study not so much to gather words, as to understand the propre
significacions of them rehersyng and techyng such things, as thou haste read
or herd, partly to thy scholars in latyne, partly in vulgar tongue, to other
unlearned persons. Prouidyng alwaie, that thou do rehearse and teach them with
no less grace than thou haste herd and read the seem before, for thus doing,
thou shall exercise both thy wit and thy tongue.

Thy style must also be exercised, which is the best master of clean and
eloquent speech.

Write, and write again, making every second day, or at the least every
third day, an epistle unto some man, that knows how to answer thereunto
again. How be it, thou shall show it first unto thy master, there to be
reformed, before thou presume to send the same, noting and bearing well in
mind such fautes, as he shall correct, that thou may not mysse in them, or
any like in time to come.

After meat, as when thou have dined or supt, breath for a space, before thou
go to thy study, and sitie down in sum place, where thou may talk and
here same pleasant communicacion, or play at some such game, whereby thou
maiste not chafe or much cumber thy body. After supper, walk with some merry
company, that is learned, which may make the merier with his communicacion,
and whose words and sentences thou may with honesti follow

Between supper and bed, drink not in any wise, for there is nothing more
pernicious both to the body, the memory, and also the wit. Wherefore, if
thirste shall at any time constrayn the to drink, go not to rest under the
space of half an hour after at the least.

Thou shalt not neglecte thy memory, nor suffer it to decaie through
ydelnesse: for it rejoices above all thing, to be set a work, and
increases not a littell thereby. Exercise it therefore daiely with some worthy
business.

The more often thou committest things to her custody, the more better and
faithfuller woll she keep them. And contraryly, the more selde, the more
untrusty thou shall find her.

When thou haste put any thing to her keeping, suffer it to rest in her
hands for a season, and within a while after, require it of her agein, as a
thing left for a time in her custody.

If thou wylt learn any thing perfectly, read it with attencion ^ower or fine
times over night, and so to bed, and when thou risest, the next morning ask
a rekenyng of thy memory for that thing thou did deliver to her custodye,
the euenyng before.

Thou must beware of surfettes, of rawnesse in the stomach, and spe^iallie of
cold in thy neck.

As to much wine weakeneth the sinews in a man, so it kills his memory.

It should be veraie well done, and if thou would a littell before thou go
to rest, call to thy remembrance, all such things as thou haste seen,
read, heard, or dooen all the day before.

And if thou have behaved thy self worthily to thy comme^dacion, thou should
rejoice, and knowlage it to come of God, purposyng to continue in like
goodness: on the other side, if thou haste done any thing filthily,
outragiously, childishly, fondly, worthy rebuke, forgette not, to ascribe it to
thine own lewdness, and to be sorry therefore, never willing to do any like
trespass againe^

If thou haste heard or read any feate, grave, or godly sentence, forget it
not.

And if thou haste seen any commendable thing, follow it: and shonne the
contrary. Let no day escape the, but thou read here or write somewhat, that
may increase, either thy knowlage, thy judgment, or thy living.

When thou prepareste thy self to bed, read or hear some thing, worthy
memory, and let it be such, that thou dreamyng of it, may take both
pleasure and profit, that even by night visions, thou may learn to amend
thy life.

There is no end appointed unto the study of wisdom in this world, but it
must be ended together with life.

It behooves man to rehearse these three things with him self, all the time of
his life, that is to say, how he may think well, say well, and do well.

All arrogancy must be secluded from studies. For all that, that he knows,
which is even the best learned man a live, is veraie little or nothing, in
comparison of the infinite things, which he is ignorant in.

The knowlage of man is sclender, a marvelous small thing, and that very
obscure, and uncertain: our minds being tied an^^d bode in the prison of
this body, be oppressed with great darkness, in so much that hard it is, for
our wits to enter eue^ into a mean knowlage of things.

Furthermore, Arrogancy much encumbereth the profit of studies, for many
might have come to wisdom, if they had not thought them selfs there all
ready.

Also Contencion, Emulacion, Backebityng, vain desire of Glory must be
eschewed. For we follow studies for this cause in special, that we may, by their
help be delivered from the cruel dominion of the said vices.

Nothing can be imagyned more pleasant, than the knowlage of many things,
few or none more fruitful, than the intelligence of Virtue.

Studies be of such efficacy and strength, that they temper Prosperitee, they
mitigate Adversity, they keep under the hasty and rash mocions of youth, they
delight and comfort crooked and peynefull age, being with us at home: abroad, in
public and priaute business, wha^ we are alone, when we be accompanied, in
ydelnesse, in labors never absent, but always ready to help and aid us.

As Erudicion, is the rightest and most wholesome food of the mind, so is it a
thing unmeet, that the body should have his nourishment, the soul being
kept hungry, from whens springs out plentuously al delectacion and perfect
pleasures, and as among these, the one brings in an other, and those that be
present, do ren^e them past, so they never depart, ne make any man weary, when
he has most of them.

Of virtue and affection.
Virtue, the most high and excellent treasure, surmountyng all worldly
richesse, is not given by man, but comes, only from God.

Wherefore we must desire it of god with meke and humble heart.

The highest among all liberal arts, is that phylosophie, which brings
remedy and health for the great and peinful diseases of the mind.

Much diligent labor is taken, to cherisshe the body, much more ought to
be given to the soul, for as much as the diseases thereof, be more privy,
more greuouse, and also more perilous.

These diseases be named, and not without a cause, Sharp storms, greuouse
tourmentes, scourges, brondes, and the furies of man's mind, which bring
with them much calamity, and intolerable corsies, if they be suffered to
reign: and contraryly, most pleasant tranquilitee, if they be conquered and
kept down. And to the easy accomplisshmente of this, such documentes serve
much, as have been of most excellent wits, for the furtheraunce of good
life, and maintenance of manners prescribed.

This is the great reward, and the very fruit, that learned men take of
their long and peinfull study, not to gather many things for men to wonder
at, or else such as he him self may crake of: but rather, to have gotten,
whereby he may help al men, and most chiefly him self, and not to let
them lie, as in a box of oyntementes, where out is taken salues, to help
other men, the box therwithall, never a dele the better.

Christen Religion looks for nothing so much, as that a clean and a pure
conscience may exhilerate the mind, and that affections, being ones stayed
and settled, we may be like unto god and his angels in continual
quietness, and tranquilitee of mind.

Remedies for such diseases be gotten, either of outward things, either of
our selves, or of god, orels of the law and life of Christ.

The nature of things is such, that as they be all uncertain, short,
chaungeable, and vile, the soul only excepted, which is in deed very man, or
at the least, the most preciouse part of man: so all other things be
translated from one to an other, least men should call any thing theirs,
beside their soul.

Let no man think those things, which, he has in his possession, to be given
him, but rather to be lent him for a season.

Wherefore it is great madness to run into any sin, worthy grievous
punishmente, for any worldly trifles.

Let no man a^aunce him self because the gifts of fortune or of Body, have
chanced unto him, seeing all such trasshe, shortly fades away: as being
uncertain, and not propre unto us. No no, as they be granted us, so they
shall be required ageine, at the uttermost, when death comes: and often times
even while we be alive.

Neither we ought to mourn if that thing, which was lent us, and as a man
would say, given us to keep, be asked again, but it rather becomes us, to
render thanks, for because we have so long enioied the same.

It is to much unkindness, to think, if thou had a long season a
benefit, that thou take wrong, if it do not always continue. Thou do
rather wrong, not to consider, what thou have had, and how long, then still
to think what thou haste not had, or how long thou have not had it.

Thou ought not, to much to rejoice, when things taken from thy ennemies,
come to the o^ thy friends: for such is the speed of fortune, and such
doubtfulnesse is in all things, that bitter wailynge oftentimes follows vain
mirthe.

Let not thy heart fail the, all though fortune turn her face: for merye
even tides do often times follow careful mornings.

Now what condition be our bodies in, what life ca^ we look for, which be made
of so vile and so brickle a metal, our ly^es being with so many perils
besieged on every side?

And all though it seem sure for a time, yet it will not long endure.
Therefore, what have we, whereupon we should (chiefly in such vncertaintee of
lyfe^ be high minded, or fierce of heart?

And for as much, as this life is none other thing but a certain pilgremage,
whereby we still be entryng into an other life eternal, and seeing also, we
need very few things, for the performance of the said iourneie, what has
this world worthy long suite? What folly, to seek such things by peynefull
servitude, as we see tossed and turned in a momente hither and thither.

For what end or purpose should we serve our never satisfied desire and
appetite, when things to come be uncertain, and we at this present need very
few things?

He is a veraie free man, which desires only those things, as be in his own
hands. On the other side, he a bondeman and slave that does the contrary.

Now I pray you, what other thing is it to be replenyshed with the gifts of
fortune than a foot man to be cumbe red with diverse and many fardelles?

There is no man so dulle, no such lack wit, but he rather prepares and
fitteth him self for the city, where he purposes to dwell, than still seeks
things for his journey:

Since this our life is of nature droupyng and fleeyng, the most part
thereof, and almost all, is spent in perturbacion, in troubles, in fantasies:
we can not say, we live all the while, that we be tossed with affections, and
in especial, when the fear of death troubles us. And where as death may
come to us, by an infinite sort of ways, it is great folly, to fear, that it
should come this way or that way: and seeing that it shall of necessitee come,
we may not commit any great mischief or wickedness, to avoid it, nor we ought
to mourn, though it chance.

Our life being oppressed with so many diverse miseries. what need we to keep it
with such anxietie? to set so much by it, seeing also we go to an other, which
is a life everlasting. Let us so order our selves, that we have ready passage to
that life, which is replenished with all goodness, full of joy eternal, full of
mirth everlasting.

Our errors oppress us, rather than things them self: where as we often
times think them to be great euylles, that are none in deed, and greatte
gooddes, that of truth are worth naught.

The nature, condition, and true value of things be those, which I have
rehearsed in the beginning: whereby it may be plainly gathered, that there is
nothing fair, nothing of price, finally nothing to be accounted ours, but
only virtue.

Where as deliberacion is taken, we being in doubt, to which part we may
most incline the love of our body, and the desire of things here in this
life, that is to say, the love of our self, is chief counselor, and one
that we all together follow.

This weakeneth the strength and manhod of our minds so much, that nothing
can be so little, but it is easily able to penetrate them, nothing so
sklender or small, but it may be able to disturb them.

This blinds the eyes of the mind: and when affections, have ones gotten the
upper hand, we flatter, we yield, we obeie them, as our lords and rulers.

Thus we hold things with tooth and nail, that are alien from us, as they
were ours: and if they be withdrawe^ from us, we lamente, tourmentyng our
selfs, as though we had great loss.

We neglecte our own, as none of ours, and do shonne things profitable, as
veraie hurtful to us, enbracyng things hurtful, as very profitable.

The harms of other folks seem small, but we think our own, being nothing
so great as theyrs, intolerable: neither content with that we wish our
selves, nor yet pleased, if we might obtain that that other men much desire.
We like not our selves, this world, the condition and estate thereof, does
not satisfy us, we would have the natures of all things turned, such is the
impacie^cie, that grow^th of deintie fantasies.

What punishment may be compared with these? trewely the torments among
damned spirits be none other. The dyuels them selves have none other
punishment, than that they be vexed with envy, hatred, and wroth.

A man may see the countenance of them, that be inquieted with these
affections, how variable, how careful, how pa^tyng, how cruel, how fearful
they be, and in like trade be these minds racked and tourmented within them.

Anger, which is the sorest of all other perturbacions, and worste of all
other becomes a man, for it tourneth his nature into a cruel b^aste, and
although every trouble does obscure and darken the judgment of the mind, yet
most of all ire ouerwhelmeth it with darkness so sore, that it sees neither
Truth, profit^e, nor comeliness. It eats up the heart, and drinks up the
holsom blood of the body, constrainyng man to do that thing, whereof Repentance
shortly ensues.

How shameful a change is there in the face, what sodeine tempests arise
there, what burning eyes, what snuffyng of the nose, what grennynge of the
teethe, what fomynge of the mouth, what palenesse, what stuttyng of tongue,
finally, what terrible and uncomely criynges be there in him, that is inflamed
with this fury? Truly such, that some, which have in their anger beholden
them self in a glass, have not known them self.

The angry man for his grim countenance, his sharp words, and cruel
deeds, ofttimes loses much of his auctoritee, much beneuolencie is taken
from him, his friends forsake him, no man will mete him, he is left all
alone, all men hate and abhor him. Wherefore great wise men never eschewed
thing more, or cloked thing with greatter diligence, than they did Ire, and
the works, of Ire, An so much, that they not only wrastled against their
own nature, but in spite of her bearde gave her the fall.

What is more worthy to be scorned, than so littell and so weak an animal, to
rage and stere up so greatte and so fierce tragedies, for vile trifles, and
things of no value? as some time for the gifts of the body, or of fortune,
yea and sometime, wisely a gods name, for one littell word.

Thou shalt sone subdue anger, if thou hold and fasten this thing in thy
mind, that is to say: No injury to be done, except when the mind takes
hurt, which no man can corrupt, but only he that possesses it, and that by
defilyng it with sin.

We have spoken hitherto of things coming from man to man, we wol now talk of
high^r matters, as coming of god. How be it those things also before
rehearsed were of god: but these that follow, come somewhat more expressly and
properly from him.

Of Religion.
THere could nothing be given unto mankind, more greatter or better than
Religion, which is knowlage, love, and veneracion of the prince and maker of
the world.

God is so beneficial to no man as he is to them, whom he teaches, how they
shall truly worship him. Therefore David the yrophete reherseth this among the
great gifts of god, showed to the people of Israel: Qui anuunciat verbum suum
Jacob. etc. that is, which shows his word unto Jacob: his justice and
judgments to Israel. He has not so done to all nations, nor has he opened
his indgme^tes unto al me^.

God is known by religion, and being known, he must neede^ be believed and
woorshipped^

Only God is prince, maker, and lord of all things, which alone is able to
do all things, and knows how to do all things.

This world, is in manner as it were an house, or a temple of God, which of
naught is brought forth into this shappe and ornacie, that it now is in.
Therefore it has received this name Cosmos among the Greeks, and is called
Mundus, of the Latins, which both ar as much to say, as a comely Ornament, a
beautiful thing: which he so rules and governs, that we may no less
wonder at the conseruacio^, than at the creacion of it.

And like as in the house of a most prudent governor, nothing is done without
his commandment, so in this world is there nothing done, without his will or
bydding: the which as he can all things do, so he knows how to do al things.

Angels, devils, men, and beasts, trees, stocks, and stones, the heavens, the
elements, and to be short, all things are governed by him, and obey him.

There is nothing made, nothing that moves, nothing that chances, another
stock nor straw, may be lift from the ground, neither flock ne fether
may flee further, than his prescript or commandment is.

In this law stands the universal world, neither is there in things any
other chance, fortune, or lotte.

He does al things with his equitee and wisdom, not withstandyng by ways to
us unknown.

What so ever happens to any man, that same tourneth to his profit, if he be
good: but not to profit of wretched money, or of worldly things trans^^orie,
but of eternal felicitee.

What so ever things therefore chance in this world, they must be ^acientli
taken and allowed, as coming of god the author, lest we in our fond affection
and foolish judgment seem to condemn and improve the will of that most
ryghtu^^^se and wise governor of al things, God.

And because we be not able to compass, for what purpose he doothe such
things: We, as children and ignorant, what is best for us, do lament, that
things most hurtful, be not given us, taking them as most profitable: on
the other side, abhorryng things most profitable, as most hurtful. In so
much, that oftetymes our enemy can wisshe no more hurt, than that we may
have our own desires. And seeing we be drowned in so great darkness of
Ignorance, gods will is, that we avoid all that is blame worthy, and commit
all the rest to his governance.

We must execute, whether we will or no, that thing, which the governor of
this so great a work has appointed us to. What madness is it therefore,
rather to be drawn against our will, with weping and wailyng, than to be led
merrily and willing to that we are called to.

Truly every friend of god will gladly obey the laws and will of god his
friend.

This is the chief manner of loving god, as Christ says, you shall be my
friends, if you will do that I command you.

Of Christ.
THe attonemente and the reconciler of Mankind, with God, and the author of
our salvation, is Jesus Christ, God and man, the only son of God almighty,
whom the father sent for the same purpose, when it pleased him to take pity
upon Mankind, which had made him self, to his own great hynderance, an
ennemy unto god.

There can be no greater hurt than by sin to be separated from god, the
fountain of all goodness, and to be turned to most hurtful myserie, to be
taken from a most sweet life, and left to a most bitter death.

For this purpose, among other things, Christ came, that he might teach us
the true and straight way, wherein we might steadfastly stand, and take our
journey to god ward: not swa^^yng from it the breadth of an hear. He has
showed this wai both by words, and also by example of his holy life.

All human wisdom compared with Christis religion, is but dirt, and very
foolyshnes.

What so ever grave, prudent, wise, pure, holy, or relegiouse thing is with
admiracio^, with exclamacion, with clappyng of hands, in the books of the
gentytles red, commended, learned by heart, praised above the moon, all this is
found more purely, more rightly, more openly, more easily in our religion.

Perf^ct wisdom is, to know this Religion: and to live according to it, is
perfect Uertue^ for no man knows it in very deed, except he live thereafter.

Christ's life witnesses his perfect humanitee, his miracles declare the
infinite power of his deity, his law shows his heavenly wisdom: so that
of his perfect goodness of living, we have example to follow him, of his power
and auctoritee, strength to obey him: of his wisdom, faith to believe him.

Let his goodness provoke the to love him, his majesty to worship him, his
wisdom to believe him.

If a man do well consider those things, which Christ commands, he shall
find all done for our profit, in so much, that who so feels him self to
believe rightli, that perceive it is to his own great profit, goodness, and
comfort.

As there is nothing more pleasant to man, than to be believed, so it is even to
god, for no man ca^ think well of him, to whom he commits him self, afraid
of hurt.

The foundation of our salvation is to believe god, to be^ father, and Jesus
Christ his only son, to be our law maker, and the holy ghost to be
breathed out of both, without whom, we do nothing, we think nothing, that can
profit us.

The true woorshyppyng of god, is to cleanse and purify the soul from all
diseases and unclean lusts, and to be turned as near to his similitude as
we may, so that we be, as he him self is, clean and holy: and that we hate
no man, but rather study, by all means to profitte all men.

The more thou transposest thy self from things corporal, unto things
incorporate, the more godly life shall thou lead.

Thus shall it be brought to pass, that God may acknowlage our nature, as
of kynne, and like unto him, and may delight in it, making it his true and
right temple, much more acceptable to him, than churches made of lyme and
stone.

The temple of god is holy, which are you, as witnesses saint Paul. So
noble, so worthy a guest, mu^^ with alcare, diligence, and tenderness be
retained.

He may not, through the foul ^^ynke of sins, be driven to change his
lodgeyng.

Bodily works be unsavory, except they have sauce from the heart.

Know, that thou haste god in the most secret part of thy heart, as witness
and judge of all thy ^houghtes, in so much that if thou fear his presence,
thou will not only avoid all naughtiness outwardely, but also thou will not
suffer unclean thoughts to enter into thy mind.

Love towardis god, ought to be such, that thou esteem him above all things,
and that his glory and honor be derer unto the, then all this life, all
honor, and commodit^es thereof.

And as when one friend remembers another, he is moved with a friendly and
honest joy, so let all divine things seem friendly unto the, that is most
acceptable and pleasant, and be thou conuersa^t in them most gladly.

As often as thou hear God named, see that a greater and a more excellent
thing strike thy remembrance and mind, than man's knowlage can attein to.

Hear the sayings, that be spoken of him, and of his faintes, not as thou
hear vain fables, but with great admiration of mind.

Judge nothing rasshely, nor pronounce thou any thing of god, and his works,
but thou do it with reverence and fear.

It is wickedness, to ^este upon holy things, or to use the sayings of holy
scripture, as foolyshe toies and triflinge tales and scoffynges, even as a man
should sprinkle durte in a medicine, adorn^d for recovery of health. But to
apply it to filthy communicacion or baudry, is a thing abominable, and in no
wise to be suffered.

It becomes all things there, to be meruai^ed at, and to ^ee received with
worthy reverence into our hertes.

Be present at readyng and preaching of goddis word, and all that holy is:
and understand, that what so ever thou either see or hear there, is most
pure, most holy, and apperteigneth unto gods maiestee, which as we may
easyly worship and adore, so we can comprehen^e it by no means.

So that thou majesty always judge more higher things to be hid in that
divine wisdom, than the strength of man's wit is able to aspire unto.

We reverence the sayings of wise men, ye although we do not will understand
them, how much more than does it beseme us, to give condign reverence unto
godly sayings?

As often as thou herest Jesus Christ named, remember thou his inestimable love
toward the, and let the rehersall of his name be unto the full of sweetness
and veneracion.

When thou hear any title or propre name given unto Christ, lift up thy
self unto the contemplacion thereof, and pray unto him, that he will show him
self, even such a one toward the. As wha^ thou herest him called merciful,
meke or gentill, pray that thou may prove him the same unto the: when he is
called almighti, desire that he may show it, in the making the, of the most
wretched sinner, a good liver, of an ennemie, his soonne, of nothing, some
thing: when thou hear him called terrible, entreat him to fear them, of
whom thou art feared: When thou call him lord, look thou thou serve him:
Wha^ than call him father, see thou jove him, and see thou show thy self a
child, worthy to have so noble a Father.

There is nothing in all the world, whose original, whose beginning, whose
power and virtue, if thou behold, but it may give the matter, highly to praise
hertely to worship god, the autour of all together.

Begin nothing, but thou first call for the help of God. For God, in whose
power art all things, gives prosperous furtherance and finyshyng unto such
acts, as we do begin in his name.

What so ever thou shall go a boute, ever have an eye to the end thereof, and
when thou haste taken good counsel, be not careful, but put thy trust in
him, in whose hand rests the luck of all things.

And holiness remains in the secret parts of the hertes, labor therefore
to understand, what thou praiest, that thou may lose no time in lip
labor. And when thou praieste: let thy heart, thy mind, thy tongue, and all
thy gesture agree together, that all thy hole action may most excellentely
agree in it self. Divine scripture accurseth him, that does the works of god
negligently.

If it be shame for a mynstrell to sing one thing, and plai^ an other not
consonant to that he syngeth, it is much more sh^me for us, to say one thing,
with our mouth, and think an other in our heart. Let our desires be sober, and
of such sort, as be worthy to be asked, and meet to be given of god, least
our unmeet and fond desires offend him.

When thou go to meat, remember the infinite power of god, which made all
thing of naught: remember also his wisdom and benignitee, which susteygneth
the same: and finally call unto mind, his meekness, and clemency, which
feeds yea his extreme ennemies.

Ponder and way, how great a thing it is, to prepare diverse and sufficient
v^tay^es, to so many mouths, as be in the world, what a thing it is to
co^serue al things, and keep them from destruction, whyther they fast bow, of
their inclinacion.

No wisdom of man, nor yet of angel, were able in any wise to perform this
thing, ^o nor yet ones understand how it is brought to pass.

Seeing therefore, that thou lyuest of his gifts, consider what cursed
unkindness, and what damnable rashness it is, to be so bold, to fall at
debate with him, by whose benefit and will, thou haste thy being, and longer
should thou not be, if he would not.

At thy table, let all thing be chaste, pure, wise, holy, eue^ as he is, whose
gifts thou art now in hand with. Let all backbytyng, bitter words, fierce
and cruel speaking, be seeluded from thy table, where thou felest the
incredible swetenes and clemency of god toward the.

Wherefore it is more intolerable, that thou should contaminate that place
with sharpness, and hatrede against thy brother, where thou find much
favor and gentill softness toward the.

This thing the Gentiles well perceived, which for the same skill named al
things, dedicate and belonging to the table, with names of pleasantness and
mirth, as feasts, iu^kettes, and ga^des, where it was counted a greuouse
offense, any sad, heavy, or heinous thing, either to be done or said.

Seeing therefore, thou haste god to thy governor, which is most in might,
wisdom, and liberalitee, put away the inordinate regard of thy self, wherein
thou semest, to mistrust his goodness, and labor only, how thou may please
and content him. It is a great foolyshnes, to say, or do any thing amiss: a
madness to displease him, for the contentacion of thy table, from whom all
nourishmentes comme: a madness, to get his displeasure, of whom thou la^orest
to obtain a benefit: namely for as much as the life is not preserved by meat
but by the will and pleasure of god: according to the saying of scripture, Not
in bread only lives man, but in every word of god.

We have by indenture of Jesus lord of all, in heaven and earth, that they
shall lack nothing, which seek accordyngly the kingdom of god, and
righteousness allowed before him.

Seeing therefore, that god is so bountiful toward the, in his gifts, be not
thou unkind to thy brother, accomtyng him no less to be the son of god, than
thou thy self: and that god is no more bound to the, than to him: and that he
has only made the a mynister of his gifts, of whom next unto god, thy
brother should ask relief.

Neither is there any thing more truly given to Christ, than that that is
bestowed upon the poor.

When thou haste with meats and drynkes refresshed thy self, consider whose
providence and power it is, to sustain the life with such things as thou have
received, and give thanks therefore to god, not as thou would to him,
which has prepared sustenaunce for the, with his money, but such thanks as
are mete for him, which has made both the, and also the meat susteinynge
the life, not by the strenthe of the said meat, but by his divine power, and
inestimable goodness.

At thy down liyng and vprisyng, remember the benefits of god, not only
toward the, but toward all mankind: yea and all the whole world.

Consider, in what dangers man is, while he lies like a dead carcas, having
no power of him self. Wherefore Christ must so much the more instantly be
sought upon, that he may voucsafe to defend us silly wretches.

Head ought to be taken, that we provoke not him to wrot^e and anger, by any
our sin, seeing he is our keeper, and our governor.

Arm thy foreheade and thy breaste with the sign of the cross, and the
secret part of thy heart with devout prayers, and holy meditacions.

And when thou shalt go to thy bed, look that thou think every day
resembles the whole life of man, whom the night succedeth, and sleep a very
express token of death.

We must therefore pray unto Christ, that he vouchesafe, to be with us ever
favorable, both in time of life and death, and that he vouchsafe to grant that
to be pleasant and quiet unto us.

We must pray him, that strange dreams fear us not, but that even
sleapyng, we may have him in mind: and that refreshed with his comfort, we
may rise merrily in the morning remembryng his blessed death, the price whereby
he redeemed mankind.

Thou shalt keep thy bed ^haste and pure, so that thy enemy, the author
and headde of all filthynesse, may have n^ claim ne right therein.

And with the sign of the cross, and inuocacion of the name of god, but
specially thorough holy thoughts, cogitacions, and steadfast purpose, never
after to offend, shalt thou drive all the power of the ^eend from it.

When thou risest in the morning, commit thy self to Christ, rendryng thanks
unto him, that he has preserved the that night, through his help and tuicion,
from the deceites and envy of that cruel ennemie.

As thou haste first slepte the night time, and art now risen again: so
remember that our bodies shall first sleep by death, and after be restored to
life by Christ, when he shall appear and come to judge both quick and dead.

Beseech him, that it may be his will, and that he cause the to spend the
day following in his service, so that thou may another hurt, nor yet be
hurt of any man, and that thou so compassed on every side, and defended with
christian godliness, may safely escape the ^ettes and snares, which the
devil, most deceitful enemy, never ceasseth to lay for mankind.

Woorship Mary the blessed mother of God, and other holy saints, the dear
beloved friends of Christ, dwelling with him in life everlasting.

Read and here often times the life and acts of them, that thou may follow the
same.

Let thy thought and report of them be, not as of m^nne, but as of
persons, that by the goodness of God, have transcended al nature and human
excellency, and now nigh conjoined with god.

Where as there is so greatte lyknesse of men, hothe in body and mind, they
being all brought into this world by one right and title, made and appointed to
a certain communion and societee of life, to the preseruacion whereof, nature
has proclaimed this law, Let no man to an other do, that that he would not
have done to him self.

He that restored nature decayed has professed this one doctrine to be his,
but yet expressyng the same more at large, and setting it out more plainly, for
to make the nature of man perfect in every condition, and as like unto god as
it may be, he commanded us, not only to love one an other, but also to love
our enemies, that we may be like the father of heaven, which sincerely loved
his enemies, as ^e declares by his great benefits showed unto them.

And how is it to be marked, that the nature of man is such, that we would
them to be our friends, whom we our selves can in no wise love.

Of Charitee.
THis most wise master and guide of our life, has given us this one
document, to xnle our life by, that is, to love one an another: knowing, that by
this only rule, we might lead a blessed life, without need of any more laws.

There is not a more blessed thing than to love. And therefore god and his
aungelles, be most blessed, as they that love all things.

Nothing is more wretched, than to hate, by the which affecte, the diuelles
be most miserable.

True love weieth all a like: where true love reygneth, no man seeks
preferment, no man steals from his well beloved, accomptyng all such
things, to be with him self, which are with his friend.

Love contendeth not with his dear brother, nor thinks not, that he doothe
him any injury at any time, and therefore he neither remembers displesure, ne
enuyeth him, because he loves him: no man rejoices in the mysfortunes of his
friend, neither is grieved at his prosperitee, but contrariwise, he ioyeth with
them that rejoice, and wepeth with them that weep, according to the saying of
the Apostle. And this does he not fayntly, but with all his heart, for as
much as he esteemethe those things, which appertain to him, whom he loves,
as his own.

The most sure, sound, and true example of this manner of living are the acts
of Christ, set before aur eyes.

For the son of God came down from d^auen, to teach ^s the right trade of
living, not only in word, but also by exaumple of life that we might, our
hertes being illuminate by that his clear soonne beam of veritee discern the
truth of every thing.

First he being exercised in all kinds of paciencie, what mo^eracion of mind
did he show, notwithstanding his infinite power and might? and albeit he was
assauted with so many and grievous injuries, yet never gave he any evil word
again, teaching all only the way of God, and abhorryng the contrary.

He suffered him self to be bound, which might have ouerturned the hole
world with a beck. How patiently suffered he his false accusers.

Finally, he so behaved him self, that no man might perceive, he had any
power, b^^ all only to help other.

The king and lord of all, by whom the Father made this world, how lowlye
suffered he him self, to be made equal with the vilest sort of men, ha^yng
no there house for him self, nor sustenance for his beloved ministers.

The maker and governor of nature, was partaker, and felt all the miseries of
the same: he hungered, he thyrsted, he was weried, and often did mourn.

Why suffered he these infirmities, but only for our instruction? So greatly
loved hepeace, concord, and charitee, that he pursued no sin, more than
pride, arrogancye, ambycion, contencion, strives, and privy hatredes, which
spring out of the said pride, showing that there is nothing, why a man
should take any thing upon him arrogantly, by reason of these outward, or
el^es bodyly gifts, seeing they are coming and going not of our own nature,
neither are these things derived from the inward powers of man, or of virtue,
but given and taken away by god: because no man should auaunce him self for
such gifts, or forget from whens they come, neglectyng those men, for whose
relief he received them of God.

And to subdue the sin of pride, and that no man should stand in his own
conceit, though he had been obedient in all points of religion, and fully
observed the law of the gospel, Christ says these words: When ye have
done all that I have commanded you, say that ye are but unprofitable
servants.

How great therefore is their foolishnes, which glory, as perfect Christians,
preferryng themselves, as concerning the obseruacion of the law, before all
other, where as often times, he who^ thou think very naughty, in comparison of
thy self, is much richer in virtue than thou, and destinate to salvation,
when thou shall be appointed to eternal miseries.

God, that has taken all judgment of men from manne, because the one is
blind and ignorant in the secrets of an others heart, reseruyng the knowlage
of hertes only to him self.

The outward things, which the eye of man only beholds, are b^t weak and
uncertain tokens of the inwarne secrets.

Wherefore it is not la^ful to give full sentence of any man's virtue, vice, or
disposicion, by cause ye have twice or thrice be^ in his company, ye can give
no sentence of him, though ye have been with him a hundred times, No, though ye
have been of longest familiaritee together.

Uery deep and dark are the dens of ma^s heart, and what man's sight is so
quick to perse thorough so greatte a myste of darkness?

And se^yng, that god has redeemed all mankind, and that with so great a price
from the servitude of the devil, let no man be so bold to contemn or
deceive his own soul, which god so entierly loved, that he shronke not, to
give his life therefore.

The lord was crucified, for us all, and for each one of us.

Think not, that thou canste please god, if thou hate him, whom god loves.
For he requires none other thanks, but that we do love and show our selves
frendli to our fellow servants, as he being our lord loved us, when we were
leude and naughty, and deserved much evil.

Here began he the mutual bond of love between manne and man, and men
toward god, that is to say, here he laid the fondacion of man's felicitee and
fenisheth the same in heaven.

This is the life and grace of Christ, wisdom exceeding man's capacitee,
agreyng in equitee to them, that have understanding, and alluryng all men to
goodness.

Let no man think him self a right christian, or to be in the favor of god,
if he hate any person, seeing that Christ has commended al men to our love and
frendeshyp.

Be frendely to man, whom god wi^leth the to favor: if he be worthy, love
him for his worthynes: if he be unworthy, yet love him because god is worthy to
be obeyed.

Neither fastings, nor yet great richesse bestowed among poor folks make a
man acceptable to god. Only Charitee toward man brings this to pass, as the
Apostle has taught us.

Thou ought to love every man as thy natural brother, reioycynge of his
prosperitee, and sorowyng for his aduersitee, being alwaie ready to help him
to thy power,

Let neither nation, city, nor kinrede, let not profession, state, ne
condition of living, let not wit dimynisshe this affecte of love: for there is
one father of all, God, whom thou art taught of Christ, to call father daily:
which wol acknowlage the to be his child, if thou in like manner knowlage al
his children to be thy brethern.

Be not ashamed, to take him for thy brother, whom Christ disdeigneth not to
take for his son.

God brought peace, concord, and love into the world, the devil, as most
expert artificer, invented partakynges, quarelling, private profit,
dissencio^s, debate, and war.

God, willing our salvation, sprinkeleth among us benevolence: the devil,
willing one destruction, sows hatred and enmitee.

Small substance increases, where concord reygneth: by discord, great
things ar scatered, and come to naught.

They that study, to make peace and concord between man and man, stablishyng
the same with all their might, shall he called the children of god: and they
that do the contrary, the children of the devil, as Christ him self plainly
testifies.

The highest point, wherein a man passes the fiersenesse of all wild beasts,
is battle, a thing more agreyng to beasts unreasonable, than to manne, which
is well declared by the name, that the latin^s have given it.

How much does nature her self abhor from war, which brought forth
man into this world, naked without armure, shapyng him to mekenes and lovely
societee of life?

God also abhors the same, which wol and co^ma^deth mutual love between man
and man.

One of us may not war with an other, ne hurt one the other, without
grievous offense

If thou suspecte any man, to bear grudge or displeasure in his mind toward
the, labor with hand and foot, reconcile and pacify him, spare thou not in
this behalf to pray to flatter and to bestow thy goods, so that thou may
thereby obteyn^ the favor of all men: For this is the most ready and
compendious way, to come to goddis favor.

Thou shalt scorn no man, remembryng, that what so eu^r chances to one, may
hap to an other. No, rather give thanks to god, that he has kept the from
such danger, and pray partly, that no like thing may fortune to the, partly
for remedy unto him that is thus afflicted, or at the lest that god will give
him grace, to take it thankefully, and help him if thy power will extend thereto.

It is a token of a dogged her^ to rejoice in an other man's misfortune, and
not to pity the common course of nature.

Be merciful to man, and God wol have mercy upon the.

The fortune and chance, that follows mankind, is common to every man,
thretnyng daily all men, and hanging over every man's head.

Think it not possible, that thou can do any thing more agreyng to this
love, dew unto manne, than if thou bring them to the greattest good of this
world, Virtue.

Again, tho^ can do nothing more repugnant to love, than to bring any man
by evil counsel, exaumple, or otherwise unto sin.

The chiefest and happiest of all other things, is for a man to love, yea
although he be not loved ageine, yet that not withstanding to be loved, is the
swetest and the surest thing.

No treasure is of so great certaintee: as perfect love and amitee: no guard
so strong, as faithful friends.

He takes the son out of the world that takes love from life.

True love, sure and stable frendshyp rests in them only that be good and
virtuous, among whom, love lightly increases.

Evil men are so far from loving the good, that they can not one love an
other.

The rediest way to be loved, is first to love. For love is allured by
nothing so much as by love.

Love is gotten also by Virtue, which of her self is so amyable, that often
times she inuiteth, and in manner constrayneth men to love her, which never knew
her.

Love is also allured by tokens of virtue, as by demure softness, by comely
shamefastness, by humanitee, by gentill and fair speech, specially if thou
neither say ne do any thing, that sauoreth of arroga^cy, insolency, or
malapert vnciennesse. Let all thy acts be sweet, soft, gentill, and pure.

The venom of love and amitee is, to love thy friend so, that thou yeldest
upon occasion to hate him, or so to take him thy friend, that thou thynkest he
may be thine enemy.

This saying is godly, I hate as one ready to love.

Let no remembrance of displeasure be, where love is, another thynk, that he,
whom thou take for thy friend, can be thy ennemie, for else shall thy love be
very weak and brickle.

In frendshyp must be such faith, constancy, and simplicite that in no wise
thou have any suspicion in thy friend, or give ^are unto them that suspecte
him, or shall evil report him.

Life is no life, to such as live in suspicion or fear, but rather such life
is a continual death.

Be not inquisitiue, how other men live: for they that pass to much of other
men's affairs, often times look upon their own business but sklenderly. It
is a point of great folly, well to know other men, and not to know thy self.

Of this thing rise many privy grudges, and such as use these things, be most
commonly they, which can spy a small mote in an other man's eye, and not see
a greatte beam in their own. It is great foolishness, to know other men so
well, and to know them self never a dele

Thou may not alonely love men, but also reverence such as becomes the,
honestly behauyng thy self among them, wherein consists the office and
duty of our hole life. To the better accomplishment whereof, thy part is,
diligently to mark, where, when, and with whom thou do or spekest any
thing. When thou art in presence of men, so order all the parts of thy body,
and in special thy eyes and countenance, that there may be no token of disdeine
or contempt perceived.

Use no wanton gesture, but let quietness and pleasant serenitee, tokens of a
quiet and clear mind, always temper thy countenance.

The fair and most favorable couerture of man's face, is modesty and
shamefastnes, which so set forth man's countenance, that without the same,
it seems a thing veraie deformed and detestable.

All hope of recovery to pas^e in him, which now is no more ashamed of evil
doing.

Show not to much seueritee or g^^^mnesse in thy countenance. For thereby men
conjecture, the mind to be cruel and unruly.

Laugh not to often, nor out of mesure, laugh not to loud, nor that thy body
shake withal, lest thou be mock^ and laughed to scorn for such thy foolish
laughter.

There may be a cause of laughter, but there can be no cause of scornful
laughter.

To scorn good things is wickedness, to mock evil, crueltee, and to jest at
other mean things great folyshnesse: to scorn good men, wickedness, leude
men cruelnesse, familiarly acquainted, immanitee, unknown men, madness: to be
short, a man to scorn a man inhumanitee.

Let thy eyes be quiet and stedy, play not with thy ^yngers as iuglers use to
do.

Accustom not thy self to strike^ for often times after a fillyp follows a
blow, and from blows men com to clubbes and swords.

Give only good men true and right honor, which comes from the reverence of
the mind.

Honor such as be in office and auctoritee, and be obedient unto them,
although they command grievous and peynfull things, for god wills it so to
be, for a public quietness.

Give place unto rich men, lest they stered to anger, hurt both the and
other good men to.

Arise unto age, and reverence it, as in whom consists often times great
experience and knowlage of godly living and worldely polycie.

Be not only even with them that honor the, but according to the apostles
precepte, prevent them when thou may.

It is an argument of greatte rudeness, not to salute him, that saluteth the,
a great point of barbarousnesse, not to wish well ageine to him, that wishes
well to the.

How small things, and of how light cost are salutacion, fair speech,
gentylnesse, reverence? And yet how great frendshyp engendre they, if they be
used? What amitees do they dissolve, if ye omyt them?

What perverse ignorance is it, not to reconcile and get again the good will
of many, when ye may have it with so small a trifle.

The more gentilman, and the better a man is brought up, the more lowly and
curteis^y he behaueth him self: the more villayne, the more disdeinfull and
fires. Sometime these vicis com of dullness and lack of knowlage, and for this
cause, good lernyng is called humanitee.

If thou salute, and be not saluted ageine, ascribe it to negligence rather
tha^ to contempt If thou be spoken to unmannerly, attribute it to lack of good
manners, or to nature, and not to malice or hatred, be not so light, to be
moved with the breath of man's mouth.

By such and other like holsom interpretacions thou shall lead an holy and
pleasant life, for so shall thou love every man, and not think thy self
offended or hurt of any person. It is an old proverb, Ut ve^ax ne suspicax,
that thou be true, be not suspicions: these words may be new, the sentence is
old. Ut quietus ne suspicax, that, thou be qui^t, be not suspicious

Look that thou show not thy self to contemn any man in countenance, in
gesture, word, or deed. If thou being of low degree, despise such as be thy
superiors, how shall thy inferiors obey the.

If thou be the greatter, thou by thy proud contemnynge of him, tournest
thine inferiors heart from the.

Contempt is a thing intolerable, for as much as no man can think him self
so vile, that he ought to be despised.

Many labor, to deliver them selves from contempt, but mo study to be
revenged thereof.

There is no man so great, but fortune may drive him to need the help of the
poorest, and seek succor of the simplest.

Besides all this, there is no man, whom god is content to take for his son,
that can justly be contemned, except thou also in him contemn gods
judgment.

Use no doggisshe eloquence, seek not preyse of cunnyng by contumelious speech
against thy brother, as touching whose reproach, better it were for the to be
tongue tied.

Often times men unknown and despised, are after found worthy much reverence.

Of speech and communicacion.
GOd gave man a tongue, to be an instrument, to set forward, keep and
preserve the societee of man's life: for the maintenance whereof nature binds
man to man.

This tongue is cause of many commodities, if thou use it well: cause of many
myschieues, if thou misuse it. Therefore James the Apostle does resemble it
veraie well to the stern of a ship.

Tongue must be brideled and kept in, that she neither hurt her self, nor
any other.

Sin is wrought by no instrument so easily, ne so often, as by the tongue.

Thou shall not rail, curse, ne hurt any man: thou shalt say nothing,
either to the loss of his goods or good name.

Thou shalt not dishonestly, proudely, or malopertely rage against any man,
thou shalt immoderately inuey against no man, although thou be thereto
provoked: for so doing, thou shall more hurt thy self before god, and men of
wisdom, than him, against whom thou railest.

To give one evil word for an other, is as much as to wype away one durte
with an other.

To threatten, is a point of naughty packes, of dwellers on the other side of
the water. Be not of so weak a mind, of so tender an heart, that a few words
be able to wound the.

Be not to curiouse, in reprehendyng other men, but rather labor, that they
may not find in the any thing reprouable.

And if thou chance, to rebuke any person worthyly, yet use no crueltee in thy
words, but myngle thy sharp checkes with some mild co^municacion, that if thou
make any wound, it may be swaged thereby: but ever taking head, that the fruit
of reprehencion be not lost, whiles that thou studiest over much to mitigate
the matter.

Beware thou slide not into flattery.

Assentacion is a foul vice, ^ brings the saier to dishonesty, and the
hearer to great hurt.

Think nothing so precious, that thou oughteste for it, to swerue from right
and truth.

Let neither riches ne frendshyp, neither entreaty, ne thretenynges, let no
fear of death obtain this of the.

Thus doing, thou shall be regarded and trusted, al thy sayings shall be as
gospelles: if thou do contrary wise, thou shalt nothing be esteemed, ne
thought worthy to be heard.

Let thy communicacion be sobre, civil, gentle, and nothing rough, rusticall,
or rude, nor yet over much curious, lest he should have need of an interpretour,
that would understand the.

Use no contumeliouse nor obstinate langage, use not to flater with nice and
minced words.

There is a certain mean, which neither leeseth his own dignity, nor
takes away an other man's.

Wanton uncleanness, is as well to be refused in our talk, as is poison in our
meat,

Be not hasty, when thou spekest, let not thy tongue go before thy wit, make no
answer before thou perfectly understand, what the matter means.

This saying, What so ever first comes to the tongues end^, which Cicero spoke
unto T^ius of Athenes, ought selde or never to be admitted, forasmuch as
nothing ought to be spoken among friends, whereby amity might be appeyred?

How foul, how perilous a thing is, Lingua quo vadis? Eoung whether go
thou.

Christ our lord, knowing how many and diverse mischefes ^prange of, vain
communicacion, as quarellynges, discordes, and privy hatredes, to the intent
he would, that men should be circumspecte in their speech, thretned al men, that
they have to make a count of every ydell word at the day of judgment.

Therefore the prophet says. Set thou a watch unto mi mouth, and a door
before my lips.

Be not to busy in talkyng or to full of words: have not al thy co^municacion
alone. There is a certain order and course in talkyng, although thou common
with most unlearned and vilest persons. And yet draw not thy words so, that
thou may seem to harke^ to thy self, and to do so, because every word
that comes from the, seems a rose.

It is more better for the, among wise men, to harken than to speak: yet
sometime it is no less fault, for a man to hold his peace, than it is at an
other time to speak, when it behooves him not.

There is no pleasure to be compared to the communicacion of a man, that is
wise and well learned.

Be never to inquisitiue, for it is peinfull, and causes hatrrd. Thou know,
what Horace says, Eschue^a busy demaunder, For the same is commonly a babbler.

Be not contencious or obstinate in resoning, but wha^ thou herest truth,
reverence it with s^lence, and arise up there at, as to a di^me and godly thing.

If thou here no such thing, yet take it feendly, and that namely, if there be
nothing said, whereby honestee, man^rs, and good living may be hyndered.

Contencion is naught worth, where is no hope of amendme^t

Men can hardly bear^ arrogance, pride, or disdaynful auctoritee, no not in men
of great power, and all praise worthy.

Brag not in words, but show in deed what thy counnyng is, think not
other men delyted in all thing, that thou take pleasure of in thy talk.

Beware always, that tho^ do nothing, that may disquiet the, except it be
closely kept.

How be it, if by chance tho^ have done any such thing, disclose it to no man,
or at the lest if thou do utter it, take good head to whom

When thou committest any thing of counsel to thy friend which thou would
have secretly kept, beware thou use therein no manner of bordynge, least he at
sometime having a mind to ieste, as thou did reuele and open the same.

Keep the secret counsel committed unto the more warely, than the money that
is committed unto thy custody.

Nothing should be safe and sure in man's lyf^, if secret counsel should
want faith.

It thou promise any thing, perfourm^ the same, although^ it be veraie hard
and dangerous, and though it were but for this only cause, to discharge thy
faith and promise.

If any thing be promised the, exact it not, being always streghter in judgment
to thy self tha^ to other men,

Thou must consider, that me^ have wit, reason, and judgment, think not,
that thou can persuade them, to take evil deeds for things well done, or to
be deceived by things counterfaited, cloked, or colored, which at length
bewraie them selves, and the more craftilier they were hyd, the more foul and
hateful they are.

Truly a man's mind ^riseth fore against those things, where with he has been
deceived.

Therefore it is better, that all things be open, plain, vnclo^ed and simple.

For although Ueritee sometimes at the first displeases, yet at the length it
is very amiable and lovely accepted.

The truth may well be peined, it will not be oppressed. It may be blamed, it
will not be shamid.

As the profit gotten by liyng, is nothing sound nor durable, even so the
damage that comes by truth tellyng, hyndereth not long.

Absteyne from liyng, as from a common rot. For there is no viler thing in man,
which thereby separateth him self from god, and becomes the dyuels bondeman.
And come the lie out early or late, Shameful ignominy is sure the liers part.

What is counted more vile? what worse than a lier? If me^ know the for a
liar, no man will believe the, although thou speak never so truly.

Contrary wise, if thou be true of word, thy beck shall be better believed than
other men's holy oaths and great sweryng.

If thou speak nothing rep^gnant, and if thy words agree one with an
another, thou greatly nedest neither force of memory, nor any other art, but
always to say that thou think truth.

Truth ever consents to truth, falsehode neither with truth, nor yet with
falsehod.

But if thou will thine opinion to be true, believe nothing lightly, but things
approved, or else things that have great lykelyhod of veritee.

He is in misery, and very miserable, which has so entangled him self, that
he can not be losed, but by a leasyng.

Accustom not thy self in swetyng. For the wise man says. That he, which
swereth much, is replenished with wickedness, and the plage of vengeance shall
not be long from his house.

Christ in his gospel utterly forbyddeth us swearyng, and teaching us to
affirm, all that truth is, with yea yea, and to dedy all that ^als is with, nay
nay.

^ur r^uerence to god ought to be great, w^ought not to call him to
witness in every place for every trif^e.

No, we ought to call him to record never, but against our wilies, and when
we are compelled.

He that swears in serious mattiers, will also swear in board for his
pleasure. And he that w^ll swear for a test, will not stycke for an oath, when
he li^th.

They that believe the, wol as well trust the without an oath, as with all thy
swearyng: and they that woll not believe the, the more thou swerest, the more
they mistrust the.

How men ought to be used.
THere is a certain difference to be had, between man and man. For some of
them be of household, some only of acquentance, and some be strangers unknown.

I call them of householde, that be of kyn, or of affinitee, or with whom we
live together in one family.

Thou must love all men, and so behave thy self toward them, that even
they, whom thou know not, may perceive the to be a friend universally to all
mankind, and to will and wish well unto all men.

And yet thou shalt not, as a white line upon a white stone, show thy self a
like toward is all wen: but some thou shall admit to counsel, to some be
obedient, and some thou shalt reverence, and to some thou shall render
thanks, if thou have received any benefit at their hands, forgetting not
those, whose diligence and, faithful service thou haste used to thy commoditee
or profit.

Where as a man's good will is to be taken and reputed for the deed there he
seems to deserve not much less thanks, which endeavors him self to do
pleasure, than he that has done in deed.

And he that has used a man's friendship or labor after this manner, is no less
bound to recompense him, than if he had borrowed money of him: think him no
less thank worthy, which has to his power, with sincere heart, bestowed his
labor, than he that lends his money. Think him I say, so much more
thanks worthy, as is the body derer to a man tha^ his monei, or any outward
thing.

Tarry not, while thy familiar ^rend open his pouertee and necessitees to the,
but harken rather, and smelle them out thy self, helpyng him of thy own
accord, tarry not, but arise and meet a rightuouse petycion in the teethe,
that ^hou be entreated before thou be axed.

Thou shall not only love thy pare^tes, but also honor them next unto god, and
shall be obedient unto their co^mandementes, even as at Goddis own bydding,
thoroughly persuaded, that they be in goddis steed unto the here in earth,
and that no manloueth the more intier^i, nor more regards thy wealth.

Next unto these be scholemasters, bryngers up of children, tutours, finally
all such as have taught the any good manners, which are of so great value, that
man can have nothing more precious.

Love these men, and have them in reverence as thy second pare^tes, and
^owly obey them, countyng what so ever they do, that they do, it not for
their own co^moditee, but for thine. And sei^g the mattier i^ so, thou
should make selender recompense, if for such kyndenesse, thou would
obstinately disobey them.

Think not, but he loves the tenderly, that reprehendeth the friendly: he
seldom hurts, that reprou^th the, although he be thy enn^my, for if he say
truth, he shows the, in what thou ought to refourme thy self, if he say
false things against the, he teaches the, what thou may schue: so that
other he makes the better, or at the least more circumspect.

Search first the manners and co^dicions of them, whom thou dooest purpose to
make thy familiars, and enquire, how they have ordered them selves, with their
other friends, lest it may after repent the of such acqueintance.

Refuse the acquaintance of him, whose familiaritee thou see honest men to
eschew.

Also shon them, whom thou perceyuest to love thy gooddes be^^^r than thy
self, as smelle feasts, or such, by whose conversation thou may either
wax worse, or fall into danger and peril.

Shonne all such, as can not suffer their friends to have better fortune than
they have.

Chose no such friends, as littell pass to ieste of thy life, to board at
such things, as thou would have kept secret, but most of all, avoid
them, that for a thing of naught, woll be at utter defiance with their best
friend, reuengeynge them self more upon such, as they have loved before,
than upon those, whom they always hated, barbarousely perswadynge them self,
the injury done of a friend, less to be forborne, than the injury done of
their enmy, wherein they plainly declare^, that they never loved: For if they
had, they would not so soon have been offended. It were better to have such
persons for enemies, than for friends.

Be slow in res^iuyng a friend, be constaunt in reteinyng him. Chose a friend,
that will not only please the, ^ut also profit the. Avoid him, that speaks
al for favor: and enbrace thou him, that will truly and plainly admonish the
of thy ^au^e.

If thou take delight, to bear them that flatter the, thou shall never here the
truth.

Among the wild beasts, there is none more pernicious than envy: among the
^ame, none so hurtefull as flattery.

As wisdom and virtue be much worthy all men's love, so is affentacion to be
cursed, hated abhorred, which lets us to come to the said virtue and
wisdom, by reason it persuadeth, that we have now all ready obtained it.

Morou^r plein admonicio^doth not a little profit, which brigeth a man to virtue,
by techyng him, what remains yet behind, and how it must be brought to pass

If it grieve the to be reproved, do nothing reproach worthy.

He is in a veraie miserable case, that nedynge a friend to warn him, has
none.

Flee from the company of evil men, as from men infected with the pestilence.
For contagion is to be feared no less at the one, than at the other: Except
thou think thy self able to bring them to goodness.

And yet thou must not trust thy self herein to much, still reme^bryng, that
as our nature of ^ self is prone to vice, that so the gate and passage to
Virtue is veraie high, and with much travail and difficultee finished

Also search, of what degree and condition thou art, what place fortune has
set the in: and think, what so ever estate thou be in, no mo things be
lefull for the, than for other men.

No, the more custom makes lefull, the less let lust long for, lust stayed
by moderacion.

Be gentill to thy inferiors, lowly to thy betters, easy and tractable to thy
peers and companions.

But yet so, that thou be always hard, stiff, and inexorable to them, that
entice the to ^ice.

Disdain not to be cont^^ned of thy superiors, but think that thing, to come
by course of fortune, rather than by the faut of the man.

If any thing be done unto the of thy inferior, which displeases the,
think it not forthwith, to be done of contumely, but rather of a certain
liberty: reckenyng also, that thou art veraie delicate and inpacient, if thou
count small ^ickelynges, great wounds. Thou must not suppose thy self a
man, and other men beasts, and that it is not leful for them so much as to
speak.

Thou art a man, live under like law, as other men do.

And if thou have more wisdom, or be a better liver, than other men be,
show thy self favorable unto them, as to men unlearned and weak. Pardon not
vice ^n thy self, whom wisdom and virtue has so e^strengthned.

If thou excelle not in virtue, why requirest thou to be better, esteemed than
an other? if thou pass other, why moderateste thou thine affections no better,
than the common sort of people.

It is better to take wrong, than to do wrong, better to be deceived, than to
deceive, which thing natural wisdom taught many, as Socrates, Plato,
Arist^teles, Cicero, Seneca, and such other.

Remember, it is a point of humain imbecillitie, to be deceived and wander in
blindness. Le^ not therefore other men's offenses, and chiefly such as be done
against thy self, overmuch offend the.

It is a token of a gentill and noble heart, to forgive: of a cruel, fierce,
unnatural, and vile stomach, to retain anger, which thing even very nature
shows in dombe beasts.

And seeing god is ready to do nothing more often, or more gladly than to
forgive, who is so mad to deny, but that the same thing is both most godly and
most excellent, by which we so much rese^ble the nature of that high and
mighty god?

Deal thou with other men, as thou would Christ should deal with the.

And truly, it is meet, that thou grant like forgiveness to thy neighbor,
as thou nedest at gods hand either for the same, or other like offenses.

There is no prayer more acceptable, or of more efficacy before god, than that
his soonne Jesus Christ our lord, has taught us, which is therefore named,
Our lords prayer: Now thou can not say that prayer with a pure mind,
except thou utterly, and with all thy heart, forgive thy brother, what so ever
thou would god to forgive the^. A great fault is forgeuen us, under this
condition, that we forgive a light offense.

What so ever one man offends an other in, it is nothing, in comparison of
that, wherein we all offend god every hour: which is to be esteemed and waied
even so much the greuouser, as god is great and higher than man.

If thou be discontente with any man, follow the counsel of the apostles
saiynge: Let not the son go down upon thy wroth. When thou go to
bed, cast out of thy mind, all debate, all anger, all displesures, all
desires and pensiveness, that thy mind being quiet and settled, thou may
address thy self to quiet sleep.

Let him, whom thou haste ones forgeuen, perceive by some token, that thou
haste forgyuen him vnfe^nedly, that both he ma^e see, thou have forgotten
injuries paste, and find the friendly, where thou may help or do him
pleasure.

Beware when thou art moved, that thou avenge not thine own quarrel, either by
thy self, or any other person. For thou have none auctoritee over an other
man's servant, much less in thy fellow servant. Thou art iniuriouse to thy
lord, if thou leave not the correction of thy fellow unto him.

God is lord over al men, we be all his servants, be thou content to have
complained to him, yea, complain not at al: for the eye of god sees all
thing, and as scripture testifies, he knows both him that doothe the
wrong, and him that suffers it. Therefore gives he this commandment, Leave
the reuengemente of thine ennemies to me, and I will see th^im paid. For
seeing the injury is in the heart, and not in the deed, only god knows,
what thy heart was, and what belongs thereto.

It behooves the, not only to love thy self, but also to show thy self
worthy to be had in reverence, so that thou may be ashamed of thy self
when thou go about to do any thing ungodly, wickedly, filthily, impudently,
foolishly.

We often take that for an injury, which in very deed is none, following in
such wise our parciall affections, that we can by no means ritely examine the
truth of matters, but are driven to give such sentence and judgment, as they
will.

what a man's behavior ought to be toward him self.
Esteem and believe more the judgment of thine own conscience, than the
gloriouse report of the multitude, which commonly is both tude and ignorant,
and unadvisedly both approves and condemns things unknown.

A troublesome conscience tu^menteth the mind, a quiet conscience is high
felicitee, passing al worldly tresure and dignitee.

This is it, that god promyseth in the gospel unto his well-beloved children,
that they shall receive, even in this life, much more pleasure, than they have
forsaken for his sake.

Fame shall nether profit the wicked person, ne infamy hurt the good. What
p^ofite shalt thou have more of thy greatte fame, when thou art ones departed
hense, than the preysed picture of Apelles, or the horse that has the
victory in Olympia?

The said fame littell profyteth any man in his life time, if that he know
(...) not, and if he know it, what profit I pray you, brings it? a wise
man will despise it, and it causes fools more to embrace folly.

The witness of Conscience is true, sound, and permanent, and shall be of
great auctoritee, when God shall sit in that his dredful judgment, ^ is a
maistresse of great governance, even in this life. This conscience is, as the
poet featly names it, a brason wall to stand betwixt us and all dangers of this
world, neither is there any thing so terrible, that can shake him whom this
wall defendeh, being coupled and knit unto god with heart and mind, puttyng
his trust in him only, knowing that he has taken the peculiar charge of him,
to whom all things obey.

It is great shame for the, to be better known of other men than of thy self.

Is it not enough for the, to be known of thy self and of god?

They that cast away the regard of god, and lie still without fear in
sinfulnes, artwise to be condemned: because they regard neither god nor man.

All such are injurious to their own conscience, der^dyng and deludyng the
same, as though they had therefore dispysed the fame of the world, because
they would the more freely frame and facion them selfs unto theyy own
conscience, which now renneth at large in synfulnes, because it is not
bridled with fear.

He loves him self, that with all his endeavor and feruente prayer, desires
of god, that he vouchesafe to garnysshe the mind, the most excellent part^ of
man, with her true and natural ornaments, that is to wite, with Religion and
godliness.

He loves not him selfe^ which sets his mind, upon richesse, honors, and
worldly pleasures, or any other bodily thing: for so much as the most
precious part of man, is the mind.

Neither loves he him selfe^ which for lack of knowlage of his own misery,
deceives him self, or suffers other to deceive him: being glad as having
those gifts, whereof in very deed, he has none at all.

Such love in a man is not to be counted the love of him self, but a blind,
beastly, and inordinate love of the body, hurtful both to him self, and to
other. The which love Socrates conplained, to be the original beginning of
all mischeues. For in deed this takes away frendshyp between man and man,
whereby arise all, myserye, all mischiefs among men. He that ouermuche loves
him self after this manner, he loves no man, and no man him.

The proud man agrees not with the meke, and much less with men of his own
disease.

Our savior, by his heavenly wisdom, briefly declares unto us, both what
it is, a man to love, and what it is, a man to hate him self, saying after
this manner: He that hat^th his soul and does not suffer it to be entangled
with the pleasant intisementes of the world, he trewely loves his soul, and
wills it to be saved Contrary wise, he that loves his soul, setting it
upon voluptuousenesse, the same hates his soul, and woll it com to naught.

Who, except he be mad, woll refuse labor and peynes, to obtain the
reward eternal in heaven, seeing that these wretched and transitorye things,
without great labor and peynes can not be obteind?

The law of Adams children is to live in labor, and the cur^ due belongyng to
babes borne of Eve is to suffer affliction^ and trouble.

Therefore we must ned is labor what way so ever we turn us,

How much better than is it, to endeavor with all our power, to have for our
labor an ample reward, as eternal joy, than to have a sklender and a vile
recompense, that shortly vanysheth, and sorrow everlasting? What also, that it
is an easier surer qui^ter and much more pleasanter, a lighter thing to do
well, than to do evil, wherein is so much fear sorrow and care.

Syn is the deaeth of man, so that he may well seem to sle him self, which
falls to syn, for he withdraws him self from God, our life, and from the
quietness of conscience, a thing most blessed, most full of comfort and joy.

Thou shall wasshe away the spots of sin with tears, with repentance, and
by the inuocacion of the mercy of god, cleauyng and holly trustyng to it.

Let all manner of occasions of sins be cut away and eschued with all
diligence. For the wise man says: He that loves peril, shall perish therein.

And the dyuell always wayteth upon all occasions, that we can never be
careless. We must war with him stylle: man's life upon earth is, as Job
truly seyeth, a continual warfare.

And for as much as our ennemy is so mighty, so strong, so subtle, so
craftye, and of so great experience, having so many policies of war against
us, that we can by no means, craft, ne power, match him: let us, castyng away
all affiaunce of our own nature and power flee unto god for succor. For this
cause, our lord often commands his disciples to pray, and desire their holy
Father, with pure heart and mind, that they may not be led into temptacion,
that is to say, into fight, into hand grypes with their adversary.

And in the prayer, that he taught us, this is the last point, which knitteth
up all together, Ne nos inducas in tentatione^, Lead us not into temptacion,
but deliver us from our adversary, that stille lies in wait for us.

Let us therefore always do as men armed in war, keeping diligent watch and
ward, not lettyng occasions slip away by sleep and sluggishenes.

And where as this life fl^eth so fast away, being of such vncertayntee, that
no man living to day, can make sure promise of to morrow, it is a great point
of foolyshenesse, and very dangerous, in hope of long life, not to prepare us
to our final iorneie, seeing that we are called upon every hour, and yet know
nothing of the time, when we shall be compelled to this journey, whether we woll
or no. Let us therefore have, to prepare us tresure unto the life to com, being
always ready with diligent attendance, that when we shall be called, we be not
found vnredye, oppressed with heavy and dull sluggisshenes, that we depart not
sad and sorrowful, but as men being full satisfied, and weary of this world,
reioicyng in hope through faith in Christ: whereby we know god, and as far
forth as the power of man may, we imitate, follow, and find him: without this
thing what is a man, but a beast immortal?

As one day of ma^s life is worthy to be preferred before the lo^gest age of
Raven or Heart: so one day, spent after the example of Christ, is better than
to live eternally, not following right religion.

This is eternal life, says Christ our lord, to know the father, and who^
he sent among us, Jesus christ his soonne,

This is the course of most absolute wisdom, whereof the first step is, To
know thy self, and the last of all To know God. To the immortal and
invisible king of the world, to God only be all honor and glory. Amen,

Finis.
Here follows certain flowers of most not able sentences of wise men, gathered
together by Erasmus of Roterodam, and translated into english.
Thales.
Be obedient to thy prince.

Prove thy friend er thou have need.

Absteyne from wicked deeds.

Specially love peace.

Do so that thou may be commended of all folk.

If thou have a tale bea^er in thy house, avoid him out.

It that thou art a shamed to do before an other, thou should not be so
hardy to do alone as though thy self than were witness.

If thou purpose to do a thing, keep it secret, left any should let the.

He augmenteth his grefe, that fears that that can not be ^schued.

Better it is to be rebuked of a foe, tha^ falsely praised of a fre^d.

To much is naught, for mesure in all things is best.

Solon.
Honor god.

Woorshyppe thy father and mother.

Succor thy friends.

Maynteyne truth.

Be obedient to the laws.

Bridle thyn^ anger.

Envy no person.

Mind that is rightuous.

Commend virtue.

None is lucky, but he that dies welthfully.

Most sure amitee is, that rests between equalles.

The guerdon of virtue, is veraie honor, not the reward of fortune.

Commend thy friend openly, but when he erreth, correct him secretly.

More clear is the nobleness, which thou through thine own virtues, do
obteyn, than that that happeth unto the by the images of thy forfathers.

If desteny can not be avoided, what profits to know it? If it be
uncertain: it is folyshenes to fear, when thou know not, whether it will
come or not.

Chilo.
Know thy self.

Use temperance.

Get thy good truly.

Let thy manners be alowable.

With such skele the life should be moderate, that thy inferiors dread the not,
which is tyranny: Nor thy superyours despise the, which is a cast^a side.

Live clean and pure, as thou should dye this day. Give thy self to honest
studyes, as thou shuldes live ever.

Bost not thy good deeds, but let other commend them.

Flouring old age, is most like unto youth.

Waywarde youth, is most like unto old age.

Pitacus.
THose things that thou purposest to do, crake not of before, if thou can
not bring them to pass, thou shalt be laughed to scorn.

The things that can not be done, look thou defyre not greatly.

It is no less craft to keep silence, than to speak.

It forces not how many, but what they be that praise the: for to be
praised of evil persons is disprayse.

It is foolyshnes to be grieved with the felicitee of them that be yuell, as
though wealth rested in goods vulgar.

As foolish it is to rejoice t^ see them that be yuell in celamitee, as
though before they were not vnwelthy.

That thou ordeinest other to do, observe thy self.

In time of prosperitee thou shalt have many friends.

But in aduersitee few friends remain, but they be true.

Bias.
BEhold thy self in a myrror, if thou appear beautyfull, do that beseems
thy fairness If thou by disf^rmed, that that wants in thy visage,
accomplish with beautee of good manners.

Hear much and speak little.

Set or apply the in youth to sobrenes, and in age to wisdom.

He is not rich that much possesses, but he, that is content with that he
has. Every covetous man is poor, who has not that he has.

A woman without dowry, is enough endowed, if she be chaste.

The propertee of a prudente man is, not to be revenged wha^ he might.

An yuel man although he can not, yet he desires to hurt.

Cleobulus.
THat thou hate, thou shuldst not do to another Threten no man, for that is a
womanly tatche.

Sooner visit thine unfortunate, than fortunate friends.

False detraction hurts the life.

All that be prudent and wise hate liers.

The more mighty thou art, the more beware thou syn not. And the more men for
thy principalitee or rule permytte the to do, the less take upon the.

Wealth yuell gotten dureth not long.

Be mylde to other, to thine own self rough.

The preyse of the forefathers goes not by enherytaunce to them that come
after.

But yet often times the children are blamed for the faults of the parents.

P^riander.
Nothing is profitable that is not honest.

The richer one is, the more careful he lives.

He is a wretch, who for we^ines of his life desires death, but he is more
wretched, that dredeth death.

It that must of necessitee be done, make as thou did it gladly.

He that is drad of many, must needs fear many.

Though fortune be favorable, be never the higher minded.

Though thou have adversity, have a valiant mind.

Aristippus.
Seek the such richesse, which if the ship break, may swym forth together
with the owner.

The goods of fortune be taken away by sundry casualtees, but the goods of
the mi^de, which be only the true goods, can be taken away neither by fire,
nor by shipwreck.

Learn when thou art a child such things, as shall be profitable to the,
when thou art a man.

Theophrastes.
TIme is the most precious cost that a man can bestow.

Antisthenes.
IT is given to a king, though he do never so well, yet to be evil spoken of.

It is better of the twein to fall among a sort of raue^s, than amo^gs
flatterers. The raue^s eat a man when he is dead, but the flatterers eat him
quick.

That ^uste does to iron, that does envy to man.

The concord of brethren i^ surer than any stone wall.

The chiefest lernyng is to vnlerne vices.

Diogenes.
A Good man is the image of god.

Love is the business of loitrers.

^edie age is a thing most miserable.

There be two, which byte most deadly, of wild beasts the backebyter, and
of tame the flatterer.

A flatteryng speech is a honey sweet snare.

They that speak gloriousely, but do nothing thereafter them self, be like
to a harp, which makes a sound to other, but it self neither hears nor
perceives.

He lives vainly, which has no care to live well.

A goodly person that speaks u^godly words, draws forth a leaden sword out
of an yu^^y s^abarde.

Bond men be thrall to their masters, and wicked men to their lusts.

Learning is to young men a soberness, to oldemen a solace, to poor men
richesse, to rich men a garnyshment.

Nobilitee, glory, richesse, be the clokes of naughtiness.

S^cr^tes.
THe things that (...) above us, perteyne naught unto us.

This one thing I know said Socrates, that I know nothing.

Crates.
LIke as in every pome granate there is some kernel rotten: so there is no man
found thoroughly clean from vice.

Zeno.
IT follows not, that who so ever is great, is forthwith good, but who so ever
is good, the same is also great.

Nature has given man therefore two ears, and but one mouth, that we should be
redier to here than to speak.

Men ought to be drawn rather by the ears than by the gown, that is to fair,
rather by persuasion, than by violence.

Themistocles.
It is better to have men wantyng money, than money wantyng men.

Pericles.
A man may be a friend, but he must go no further with his friend then til he
com to the aultare, that is, he may not offend god for his friends cause.

Lamachus.
It is not laufull in battle to make a fault twyse.

Iphi^rates.
It is an uncomely saying for a wise man to say, I would not have thought it,
or I would not have looked, that it should have come so to pass.

M. Curious.
It is far better for a man to bear a rule upon men having gold, the^ to
have gold him sel^.

Cato Senior.
It is marvel that that city can be safe, in which an ox is sold for
less price, than a fish is sold for.

Musonius.
If through labor thou shall work any worship, the labor vanysheth, and the
worship tarieth. But if thorough pleasure thou shalt work any shame, the
pleasure vanyssheth, and the shame tarieth.

Anach^i^is.
Of a craft can no man judge but the crafts man.

By other men's vices learn how foul thine own be.

Charm the tongue, bealye, and priuitees.

FINIS.
To the king our most graciour sovereign lord, the prologue of sir Thomas
Elyot knight to the Banquet of sapience.
AFter song fa^yng, and also much travail, it hath^ been thought ever,
most noble prince, not only conueniente, but also to stand with good reason,
to have a dinner or supper provided with meats sufficient, as well to recreate
the vital spirits, as to restore eftsoon the strength abated by labors.

Moreover in this time of the year, called the spryng time, provoked by the
natural beauty and ioiouse aspecte of the flourishyng habit of this temporal
world, the nature of them, in whom is any spark of gentle courage, requires
to solace and banquet with mutual resort, co^municatyng together their
fantasies and sundry devises, which was not abhorred of the most^ wise and
noble philosophiers, as may appear to them, that have wytsaufed to read the
works of Plato, Xenophon, and Plutarche, which they named Symposia, called
banquettes in Englisshe, Semblably, I being styrred most excellent^ Prince, by
a like imitacion, considering the long abstynence and fasting of this
present Lent, with also the contynual travail that your highness, your
counsel, and diverse your subjects have sustained, in consultynge about the
weal publyque of this your graces most noble realm, I have provided this
littell banquet (so is this littell treatise entitled) composed of sundry wise
counsels, gathered by me out of the warkes of most excellent persons, as well
faithful as Gentiles. And like as in this lusti^ time, things do appear in
sundry delectable colors and facions: so in this littell ^oke shall your grace
and other reders behold sentences sundry and diverse, which I do apply unto
bankettyng dysshes, made and seasoned by Sapiencehir self, and served forth
to the table by them, which did write or pronounce them. And as for me, ^
have no more part in the banquet, nor deserve any more praise therefore than one
of them that bears a torche before every course when they come from the
dresser: And yet where there is such abundance, I may perchance for my
labor have the reuercion or scrappes of some of the dishes. Finally for
as much as diverse meats be of diverse qualities, some sweet, some poynant, some
aigre doul^e: it shall be expedient, that every dishe of this bankette, be
thoroughly touched, dou^yng not, but how so ever the taste shall content men,
all shall be holsom, if they be well masticate, and not hastily devoured. This
little wark with my labors have I dedicate unto your hyghnes, unto whom of
bounden duty being your humble servant, I owe all my studies, prayer,
service, and loialte, besechyng your grace to receive this little work, as a
token of my sincere mind and intent, according to your accustomed and
incomparable gentilnes. And for my part, I shall daily pray thauctour and
fountain of sapience to preserve your most royal person in the abundance
of his grace, to the comfort of your loving subjects.

The Introduction to the Banquet.
SApyence has builded and house for her self, Salom.
she has prepared her wine, prouer.
and laid forth her table, Cap. 9.
she calls out abroad in the streets, Cap. 1.
and in the chief assembly of people, and at the gates of the city she
speaks with a loud voice: ye babyes how long will ye delight in your
childishenesse? And how long will fools couete those things, which shall
hurt them? And they which lack wit, hate knowlage and lernyng? Come on, and
eat ye my bread, and drink my wine, that I have ordained now for you. To me
do belong counseil and equitee, mine is prudence, Cap. 8.
and mine also fortitude. By me kings do reign, and makers of law^s do
determyne those things that be rightwise. By me princes do govern, and men
in auctoritee d^ give sentence according to justice. I love them that love me,
and they that wake earelie shall find me, with me do remain both substance
and renome, stately richesse, and Justice, my fruit does excel gold and
stones preciouse, and my branches are better than fine tried silver, my walks
be in the high ways of Justice, and in the mydd^ll of the paths of
judgment, to the intent that I will make them rich that do love me, and
fill up their treasures.

Banquet of sapience.
Abstinence.
WINE and youth is a double flame of carnal desire. Hyeron^mus.


That man seldom falls in to things unlawful, Gregor.
which in things lefull can sometime refrain.

A man should so know the craft of continence, that therewith he may flee the
vices of the body, and save well his person.

Nature is come^t with a few things and littell, Seneca.
whose contentacion, if thou do oppress with excess, that which thou
^atest, shall be unto the unpleasant or hurtful.

Better is a man pacient tha^ strong, Salom.
and he that maistreth his will, sourmounteth a conqueror.

Aduersitee.
THe potters vessel is tried in the furneysse, Salo.
and good men be proved in time of aduersitee.

Hyde thy misfortune, Perian.
that thine enemy rejoice not.

There is nothing so grievous but an upright mind may find therein solace. Seneca.


In all thy troubles remember this reason, hard things man be mollified,
strait things may be loused, and heavy things shall littell grieve them that
can hansomly bear it.

Trouble is cause of patience, Paulus.
patience makes proof, proof brings in hope, hope is never rebuked.

My child neglect not goddis correction, but when he doothe punyshe the, think
it not ^edious, for whom god loves, him will he chastise.

Coals being in the forge do brenne and consume, August.
but the gold is there tried, the one is t^urned to ashes, while the other is
syned. The forge is the world, good men are the gold, aduersitee is the fire,
the warke man is god.

It per^eigneth to virtue, Bernar.
to suffer aduersitee, it belongs to wisdom in aduersitee alwaie to be
merye, pluck up thy heart, and suffer goddis pleasure: for the chief part of
virtue is to taste and feel how sweet and delectable is the lord of all
wisdom.

The wise man in tourmentes is evermore happy. Lactan.
But he that is troubled either for faith for justice, or for god almightye,
that suffera^nce of pain brings a man to perfect felicitee.

I judge the to be miserable, Seneca.
that never knew misery.

What a man may, or may not, it is never perceived, until he be proved.

Affection.
VUhere affection ones in the heart of man enters and flows into his breast
and drowneth his heart, Plant.
fidelitee virtue, good fame, and honestee him clean forsakes, and he dai^ly
in all mischief increases.

Where affection abounds, E^rip.
there good fame and virtue oftentimes perishes.

Ambicion.
They that be infected with ambicion, Pluta^.
and are desirous of honor, would be exhorted to possede only such treasure
as is vnso^tted, and clean from all mischief, which may not of any ennemy
be corrupted, nor with rebuke noted, nor with any dishonesty sclaundered.

The devil did fall only because he rather would be a lord than a subject.
August.


He that is in auctoritee, Gregor.
let him consider how he comes to it, and coming well to it, how he ought to
live well in it, and living well in it, how he must govern, and gouernyng
wisely, he must often call to remembrance his own infirmitee.

A virtuous man should receive rule or auctoritee, as if he were thereto
compelled: but he that lacks virtue, though he be compelled, yet let him
not take it.

Ambicion is a subtle mischief, Bernar.
a privy p^yson, a covert p^s^ilence, the forger of d^^eyte, the mother of
hypocrysy, the nourice of envy, the fountain of vices, the mothe of devotion,
the blynder of hertes, making diseases of remedies, and sickness of salues.

It is hard for him that desires to be above all men, Tullius.
to keep alwaie equitee, which is the chief part of Justice.

He that is desirous of glory, is soon styrred to do things against equitee.

Authoritee.
HIgh authoritee is always in peril. Q Curt.
For it is hard to hold that, which thou canste not welde.

They that would excel all other in a city or cu^trey, Plutar.
should allure their inferiors with indifferency, gentylnes, and liberalitee:
And content great men with diligence, affabilitee, and sobrenes, and with good
reasons reteyne them in the weal public, in one consent and agreement. Seneca.


Flee that authoritee, wherein springs continually new occupacion and sundry.

Amitee.
I Suppose this to be the very true law of amitee, August.
a man to love his friend, no less nor no more than he loves him self.

Amity either takes or mamaketh men equal, and where in equalitee is, by
pre^minence of the tone, and much baseness of the other, there is much more
flattery than friendship.

In amitee the thing is not so much to be sought for, as the will and intent,
the tone between men is oftentimes given, the to there, only proceeds of love,
and the same thing to will or will not, is canstant amitee.

Where the manners (...) diverse and studies repugnant, Ambros.
can never be friendship.

He that is beloved in time of prosperitee, Gregor.
it is very doubtful, whether the fortune, or else the person be the thing that
is favored.

A faithful friend is a sure Salom.
protection, he that finds such one, finds a treasure.

A freende is not known in things that be pleasant.

In things displeasant, an enemy is spied.

They be never faithful in frendshippe, Isidorus.
whom gifts have gotten, and love never ioigned.

That is true friendship, that looks for nothing of his fre^d, but only of
his favor, as who says, without mede, loves his lover.

We be not borne for our selves only, Plato.
but partly our country, partly our friends claim an interest in our
natiuitee.

Let us see, Tullius.
that we use always that liberalitee, whereby we may profit our friends, and do
no man damage.

In things most prosperous the counsel of friends is most to be used.

The strength of a realm does not consiste in great puissaunce or treasure,
Salust.
but in friends, whom thou canste geatte neither by force, nor provide them
with money, but they be provided with gentilnesse and confidence only.

Apparaise.
THe appara^le, Ecclesi.
the laughter, and gate of a man do show what he is.

The right appara^le of christen men and woman, August.
^s in no manner of deceitful paintynge and trymmynge, nor yet the pompous
apparaile and iewelles, but it is their good conditions and manners.

Neither to much sluttyshenesse, nor ^xquisite niceness becomes a christian.
Hieron.


Thou woman, Ambrosi.
when thou paintest thy face with material colors, thou put out the true
picture of god.

Foul manners wars than dirt, Pla^t.
defiles fair garments, fair co^dicio^s do garnishe foul garment is with
laudable actis.

She is not well apparailed that is not well man^red.

He that fayn would have business, leat him get him and ship and a wife.
For in no two things is there more business: for if thou intendest to
appara^le them both, they two will never be sufficiently trymmed.

Almesdede.
IF thou have much, give than aboundauntly: ^obias.
If thou have littell, yet give somewhat gladly: thereby do thou lay up a
good treasure again the time of necessitee. For alms delivers the from syn
and from death, ne will suffer thy soul to enter into darkness.

Blessed is he that considreth the poor man and nedy, David.
in the troublesome day the lord shall deliver him.

He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor man, Salom.
he shall ones cry, and God shall not here him.

He that does alms, Eccles^.
does offer up sacrifice.

If I give all my goods to the feedyng of poor men, Paulu^.
and have not charitee, it nothing shall profit me.

Alms of the heart is much more than alms of the body. August.
The alms of charitee without worldely substance suffiseth, that which is
corporally given without a merciful heart is not sufficient.

Perfytte compassion is to prevent the hungry, Idem.
er^ the beggar desire the. Charitee is not perfitte, when crauynge exhorts
it.

Accusacion.
IT is better that an ill man be not accused, Liuius.
than to be suffered to go unpunished.

Arrogance.
A Sturdye heart shall sustain damage, Ecclesi.
and he that loves peril, therein shall perish.

The congregation of proud men shall never prosper^, the sin that in the^m
is planted, shall be digg^d up, and not be perceived.

To set little by that, Tullius.
which men do deem of the, is not only the sign of an arrogant person ^^ut
also of a man foolish and dissolute.

Age.
AGe which is reverend, Ecclesi.
is not acounted by length of time, or no^bre of years for the wit of man is
not the hoar hears: but veraie age is the life uncorrupted. How semely is it
to a white head to have a good judgment? and to old men to understand
counsel?

There is nothing more reprochefull, Seneca.
than an old man, which has none other argument to prove that he has lived
long, but only his years.

Avarice.
O with what difficultee shall they that have money enter into Christus pud^^^
the kingdom of heaven? Uerily I say unto you, more lightly may a camel
pass through the eye of a nedell, than a rich man enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

No doubt but they that be rich or couete to be rich, Paulus.
do fall in temptacion and snare of the dyuell, into sundry unlawful desires,
and also unprofitable, which drouneth a man in damnacion and death everlasting.

To a man couetouse and nyggarde, Eccles.
substance is to no purpose, to an enuiouse man what profits richesse?

From the least to the most all men be couetouse, Ierem.
from the prophet to the priest, all do dissemble.

The chariott of avarice is Bernar.
carried on four wheles of vices which are faint courage, vngentylnesse,
contempt of god, forgetfulness of death. And two horses do draw it, raueny and
nygardship: to them both is but one cartar, desire to have, that carter
drives with a whip having two cords, appetite to get, and dread to forlette.

He that heapeth up richesse, Salom.
and sets his mind to gather for other men, having no respect to justice,
his gooddes shall be consumed in riot and folly.

He that hydeth corn, shall be cursed of the people, and benediccion shall
light on them that be sellers.

Substance soon come by, shall minishe, and that which by tittell and
littell with labor is gotten, shall increase and continue.

Hell and pardicion be never filled, nor the insaciable eien of a covetous
person.

He that makes haste to be tyche, and has indignacion at other, litell
weneth he how sone after, need will attache him.

Everlasting woe be to him, Aba^u^.
that couetously does gether to maynteyne his house, that his ^est may stand
high, and thinks to escape the great stroke of ve^geaunce.

Pouertee lacks many things, Seneca.
couetise all things. The nygard to no man is good, but to him self he is
worst.

Money, if thou can use it, is thy sernaunte and drudge, if not, she is thy
lady and sovereign.

To practice in ^h^ public weal for to get richesse, Tullius.
is not only a shame, but also a thing to all men most odious.

Inordinat desire of riches and rule is the first mattier, Salu^.
whereof springs all evil, for covetous appetite, subuerteth crede^ce,
honest^e, and all other virtues.

It is hard to content us with that, Q Curt.
which occasion does proffer, for the thing that comes first, does
obhorre us, when we hope to have better.

Babblyng.
THat which passes out of the mouth comes from the heart, Matthew.
and that is the thing that defiles a man.

In much babblyng lacks no sin, Salom.
he is wise that can te^per his language.

A babblyng enemy shall less annoy the, Seneca.
than he that speaks nothing.

That which is oftentimes spoken, Aristotle.
troubles the herer.

Talk so with men, Macro.
as if god did here the, speak so to god, as if men understood the.

Battle.
THat Fortitude, Hieron.
which preserves by battle the country from infidelles, and at home
defendethe feeble men, and true men from thieves, agrees with justice.

In wars the multitude, nor the puissance unlearned, may so much avail
toward victory, as knowlage and exercise.

He that desires peace, let him prepare for wars, he that would vanquisshe,
let him instruct well his people: And he that would acheue his exploitures,
let him fight with craft, and not with chance or adventure.

War would be in such wise taken in hand, Tullius.
as nothing but peace should seem to be sought for.

Octauian the emperor was wont to say, Sextus Aurelius.
That war should not be styrred without surety that the gain should be more
than the charges, lest that the victory gotten with much loss and small
advantage, may be like to a fish hoke of gold, which either being broken or
lost, can not be paid for with that that it takes.

Uictory rests not in a great army, Machabeorum.
but the strength of the battle comes from heaven.

Chabrias a noble man was wont to say, Plutar.
an host of hearts that had a Lion to their capitay ^e, was more to be dread,
than an host of lions being led with an heart. Salust.


These four things ought to be in a great capitayn, knowlage in arms,
valiant courage, authoritee, and fortune.

Sobrenesse in a soldier is no less commendable, I^l. Ce.
than strength and hardiness.

Idelnesse is most contrary to soldiers attemptates.

Benefit.
DO thou good to a good man, Ecclesi.
and thou shall find recompense, and if he can not requite the, yet god sha^
remember the.

If thou practice beneficence on a person unworthy, Democ.
thou geuest occasion to fools to do leudely.

That benefit comes late, Seneca.
that abides a craving.

A shrewde turn is sooner requit than a good turn, Tacitus.
for thank is reputed a charge, renengyng for a gayn and advantage.

Those benefits are most thankeful, Seneca.
which a man finds ready, and comes on quickly, wherein is no tariyng, but
only, the shame fastness of him that shall take them.

Bysshope.
A Bishop must be without faut, Paulus ad Titu^.
as the stuarde of almightye god, not proud, not wrathful, not drunkely, no
fighter, not covetous of dishoneste gain, but a good householder, bountyful,
wise, sobre, just, holy, and continent, having the true manner of speech, which
is according to learning, wherewith he may exhort by wholesome doctrine, and
reprove them, which will speak to the contrary.

Bostyng.
BE thou praised of an nothers mouth, Salom.
and not of thine own Let a stranger commend the, an^ not thine own lips.

Nothing does more minishe a man's commendacion, Ualerius. Max.
than much auauntyng the success of his acts.

It is a foul thing a man to tell much of him self, Cicero.
specially that which is false, and with mockes of them, which do here
him, to seem to resemble the bostyng soldier.

Chastitee.
IF thine eye be simple or clean, Christus. in Matt,
all thy body shall be bright.

Chastitee is the beautee of the soul, or of the kingis daughter, which is
from within.

Where necessitee is laid unto chastitee, August.
authoritee is given to lecherye: for neither she is chaste, which by fear is
compelled, nor she is honest, which with mede is obtained.

Chastitee without charity is as a lamp without oil, Bernar.
take the oil away, the lamp gives no night, take away charitee, than
pleseth not chastitee.

There be six things that do preserve chastitee, Cassiodotus.
sobrenesse in diete, occupacion, sharpenes of the inner apparayle, refraynynge
of the senses, that is to say, the five wits. Also selde communicacion, and
that with honesty, and eschuyng oportunitee of the person, the place, and the
time.

Charitee.
IF I had the spirit of prophecy, Paulus.
and knew all mysteries, and all manerr of cu^^yng: Also if I had all faith, in
so much as I could translate and carry away mountains, yet were I nothing, if
I lacked charitee.

Moreover, if I did distribute all my goods, in fedyng poor people, and
although I gave my body to be burned, having no charitee, it nothing avails
me. Charitee is pacient and ge^til. Charitee has envy at no man, it does no
thing amiss, it is not puffed up with pride, it is not ambicious, she seeks
not her profit, she is not moved, she thinks none ill, she reioyseth in no
mischief, she ioyeth with truth, all thing she suffers, all thing she
believes, all thing she hops, all thing she bears, Charitee never fails.

Constance.
AS well to much reioysyng in prosperitee, Tullius.
as to much sorrow in aduersitee betokens lyghtnesse.

What so ever is done by necessitee is shortly dissolved, Hieron.
and that which is willyngly received of long time, abides.

He that is constaunt feeieth no trouble, Seneca.
and is without heaviness.

Nothing so well becomes a man, Tullius.
as in every enterprise and taking of counsel, to be sure and constant.

What is so great folly, or so unworthy a wise man's constance and grauitee, as
is false opinion? or boldly to defend that, which he does not understand
well and sufficiently?

Carnal appetite.
CArnal appetite is alwai a hungered, Hieron.
and of that, which is passed, a man is not satisfied.

It agrees not with reason, Tullius.
that he, whom fear can not vanquishe, to be subdued with couetise, or he
which can be overcome with no peine, to be vanquisshed with carnal affection.

Carnal appetite more often leaves behynd her, cause of repentance, than of
remembrance.

Carnal appetite ennemie to reason, lets all counsel, and dusketh the
eyes of the mind, nor with virtue will have any medlyng.

Consideracion.
HE that intends to do any thing, Tullius.
leat him consider, not only how convenient is the thing that ought to be done
but also what power he has to bring it to pass.

If we will consider what excellency and preeminence is in the nature of man,
we shall well understand, how horrible a thing it is to flow in excess,
and to be wanton and delicate, how ^ayre and honest it is to live warely,
continently, sadly, and sobrely.

He whom fortune never deceives, Liuius.
does not without cause remember the vncertaintee of sundry ad^entures.

If thou consider well things that be passed, Socrat.
thou shalt the better give counsel in things that may happen.

Remembrance of acts passed, Galenus.
shows to us, wherein we offend, and conferryng it with things that be
present, we are taught how to refourme it.

Confession.
Confession is the remedi of souls, August.
the co^founder of vices, the restorcr of virtues, the vanquysher of dyuels,
what will you more? It stops helles mouth, and sets wide open the gates
of paradise.

The vengeance of god ceasseth, Ambros.
where man's confession timely preuenteth.

Confession is the life of a sinner, Bernar.
the glory of good men, to offe^dours necessary, and yet unto just me^ not
inconvenient.

Contempt of worldy things.
THe world is a sea, and every man's covetous desire, is naught else but a
tempest. Do thou love god? than walk thou on the sea, and the fear of the
world is under thy feet, love thou the world? and he will fwalowe the, for
he can toll his lovers unto him, but he can not bear them. Therefore when thy
heart flittereth in covetous appetite, call to thine aid Christ's diuinitee,
that thou may vanquyshe thine inordinate folly. August.


The pleasure of this world is vanitee, which with much expectacion is
looked for, and when it is come, no man can hold it.

Bost not of tomorow, Hieron.
thou wottest not what the day will bring, when it comes.

Set littell by richesse, Chrisos.
and thou shalt be rich: set littell by renoume, and thou shalt be famous:
Care not for afflictiones, and thou shalt overcome them, pass littell on
rest and quietness, and thou shalt obtain them.

In things perteinynge to man, Lactan.
nothing is so diligentely don, but that as well by the puissaunce of man, it
may be undone, for the works of men mortal also be mortal.

Nothing is so happy, Seneca.
that it is without fear. Where there is suspicion, the life is unpleasant.

He that is dedicate to the hasardes of fortune, Idem.
he prepares for him self much mattire to trouble, which will not shortly
be slacked.

There is one way to go surely, Idem.
that is, to set littell by things worldely, and a man to hold him contented
only with honestee.

Custom.
IN things, August.
whereof holy scripture has determined no certainty, the use of gods people,
and statutes of fathers are to be holden for laws, and likewise as
transgressors of gods laws are to be punisshed, so contemnours of
ecclesiastical customs ought to be chastised.

The wound often renewed, Isidorus.
is hard to be healed.

Custom teaches that to be Seneca.
littell, which seems to be great.

Educacion and discipline forms good manners, and men sauoreth always of that
thing, which in youth they have learned

In truth, August.
which appears openly, custom must give place to veritee.

Correction.
HE that byndeth a frantike man, August.
and waketh him that has the letargie or slepyng liknesse, displeases both,
loves both, and heals both: both whiles they be sick, do disdain him,
and when they be hole, yet both do thank him.

Correct not a scorner, Salom.
lest that he hate the, correct a wise man, and he will thank the.

In correction wrath is specially to be prohibited, Tullius.
for he that will punisshe, when he is angry, he shall never keep well the
mean, which is between to much and to littell.

A gentil horse is ruled with the glymse of a rod: Q. Curt.
A dulle royle will uneath styre with the thruste of a spur.

It is better to be of a wise man corrected, Ecclesi.
than to be with the flattery of fools deceived.

The ear, Salom.
which will hear his own life rebuked, shall dwell in the middell of them
that be wise men.

Be of thine own living a sharp correctour, Chryso.
and of other men's a gentill reformer, and let men here the command small
things and easy, and thai thou thy self do great things and peinfull.

Correct thy friend secretly, Seneca.
and praise thy friend openly.

It is the part of a wise man, to root up ^ices, and not the offenders.

A good captain orders his men better by keeping them from ill donynge,
Salust^
than by sor^ chastisyng.

Counsel and counsaylours.
THey that do all things with counsel, Ecclesi.
are governed by wisdom.

Call not them to thy counsel, which lack discrecion, for they can love
nothing, but that which contenteth their appetite.

To every man disclose not thy mind, lest some do dissemble, and after
reproach the.

Son do al things by counsel, and when thou have done, thou shall not
repent the.

Observe well the law, Salom.
and follow good counsel, and thy soul shall have life, and thou shalt walk
trewly, and thy foot shall not trippe.

Believe not every spirit, Joan.
but prove well the spirits, if they be good.

Armure abroad is of littell effect, but if there be counsel at home.

Governors of the weal Tullus.
publyke ought to be like to the laws, the which not for displeasure, but
only for equitee do punish offenders.

That publyk weal is in better state, Ualerius Max.
and in a manner more sure, where the prince is not good, tha^ where the kings
cou^sailours and companions be ill.

All violente attemtates being set forth without counsel, Tacitus.
at the beginning are puissaunte, but in continuance they are insufficient.

Who will judge him to be necessary in an other man's cause, Ambros.
which to him self appears unprofitable.

There been two things to counsel most contrary, Haste and Displeasure.

After hasty counsel, next follows repentance.

Ill counsel is worst to the gyuer. Hesiodus.


Power without counsel oftentimes breaks his neck with his own bourdeyn.
Horatius.


Communicacion.
VUhan thou art among fools, Ecclesi.
keep thy words in store.

Among wise men be ready to commune.

In the presence of great men presume not to speak, and where as be thine
elders, talk not to much.

Honor and praise be in the words of a wise man: Salom.
The tunge of a fool is his propre subuercion.

Dispute not with a person disdainful, Tullius.
least he sitting still, do lie in awaite for thy words.

It is a thing foul and rebukefull, in a sad matter, to bring in words
wanton, or mete for a banquet.

Crueltee.
Look what measure you give unto other, Christus in Mat.
like measure shall be mete unto you.

They which delight in the fall of good men, Ecclesi.
shall be taken in a trappe, and shall be consumed with sorrow er ever they die.

Judgment without any mercy shall be given to him that Iacobus.
will not be merciful.

The best example, Seneca.
whereunto a prince should conform him, is to be such one to his subjects,
as he would that god should be to him self.

It is even as ill at home as abroad to be much feared, Idem.
as ylle to be dradde of thy slaves and drudges, as of thy chyefe servants:
no man lacks power to do harm: Add also thereunto, that he that is drad,
of necessity fears. Never man might be terrible, and also in surety.

Curiositee.
Seek not for that, which is out of thy reach: Salom.
Search not those things, that excedeth thy puissaunce, but think on that,
which god has commanded the, and in his sundry works be not to curious.

Compassion.
THey that trust much to their friends, Q. Curt.
know not how shortly tears be dried up.

Death.
HE must live ill that lacks knowlage how to dye well. Seneca.


They which prepare them to battle before that battle approaches, Idem.
they being always ready, do easyly sustain toe first bru^t, which is most
troublous, so death or fortune always looked for, is and seems more easy, and
with less pain suffered.

One day demeth another, Plinius.
but the last gives judgment of all that is passed.

Delicate living.
AS it is impossible, Chryso.
that fire should inflame within water, so it is impossible, that contricion of
heart should be great in things that be delicate: for they be mere repugnaunt
the one to the other, the contricion being mother of weeping, delicatenes of
laughyng, she straineth and wringeth the heart, this louseth it and sets it
at libertee.

Deceit.
MEn can better suffer to be denied, Seneca.
than to be deceyned. Tullius.


Where wrong is committed by two manner of ways, either by force, or by
fraud, fraud belongs to a fox, force to a lion, both the one and the other
is to the nature of man wonderful contrary.

We ought to beware more of the envy of our friends, Laertius.
tha^ of the assaults of our enemies, for these be apparent unto us, the other
is covered, and the craft to annoy, which is not looked for, is ever most
daungerouse.

A false witness shall not be Salom.
without punishment, ne a forget of lies shall escape from correction.

Detraction.
NEther detractors nor yet extorcioners shall possess the kingdom of heaven.
Paulus.


Never detracte or backbyte any man, Hieron.
nor be seen to get praise by rebukynge of other: but learn more to adorn
thine own life, than to defame others, remembrynge the scripture, which
says, Love not to pull away a man's praise, least thou be plucked up by the
roots

To sclander, Bernar.
or to here sclanderers, I can not tell of them two which is most damnable.

We ought to suppose that Tullius.
detractyng or ill reportyng one of an other for a private advantage, is more
against nature, than to suffer any discommoditee, be it exterior or bodily.

Drunkenness.
A Drunken work manne shall never be rich, Ecclesi.
and he that sets naught by a littell, shall by a littell and a littell,
come unto nothing.

How sufficient unto a learned man is a small quantitee of wine? for therewith
when thou slepest, thou shall not be troubled, nor feel any pain.

Everlasting pain shall be unto you, Isaias.
that do rise early in the morning to drink excessiuely, and to quafte until
night, that ye may be with wine excessiuely chauffed.

Lechery, Oseas.
wine, and sacietee consumes all wisdom.

The drunken man confounds nature, August.
loses both grace and honor, and rnneth headling into everlasting, damnacio^.

Wine inordinately taken, Boethius.
troubles man's reason, makes dull understanding, infeebleth remembrance,
sends in forgetfulness, pours in errors, and brings forth sluggyshnesse.

Discord.
Every realm divided with in it self shall be made desolate and every city
and house divided by mutual contencion, Christus in Mat.
shall not long stande^

In three things my spirit is well pleased, Ecclest.
which be also commended before god and man, the good concord of brethren,
the love of neighbors, also man and wife of one consent and agreement.

If they, Gregor.
which make peace, be called the children of god, without dout the disturbers
of peace be the children of Satan.

They that sustein one part of the people, Tullius.
and neglecte the other part, they bring into the city a thing very
perilous, that is to say, sedicion and discord.

With concord small things grow to be great, Salust.
with discord the most greattest things b^ brought unto nothing.

War is sone made, but it is not so shortli discussed, for he is not sure to
fynysshe it, that first took in hand to begin it.

Dignitee.
HE is honorable, Chryso.
a great estate, and a noble man, which dysdaynethe to scrue, or be subject
to vices.

If thou will esteem a man truly, Seneca.
and know what he is, behold him naked, and let him lay aside possessions,
authoritee, and other fables of Fortune: Finally, let him put of his boby,
and behold thou in his soul, what he is of him self, and what he has of
other, which is not his own.

Dolor.
LIke as a mothe in a garment, Salom.
and a wourme in a tree, so heuinesse hurtethe the heart of a man.

In heuinesse it is to be foreseen and provided, Idem,
that nothing be dooen desperately, nothing fearfully, nothing wretchedly,
or any thing foolyshely.

There is no sorrow, Se. Sul. pit^us.
but that length of time shall mynishe it, and make it more easy.

Doctrine.
LIke as fair legs be in vain to a cripple, Salom.
so unseemly is doctrine in the mouths of fools.

Doctrine is of such puissance, Nelasius.
that in good men it is the armor of virtue, to persons corrupted, a spur
to do mischeife.

Like as wolle takes some colors with one only dieping some not without often
stepyng and boylyng, Seneca.
so some doctrines ones apprehended be forthwith showed, some other except they
be depely received, and long time, settled, colors not the mind, but only
touches it, and that which is promised, it nothing performs.

Doctrine is an ornament to men being fortunate, Democ.
to men unfortunate a refuge and succor.

No man may profit in he aryng so much, Ambros.
but whiles he lives he shall have need to be taught.

A corn fyelde or a wit being never so fertyle, Tullius.
without it be exercised, may never be fruitful.

Phylosophye is not a commune warkemanshyp, Seneca.
or made for to brag with. It is not in words but in mattier: ne it is given
only to pass the time pleasaunly, but it sets the mind in good frame, the
life in good order, it tuleth our acts, and shows what is to be dooen, and
what to be undone, she sytteth at our stern, and among the uncertain
sourgies, she orders the right course of our passage, without hit no man is
in surety.

Men believe better their cien Idem.
than their ears.

It is a long way to go by rules and precepts, the way by exaumple is
short and commodiouse.

We teach our children liberal sciences, not because those sciences may give
any virtue, but because they make the mind apt to receive it.

Dissimusacion.
Sorrow will be to them that have dowble hertes, Ecclesi.
mischeuous tounges, ylle doing hands, and to the yll^liuer, that enters into
the world by two sundry ways.

I hate these men, Pacunius
which in their acts be fools, and in their words philosophers.

Diete.
IN many meats is occasion of syknes, Ecclesi.
and gredy fedyng shall approach unto cholere.

To him which is fallen to a distemperance in heat or cold it is expedient to
give things of contrary qualitees. Galenus.


If thou will preserve the temperature, which is in thy body, to a^moyste
nature, give things moist, to a dry nature, dry things, if thou will alter
the temperature, give ever the contrary.

Ye may not only remember, that contrary things be healed by their contrary,
but also in every contrary ye must consider the quantitee.

When sickness is in his force, Hyppocrates.
than the most spare diete is to be used.

The preservation of heal the begins with labor, Hippocrates et Galenus.
which meat and drink ouertaketh, than sleep ensues, th^^ Uenus follows,
but each of them in a measure.

Unclean bodies, and they which of superfluouse humors be not well pourged,
the more ye nourish them, the more do ye hinder them.

Stomachs in winter and spryng time be hotest, Hyppocrates.
and sleep than is longest. Wherefore in those times, meat should be taken
in greattest abundaunce.

Sodaynely and very much to ^^acuate or to fylle, to make hot or to cool,
nor any otherwise to remove the state of the body, is veraie dangerouse, for to
much of any thing is ennemy to nature.

Eease.
MUuch ease and defaulte of competente labor, Galenus.
makes heat feeble, which should resolve and make thynne that which ought
to be purged.

They that live in much eas^ do gather commonly a f^eumatik or slimy juice in
their bodies.

They that do labor much do gather juice cholerike or melancoly, the one in
summer, the other in corn harvest time, or toward winter.

Example.
SO leat your light shine before all men, Christus apud Matthew.
that they may behold your good warkes, and may glorifye your father, which
is in heaven.

Who so ever lives ill in the sight of them, August.
over whom he has rule, as much as in him is, he sleeth the beholders.

The bishops conversation and householde, Hieron.
is set as it were masters of the commune discipline on the top of a
mountayn. For what soever he does, all other men think, they may lefully do
it.

devout conversation without co^municacion, Hieron.
as much as by exaumple it profits, by silence it hurts. For with barkyng
of dogs and staves of the shepardes, the rageyng wul^es be let of their
purpose.

More avails example then words. Leo.
And much better be men taught by doing, than they are by speaking.

In the knowlage of things, ^iliu^.
this is it, which is chiefly most holsom and profitable, to mark well the
lessons of every example, which is put in famous remembrance, whereof thou
may take for the and thy countreye, that thou may ensue, or that which
has an ill beginning, or a foul ending, thou may the better eschew.

Enui.
Envy is blind, Liuius.
and can do nothing, but disprayse virtue.

It is a scabbe of this world to have envy at virtue. Tullius.


O the miserable conditions of people that are to be governed, Tullius.
among whom diligence is hated, negligence is reproved, where sharpness is
perilous, liberalitee thankelesse, communycacion deceytefull, pernicyouse
flatterye, every man's countenance family at, many men's minds offended,
wait to hurt privily, fair words openly, when officers be coming, they
tarry for them, while they be present, they do awaite on them, being out of
authoritee, also do forsake them.

Esoquence.
ELoquent words become not a fool, Salom.
nor liyng lyppes a man in auctoritee.

Fame.
BEtter is a good name tha^ abundance of richesse, Salom.
for good estimacion surmounteth all treasure.

Those men say ill of the, Seneca.
that be ill them self. Reason answers, I should be sore meued, if Cato,
Lelius the wise, the other Cato, and the two Scipions should so report of me:
or if these men should say this with a ripe Judgment, which they do now
by malice corrupted.

The acts, Tullius.
and not the ^ame should first be considered.

The infamy of man is immortal, Plaut.
for she is alive when thou think her dead.

Faith.
OUr lord will reward every manne according to his Justice and faith. Reg^^.l.


We that believe Christ, Hieron.
let us follow Christ is living.

They which believe in god, Paulus ad Tita^^
let them endeavor them to excel in good works.

Like as the body is dead, wherein is no spirit, Iacobu^.
so that faith is dead, where there lack works.

The faith of a christain is joined with charitee, August.
and without charitee is the faith of the dyuell.

Faith not exercised, soon waxes sick, and being unoccupied, it is
assaulted with sundry displeasures.

Not the herers of the law be rightuous in the presence of god, Paulus ad To.
but the doers of the law shall be justified.

Not every man that says to me, Dhristus apud Matthew.
Lord, lord, shall enter into the kyngedome of heaven, but they which do
the will of my father, which is in heaven.

Fear.
THe root of wysedom is to fear God, Salom.
and the branche thereof, shall long time endure.

There is none authority of so great a puisance, Tullius.
that oppressynge with dread may long endure.

Whom men fear, they do hate, Ennius.
and every man whom he hates, he desires to peryshe.

Dread and terror be weke bonds of love, for if that they break, and men
cease to fear, than begin they to hate.

It is more danger to be dred than to be despised, Seneca.
for needs must he fear many, whom many fears.

Folly.
A Foles way in his own eye is best, Salom.
a wise man hereth good counsel.

He that answers before that he hears, proves him self to be a fool,
and worthy rebuke.

A wise sentence in a fools mouth shall not be regarded, Ecclesi.
for he tells it not in oportunitee.

Talk not long with a folt, and with him that lacks wit keep not much
company.

He that sets much by him self, Paulus.
where in deed he is naught woorthe, he brings him self into folly.

It is the propretee of a fool to seek out other men's fautes, Tullius.
and forkette his own.

Flattery.
MY son, if ill men will feed the with flatterye, Salom.
consent not unto them,

Better ar the strokes of him that loves truly, than the fal^ kysses of them
that do flatter the.

Tale bearers, Hieron.
riotters, glosers, and flatterers, flee far from them, as from thy chief
ennemies.

Within thy self, behold well thy self, and to know what thou art, Seneca.
give no credence to other.

Whose ears be so slopped from truth, Cicero^
that he may not abide to here troth of his friend, his health and prosperitee
is to be despayred.

Like as worms soonest do bread in soft wood and ientyl, Pl^tar.
so the most noble wits, desirous of praise, gentle and honorable, most
makes of flatterers, and do nourysshe such persons as be their distroyers.

The familiar compaignion, which is always like pleasant, and gapeth for
thanks, and never byteth, is of a wise man to be alwaie suspected.

Great men's sons learn nothing well but to ride, for in other doctrines their
masters do flatter them, praysyng all that they speak. At wrastlyng their
fellows fall down er they be throwe^. But the rough horse when he is rydden,
knowing not whether he that rydeth be a prince or subject, a rich man or a
poor, casts him out of the sadde^^, if he can not good skyll of rydyng.

Fortitude.
FOrtitude and constance is the high way, Hieron.
he that tourneth to much on the right hand is foolchardye and froward, to
much on the left hand is ferefull and cowarde.

Fortitude is an affection of mind, Tullius.
susteynyng pacientely peril and grefe, and being alwaie free from all dread.

Fortitude appereeh not but in the time of aduersitee. Gregor.


To a wise man none ill may happen, Sene^ca.
for he stands upright under every burdeyn, nothing may appaire him,
nothing displeasith him that ought to be borne, for what so ever might happen
to man, he never complayneth that it has chanced unto him.

All things ought to be fore thought on, and the mind fortifyed against all
that might happen^ Banishement, torments, sickness, bataile, shypwreckes,
think on them daily.

To suffer grefe quietly and coldly, it profits much to consider, and so to
do it is a great honestee.

Needs must he that is valiant, be of a great courage, and also invincible, he
that is invincible dispiseth all things that be transitory, supposyng the^ to
be inferior unto him. But no man may despise those things, where by he may be
grieved, but only h^ that is valiant. Wherefore it happens that a vallant
person can never be grieved, al wise men therefore needs must be valiant

It was wont to be a great praise and a marvelous, to have pacienely taken al
froward adventures, not to have been subdued by fortune, but in all aduersitee,
to have retained their estimacion and dignitee.

The timorous dog barketh more sore than he byteth. Q Curt.


We see the greatest ryuers fall with least noise.

Fortune.
FOortune can never make that to be thine, Boethius.
that nature denies the.

It is a natural sycknesse in Tacitus.
men to behold with sore eye^ the new advancement of other.

Look how many wonderers, ^eneca.
so many enuyers.

As fortune becketh, ^ustinus.
so favor inclines.

Innumerable be the exaumples of changeable for^tne, for ^ here made she ever
great joy, but where sorrow proceeded? ^r what sorrow has she caused, that has
not proceeded of ouermuche gla^nesse?

Felecitee begins by the ordinance of god, where miseryis esteemed by the
judgment of man.

The entirprises be in our pu^ssance, Seneca.
but their conclusion^ fortune determines.

To bear rule is chance, to give rule is puissance.

Fortune favoring variance, dispiseth constance.

Whose hope, Tullius.
reason, or imaginacion depends on fortune, in him nothing may be constant
or certain.

Fortune is to great men deceytfull, to good men unstable, all that is high is
unsure.

What fortune high raises, she lifts up to let fall.

In things which be moderate, continuance is constant.

Chilo the wise man being demanded what fortune was, Chilo.
He answered, a leude phisicion^ for she made many folks blind that trusted
much to her.

Oftentimes fortune corrupts nature. Q curt.


God.
THe eyes of god be more bright than the son, Salom.
be holding every where all the ways that ^en^e take, the depnesse of that
which is bottomless, seeing men's thoughts, where they think them most
secret.

In the heart of man be mani devises, the will of god ever abides.

No sapience, prudence, nor counsel, may prevail against god. The horse is
prepared to bataile, but yet god gives always the victory.

They that fear god, Ecclesi.
will believe his word: and they that love him, will keep his commandment

Blessed be the name of our lord, Daniel.
for wisdom, and puissance be of him only, he alters times and ages, he
also translateth and ordeyneth kingdoms.

Governor.
VUhere as lackethe a governor, Salom prouer.
the people decays, where as be many counsayls, there lacks not surety.

In the multitude of people is the state of a king.

In the fewness of subjects is the princis dishonor.

A prince that gladly herethe leasynges, has all his officers perverse and
wicked.

Woe is the country, where the ruler is wanton, and they in auctoritee break
their fast tymely.

Happy is that land, that has their king noble, and where men in
authoritee ^a^e in good season.

He that is a governor offends more greuousely by his example than by his
offense. Tull. de offic.iii.


Where a gouernoure lacks, Salom.
the people shall perish: the sauegarde of them is, where be many counsayles.

Rulers have done things with folly, Ierem.
and sought not for our lord: therefore they understand not, and their flock
is broken and scattered.

Prepare thy self, Plutar.
and furnishe so thy conditions and manners, and set forth the form of thy
living in such wise, as he that in the middel of every ma^s sight leads his
life, and may be hyd from no man.

The commune people are wont to search and behold curiousely the manners, lives,
and conditions of them that be rulers, although they be covered never so
closely, or hyd and kept with hanginges and courteynes never so privily.

Good men.
A Good man shall receive abu^dantly grace of our lord: Salom.
He that trusts in his own wit, does ever vngrac^^^sly^

We may call that man graciouse, Seneca^
to whom nothing is good or ill, but a good mind or an ill, which is a lover
of honestee, contented only with virtue, whom no fortune extolleth or
oppresses, nor knows any thing to be better tha^ that he may give to him
self, to whom very pleasure is, to set littell by pleasure.

Gluttony.
HAunt not the company of drynkers, Salom. proverb xxxiii.
nor the dyners and suppers of the^, that bring flesh with them to eat, for
they which attend only to drynkyng and making of banbettes, shall be consumed.

Not the use of meat, August.
but the inordinate desire thereof ought to be blamed.

The rich men woll not be constrained to eat that which poor men eats,
August.
but let them keep the custom of their infirmitee, being sorry that they can
not otherwise satisfy their nature. If they change their custom, and therefore
be sick, let them use their superfluitee, and give to the pore men that,
which unto them shall be convenient and necessary.

Unhappy are they, Hieron.
which have their appetite more than their stomach.

Glotony is an ill maistresse to serve, Ambros.
she alway^ desires, and is never contented.

What is more insatiable than is the bealy, that this day she receives, to
morrow she expels: when she is full, she disputes of continence: wha^ she
has digested, ^he byddeth virtue farewell.

Devise king of Sicile, Cicero.
wha^ he had eaten pottage, which a cook of Lacedemonia had made, he said
that the meat did not delight him, the cook answered, It was no meruail, for
it lacked spices, when the king asked what he lacked, he answered, Labor,
sweatte, rennyng, hunger, and thyrste, for with such manner of stuff, the
meat of the Lacedaemonians was ever prepared.

Glory.
Glory is a thing substancy all and perfectely expressed, Tullius tus. q.iii^.
It is the praise of good me^, co^senting together, a vocie incorrupted of the^
that judge well of an excellent virtue.

The chief and perfect glory stands in three things, Offic.ii.
If the multitude love us: if they have good opinion of us: If (as it were
meruailynge at us) they suppose us well worthy to be had in much reverence.

Thus says our lord, Ierem.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength, nor the rich man in his substance, but he that is gloriouse, let
this be his glory, to know and understand me. For I am the lord that do
execute mercy, judgment, and justice in earth: these things do please me
says our lord god.

Nor that fire makes smoke, Plutar.
that quickly is kendeled, nor that glory causes envy, that shortly
appears.

Grace.
THe grace of God, August.
why it is sent unto this man, and not unto that manne, the cause may be privy,
but without justice truly it may never be.

The grace of Christ, Augu. de natura and Gratia.
without the which neither children nor men may trust to be saved, is not
given for merits, but is favorably dysposed without deservings, and therefore
it is called Gratia, which does signify favor in english.

Grace (as I do suppose) consists Bernar.
in three things, in abhorryng things which are passed, in dispisyng things
present, and in desiring things, which for us are prepared.

Grace is given for this cause, August.
that the law be fulfilled, that nature be restored, and that by syn we be
not subdued.

Humbleness.
Never suffer thou pride to rule thy wit or sentence: Tobias.
for in her all destruction takes root and beginning.

On whom says our lord shall my spirit rest, Isaias.
but on him that is humble and gentle, and dredeth my words?

God resists proud men, but to them that be humble, Petrus.
he gives his grace.

The more honorable thou art, Ecclesi.
the more humble thy self unto all men, and thou shalt find favor both of
god and of man.

In thy thought extol not thy self like a bulle, ne be thou proud of thine
acts, but in hu^blenes keep ever thy courage

The greatter thou art, Salom.
the more humble be thou, and in the presence of God, thou shalt find grace.

How great so ever thou be, Ecclesi.
be humble in all things, and thou shall find grace before god

Haaste.
The Emperor Octanian was wont to say, Sextus (...).
nothing becam worse an emperor or king than have and fool hardynesse: for
that which was well done, was soon done.

Honor.
AS unsitting is honor to fools, Salom.
as snow is in summer, and hailstones in harvest.

Honor norisheth cunnyng, Tullius.
and with preise men's wits be kyndled to study.

Honors over great, Plutar.
wherein is pride, and to much statelines, like great and corporate bodies, be
throwe^ down sodeinly.

Honors substanciall and perfect, and also favor of the^, which have a good
turn in remembrance, and be in rendryng thanks very diligent, should not be
refused.

Hypocrisy.
Take heed of false prophets that come to you in the garments of sheep,
^hri^^us (...) Mat.
but within they be rauernouse wulues, by the fruits of them shall ye
perceive them.

He that desires to seem that he is not, August.
he is an hypocrite, he faineth to be good, yet does he not practice it, for
in the praise of men he estemeth his profit.

Dyssembled equitee is not proprely equitee, August.
but double iniquitee, for it is both iniquitee, and dissimulacion.

Hypocrites ar^ vile in apparel, Gregor.
and praude in their courage, and while they seem to despise all things in
this world, they seek by means to atteyn to all things that be of the world.

The nyghest way to renome is to be such one in deed, Tullius.
as every man would he reputed.

He that faineth him self to be a freende, and is not, is worse than he that
is a forge^ of money.

Openly to hate or to love, more belongs to a gentil courage, than to hyde in
his countenance what his heart thinks.

Humbleness.
Every man that exalts him self, Christus.
shall be brought low, and he that hu^bleth him self, shall be advanced.

All men delight to be high, August.
the griece is humilitee, why set thou thy foot so far from the? thou
wylt fall and not clymbe, begin at the grice, and thou art forth with at the
top.

He that does gather other virtues without humiltee, Gregor.
d^eth as he that bears fine powder into a boystuous wind.

That man is happy, Seneca.
which the higher that fortune aduanceth his substance, so much the lower he
avails his courage.

Ill men.
Three kinds of people my soul has hated, ^^clesy.
I poor man proud, an old man lackyng wit, a great man a lier.

There is no hope of remedy, Seneca.
where that which sometime were vices, be turned to manners.

That which the ill manne most dredeth, Salom.
shall come unto him, and that which he desires shall b^g yuen unto good men.

The ill manne shall vanishe away like a storm, the good man shall stand
fast, like an everlasting foundation.

The warke of an ill manne is ever unstable, he that so weth good warkes, has
a sure advantage.

Do thou none evil, Ecclesi.
and none shall come to the, Leave evil company, and evil will forsake the.

If a Morian may thaunge his skin, Jeremy.
or a libard, her spots, ye may also do good, when ye are brought up in ill.

To him that does ill, Seneca.
there is no greatter penance, than that he displeases all men, and
contenteth not him self.

Justice.
NO man may be just, Tullius.
that fears either death, peine, exyle, or pouertee, or that prefers their
contraries, before very equitee.

The foundation of perpetual preyse end renown is justice: without the which
no thing is commendable.

King Agesilaus being demanded, Age^ilaus
which was the better ^ither Justice or Fortitude, He answered, If al men
were just, we neded no fortitude.

The glory of a good man is to do justice. Ecclesi.


Justice exalts the people, but sin makes people wretched and miserable.

The emperor Alexander, Alexandre the emperor.
hearing that a poor old woman was ylle entreated with one of his
soldiers, he dyscharged him, and gave him in bondage unto the woman, to get
her her living with his craft, for as much as he was a carpenter.

Aristides, Aristides.
called the rightuouse, being demanded of one, If he were rightuouse of his
own nature, Nature, said he, has much helped me there to, but yet by mine
industry, I have helped her also.

In the path of justice is life, Salom.
the way that turns there from, leads to death.

Justice mounteth the people in honor, sin makes people wretched and
miserable.

Be not ouermuche just in extremitee, Ecclesi.
and favor no more than is necessary.

My son, Ecclesi.
desirynge wisdom, keep thou true Justice, and god almighty will give it unto
the.

He is a just man that spaceth not him self. Ambros.


Judge.
According to the judge of the people, Salom.
so be his officers.

Such as be rulers of a city, such be the commons.

Presents and gifts make ^lynde judges. Ecclesi.


Covet not to be a judge, except thou be of power able to subdewe
iniquitees, least perchance thou shall fear the state of a great man, and
give occasion of rebuke in thine own hastiness.

Everlasting woe shall be to them, Isaias.
which make vnrightewyse laws, and do write against justice, to the intent
that they will oppress poor men in judgment, and violentely subuerte the
cause of the people.

All do love presents, and follow rewards, to the fatherless child they do
not minister Justice, the poor widows matter comes not before them.

Here therefore ye kings, Sapien.
and understand ye. Learn ye judges of all parts of the world. Give ears
ye that rule over multitudes, and delight your self in the trouble of people,
for power is given to you from our lord, which shall examine your acts, and
inserche your thoughts, for when ye were ministers of his kyngedome, ye judged
not straitely, ne kept the laws of true justice, ne went after his pleasure,
horriblye and shortly he will appear to you: for most so rest judgments
shall be to them that have rule over other. To the poor man merci is
granted, but the mighty man shall suffer mightily tourme^tes.

Take thou no gifts, Moys. in Deuter.
which do make wise men blind, and peruerte the words of^ them that be
rightuouse.

Judgment.
HE that justifies an ungracious person, Salom.
and he that condemns a good man, they before god be both abominable.

The kyte in the air knows her time, Ieremi.
the turtil, the stork, and the swalowe do come at their seasons, my people
know not their lords judgment.

A good man will not in his friends cause, Tullius.
do against a weal publyke, against his ^th, nor against the trust which
is put in him, for he lays aside the personage of a friend, wha^ he takes on
him a judges office.

The emperor Alexander Alexander. Augustus.
would never suffer to be sold the office of a judge, or greatte authoritee
in the execucion of laws, saying, Needs must he sell, that does bye. And I
will not lettet at there shall be merchants of governance, which if I do
suffer, I may not condemn: for I am ashamed to punish a man that bieth and
sells.

Themistocles being the chief judge in Athenes, when there came to him a great
musician, which desired of him a thing somewhat against justice: Themistocles
answered, If in singyng thou do not regard nu^bre and tym, thou art not
worthy to be called a good musician: nor I a good judge, if I would prefer
before the laws the private favor of any one person.

Ignorance.
IF a blind man do take upon him, Christus apud.
to lead one that is blind, Matthew.
they both shall fall in the dyche.

Sapience and doctrine of fools be despised. Salom.


Ingratitude.
HE that does render an yuell turn for a good, Salom.
yuell shall not depart from his house.

The hope of a person unthankful, Sapien.
shall relent like winter yse, and as water superfi^ouse shall vanish away.

The greatter benefits that men do receive, Chryso.
the more greuouse judgment shall be given them, if they do offinde.

A good man does all thing well, Seneca.
if he do al well, he can not be unkind.

He that thyngeth always to crave, forgets what he takes.

In couetise nothing is wors than that she is unkind.

He takes away the mutual course of gyuynge and taking good turns, who so
^u^^ neglects to render equal thank to him that deserves it.

That is a person dishonest, Pla^t.
which knows how to take a benefit, and not how to requyte it.

Idelnesse.
THe good Emperor Antonine Antonin.
withdrewe from diverse persons their pencions and salaries, perceyuyng them
ydell, saying, that there was nothing more reprochefull or cruel, than that
they should gnawe and devour the weal publyke, which with their labor
nothing increased it.

Idelnesse has taught much unhappiness. Ecclesi.


He that will not work, Paulus.
shall not eat.

Some times be take from us, Seneca.
sometimes do escape us, some flow away not vnwyttynge unto us, but the
foulest loss of time is of that, which by our negligence does slip away
from us.

Idelnesse wears strength as ruste does iron, the bronde vnsterred bourneth
slowly, and if he be moved, he causes the fire eftsoons to kindle.

We are not brought up so by nature, Tullius.
that we should seem to be made for game and solace, but rather for grauitee,
and for some studies more serious and weighty.

Idelnes without lernyng is Seneca.
death and the grave of a quick manne.

Inordinate appetite.
THe root of all mischief is inordinate appetite, Paulus.
which some men following, have erred from faith, and brought them selves
into many sorrows.

There are three things specially, Innocen.
which men be wont to desire inordinatly, richesse, bodily pleasures, and
great auctoritee. Of richesse do proceedyll things, of pleasure dishonest
things, of auctoritee vain things.

There is no grefe in lackyng, August.
but where there is inordinate desire in having.

That which is other men's, Seneca.
lyketh us best: that which is our own, lyketh best other.

To flee inordinate appetite is veraie nobilitee: but to subdue it, it is
royal and princely.

The reasonable mind must judge the to be rich, Tullius.
not thy possessions or men's estimacion.

Cunnyng.
A Man to perceive that he is ignorant, Didymus.
is a token of wisdom, like as to perceive, that he does wrong, betokens
justice.

In much cunnyng is much indignacion. Paulus.


Counnynge causes us to know, Lactan.
whither we shall come: virtue, how that we may thither come, the one without
the other littel avails: for of cunning springs virtue, of virtue perfect
felicitee

Counnyng is to know god, and to embrace virtues, in the one is Sapience, in
the other is Justice.

Science is a knowlage convenient, Galenus.
stable, and never declinyng from reason.

Estee ne thou much cunnyng to be more worth than coin, Socrat.
for this shortly becaieth, counnyng ever continues.

The wise Solon made a law in Athenes, Plutar.
that the child should not be bounden to succor his father, of whom he had
received no manner of doctrine.

King.
HE is in great error, Seen. de elementia.
that thinks a king to be safe in his person, where nothing may be safe
from the king, senssuretee is assured by mutual suretee.

Theopompus king of Lacedemonte, Theopompus.
unto one that demanded of him, how a king moughte most surely keep his
realm, and defend it, said, If he give to his councillors lybertee to speak
alwaie truth, and to his power neglects not his subjects, when they be
oppressed.

Troth and compassion keeps a king, Salom.
and his place of astate with mercy is stablyshed.

Oye kings, Saplen.
if ye delight in high places, and sceptoures make much of sapyence.

Most happy is that publyke weal, Plato.
where either men studiouse of wisdom do reign, or where the king is
studiouse of wisdom.

To be in a fury, Seneca.
it may be called womanly.

It never besemeth a king to be angry.

If thou will subdewe all things unto the, subdewe thy self unto Reasone. If
Reasone rule the, thou shalt rule many.

It beseems men to fear their prince, but much more to love him.

Lendyng and borowynge.
LEnd not to a greatter tha^ thou art, Salom.
and if thou have lend, accomte it for lost.

Loss of a friend, or of goods.
HE that is robbed and loses his cote, Salom.
where he has no mo, if he had leauer lamente him self, than to look about
him, and provide how to escape from cold taking, and to find some thing to
cover his shulders with, would thou not think him to be a natural fool?
Thou haste buried him, whom thou dyddeste love: Seek now for him, whom thou
may love. It is much better to prepare eftsoon a friend, than to weep for a
friend

Labor.
BY custom of labor we ^all make the pain more easy to suffer. Tullius.


Cato Cato.
in an oracion, which he made to the men of arms of Numantia, said, Consider
in your minds my fellows, that wha^ ye do a thing well by labor and travail,
the labor soon passes, the thing well dooen, alwaie remains. But if ye do
ill by inordinate pleasure, the pleasure soon vanissheth, but the deed that
is ill done, never remoueth.

It is a token of a feeble Po^tanu^
and tender courage to flee from things laborious and peinefull, of the
forbearyng whereof, slouthe is engendered, and nycenesse, and their continual
companyon unthriftiness.

To labor in vain, Salust.
and a man weriyng him self to get naught but displeasure, is extreme
peevishness.

Law.
NO law is to all men co^modiouse, Liuius.xxxiii.
it is enough if to the more part, and in a generaltee it be sufficient.

Sharp punishment of unlawful acts is the discipline to live well and
warely. Cecilius.


The king Antiochus wrote to the cities, Plutar.
being under his obeisance, co^mandyng them, that if he required them by his
letters to do any thing that was contrary unto his laws, that as to him that
was ignorant they should repugne and deny it.

Traiane the emperor most noble and valiant, Dion.
by no marciall affairs might be called from geuyng laws to his people, but
that now in one place, sometime in an other, he would sit openly and here
suites, and also give judgments.

The law is good, if it be lefullly used.

The people that are without law, Paulus.
and do that which in the law is contained, they be a law to theimselues.

This is ones certain, Tullius.
laws were invented for the preseruacion of people and countreies, and for the
quiet and prosperous life and astate of men that live underneath them.

Like as where there be many phisicions and medecynes, Arcesilans
there are many diseases, so where as are many laws, there be many mischieues
and greattest injuries.

Laws.
VUhere men apprehended in littell trespass, Modestinus.
some be greuousely punisshed, sum uneath are touched, it is greatte cause of
discord in a weal publyke.

Law is a high reason engendered Tullius.
in nature, which commands that which ought to be done, and forbids the
contrary.

Laws of men may be likened to copwebbes, Anaxagoras.
which do tie litteil flies fast, and with great flies ar braste.

Lechery.
LEchery is ennemie to god, August.
and enemy to virtues, it consumes all substance, and delityng in the
appetite present, lets that a man can not think on pouertee, which is not
long absent.

If we will consider the excellency of man's nature, and the dignite^ thereof,
we shall well perceive, how foul and dishonest thing it is to be resolved in
lechery, and to ^yue wanto^ly.

Contrary wise how honest and fair thing it is to live temperately,
continentely, sadly, and soberly.

Youth intemperate, and full of ^eche^y, makes the body to be in age withered
and feeble.

Libertee.
IN veraie much libertee it is hard to be modecate, Hieron.
or to put a bridell to wanton affections.

They be out of libertee, Seneca.
that do not labor in their own business, they sleep at a another man's
wynke, and set their fete where an other man sleppeth.

What is else lybertee, but to iyue as thou would?

Truly of overmuch license happeth great pestilence. Terentius


Liberalitee.
HE only is lyberall, the which spends after his subslaunce, Aristotle
ethic.iiii.
and as it is needful.

Liberalitee is not in the multitude or quantity of that why ^he is given,
Aristotle.
but in the facion of him that gives, for he disposes if after his substance.

He gives very late, Seneca.
that gives not until his fre^d craves.

Beware that thy benefyt excede not thy substance, for in such liberalitee is
an appetyte to take vnleafullye, that there lack nothing to give away
bount^ous^lye: for where men give and be nedy, they be constrained to pluck
eftsoon from other, of whom they purchase more hatrede than favor of them
that they give to.

In geuynge, these things must be considered, what thing and to whom, how,
where and wherefore thou geuest.

When thou employest a benefit, chose such a person as is plain and honest,
of good remembrance, thanckfull, absteyning from the goods of other, no
nygarde of his own, and specially to all men beneuolent.

The greatness of the benefit is declared, Tullius.
or by the co^moditee, or by the honestee, or by the necessitee.

There be two fountaynes, Ualetius.
which do approve liberalitee, a sure judgment, and an honest fauo^r.

Life Euersastyng.
O The deep richesse of the wysedom and knowlage of god, Paulus.
the judgments of them, how impossible is it to comprehend? how
impossible is it by seking to find them? Wisdom
Who knows the mind of the lord, or who was his counsaylour, or first gave
it to him? and he shall be recompensed.

For of him, and by him, and in him are all things: To him be glory unto the
world of worlds. Amen.

That which god has prepared for them that do love him, August.
faith does not take it, hope does not touch it, charitee does not
apprehende it, it passes all desires and wyshes, gotten it may be, esteemed it
can not be.

We may lightlier tell what is not in the life everlasting, August,
than what things be there.

There is no death, there is no waylynge, there is no werynesse, there is no
sickness, there is no hunger, no thyrst, no cha^fyng, no corrupcion, no
necessitee, no heaviness, no sorrow.

Loyaltee.
THe liyng lips are to god abhomynable, Salom^
they that do truly, do please him,

Malice.
VUho that provides for an nothers destruction, T^llius.
let him be sure, that a like pestilence is provided for him, so that of a
like thing he shall soon after be partener.

By malice a man sleeth his own soul. Sapien.


Malice drynketh the more part of his own venym. Seneca.
Serpents, the venym which they have for the destruction of men, without
their own pe^yll they keep it, malice hurts him most which does retain is.

Marriage.
Like as in chafe or hears of an haare, Plutar.
fire is soon kendled and soon put out, except some other thing be myxte
with it so nourysshe and keep it: so love suddenly inflamed in man and wife
with beautee or personnage may not dure long, except being joined with good
conditions, it be nouryshed with wisdom, and thereby receives a lively
affection.

Women that had lever rule foolish husbands, than obey^ wise men, be like
them, which would rather lead a blind man, than follow him that has both
sight and good understanding.

House and gooddes we receive of our friends, Salom.
a wise wife is proprely given of god.

Depart not from a wife that is sad and wise, Ecclesi.
which thou haste taken in the fear of god, the grace that is in her honestee
surmounteth all richesse.

Art thou bo^nden to a wife? Paulus.
seek not to be loused.

Art thou louse from a wife? seek not to be mari^d.

Marriage in all things is honorable, and the bed immaculate, for god shall
judge fornicatours and also aduoutrers.

Themistocles Themistocles.
a noble man, having but one daughter, demanded of her, whether she would be
married either to a poor man having worshypfull manners, or to a graete man with
leude conditions. She answered, Sir, I had leauer have a man lackyng
possessions, then possessions lackyng a man.

The vice of a wife is either Uar^^.
to be taken away, or to be suff^ed. He that takes it away makes the wise
more commodiouse, he that suffers, makes himself better, by obteynyng of
patience.

Mercy.
MErcy is a temperaunce of mind in the power to aduenge. Seneca.


Compassion regards not the cause, but the astate of the person. Mercy is
joined with reason.

Nothing is more commendable, Tullius.
nothing is more worthy to have place in a great man, than placabilitee or
mercy.

Blessed be they that at mercyful, Christus. in Mat.
for they shall be sure of mercy

Among many virtues none is more wonderful, or more gracious tha^ mercy, for
in nothing men do more approach toward god, than in gyuyng to men health.
Fortune may do no more, nor also nature can will no more, than preserve life.

Manners of men.
IN felicitee is imperfection, Seneca.
where things dishonest do not only delight but also content, and there
ceasethe hope of all remedy, where that which was vice is turned to be manners.

Nature.
Wits enforced do bring things ill to pass. Seneca.
The labor is in vain, wherein nature strives.

All nature of beasts, fowls, serpents, and of all other things by ma^s
nature is tamed.

That which is infixed and inge^dred by nature is not lightly removed by
craft. Iacobus.


Thou dooest naught thou man most unkind, Seneca.
which say, that thou haste nothing of god, but of nature. I tell the,
Nature without God is nothing, nor god is without nature, but both are one,
and be not diverse in office.

Necessitee,
NEcessitee makethe that quick, O^^urtius.
which else would be dull, and often times despair is chief cause of hope.

Suffer and blame not that which thou may not escape. P. Mimus


Think how they that be gyued, Seneca.
take first greuousely the weight of their yrons, and let of their going. At
the last, when they leave to disdain these things, and do determine to
suffer them, necessytee compels them to bear it valyantly, and custom to
think the pein easy.

It is Necessitee that in peril of wrecke dyschargeh the ship of his
burdeyne. It is Necessitee, that by pluckynge down houses do keep them from
brennyng, Time makes necessitee a law.

Nobilitee.
VUhat nobilitee rythesse or puissaunce may be sted fast and sure, Eactan.
sens god may make kings baser ye than those that be lowest?

The only lyberty before god is, Hieron.
Not to do service to syn.

The thief nobility before god is, To excel in all virtue.

What avails noble lineage to him, Criso.
which is with vilaine manners reproched? or what reproach is a pore stock unto
him, which is with good manners adourned?

He that bosteth alwaie of his ancestors, declares himself to be unworthy
of preyses.

The more honorable that Salust.
the life of the auncestoure is after esteemed, the mo^e reprocheful is the vice
of the lineage that them succedeth.

Iphicrates a valiaunte captain, Iphicr^^.
but the son of a shoemaker, being therewith imbrayded of Hermodius a noble
manne borne, answered in this wise: My blood takes beginning at me, and thy
bloudde at the now takes her farewell.

Obstina^y.
To resist in vain and with much travail, Salust.
to get naught but displeasure, is extreme folly.

Obedience.
VUhat manner of obedience may be there, Po^tanus.
where vice is much made of, and rulers not regarded, whose contempt is the
original fountain of mischief in every weal publyke.

Ye servants obey ye your sovereigns carnal in all things, Paulus.
not seruyng to the eye, as it were to plese men, but in symplicitee of
thought, fearyng almighty god.

Better is obedience tha^ sacrifice. Salom.


He that resists authoritee, Paulus.
resists gooddis ordinance.

It is a general cou^naunte made by mankind, August.
to be obedyent to kings, how much more unto god, which reigns over all
creatures?

If thou will be wise, Bernar.
be ever obedient, for it is written. Desyrest thou wisdom, than keep the
commandementes, and god will give her unto the.

Theopompus Theopom.
the king of Lacedemonia, to one which said, That the countreie was well
kept, because that kings there knew how to govern: he answered, No not
so, but rather because the people knows how to obey them.

Some fautes of rulers and officers ought to be tolerate, Aristotle.
for he that goes about to correct, shall not profit so much, as use to
disobey their superiors shall bring to men detriment.

Patience.
THe pacient man will suffer for a time, Ecclesi.
and after shall comme restytucion of gladness.

All that happens unto the, suffer in thy trouble, and have patience alwaie
in thy pouertee: For gold and silver are proved with fire, and men be
acceptable when they be in the oven of worldly aduersitee.

Better is he that contempneth wrong, Ambros.
than he that is grieved therewith, for he that contemns it, does despise it,
as if he felt it not, but he that is gr^ued therewith, is tourmented, as if he
felt it.

If thou will be noble of courage, Seneca.
suppose that no displeasure may happen unto the, but say this of thine enemy:
He would have hurt me, but he hurts me not: and when thou perceiuest him to
be in thy danger, think that to be vengeance sufficient, that thou moughtest
be revenged.

Peace.
BLessed be they that make peace, Christus apud
for they shall be called the children of god.

Every realm divided against it self, Matthew.
shall be made desolate, Idem.
and every city or house in it self divided, shall not stand or abide.

He that has not peace of the h^rt, the mouth, and the act, ought not to be
called a christen man.

He that punishes his body, August.
and keeps not concord, he praises god on the taber, and not in the quier.

Perjury.
He that provoke a man for to swear, Hieron.
and knows that he shall swear falsely, he is worse than a murderer, for a
murderer sleeth the body, but he sleeth the soul, ye two sowles together,
his, whom he procured to swear, and also his own.

The punyshement of periuty by gods law is death, Tullius.
by man's law perpetual infamy.

I say unto you, August.
that ye in no wise do swear, least by, that swearyng ye came to the point to
swear lightly, and that by lightness ye come unto custom, and from custom
ye fall into perjury.

He that is ready to be forsworn, ^ieron.
he seems to be forsworn before he swear falsely, for god judges not only by
deeds, but also by thoughts, which proceed from the heart.

No man swears often, Idem.
but he is sometime forsworn, like as he that uses to speak much, speaks
sometime things out of reason.

He is a double offender, Isidorus.
that takes the name of god in vain, and deceives his neighbor.

Peryfl.
THere is nothing so sure, Q. Cure.
that it is out of danger, perchance of that thing which is of no puissance.

If thou may not clearly escape Socrat.
out of peril, choose rather to dye honestely, than to live shamefully.

Pouertee.
IT is soon made redye and easy, Seneca.
that nature de syreth, to things superfluouse, sweat is required.

The patience of poor men at the end shall not perisshe. David.


Better is litell in the fear of our lord, Salom.
than great treasure, which will never be faciate.

They be poor in spirit, August.
which when they do good, they give praises to god, when they do ill, they lay
fault in them selfs.

The life of man is not in abundance of richesse, A^bros.
but in virtue and faith, this treasure shall make the a rich man, if thou be
rich to godwarde.

If thou will live after nature, Heneca.
thou shall never be poor, if after thine opinion, thou shalt never be rich.

Prayer.
GOd is far from them, Salom.
which do not honor him, and gladly he will here the prayers of good men.

Watch and pray ye, Christus.
that ye enter not into temptacion.

Thy prayer is thy speech unto God, August.
when thou redest, god talks with the: when thou praiest, thou talkest with
god.

The two wings, August.
wherewith a man flees unto god, be these, if thou forgeuest him, which has
offended the, and helpeste him, who has need of the.

With fasting, corporal passions Hieron.
ar to be cured, with prayer the pestilence of man's mind is to be healed.

Puissance.
It is a pestilent puissaunce, Seneca.
to be of power to do harm.

Prodigalitee.
VUhat thing is more foolyshe, Tullius.
than to endeavor thy self to do gladly a thing, that thou may do it no
longer?

Excessive expenses of that which should maintain thy household, Tullius.
drinks up the fou^tayn of just leberalitee.

Prosperitee.
If god suffer ill men to have much prosperitee, August.
than his iudignacion is much more gre^^^^s. If he leave ill deeds unpunished,
than is his punisshement more dreadful and perilous.

The world is more dangerous laughyng than lowrynge. Idem.


If thou had the wisdom Hieron.
of solomon, the beauteee of Absolon, the puissaunce of Samson, the long life
of Enoch, the richesse of Cresus, the power of Octauian, what can all this
avail the? when finally the body is given to woormes, the soul unto devils
to be with the rich man in peine everlasting.

In all fortunes aduersitee, Boethius.
the most unhappy chance is, to have been ones happy.

Aristotle
Perfect felicitee is the use of virtue.

Much abundaunce makes corn to lie, Seneca.
bowghes are broken with their own burdeine, the fruit that comes often
comes seldom to rypenesse.

Providence.
PLato does lyken man's life unto a chance of dice, Plato.
the better it is, the more is it desired of him that casts it, but what so
ever chance comes, there is good craft in the vsyng of every thing as it
happeth, the one is not in us, that is to say, what we shall throw: the other
is in us, if we be wise, that is to say, to take in good worth the chance
that does fall, and appoint to every thing his place, so that the thing that
well chances, may profit us, and that which evil chances may not indamage
us.

Pride.
Three kinds of ^hynges my soul has much hated, Ecclesi.
and I am much discontent with their disposicion.

A poor man proud, a great man a liar, an old man a fool and lackyng
discrecion.

God resists them that be proud, Iacobus.
and to them that be humble, he gives his grace.

Be not proud in wisdom, Phocilides.
in strength, nor in richesse, it is one god that is wise, puissant, and full
of felicitee.

Prudence.
Prudence consists in the knowlage of things good and ill. Sullius.


A wise man does all thing by counsel, Salom.
and a fool soon discovers his folly.

More easily may one resist ill mocions, Ecclesi.
than rule them, and more easily refuse them tha^ moderate them.

To him whom fortune never deceived, Liui.xxx.
it is no folly to remember the vncertaintee of sun dry adventures.

The help of God is not only gotten with wishes and prayers, Salust.
but by vigilant study, dilygent executyng, and wise counsellyng, al things
come to pass.

Separate them that do craftily flatter the, Socrat.
from those that do faithfully love the, lest ill men have most profit by
the.

Be sure of friends, Aeschilus.
that speak not ay pleasantly.

Those which to content the will speak unthriftily, forbid them they house,
and put them out quickly.

Promise.
THese promises are not to be kept which a man makes either by fear
compelled, Tullius. Offic.
or by craft, deceived.

The noble king Agesilaus, Agelius.
to one which said to him, ye have promised: By god said he, that have I, if
it be right, if not, I than spoke, but I promised not

The foundation of Justice is credence, that is to say, constantnesse and
troth in sayings and promises.

Those promises are not to be kept, Tullius.
which be harmefull to them, unto whom thou haste promised, or by the which
thou shalt receive more detriment, than they, to whom thou made promise,
may thereby take profit.

O the shameful confession of fraud and common mischief of man: Seneca.
more credence is given to men's signettes, than to their souls.

Pastyme.
NAture brought us not forth, Tullius. ^ffie.i.
as we should seem to be made for pastyme and solace, but rather to granitee
and studies of more weighty importance.

Recreacion of wits ar to be suffered, for when they have a while rested they
spring up of tentymes more better and quicker.

Publyke weal.
TO use the publyke weal for a particular gain or advantage, Seneca.
is not only a thing foul and dishonest, but also mischeuous and very
abominable.

To change suddenly the customs and disposicion of people, Plutar.
and with new laws hastily to rule them, is not only hard, but also
unsure, as the thing that requires much time with great power and authorite^.

Like as the hand divided in fyngers, is therefore never the feebler, but to
every purpose is the apter and redier: so he that joins to him other in the
governance of a weal publyke, aided with company, shall accomplish the thing
in experience the more effectually.

A prince of a weal public ought with all study and dilygence to expel and
drive out of his country ambicion and sumptuouse expenses, wherewith the mind
being nourished and styrred, is made more cruel and fierce, and with a
prodigalle wantonness appears to be ryottouse: and if he can not bring it
to pass, at the least let him abhor them, and keep him self from them,
and resist to his power those that desire it, and with all mischief do assaie
to atteine it.

Dwell not (said Plato) Plato in Laertio.
where superfluous expenses do surmounte the revenues, nor where ill men be
more made of than good men, nor where the rulers, for the more part be liers

Quietness of mind.
ARt thou put from thine office? Plutar.
thou shall be the more at home, and the better apply thyn own business. Thou
laboureste to be nyghe the king, but thou art disappoynted, thou shalt live
more surely, and in the less business. But thou art tourmoiled with muc^e care
and business, ye warm water (as Pyndare says) does not so swetely ease and
comfort the delicate members, as honor joined with authoritee makes labor
pleasant, and to sweat easily.

To him that would be quiet and live in most suretee, Seneca.
the right way is, to set naught by exterior things, and to be only contented
with virtue: for who so ever estemeth any thing to be above virtue, ye or to
be good, but virtue only: he sets forth his breaste naked to all thing
that flees from the hand of blind Fortune, and with great study and
diligence abides her shot.

Reason.
NOt only fortune helps men that bee^ valiant (as is the old proverb)
but reason much more, Tullius.
which as it were with precepts, confirms the puissaunce of prowess.

What thing in man is best? Reason: for by that he goth before beasts, and
follows the Gods. Wherefore a perfect reason is that good, which proprely
belongs to man, all other things is to him common with beasts. For if he
be strong, so is the lion, if he be fair, so is the pecocke: if he be
swifte, so is the horse, I do not say, that in every of these things, the
other surmounte him, for I seek not that thing, which is most excellent in
him, but that which is his own, and belongs proprely to him, for as he has
substance, so has the trees: and as he has voluntari meuing, in likewise has
not only the beasts, but also the wourmes, If he have a voice, so has
dogs, and much louder, the egles more sharp and percinge, the bull much
greater, the nightyngale sweeter. Than what thing proprely is a man's own?
surely reason: for that being in the right course and perfect, makes a man
full of felicitee.

Religion.
REligion pure and immaculate in the syghte of god, Iacobus.
is to succor poor children and widows in their tribulacion, and to keep
them self uncorrupted in this temporal world.

He is a strong thief, Hieron.
and tourneth goddis house into a thieves cabyn, that of religyon seeks
promocion.

Report.
Among thy friends detracte not the king, Ecclese.
nor in the most secret place of thy chaumbre, report none euylle of a
greatte man: for the by^des of heaven will bear about thy voice, and they
that have feathers, will tell thine opinion.

Richesse.
TO much richesse makes place to loss. Q. Curt.


Sum things be more easily gotten than kept.

Riches shall nothing avail when god will take vengeance: Salom.
good deeds shall deliver man fro damnacion.

Substance sone gotten shall appaire: Salom.
and that which is gathered by littell and littell, shall increase in thy
hands.

Richesse becomes not a ^oole, nor a vile servant to have rule over princis.

He that gathers treasure with a tongue full of lies, is vaynglorious and
folyshe, and at the last shall fall into the halters of death.

That rich man is blessed, Ecclesi.
that is found without blemish, and that follows not richesse, nor puts
his trust in money and treasure. Let see who is he, and we will commend him:
for in his life he has dooen wonders.

They that would be rich, Paulus.
do fall into temptacion, and the snare of the dyuell, also into many
unprofitable and harmefull desires, which drown men in death and pardicion.

Command thou the rich men of this world, Paulus.
that they presume not to highly, nor trust to the vncertayntee of their
richesse, but to do well in god, that lives ever, which gives us
abundantly, all things to use at our libertee, and to be rich in good
works, and to give gentilly, to participate with other, and to make with their
treasure a good foundation for the time coming, for atteynyng to the life,
which is veraie certain.

Sapience.
MEn called wife men are not to be honored for every word that they speak,
Tullius. us^ul.v.
but for their stabilitee and constancy in virtue.

Princes becomme wise by company of wise men. ^uripides


The ardent desire of wisdom bryngethe one to the everlasting kingdom.
Sapien.


O ye rulers of people, Ecclesi.
see that ye love wisdom, that ye may have a perpetual kingdom

The root of wisdom is to fear God, Ecclesi.
and the branches thereof be of long life.

A wise heart and that has understanding, will absteyne from ill deeds, and in
works of justice, his purpose shall prosper.

The thoughts of a wise man at no time, nor for any fear shall be depraved.

A temperate and moderate person needs must be constaunt, Tullius.
he that is constaunte, is quiet of mind, he that is quiet has no vexacion,
and consequently no grefe or disease: and all these things do perteyne to a
wise man. Wherefore it follows, no grefe or disease may be in a wise man.

The greattest token and office of sapience is, Seneca.
that the deeds do agree with the words, and that the person be ever one and
like to him self.

Let thy mind and thoughts hereto extend: only wish and busily care, for
to be with thy self alwa^ content, and satisfied with the goods that of the
do proceed, all other desires referryng to god.

Wisdom excels strength, Sapien.
and the prudent person is to be preferred before him that is puissant.

A wise man's joy is so surely wroughte, that no fortune may break it, and is
alwaie and in every place quiet: It depends on none other thing but it
self, nor looks for the favor of man or of fortune.

Scripture.
AL scripture inspyred of God is profitable to teach or to reprove, Paulus.
to correct, to instruct in justice, that the man of god be perfect, and
furnished unto every good work.

The scripture and the creature serve both for this purpose that he may be
sought for and loved, August.
that created the creature, and inspired the scripture.

If according to the saiynge of Paul, Hieron.
Christ is the virtue of God and his wisdom, he that knows not scripture,
knowethe not the virtue and wisdom of god: for the ignorance of scripture is
la^ke of knowlage of Christ.

Leat us not think that the gospel is in the words of scripture, Idem.
but in the understanding, not in the skin, but in the marowe, not in the
leaves of words, but in the deep roots of reason.

Simplisitee or plainness.
THe symplycytee of just men shall adresse them to god, Salom.
And the deceit of ill men shall be their destruction.

The just man that walks in his simplicitee, shall leave his children after
him happy.

Prudence without symplicitee is malice and craft, Hieron.
and simplicitee without prudence is maistresse of folly.

Sickness.
SUfferaunce of syckenesse is tolerable, Seneca.
if thou contemn that which last of all she does menace.

In many meats is hyd much syckenesse. Salom.


Nothing so much lets health, Seneca.
as often change of medicines. The plant never proves, that is oftentimes set.

The first cure of sickness, Io. Damascenn^.
is the preparacion of good air, which conserueth the heart.

The second is moderacion and order of meat and drink. The third is in
direction of labor and rest: The fourth is, forbearynge to much sleep and
watch: The fyft is the discrecion in expellynge or stoppynge the humors: The
syxte is the temperance of gladness, anger, fear, and sorrow. The departing
of these from their equal temperaunce is cause of all syckenesse.

Supersticion.
Nothing more effectually rules a multitude than supersticion, Q. Curt.
else be they unruly, cruel, and mutable.

Not only philosophers, Tullius.
but all our forefathers did ever separate supersticion, from true religion:
for they which prayed all day, that their chylderne moughte ouerlyue them,
were called supersticyouse, which name afterward was larger extended.

He that is inclined to supersticion, shall never be quiet.

Supersticion is a mad error, Seneca.
for it fears them, whythe ought to be loved, and who^ she worshippeth,
them does she violate, what diuersitee is it, whether thou denyest god, or
speak ill of him?

Shamfastnesse.
THat which thou art a shamed to speak, Hieron.
be also ashamed to think.

Shamfastnesse is to be much made of: Seneca.
for as long as that abides in the mind, there is yet a place for good hope
to rest in.

Diogenes beholding a young man blusshe, Diogen.
said unto him: Son, be of good comfort, this is the right color of virtue.

Silence.
Receive not a swalowe into thy house, Pythagoras.
that is to sal, have not in thy house clatterers and me^ full of language.

An ill man is sooner vanquished with silence than with aunsweres: Chriso.
For malice is sooner styred with words than reformed.

Like as a city is, Salom.
which stands wide open, and is not compassed with walls: so is a man which
can not keep silence.

Truth.
ALL the ways of our lord is mercy and truth. David.


Leat thy tongue be ignorant of liyng and swearyng, Hieron.
and love so well truth, that what so ever thou speak, think that thou
swearest.

^ Truth most commonly, Lactan.
with many words is scattered to nothing.

Temperance.
TO a well ordered country or city those expenses be thought mete and
convenient, Plutar.
that be littell and moderate, the end whereof is necessary and honest, pleasant
and thankful: so that it lack both reproach and damage.

A temperate and moderate person, Plutar.
not wanton nor affectionate to his own apetite, may be to no man in his
country charg^ouse, to no man truell or grievous, to no man dangerous: For he
is of Nature familiar and ientill, easy to men that wilcome and speak with
him, whose house is unlocked, not shut, but open to all men, where every
manne, as it were in tempests and storms, may repair for their succors.

What does that man lack to live in felicitee, whom valyant courage
delivers from all sorrow and fear, and Temperaunce calls from carnal
appetite, and lets him not excede in foolish reioycyng?

Tale bearers.
TEll no ill tales of God and his saints, Salom.
nor report no ill of the prince of thy country.

Ill reporters be to God odiouse. Paulus.


More offends the tale bearer that minisheth the love in a man's heart from his
nigh friend or neighbor, Hieron.
than he that pulls meat from the mouth of a hungry beggar. For like as the
soul is more precious than the mortal body: so is the food of the soul of
more estimacio^, tha^ the nourishement of carrayne.

Virtue.
NO man may be said to live a short time, that has attained of perfect
virtue the perfect reward.

It beese^meth virtue to be f^^e from all dread, G. lasius.
and out of subjection.

Uertu is (...) one with most deep roots perfectly set, Tullius,
which with no manner of violence may be distroyed.

It is the virtue of an honorable personage, Aristotle.
commendably to rule, and also be ruled.

Flee from young and wanton desires, Paulus.
and follow Justice, faith, charitee, and peace, with them which honor god
with a clean heart.

Virtue is to be honored, La^^an.
not the image of virtue, nor she is not to be honored with censyng or prayer,
but only with a good will and purpose.

Virtue is to restrain anger, Paulus.
to mitigate desire, and refrain carnal pleasure.

The fruits of the spirit is charitee, ioyfulnesse, peace, patience,
bounteousnesse, goodness, long sufferance, ientylnesse, says, temperance,
continence, and chastitee.

As the coming of one swalowe makes not spryng time, Aristotle.
nor one hot day or hour makes not summer: so one virtue makes not a
ver^uouse person, or one littell time in prosperitee, sets not a man in
perfect felicitee.

Where riches is honored, Salust.
and estimacion rule and authoritee thereon attends, there virtue waxes
dulle, pouertee is had in reproach, innocencye is reputed for ill will or
malice.

Voluptuousness.
CAto the elder inuehyng^ against the people for their inordinate living, C^to^
said, It is in vain to talk to a bealy that lacks ears.

wife.
A Foolyshe child is the fathers heart sore, Salom.
and a brawlyng wife is a house always droppyng.

A wise woman buyldeth up a house.

An unwise woman will destroy with her hands that which is builded.

That manne is blessed that has a good wife: Philo in Sapien.
the years of them thereby are doubled.

No head is more mischeuous tha^ the head of an adder, Ecclesi.
no wrath excedeth the wrath of a woman.

It is more pleasant abiding with a lion or dragon, than to dwell with a
vengeable woman.

Like as the clymmyng on a sandy hill is to the feet of an old man, so is a
clattering woman to a man that is quiet.

A woman if she have souerayntee, is to her husband froward and contrary.

Give not to the water that serves thy house never so littel (...) issue: nor
to an ill wife license to wander.

A constaunt wife rejoices her husband, and in peace shall prolonge the term
of his life.

A steadfast woman is a golden pilar set on baces of silver.

Vainglory.
LEt us not be desirous of vainglori, Paulus.
one provoking the other with mutualls envy.

The vainglory of this world is a deceitful sweetness, August.
an unfruitful labor, a continual fear, a dangerous advance meant, a
beginning without providence, an end without repentance.

There is not so much joy in high clymmynge upward, Ambros.
as there is sorrow in falling hard downewarde, nor so muthe renoume after
victory, as after ruin reproach of folly.

What should he that is strong, auaunt of his strentgh, whom bodyly sycknesse
brings to feebleness?

What should the rich man auaunte of his richesse, whose hope by a thief or a
tyrante is soon disapoynted?

Virginitee.
VIrginitee is sister of angels, Cypr^a.
vainquisher of lusts, princess of virtues, possessour of good things.

The woman unmarried, Paulus.
and the maiden uncorrupted, think on things that perteyne unto god, to the
intent to be holy in body and soul.

What profits a hole body with a mind corrupted? August.
Better is an humble matrimonye than a proud virginitee.

A maidens speech would ^e circumspect, Ambros.
sober, and scelde: not so excellent in eloquence, as in basshefulnesse.
When thou speak, let men m^ruaylle at thy shamelas^enesse: when thou
speak not, let them wondre at thy wisdom and soberness.

wrath.
A Fool immediately discovers his anger, Salom.
he that hydeth his iniurye, is wise and craftye.

An angry person provoke contencion, but he that is pacient, appeaseth debate
when i^ is styrred.

Be not familiar with a man full of anger, nor keep not company with a ^uryous
person, least thou learn his ways, and cause thy soul thereby to offend.

Let every man be swifte in hearing, Iacobus.
slow in speech, and slow in displeasure.

By wrath, Grego^.
wisdom is lost, so that it can not appear, what should be done, nor how
it ought to be done.

The chief remedy of angr^ is delaie, Seneca.
that the fury may abate, and the darkness that makes wit blind, may
decaie, or at the least way be not so gross.

Haste and wrath be the chief ennemies of counsel. Bias.


Plato being demanded, Plato.
whereby a wise man is best known, he said: A wise manne when he is rebuked,
is therewith not angry, nor any thing the prouder, when he is praised.

Here ends the bankette of sapience.
To the right excellent and noble baron, my lord Mont^oye, Thomas Paynell
gretyng.
BUt that I hitherto have marked excellent baron, both by philosophers,
lawyers, orators, poets, and divines, accustomably to have been used, that
when so ever any of them did either make or translate any excellent man's
work, they were wont (for the defense thereof) exquisitely to chose some one
well learned or noble person, to whom they should dedicate their labor: I at
this time musyng, to whom I should ascriue this my rude translacion, before
many other have chosen y our excellence.

Than if I use an honest, old, and approbate custom, who will blame me? If I
choose an excellent learned man, (I mean your lord ship) and borne of high
blood, who will not approve my dooynge? If I dedycate my small peines to you my
especial good lord and patron, who can reprove me? For the smalnesse of this
work shall not withdraw me to ascriue it to your lordshyppe: for oftentimes
in small and compendiouse rules, are wont to be in closed great wisdom and
lernyng, as says Beroaldus in these verses.

Sunt hec pa^^a quidem fateor sed mag^a subinde.

Esse solent paruis deter^ora bonis.

Hoc adamas, gemmeque doce^t: que corpore paruo.

Oblectant reges, diuitibusque placent.

Nos contra horremus magnos persepe gygantes.

Terremur magnis sepe voluminibus.

And of a man of my degree and fortune, what other thing might be offered to
you so rich, so high in dignitee? Statius writes for Rutilius Gallus.

Sepe dies hos inter honores

Cespes, et exiguo placuerunt farr^ salino.

Farthermore, if Agapetus as bashed not to write this his littel book unto the
emperor Iustin^an, I without blame may dedicate the same to your goodness. I
confess it a small thing, but than I suie it is a book of great wisdom and
learning, conteynyng all these precepts, by the which not only a prince, but
all other estates may learn to do justice, may learn how by humanitee and
gentilnesse, to order their subjects and servants. Is this small book than
unworthy to be much made of? unworthy to be dedicate to your lordshyp?
unworthy to be accepted? unworthy often to be turned? Is ^t a light thing
for a prince, to learn justly how to rule his people, and to tempre every
thing by Justice ^ Let them therefore that will disprayse this small work,
because it is small: but my trust is, that you (not considering the smalnesse
thereof, but the brief precepts of great wisdom and learning therein
contrived) wll not only preyse it, but also (by goddis grace) stille
continually ensue the same. Thus I commend me to your lordeship, desyryng your
gentilnesse gentilly (as ye be accustomed to do) to accept this my rude
translacion.

THE PRECEPTS of Agapetus to the Emperor Justinian.
and to punisshe them, which persuade the contrary, following and obeiyng his
laws and his precepts, and orderyng thy subjects as right and equitee
requires.

As the governor of a ship

Therefore we mortal men specially our self. For who that knows him self,
shall know god: and he that knows god, shall be likened to god: truly he shall
be likned to god, that is gods servant: he is gods servant, that does
nothing contrary to gods commandment, but that he thinks be perteinynge
to god: he speaks as he thinks, and does as he speaks: which thing no man
may do effectually, without perpetual contynuance in goodness.



Therefore no man ought to exalte and preyse his vile and earthly kynred, but
only glorify and reioye in good and godly manners.

O man, look and know thou,

Truly there is nothing that Consyderyng than, that this power is given the by
almighty god, of the which in our behalf thou had greattest need: thou
shalt will and do no thing, but as god (that has given the such facultee
and power) wills and commands. For truly nothing is more pleasant both to
god and man, tha^ to do justice.

deeds be to man most sure and steadfast: for the merit of them returns
evermore to the profit of the good deed dooers.

Because of this high and worldly

The pensifull and troubled that so it may by divine and godly light,
continually glister and shine: and also that he by quietness of mind may
learn distinct and true knowlage of things. For truly there is nothing that
causes man so well to mark and behold what is to be done, as a quiet mind
and clear conscience.

he hurts the holl co^minaltee, Therefore ^oeasmuch as he must give a strayte
count, if he rule not well: it were needful, that he with exquisite diligence
both speak and do every thing, and so avoid all danger.

The cercle and whele of these



change with every waueryng and unsteadfast thing, is a token of an
inconstaunt mind. Therefore thou should cleave and affixe thy self to good
and virtuous men, which shall stablysshe and make steadfast thy kyngedome and
empire. Nor thou should not proudely eleuate thy self, nor yet without
reason to much submit thy self: but prudentely after the use and custom of
wise men, surely to ground the in constance. For who so ever groundly
thinks upon the deceitfulness of this life, and will also behold the
vileness and shortness thereof: considering farthermore the bodily
filthiness, he will never wax proud, be he in never so high a dignitee.



thy rich possesses all the world, the poor man has not where he may set
his foot.

Therefore, to thentent that they both may be help, they must be ruled by
deduction, that is, the rich must give to the poor, and so the inequalitee
shall be brought to equalitee.

The time and season of prosperous gouernyng, ye decline not from reason and
wisdom. For if to love wisdom makes the philosopher, Psalm. 110.
and the beginning of wisdom is the fear of god, which by must evermore
remember: who can say, but my writynge is true, and as clear as true.

as these virtues be far from all peri^^e, so they be everlasting.

If thou will be beloved and

Thy empire by all right and his ennemies by strength of armis, so his
subjects by charitee and good love surmounte and overcome his gentylnesse and
goodness: Truly between these.ii. kinds of humanitee and love is no more
difference, than is between the tame sheep and other wild beasts.



give the good counsel, but not those that flatter the: good cou^sailours
consider, what ought to be done: flatters consider, what may please men of
might: which ^latterers are like men's shadows: For they gaynsaie nothing, but
allow and preise what ever is said.

Be so to thine, as thou would

As a fair glass expresses the ill favored their ill fauour^ so the
rightousnesse and equitee of God is likened to our deeds. For after our
deeces, God will reward us.

what shall be profitable for the, to rule and govern this world.

Thou shalt best govern thy

Because there is no erthely breaker of it, worthy to be punyshed.





to the, rule of all the world, look thou use no ill officers For he that
promoteth them, shall answer for their offenses. ^herfore great offices must be
diligently given, and well and wisely bestowed

I esteem these two things to

Esteem not those thy feithfull those, which without any f^ignyng do all that
they can for the: and be glad and rejoice, when thou say or dooest any
thing well: and ageine be sorry and heavy, if thou do or say any thing ill.
For certain these be tokens of frendshyp, abhorryng all fraud.

turned now thus now otherwise, and wroughte in diverse facions of
ornaments: yet it remains gold still, nor will not be changed from his
nature: So thy self (most noble emperor) though from grice to grice have
borne one office after an other, and art come to the mos^e highest honor: yet
thou remaynest the same thing thou were. Keep thou therefore among these
diuersitees of things, an unalterable and a constant mind, the which from
this worldely empire shall bring the to perpetual bliss and joy everlasting.

If thou wylt have the dominion of thy subjects. For in this world no man,
but only thine own conscience, can punish the.



experience and cast of everlasting joy, they shall be to us sweet and pleasant.
These world^^y things, that seem to us pleasant, should be eschued and
utterly avoided, as unmeet, and nothing perteynyng to us, that they by
inticement disceiue us not.

Look thou quite the^ with gay

Tha^ truly thempire excedeth all other things, when the ruler thereof
enclineth not to indiscreet rygoure, but to amyable equitee and justice,
fleeyng beastly cruelnesse, and ensuyng Godly kyndnesse.



will leave the feigned eloquence of atturneis, and considering the true
entencion, will flee the likelyhoode of causes, he shall shortly perceive the
troth. And farthermore avoid two diverse fautes, that is, they shall neither
do, nor yet permit any other to do against honestee.

Though thou have as many

For what so ever we offer to God, we offer to him but his own. And as no
man can go fro, or before his shadow in the son, always going before or nere
following him: so the goodness of god is insuperable, and can not he exceded with
good works of any man.





For god therefore has given the so abundant richesse, to hea^pe and succor
poor men.

An emperor is no otherwise

He is deputed of god to mynister those things, that may be profitable for
man. Therefore an emperor ought to do none other wise for all men, than he
would do for him self: that so by his tuicion they may avoid all daungiers,
and prospere in goodness.

Think thou the most sure no man does cause good custody and safegarde:
than truly by liberalitee thou shalt the sooner obtain it. For as liberalitee
gets and engenders defense: so it conserueth good and honest love. For if
we do that is honest, men will love and keep us.

as by austeritee and sharpness chastise to greatte familiaritee.

Such things as thou by

Love them most (noble emperor) given or done for poor men.



do highly thank the.

Look how much thou excellest

Ere thou command, that that right is. Man's tongue is a vera^e s^pperie
instrumente, the which has brought many one into great peril and danger.
Therefore, if thou prefix to the foresaid instrument, that is goodly and
honest, it shall sou^de only that is pleasant, and right to be executed and done.



perfectly the manners and conditions of thy servants and of all those, which
charitee enforces the to love, And also be thou diligent, to know those,
which dilteitfulli do flatter the For often times disceitful lovers, and
flattere^s do great hurt.

When so ever thou hear



be among them.

Liberalitee and charitable deeds

Considering, that god has





Therefore follow him that has no need, and show mercy abundantly to them that
ask it, not reckenyng straightly thy expenses of householde: but rather healpe
every man that desires to live. For it is better to help the unworthy for
honest men's sakes, than for the vice of the unworthy to defraude the worthy of
that they deserved.

of thy sins, so forgive other that the offend. God forgyueth them that
forgive, and where forgiveness is, there is God.

A prince that would demean

It is a private man's vice to from ill, does not in stify man, but the dooyng
of honestee and goodness. Therefore no man should only abstain from ill, but
also endeavor him to do justice.



plesures and ioys of this word.

As man's shadow follows

As a ship, having wind at study how to get to the port of heaven, where is
nowailing, but eternal joy and pleasure.



thou come to the kyngedome of heaven. Which thing Christ the keeper and
en^reacer of all thing (whose name me^ shall glorify and preise eternally)
grante the, and the empress thy wife.

Thus ends the precepts of Agapetus.
The table to the banquet of Sapience.
A
ABstinence. fo.i. Aduersitee. fo.ii. Affection. fo.iii. Ambicion. fo. eod.
Authoritee. fo.iiii. Amitee. fo.v. Apparel. fol.vi. Alms deed. eod.
Accusacion. fo.viii. Arrogance. eod. Age. fo.ix. Avarice. eod. Babblyng.
fol.xi. Battle. eod. Benefit. fo.xiii. Bishop. eod. Bostyng. fo.xiiii.
Chastitee. eod. Charitee. fo.xv. Constancy. eod. Carnal appetite. fo.xvi.
Consideracion. eod. Confession. fo.xvii. Contempt of worldely things. eod.
Custom. fo.xix. Correction. eod. Counsel and counselors. fo.xx.
Communicacion. fo.xxii. Crueltee. eod. Curiositee. fo.xxiii. Compassion. eod.
Death. eod. Delicate living. fo.xxiiii. Deceit. eod. Detraction. fo.xxv.
Drunkenness. eod. Discord. fo.xxvi. Dignitee. fo.xxvii. Dolor. eod.
Doctrine. eod. Dissimulacion. fo.xxix. Dyete. eod. Ease. fo.xxx Example.
fo.xxxi. Envy. fo.xxxii. Eloquence. eod. Fame. eod. Fa^the. fo.xxxiii. Fear.
fo.xxxiii. Folly fo.xxxiiii. Flattery. fo. eo. Fortitude. fo.xxxvi. Fortune.
fo.xxxvii. God, fo.xxxviii. Governor. fo.xxxix. Good men. fo.xl. Gluttony. fo.
eo. Glory. fo.xli. Grace. fo.xlii. Humbleness. fo.xliii. and.xlv. Haaste. fo.
eo. Honor. fo.xliiii. Hypocrisye. fo. eo. Ill men. fo.xlv. Justice. fo.xlvi.
Judge. fo.xlvii. Judgment. fo.xlix. Ignorance. fo.l. Ingratitude. fo. eo.
Idelnesse. fo.l^. Inordinate appetite. fo.lii. Kunnynge. fo. eodem. King.
fo.liii. Lending and borowing. fo.liiii. Loss of a fre^d or of goods. eo.
Labor. fo.lv. Law. fo. eo. Laws. fo.lvi. Lechery. fo.lvii. Libertee. fo. eo.
Liberalitee. fo.lviii. Life everlasting. fo.lix. Loyaltee. fo. eo. Malice.
fo.lx. Marriage. fo. eo. Mercy. fo.lxi. Manners of men. fo.lxii. Nature. fo. eo.
Necessitee. fo. eo. Nobilitee. fo.lxiii. Obstinacy. fo.xiiii. Obedience. fo.
eo. Patience. fo.lxv. Peace. fo.lxvi. Perjury. fo. eod. Peril. fo.lxvii.
Pouertee. fo. eo. Prayer. fo.lxviii. Puissance. fo. eo. Prodigalitee. eo.
Prosperitee. fo. eo. Providence. fo.lxix. Pride. fo.lxx. Prudence. eod.
Promise. fo.lxxi. Pastime. fo. eo. Publyke weal. fo.lxxii. Quietness of mind.
fo.lxxiii. Reason. fo.lxxiiii. Religion. fo.lxxv. Report. fo. eod. Richesse.
eod. Sapience. fo.lxxvi. Scripture. fo.lxxviii. Simp^citee or plainnes. eo.
Syckenesse.lxxix. Supersticion. eod. Sham fastness. fo.lxxx. Silence. eod.
Truth. fo.lxxxi. Temperance. eod. Tale bearers. fo.lxxxii. Virtue. fo. eod.
Uoluptuousnesse. fo.lxxxiii. Wife. fo. eod. Uaynglory. fo.lxxxiiii. Uirginitee.
fo.lxxxv. Wrath. fo.lxxxvi.
Finis Tabulae.
IMPRINTED AT London in Fletestrete, in the house of Tho. Berthelet.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno d^^i. 1550.


