Frensshe
Cy commence la table
Premierment linuocacion de la trinite Comment on doibt chescun saluer Les
meubles aual la mayson les noms des chars and de beestis Et doysiaulz priues
and sauuages Les noms des poyssons de mer Et des poyssons des Ryuiers Les noms
de compenaiges. Les noms des fruis darbres. Les noms des pluiseurs a^bres Les
noms des potages Les noms des co^muns beuurages La marchandyse des draps Des
diuerses villes et festes Les marchandises des laines. Les noms des cuyrs et
des peauls Les noms des apotecaires Les noms des Oils Des coleurs des paintres
Les noms de ^^rasseries* Des aluns et da(...)tres tainctures. Les noms des tous
metauls Les noms des merceries Les noms des pluiseurs grains Des prelates de
saint eglyse. Du pape cardinaulz euesques Archeuesqnes abbes et officiaulx.
Des moynes et gens de lordene De lempereur roys et roynes. Des ducs countes et
princes Barons cheualiers escuyers Les noms dhommes et des femmes Et des
mestiers selon lordre de a. b. c. Les grandes festes et terms de lan. Des or
feures tisseran^s and foulous Tondeurs pigneresses fileresses Des lormiers et
armurers. Des tailliers and vieswariers. Des taincturiers and drappiers. Des
boulengiers and cordewaniers. Des escripuains and arceniers Des moulniers and
bouchiers Des poissonners and teliers Des chandeliers and libraries Des
gauntiers and corbelliers Des painturers and vsuriers Des conureurs de tieulles
and destrain Des charpentiers and feultriers Des chauetiers et boursiers. Des
cousturiers et especiers Des coultiers et hosteliers. Des touriers et cuueliers
Des mesuriers et messagiers Des chartons et changiers Des mo^noyers et
pastesiers. Des Iongleurs and teneurs. Des vairriers et serruriers Des gorliers
et huchiers. Des parcenniers Et les parolles que chescun En la fin de cest
doctrine. Faittes diligence daprendre
oV nom du pere. Les was saluer Allez a dieu qVi vin veult maintenier.
Escuyelles sausserons. Vestures fourrures Le temps quilz soient Iofnes Moussons
masanges Ainsi ne fon^t les maronners. Wasteletz rastons Ce son^t les
buuraiges. bastard Dame que faittes vous laulne. De tant daulnes Tien valton si
le port Tresgrand merchis Que voules vous auoir du clau Ie achatteray chooses
Aux marchans. Le pape de romme Sont les dousze cardinaulx La count weruy ^Dam
amain cha. Nous desiunerous des trippes Iusques as vespres. Le procession
deuerwik Car on did Bertran ce seroit asses cOlard li or feure Et vng
triaclier Colard ly foulon Conrad li tondeurs Tencierent ensamble Pour la bonne
diligence Elle vey bateiller deux hommes Ou il auoit dedens Gerard le moulenier
Cest la plus noble mestier. Et destoupes. Gertrude la soeur gillebert. grand
rayson Lieuin le brasseur. Leonard le couureur destrain Et moult de cannes Elle
les kent de deux constures Ly bourialx de bruges. Il est tout gryse Est aus
Ioustes. Don't array deux goriaulx Ie me veul reposer. Aller veoir le sacrament
Donnes du fain as cheuaulx Par le quel

Cy fine ceste doctrine La grace de saintt esperit

Englissh
Hier begins the table
First the calling of the trinite How every man ought great other The catayllys
langyng to the house The names of flessh and of bestis And of birds tame and
wild The names of fysshes of the sea. And of fysshes of the Rivers The names
of white mete The names of the fruytes of trees The names of diverse trees The
names of potages The names of common drynkes The merchandise of clothe Of
diverse tounes and fayres The marchandyse of wulle The names of hydes and of
skynnes The names of the apotecaries. The names of Oils Of the colors of
p^^nters The names of cori^rs Of alume and of other colors. The names of all
metals. The names of merceryes The names of diu^rse graynes. Of the prelates of
holy church Of the pope cardinals bisshops. Archebisshops abbotts and
officials Of monks and folk of order Of the emperor kings and queen's Of dukes
earls and princes Barons kn^ghtes and squyers The names of men and of wommen
And of crafts after thordre of a. b. c. The great festes and terms of theye^^
Of goldsmythes weuers and fullers Sheremen kempsters spynsters Of bridelmakers
and armorers Of tayllours and vpholdsters Of dyers and drapers Of bakers and
shoomakers Of skriueners and boumakers Of mylnars and bochiers Of fysshmongers
and of lynweuers Of ketelmakers and librariers Of glouers and of maundemakers
Of paintours and vsuriers. Of tylers and thatchers. Of carpenters and
hatmakers. Of cobelers and pursers. Of shepsters and spycers Of brokers and
hosteleeres Of kepars of of prisons and coupers Of metars and messagiers Of
carters and chaungers Of myntemakers and pybakers Of pleyers and tawyers. Of
makers of greywerke and lokyers Of gorelmakers and Ioyners. Of parchemyn makers
And the words that eueryche land or town to anothir. And moo other resone
should be over long. In the end of this doctrine and your gyuing out Do
diligence for to learn and great. good lernyng. and englyssh
In the name of the fadre And of the soon And of the holy ghoost. And ordeyne
this book. and englissh and stratche Declared in this. and reasons. Comprised /
and of ansuers And to know many wares And ye mete any. and ready. and
damoyselles May ye salewe them god you keep god give you good day good day
give you our lord And of your good will God reward you God late me deserve it
deceived. would I do and for youris god I you command god mote ye be
commanded God you have in his holy keeping Goo ye to god and your doughtres.
and to your modre and to your nieces. And the ansueris ordained wyndowed and
garettis. wHo wine will mayntene And a low chamber and cannes and half stopes.
and half pyntes Disshes saussers and of earth. and of iron forsaid things And
the spones of tree goold. And sauses thorugh the strayner Clothes furs and of
somer unclothed and of conyes And other white mete And glases and great married
And ye have a wife And ye have a husbonde and mother And the counseill of
cathon. and mother. And inform them good manners the time that they be young and
to write salted mustard Sparowes meesen named Also ne do not the maroners Reed
heeryng scotland And that whereof is made and butter and of eggs pr^nted cakes
And of flessh pasteyes Wastles eyrekakye. named and grain And hedges in
medowee and nettles and white. fenell and wortes Thise ben the drynkes and of
elzeter and of gerinole and of spain and bastard and of garnade and clarey ben
made. and good spices england and of leuayn And of wurte and teache medleyed Red
cloth or grene. yasured reed. chekeryd and blew Dame what hold ye the elle.
good cheep would I have Good scarlete would not give axed had I ^euer gold in
your cheste. should not lose thereon For so many else and an half had called the
metar called. And since it well me suffyseth. Hold thou boy and bear it Good
money england. and half plackes. england had lever england gold lions good
money and I may give it out And all about the contre failled Right great
gramercy And to my felaws And I shall bye wulle What will ye have of the nayll.
pound good cordewan. herd and of lether and broun And good poudres. Good
sausses And electuaries for medicines and of feldeseed and of rapeseed lynseed
hempseed And men make mustard I shall bye things and grene of spain And of
siewet and mader And I know a party At the marchans named the metals. leed
tynne. and bras. Gold silver things gylt. siluerid. and penners. and shall
say of graynes. The pope of rome and rich. scotland. Ben the xij. cardynals
rented world bernard is their patron. and friar menours and austyns The earl of
warwyke henaud of holand beaumond And was conestable of france aspremond good
queen And ben in rest And the maistres of medicyns And the surgyens also and
of wymmen aDam bring hither. And set on him and bridle promised to be shoed
shoed. And the other have promised assayed. And the first tavern and an half.
And do the well to be meten We shall break our fast with trippes And shall
drink beck to beck And the trestles And the pestel Arnold give us wine And
give us to drink Until euensonge And if he tarried. And if he come never. should
not recche much And the terms of the year god help me whitsontid The
procession of york And better taught. and wise good Good and fair. For men
say. And their royames And the scotts had thereof lettres. And of the
prouostye. And I am his Bernard is the clock sowned. And put therein mo galls
And more substance And styre it that it brenne not Bertram this shall be enough
And good ale household roasted And dress it by disshes cOlard the goldsmyth
nailed And a triacle box. promised to weue. had not be wouen Colard the fuller
kyssed her had no lust. And she me cursyd And I cursyd her again Chydden to
gyder said that never stepfadre had founden bestowed learned it rocked and
spores And that thereto belongs swerd performed my doublet And my Iaquet For
the good diligence promised And has plente of sowers. promised hem Euerard the
vpholster hooled And all old cloth howsed again and remeuyd. Praid him he would
do it well and clear And if it be foull. She saw two men fighten And that other
hurt. And the orphans and broun hundred quarters of corn and at hour and of
galoches And so evil sewed Where there was therein And rybans of silk And of
fustian And set in prison. had she thretened. And pauteners of silk Gherard
the myllar And yield rekenynges good seruise Hit is the most noble craft and
faith should perisshe And all the holy scripture. and friends And them self owe
it to know God shall demand them And shall take of it vengeance good thing
good craft And of fressh water. And of touwe And of warpe ended sold his vannes
good fair named enprinted pourchaced enlumined and perchemyn Good portoses
good money pound for three halfpens Gertrude the suster of gylbert deed and
passed passed she God forgive her. and her trespaces plesid with him. good that
he has gadred to gedyr and his felaws bargayned with me. and a berne. And he
ougheth to tymbre it good work And the steyres. bound to deliver him self.
And shall bring the werkmen And ben bought Good stones of marble Lyeuyn the
brewar renomed. Couerd the steple. discouerid Lenard the thaccher couerd my
litell house. and with reed And daubed them with earth good hatte and of felt.
hound and of sheep and pauteners And them bye the children. And has many boxes
painted And many pottes And apostomes And with plastres And hele by drynkes and
of brekynge. heed ache and cure and tercian. And of all that And for other
seknesses good herbs and all that She sows them with two semes. good vynegre
Good veriuse good mustarde Good gauselyn. good styewe stewed pound or thyrty
good ghestes friseland named The hangman of bruges. knowlechid her evil deeds.
God keep us And the sergeants ben there also banysshed out of the land hanged
And the wardeyns of the craft and formaketh the keupis. and droppyng. and
mestelyn He is all graye. pound of grotes good marchandyse Sealed with the
kings seal And has lost her hekell Rychard the carier land ered And on my
herber And in to the orchard god will. Is at Iustes acompanyed desired
dampened and of horns And of good furs. Than shall I have two coliers
Complained her of the lokyer child that he wan. vyneyerd vyneyerd And the good
candelmaker flued And a coueryng of franchyn And of the best papier And shall
send it to my love I will rest me god has made us God is merciful And so he
is rightful And their penance fuldoo And the false evil advised wounded him
self feleth lord And the maid marye and archangelis and martris good reward
And all the hours of the day Goo see the sacrament good brekefast meuyd. And
ye know not the way god god good people And at which hand plasyd. And ye
shall have a good Inn god be here logged and clenly god be thanked Give he ye
to the horse And straw them well waterd easyd And shall pay also plesid. And
led them there above And bear them hoot watre And couere them with quysshons
God well them conduyte God bring them in sauete God late them their way and
haylleth God save the goods of the feldes God may them bythynke ended should
find always more By the which And the receyttes receyuyd paid. declared here
after hundred hundred thousand a hundred thousand. pound sterlinge england
pound great enprinted. and englissh The grace of the holy ghoost And us give
perseueraunce good works And after this life transitory and glory


