ORDERS Enacted for Orphans and for their (...) within THE CITY OF EXchester
(...) sundry other ^^structions incid^^^^ to the same Colle^^^^ (...) forth by
John Vowell alias Hooker (...)

Psalm^ 82 (...)

IMPRINTED ^^ LONDON by (...)



TO THE RIGHT WORshipful, grave and prudent, the Mayor and SenaTORS OF THE
ANCIENT AND HONORABLE City of Excester. John Vovvel alias Hooker* gentleman
and Chamberlain of the same, wishes a prosperouse and a happy government, to
the benifit of the public wealth and increase of Worship.
THe Inditers and Recorders of things done in the former ages and old days
(Right worshipful) do in their vvritings testify and affirm that the first
man being for his transgression driven out of the garden in Eden, ^ene. 4.
his whole posterity became to be vagabonds, runagates and vvanderers upon
the face of the Earth: and their life and conversation being amongst the
beasts of the ^^eld, was saluage, lose and disordred, for why? as it is
vvrit^en. Nulli tunc hominibus inter se fines neque agrum excerce^^nt, Domus
illis nulla, nec tectum, nec seeds fuit, I^sti^
armenta (...) pecora semper pascentibus et perincultas solitudines erra* ^
(...) solitis. And then were they subject to all perils and (...), for self
^^ill then bare the rule, violence then carried (...) soueraintie, and
oppression directed all things: according (...) Plutarch says Seculum (...)
Homines edidit, (...) pedum vel^citate, et corporum viribus, (...) atque
inuictos sed qui^^s naturae dotes, ad nullam (...) imo arroganti^ (...) seuitia
et feritate opprimendum, quicquid in eorum manibus inciderat. But at length and
in process of time, me^ vvaxing vvery to endure and continue such, so many,
and so great inconveniences, were very desirous of some better kind of stay
and assuredness of life: and therefore began to devise and to consult, how to
provide a remedy for this disease, and salve for this sore: but yet could find
no way so ready, nor help so good, as to be reduced to some kind of
government, for as Patricius vvriteth. Cum esset nemo, qui pro communi
vtilitate laboraret, Patricius de institutione lib. 1. tit. 10.
aut multitudinis curam ageret, sed errabant omnes tanquam oues absque pastore,
cogitandum fuit vt esset aliquis qui alijs preesset, cunctos regeret, ac
communi vtilitati et co^modo studeret. And therefore they made choice of such as
were most wise, discreet and valiant among them selves, whom they
appointed to be their Rulers to go before them, and unto whom they yielded
and submitted themselves, to be directed and ruled after their wisdoms. Cum
enim premeretur multitudo initio, Cicero officiorum. lib. 1.
ad vnum alique^ virtute^ prestantem confugiebant, qui aequitate constituta,
summos cum infimis pari Iure teneret. Thus were men in the beginning called to
be governors, and chosen to be Rulers, not through pride or violence, nor yet
by any sinister means. Sed quos spectata prouehebat moderatio, et qui virtute
sermone^ atque fortitudine caeteris prestarent, li. 1.
ac probitate et moribus integri essent. The author of the Chronica Chronicarum
declares three special causes why men were thus enforced at the first. The
first was necessity, because the life of Man was subject to many perils. The
second was (...) man being equal and in like estate and degree, and vvanting
right Judgment: they lived in contention and (...) a superior to direct and
decide their causes. The (...) Fortitude, that such a one as was more valiant
then the rest might defend them against the enemy and the oppressor. Cronica
cronicorum.
Et ideo eligebatur aliquis vir bonus ceteris iustior ac probior, qui
communitati presideret, vertuosos promo ueret, mediocres defenderet et malos
coherceret. Governors and rulers thus being constituted, they did foorthvvith
endeavor themselves to satisfy the trust, and to perform the charge
committed unto them, and first therefore they seek out to provide meet and
convenient places where to seat and settle themselves in, for their safe
dwelling together, and from the communion of the beasts of the feeld, unto
which before they were accustomed: for as Vegetius says. Vegetius de re
militra lib. 1.
Agrestem inculta^que hominum vitam, in initio seculi, a communione Brutoru^
animalium atque ferarum vrbium constitutio discreuit. And because they were
vvunt to enclose and entrench the same with a round ditch, the place was
called Vrbs. Ab orb, qua antiquae Vrbes in orb fiebant: Isodo lib. 15. Etymo.
ca. 2.
or Ab orbo, ea videlicet part aratri, quo designabantur muri, locus enim
futurae Ciuitatis sulco vel aratro designari solebat. And so did Romulus when
he chose out a convenient place where he and his people would dwell. Fossam
rotundem duxit, Plut. de To.
qua vrbem amplecti statuerat. And then the people thus collected and dwelling
together, laws began to be devised, orders to (...) made, and good
ordinances to be established, how the ^ommon state should be directed, and
how each man should ^iue in his art and calling. And then that which in
re^pect of the place and building was named Vrbs, is now cal^ed Ciuitas, in
respect of a multitude of people assembled and ^ollected together to the end to
live orderly and in good or^er. Est Ciuitas hominum multitudo, Isidor. Et^^
lib. cap. ^^tricius (...)
societatis vinculo adu^ata. Or as others define it. Est Ciuitas hominum
collecta ^ultitudo, ad been iureque viuendum communibus decretis sub eadem lege
viuentium. And the manner of their life, the good constitutions and pollicyes
was named Respublica. Plato libro de ^e finitionibus,
So that Vrbs is the place, Ciuitas the me^, and Respublica the politic
constitutions and the life well ordered. But here by the way I cannot a little
muse at them which would and needs vvil have that a City should take his
name of a Bishops seat or Sea, and that all Cities had their being and
beginning from and of Bishops, and therefore there is no City but where is a
Bishop: but how far this is fetched and how unlike: I may refer it to the
Readers own consideration, for long before any Bishops were had or
known, there were Cities, as Troia, Room, Carthage, Athenes and many
others, and also this City of EXCESTER, which was beseeged by Vespasian the
Romain capitain anno.49. almost xxiiij. years before the destruction of
Jerusalem, Gaufrede Huntyngd.
and every of these was named Ciuitas: and moreover when Bishops in this land
were first constituted, he who was Bishop of this diocese of DEVON had his
Sea at London, Polichronicon Matheus Vestmon Dicetus.
and after in the time of king Kingilphus anno.636. at Dorchester, and from
thence anno.705. removed unto Shireborn. And in process of time when every
particular Province, had his particular Bishop, then VVerstanus being Bishop
of Deuon had his Sea at Bishops Tavvton, and after at Crediton.

And Herstanus Bishop of Cornwall, had his Sea first (...) Saint Germans,
then at Bodmin, and lastly removed (...) Crediton: and yet nor Dorchester,
Shirborne, Tavvton, Cre^diton, nor Saint Germans, nor Bodmin, were ever any
Cities that I could read of.

But to the matter from whence I degressed, I say that governors and Rulers
being appointed, then laws and Ordinances were foorthvvith ordained by the
Rulers: as Sem who builded the first City after the flud then called Salem,
but since and now Jerusalem, Exodus. 2^
the cheef City of the Jews, he and after him Moses and others the
governors over the Jews, did prescribe most godly laws: Plutarch. de
Theseo,
as well for their directions in Religion, as for policyes and moral life.
Theseus when he had gathered and assembled into Athenes, his people to reside
within the wales thereof, who before, lay scattered abroad in the feelds, he
first instituted orders for Religion. Ab dijs auspicatus remp, digessit. And
then established such orders and ordinances as were necessaray for common
order of life, and by those means, that City in process of time, was so
fraughted with wise me^, and did so flourish with good letters: that for
learning and knowledge it became and was the Treasury of the whole world,
and from whence the City of Room, and all other well governed common vvelths
took a pattern of good government.

Romulus was at the first a ruler and captain of all the Pirates and ruffians
in those parts of Italy where he first resided, Idem de Romulo.
and of such (as some say) as came from out of Greece after the destruction of
Troia, who having reduced them into one society, and placed them within the
City of Room (which he had of purpose builded for them) he made and
instituted laws first for Religion and then for pollycies: and by the means
of the straight and due keeping thereof, it did so increace, prosper and
flourish: that it became the Monarchy of the whole world, and therefore says
Salust. Nolite existimare Maiores nostros armis remp, ex parua magnam fecisse,
Salustius in Catelina.
sed do mi industria foris iustum imperium, et animus in consulendo liber neque
delicto neque libidini obnoxious.

Licurgus the governor of the Lacedemonia^s, who were a saluage, fierce and a
barbarouse nation, Plutarch* de Licurgo
minding to reduce them to some better order and frame of life: first (...)
old and former corrupt vsages among them, and (...) new ordinances. In
quibus nullum iniuriae, nullum iniquitatis erat vestigium, sed ad iusticiam
rectamque rationem, sunt omnia composita. And that City by that means grevv
to so perfect a common wealth, that it was the Spectacle of all Grecia, and
did so much prosper by the due keeping of Licurgus laws: Quod principatum
tenuit totius Greciae, quingentorum spatio annorum. For all Greece stood at
their devotion, they for their valiantness being much feared, and for their
just and upright dealing most belooued: in them it lay whether it should be
war or peace. Such commodityes they received and such fruits they reaped by
the due keeping and observing of Licurgus laws, according to the answer of
Apollo. For Licurgus after that he had established and made those his laws:
he went unto the Temple of Apollo in Delphos, and there asked (as the manner
was then in all doutful matters) whether the laws which he had made were
sufficient to maintain and keep the common state and City of Sparta: who was
answered that the laws were very good and excellent. Gaufrede. Flores
histo. Polychronicon Grafton.
Et Ciuitatem, quousque Licurgi legibus viueret, permansuram clarissimam.

Brute the son of Siluius the son of AEneas (as our english Chronicles do
affirm) being after the destruction of Troia driven to seek adventures: he
and his nephew Corinaeus, with a great troop of their followers, came and
arrived in to this land now named England, and having conquered and recovered
the same from out of the hands and possessions of the Giants, who then
inhabited this la^d. Corinaeus had allotted unto him for his portion, the West
parts thereof named Cornwall, Baleus.
and then they builded each of the^ a City. Brutus in remembrance of Troia,
builded the city of London, then by him named Troynouant or new Troia. And
Corinaeus (...) City of EXCESTER, (which as some write) he then after his
own name called Corinia, both which Cities were then and have been
since so fraughted with good laws and so well governed by prudent
Magistrates, that they have continued for the course of many hundreths of
years unto these presents. And albeit they have sustained much troubles,
endured great afflictions, abiden many storms and oftentimes in peril and
danger of utter ruin and destruction, yet they being laid upon the sure
foundation of obedience, Justice and concord: they were never subverted, Math^
7.
be not unlike the house builded upon the Rocks, for though the Rain fell, the
fluds came, the vvindes blevv and did beat upon the house, yet the same fell
not. Quia fundata est super petram.

By these and sundry other like examples it is apparent that as Cities and
common vvelths were first founded upon good government and common society,
for as long as they yielded to the one, and maintained the other, they
prospered, and men became then not only valiant and strong, being able to
vvithstand the enemy: but also wise, politic and vvelthy, able to maintain
the common society, and the private family. Such are the fruits of good
government, in the magistrate, and of dutiful obedience in the Subject, and of
the maintenance of the common society in all men. For as the soul gives
life to the body: so does law dirict the Magistrate and Subject and keep all
things in due order, and thereby give life to a City or common wealth, all
which do perish without it, as the body dies being deprived of the soul.
And therefore when soever any City does decline from the rule of good
government in the Magistrate, of dutiful obedience in the Subject and of
contempt of laws: then be assured, that ruin and destruction of the state
ensues. The most famous City in all the world, Jerusalem by name, where
God as the Prophet says was honored. Psalm. 67.
Notus in Iehuda deus, et in Israel magnum nomen eius. Where the law was
taught, and from whence salvation was spread into all the world, when with
vnrepenting hearts they forsook Gods true Religion, Mark. 13.
contemned their governors, slew their Prophets, fell at civil division and
strayed out of all good order: then was Gods anger inkendled against them,
great plagues poured upon them, Luke. 19.
and in the end the City utterly destroyed, and according to the prophecy not
one stone left standing upon an other. Josephus de bello iudaico
And the people without all pity were either destroyed, or miserably carried
into captivity, and those fevv which did and do remain: are lothesome to all
men, being become Vagabonds upon the face of the Earth, having no certain
place vvherin to stay and reside.

The City of Sparta so long as they stayed and endured in keeping of Licurgus
laws: Plutercus de Licurgo.
their common wealth flourished and their City prospered, but when they began
to contemn their Ephoros, to neglect their laws, to be at division, to be
couetouse, and to live out of all order: that mighty kingdom and famous
estate, in short time was ouerthrovvn and the whole City subverted.

The famous City of Room, to whose Empire the whole world was subject,
as long as each man lived in his estate, and regarded the common wealth, before
the private profit: all things went well with them, but when clyming minds
and ambicious heds would rule the roste, when the common state was
neglected, and private profit preferred, when covetousness ruled, and the
common society dissolved, when no laws were regarded, nor Justice
executed, when these pestilent diseases were entered the Town and had
infected the City: Ciuitas est immutata virtusque hebescere cepit, Salustius
in C^telina.
ac imperium ex iustissimo et optimo crudele atque intollerandum factum est.
And in the end that most noble state and well governed City brought to
nothing. What shall I speak of Troia, Athenes, Carthage, and a number of
other famous Cities and common vvelths, which by like disorders are come to
the like confusions. For as the wise man says, Prouer. 11.
where the righteouse man rules and the wise man does govern: the City
prospers and is exalted. But forasmuch as it has pleased God to prosper the
state and common wealth of this City (which is now under your government)
albeit it have in times past abiden many storms, endured great calamities,
sustained sundry iniuryes, and being subject to many enemies has been
sometime in peril and danger of utter destruction: yet it has pleased God of
his good vvil to deliver and rid the same from out of all those perils and in
mavvgre of all their enemies, has preserved the same from the time of Brutus
even to these our days, the same being the course of ij. thousand and almost
vij. hundred years. Psalm. 127.
As you have good cause to be thankful to God for the same, who unless he do
keep the City, Frustra vigilat, Qui custodit eam: So are you to endeavor your
selves to continue and follow in the steps and paths of your so worthy
predecessors and prudent ancestors, and to be careful and vigilant that your
government may be as was theirs in true Judgment and Justice, free from all
covetousness and void of corruption, for why? you are not only the fathers of
this common wealth: but you are Patres conscripti, et Patres iurati, fathers
for your vvisdome, truth and diligence, appointed, called and chosen to this
estate, before the rest of all your Citizens: you have obliged your self with
a solemn oath, and bound your selves with an open vovv to satisfy your
charge and calling.

Therefore on your parts nothing is to be omitted nor left undone, which in
any respect may tend to the maintainaunce of your City or preservation of your
common wealth. And surely I being many times privy of your doings and present
in your councils, must needs testify and witness your continual cares and
daily studyes in this behalf: which as they are knovve^ in many things: so in
no one thing does the same more appear, then in the care which you have for
the Orphans and Fatherless children, for whose preservation and good
education, you of late have procured a special law and statute for the same,
binding your selves now by an oath and of devvtie to perform tbat which
before was but voluntary and of courtesy.

And I (considering with my self how necessary it is, that that which
touches all, might be understood and known of all) have thought good under
your favors to bestow some pains and travel heerin: for if any one thing is
above an otber to be respected and tendered in the public weal: it is the
care to be had of yung Orphans and fatherless children. Who being destituted
of their own natural parents: are to be provided for, now by the common
Fathers of the common weal, whose making and marring lies now in their
hands and devotions, and by their cares and industryes, to be framed, to be
well employed in the common wealth, or by their slacknes and negligence, to be
in peril and danger to be spilt and cast away.

Man in the latin tung is named Homo of the word Humo which is earth: For of
Earth man was first made and framed, but where and in what place: the
Egiptians and Scithians do contend either of them, claiming the property
thereof, Justinius li. 2.
but where soever it was, certain it is that of Earth it was and Earth he
is. And the nature of Earth is, that being it never so fine or fertile, yet of
it self it brings forth nothing but brambles and briers, Gene. 3.
as God said unto Adam, thorns and thistles shall it bring footth unto thee.

Even so is man of himself, Job. 6.8.
he brings forth nothing but wickedness and corruption, his thoughts be
evil and his vvayes are wicked, unless he be nurtured, educated and brought
up, even from his childhood in godlynes and virtue: for vvhervvith the vessel
is first seasoned: thereof it keeps longest the taste and smack, as the Poet
says. Quo semel imbuta recens seruabit odorem testa diu. Wherefore, Horatius.
the fathers in the old days, were very careful and diligent, for in the
education of their Children, that they might so and in such order be nurtured
and bred up in their youth, whereby to become profitable to the common wealth
in their age: for as Erasmus sayetbe. Nihil felicius discitur, Erasmus in
colloquio de fide.
quam quod ab ipsa statim pueritia discitur. For education is another nature,
and as men be brought up and bread in their youth so commonly they prove in
their age.

Licurgus the prudent governor of Sparta, whose only care and endeavor was
by all the means he could: to persuade the Lacedaemonians to leave their
saluage and barbarouse trade of life, and to be reformed and reduced to some
better form and order, uses this practice. Erasmus. li. 1. apoph. de Licurgo.
He caused two yung vvhelpes to be taken from their dam at one time, and
instant. The one of them he commanded to be delivered to his huntsman, and to
be trained up in hunting. The other was delivered to the Cook to be brought up
in the Kitchen. At length these two vvhelpes being brought up and grown to
be Dogs, and trained up as was appointed: Licurgus commanded them both to
be brought out into an open and a large room, where he had caused a bush of
thorns to be set, and a Hare in the same, as also fast by a pot of Potage and
scraps of meat. And then assemhling his people together: he commanded the two
Dogs there tied in one line to be let lose and slipped, the one of them used
to hunting, as soon as he had espied the Hare: he coursed and follovved him.
But the other having smelled and seen the potage pot: to that ran he. Then said
Licurgus, lo, you see here two dogs both of one age, borne of one dam, and
in nature one, and yet by means of their unlike education: they are unlike in
conditions and diverse in qualities, for according as they were brought up in
their youth and being vvhelps: so they be disposed and inclyned being Dogs.

Cromerus in his History of Polonia makes resitall of a manifest example
heerof, Cromerus de rebus Polonorum. lib. 3.
namely how Vnratislaus King of Bohemia, being a godly and a virtuous
Prince, married one Dragomira, a woman wicked and heathenish, and not so void
of true Religion: as replenished with all impudency and wickedness.
Vnratislaus had by her two sons, Venceslaus and Boleslaus, the elder of them
was brought up under his grnndmother Ludimila (who was mother to the King,
and she a very good and a godly woman) who careful of the yung Prince, caused
him to be nurished and instructed in good letters, virtue and knowledge.
The Other was hrought up by his mother, and by her instructed and taught in
such qualities and conditions as she listed and after her naughty disposicion.
These two yung Gentlemen though borne of the same parents, were in nature
like, yet in disposicion contrary, for the King their father being dead, and
the kingdom divided betvveen the^: Venceslaus as he was educated and
instructed in learning, virtue and knowledge: so did he rule and administer
his Realm uprightly in all Justice, equity and judgment. Boleslaus being
imbrevved at the first under his mother in all liberty, losenesse and
levvdnesse: became and was a cruel tirant, an oppressor of his Subjects, and
void of all virtues and good qualities, appertaining to a King, or a private
man, and in the end was a most cruel fratricide and a bloody murderer of his
natural brother, whom he bereft both of life and kingdom.

And thus it appears what education does, and how much it avails, which
being good and virtuous, if it do not alltogither alter and change: yet it
amendeth the evil dispositions and inclinatio^s in a man: what manner of
children and in what sort they shall be borne; it lies out of man's power.
Sed vt recta institutione boni euadant, nostrae est potestatis. But in us it
lies by good education to make them honest. VVherof Clemens Alexandrinus thus
vvriteth. Clemens Alexand, stromatum lib. 1.
Non natura sed disciplina fiunt viri boni et honesti quemadmodum medici et
gubernatores, Not by nature: but good discipline do men prove and become good
and honest.

The plant being yung and tender, is to be vvun, guided and framed to what
form it pleases a man, either to be made straight and upright meet for good
buildings: or to be crooked and fit for a gamrel: and being once grown to
that form it is not to be altered nor reformed. In omni stirpe, si primum
germen recte processerit, ad naturae suae, Plato legum Dialogo. 6.
virtutem maximam vim habet ad hoc, vt comodum finem imponat. Et hoc stirpibus,
in animalibus mansuetis et feris, et in ipsis etiam hominibus contingit. And
therefore as he is guided and trained up in his youth and springing time: so
does he prove to be either profitable or unprofitable. Erasmus de Socrat. de
Apophthe li. 3.
Homo si rectam disciplinam fuerit adeptus, diuinissim^s euadere solet. Si vero
non satis aut non recte fuerit educatus: omniu^ animalium que terra producit,
fit ferissimus.

It is written that on a time one Zopirus a Phisiognomon, came to Socrates,
and by his face and other liniaments discribing his inclination and
disposition: declared him to be a lecheror, a drunkard and a fool, and a most
disordered man. Socrates friends standing by and knovving all this to be
untrue, were offended and began to threaten him for his sayings, but Socrates
stayed them and willed them to be contented, saying, he has spoken nothing
but the truth, for such a one had I been as he says: Nisi me Philosophiae
gubernandum tradidissem, and unless learning and understanding had altered my
wicked and lewd disposition. For as it is said, Socrates was but a deformed
man, his ears and nose like to an Ape, Indagine lib. de Phisiognomy.
his eyes black and hollovv, his eye brows heary and his back crooked: which
are arguments and demonstrations, by the censure and Judgment of such as are
professors and vvriters in the art of Phisiognomy, of such qualities and
dispositions as Zopirus charged Socrates with all. As Socrates being
instructed and brought up in good learning notvvithstanding his corrupt nature
and evil disposition, he became and was a virtuous and wise man: even so
who so vvil do the like shall prove and be the like. Gene. 11.
Joseph and Moises being brought up in the learning of the Egiptia^s, Exodus.
3.
were in great authority and bare a great rule among the people.

Daniel being instructed in the good letters and learning in Babylon: Daniel.
3.
became to be the cheef governor over the whole province of Babel, and a ^ed
Ruler in Babylon.

King Cirus the son of Cambises and of Mandene the daughter of Astiages (king
of the Medes) being cast out to be devoured of the beasts, Iustinu^. li. 1.
was kept and defended by a Bitche, who nurished and gave him suck, until a
Shepherds wife took him away and kept him. Patricius de regno li. 4, tit. 5.

^


The vvriters of natural causes do affirm, that according to the nature and
^^^litie of the food vvhervvith the body is fed and nurished, (...) of the body
take their force and nature, and thereby not (...) the body: but the mind also
receives his disposition and inclination, whether it be magnimitie,
drunkenness, vvantonnes or any such like, but especially of the nurses breast,
with whose milk such dispositions do make their entry and season, wherefore
Galen gives counsel, that a special care should be had in choosing of the
Nurse, and of her disposition, Gal. de sanit. tuendi lib. 1.
dyat and order. De Nutrice imprimis non minima est habenda cura quid edat,
quid bibat et quo pacto se habeat, vt videlicet lac eius egregie fiat
temperatum, quale certe erit si sanguis eius sit quam optimus.

And therefore some are of the mind that Alcibiades that noble, worthy and
famous governor of Athenes, took the good qualities both of his body and
mind, Plutrachus de Alcibiade.
of his Nurse Amycha who was a Spartane or a Lacene woman. Nam plurimum
lactis alimonia confert, non modo ad corpus formandum, verum ad effectus et
mores. If this be true: then Cirus whether he were nurished of the bitch, or
of the saluage Shepherds wife, he should be disposed and affected according
to their natures and qualities. And yet he being brought up, educated and
nurished, first in learning and then in such honest exercises as do chiefly
appertain to a noble man: he proved and became a most noble, worthy and an
excellent Prince, asvvell in prudent and politic government: as in valiantnes
and provves. Fuerat corporis forma pulcherimus, Zenophn de pedya Ciri. libro. 1.
animo humanissimus atque disc^^linae et honoris studiosissimus. Thus Cirus in
respect of birth and first disposition, by nature being very unapt and unfit
to achiue to any great matter: yet by means of his good education he surpassed
in every respect of virtue, all the most worthy personages in those days:
for his vvisdome had in great admiration, and by his valiantnes became the
Monarche of all Siria and Asia.

King Philip of Macedonia when as his son Alexan^^^ was borne, considering
with him self how necessary it were, he should be educated and well
instructed: as soon as he was out of his svvadling cloutes, he delivered him
unto Aristotle the Philosopher, by him to be brought up, and instructed in
learning, as also appointed unto him Tutors, by whom he should be taught and
instructed in such good exercyses, as appertains to a noble man. And in both
the one and the other, he prospered so well: that fevv before or since him,
have excelled him in learning or valyantnes, by the one he attained to the
conquest of all Asia, Patricius de Iustit, reip. Era* Apoph. lib. 4.
and was sole Monarche: by the other he directed his government in great
vprightnes and Justice, and therefore he was vvunt to say, that he did owe
as much reverence and honor to his master Aristotle: as to his father King
Philip, for of his Father he had but his natural life, but of his Master,
Been viuendi initium.

The Chronicles of England do report, that Egbertus King of the west Saxons,
being a wise and a good Prince had a special care for the good education of
his son Ethelvvolphus, who to be king after him he savv how needful it
was, he should be wise, learned and valiant: did see him to be well
instructed even from his Childehood, and so well he profited therein, Quod omni
tempore, regia laud fuerat dignus. Polidorus his. Angli. lib. 5.
And the same Ethelvvolphus having reped the good fruits thereof, was no less
careful for his iiij sons. Quos bonis artibus imbuendos summopore curauit.
And they by that menes, the one succeeding the other, were all kings, and did
govern both well and vvorthyly. Plato therefore, attributing this unto good
educatio^ says, Plato legum dialogo. 1.
Dico et assero, virum qui in re quacunque prestans euadere volet, eruditionem.
statim a pueris meditari oportere. how be it such is the blindenes of the
world, that many or the more part, putting a felicity in riches: are careful
for nothing but how they heap up lands, lyuings: great store of riches and
money for their children, thinking then that all is well, and happy is that
son who shall be so left, and may glory and boaste in the multitude of his
riches, but the Prophet says Haec ipsorum vita stulticia est, for wealth and
riches being joined with knowledge and understanding, they are good, Et
splendorem suum retinent, Psalm. 49.
Patric. de regno li. 1. titu. 1.
but without the same Obscurae fiunt et turpitudinem temeritatem que augent.

Cicero therefore was of the mind that the best inheritance which a father
may leave to his Son, is wisdom and learning. Optima enim hereditas a
patribus traditur liberis, omnique patrimonia prestantior virtutis gloria.
Cicero officiorum lib. 1.


Well then if people assembled together to the end to live well, and in civil
society, and to be directed by the rule of good government, which consists
in the vvisdome of the governor, and the dutifulnes of the Subject and both
of these gronvv by menes of good and virtuous education: I dout not of your
wisdoms but that you vvil as good fathers and careful governors have a
special regard heerin, you have well entered and begun in providing for the
safety of such Orphans as to whom any wealth or liuelyhoods be groing but
consider you that a natural Father how many children so ever he have, he
cares, labors and provides for all, and so you ought to do. It is not
enough to provide for the rich and vvelthy, for if you did it not, others
enough there be that vvil take that care, but you ar to provide also for the
poor Orphans: who vvanting all helps, frendships and succors, are for want
of your fatherly and careful provision in peril either to perish, or to become
noisome and unprofitable members to the common wealth, for Children left to
their own vvilles and disposicio^s, they be as earth which of it self
brings forth nothing but briars and brambles, and in the end, not only
improfitable to themselves: but also most noyfull to the common state, they
being thorns in the sides and pricks in the eyes of the good and honest. God
therefore, when he had given the land of promise unto the Israelites, he gave
them in commandment to destroy all the^ which they should find dwelling in
the land without remorse, Numer. 33. Joshua. 23.
pity or compassion, because they were wicked, idle and lose people. For
says he, they shall be whips in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until
you perish out of the la^d, which the Lord god has given you. For Idellers
and floisterers are but thorns and thistles in a good City, and a well
governed common wealth.

It is lamentable to see what troops and clusters of children, boys and
elder persons, lie loytering and floistering in every corner of the City, but
more lamentable it is that no care, no order nor redress is had thereof, which
if it be not looked unto in time: it vvil rebound to the peril of the public
state of your City. Great shows have been made and attempts pretended for
erecting of an Hospital, and for employing of such idle children in some
honest arts, but of these great blothes comes small fruits, and of this
shaking Hill, GOD grant their come not forth but a ridiculus Mus. But if you do
in deed tender the preservation of the common state of your City and the
continuance of so honorable and ancient a common wealth: Plutar. prob. Zasius
de actionibus.

Polydor de rerum inue^t. lib. 4. cap 31. Eborensis de legib.

Galenus de sanitat tuenda (...)*


you may not only acording to the council of Moses, rid your City of such
idelers as vvhervith the same is now replenished: but you must also remove
and take away the cause thereof. For the Romans did not only put to death the
woman taken in adultery: but also if she did immoderately drinck wine,
because drinking of wine is a mean to dispose and make the body apt and prone
to lust and vvantonnes. Venture maero astuans facile dispumat in libidinem. For
wine as the Phisicions say being not moderately taken: hurts both the body
and the mind. Ad iram et libidinem precipites facit, et partem animae
rationalem hebetem atque turbidam reddit. And it is a common practice of the
Physician, that when the sick patie^t is to be restored to health, he does not
only purge the corrupt humor or sickness: but also the humor, which is the
origin and cause thereof, for otherwise the body cannot recover his health. And
so in a common wealth not only Idlers and loyterers are to be exiled and driven
out thereof: but also the occasion and breeding of the^ is to be cut of which
is that yung children may be brought up and be instructed in honest arts, for
as of a good plant comes a good tree, and of good seed comes a good herb:
so of evil plants come bad trees, and of naughty seeds evil herbs, and these
having once taken root do commonly so prosper that if they be not vveeded and
pulled up by the roots: they will clean ouergrovv and choke up the good.
Experience teaches that vvher the nettle prospers: no good herb there
grows, and where the weeds ouergrovve: the Garden is destroyed. Plutarcus
de Licurgo.


Licurgus therefore did not only exile and banish out of Sparta all the idlers
therein: but also to prevent, that no imps of that sort should increase and
grovve, he erected Schools and appointed School masters who had the charge
to instruct and institute the Children in Sparta in learning or some honest
arts and exercises, Patricius de regno.
Alexander the great in every contrie which he conquered, he appointed
Schoolmaisters who had the charge to bring up and instruct all the yung
peoples therein, in honest Arts, Sciences and exercises: by which means he
had alvvayes iij M. yung men and Children which were well learned in the
Creek tung, and well practiced in good and honest exercises. Olphanus de reip.
christian pro*
Traianus the Emperor erected common schools, appointed the best learned
school masters, provided great liuelohods and gave liberal allovvances
vvherby Children might be well taught and instructed. Patric. de ius. reip.
lib. 1.
The saluage Indians, who knovving no God, are only led by a natural reason,
did so much abhor and hate idleness, that none could be suffered nor permitted,
to eat any meat among them before he had given an account what he had done
that day, and whether he had deserved any meat, which if he could not do:
Cicero. offic: lib. 1.
Tanquam inutilem ex caenaculo extrudebant.

The Romans had not only schools for learning: but also their campos,
martios, and common places, vvherin the yung Children and people were
exercised and inctructed in such honest exercises and disciplines. In quibus
nulla erat turpitudo. For it is the speciallest point and the cheifest part of
a good governor and a prudent Magistrate to provide that Children and yung men
be by their means instructed and brought up in honest arts, knowledge and
discipline. Ineuntis aetatis inscitia, senum constituenda et regneda est
prudentia. And surely the magistrate is no more bounden, but he would be as
ready to perform the same, if he did or would consider, how that he is not in
this respect a simple and private man: but is the father of the common wealth,
Ac personam totius Ciuitatis gerit. And therefore well considering his charge:
he is to tender the same, and to regard all sorts of people, Idem ibid.
with a fatherly respect and affection. Ac summos cum infimis pari iuri tenere.

Cicero notes out of Plato, two special precepts incident and most
necessary in a Magistrate and governor, the one is, that without respect, he
do chiefly tender the utility and profit of all and every of his Citizens:
the other is, that he do also consider the saftie of the body of the City,
for the government of a common wealth is most like to the Tutorship of a yung
pupil, whose governor and Tutor is to do, such and all manner of things
which may tend and be for the best behoof and profit of the pupil: and for
that cause is he called a tutor, Institutis de tutelis and tutores.
quasi tuitor, that is to say a careful defendor and a diligent preserver,
both for the good educatio^ of their personages and of what so ever to them
appertains, and so ought the magistrate who being the general Tutor is the
eye of the whole City, and therefore must behold and see every particular
man's cause, he is the ear and mouth of the whole body, and therefore is to
hear all and to speak for all, he is the head of the whole common wealth: and
therefore must understand and direct every man in his estate and calling. Sic
enim remp. tueri debet, vt omnibus consulat.

Many good orders I confess have been devised by the prudent Magistrates and
governors of this City for the good government both of the elder sort and
of such yung Orphans, as unto whom any wealth is left, and who are to enjoy
the benefit of their parents travels: but such Orphans, who having nothing
left unto the^, and being destitute of all releef and help: ar left to their
own dispositio^s, these as I said, I say again, swarm in clusters in every
corner and quarter of your City, and for want of good education and
nurturing, do grovve to be thorns and thistles: and who as the Caterpillars,
Frogs, grasshoppers and lice of Egypt, Exodus 7.8.9.
shall be the plagues of this your common wealth, and if remedy be not provided:
shall utterly devour and destroy the same. And for these there is no care, no
regard nor account made* but you being the fathers of this common wealth: it
is your part and bounden duty to provide also for the education, instruction,
and what soever is necessary for such, not only in respect of the safety and
preservation of this City: but also because God him self, who is the father
of the Fatherless, Psalm. 68.
has given unto you being his ministers the charge over them, and being a
percel of your talent, and a portion of your office: you are and shall render
for them an account before the high God at the latter day, Sapi. 6.
when and where all such as bear rule and be in authority, and do not deal
uprightly: shall have a hard judgment. Wherefore as you do tender the
preservation of your own City, do vvish well to your own posterity, and
vvil avoid the indignation and displeasure of the ever living God: have some
regard to these poor miserable and destituted persons, let them be provided
for, that by your means and under your government they being taught and
instructed in some honest art or discipline: they may become to be profitable
members to the common wealth, for as it is written. Si been educati fuerint et
educantur iuuenes, Plato legum Dialogo. 7.
omnia tunc in rep. prospera nauigatione procedunt. But if you should be
remiss, slack and careless heerin: which God forbid, how great would be
your offense and how greeuouse would be your folly against Cod, against
nature, against your country, and against so many poor souls: whose want
and distress shall pour out lamentable cries, and whose blood shall cry out
unto the Lord for vengeance against you? Learn of the beasts of the feeld, of
the birds in the Air, of the fish in the water and of the worms creeping
upon the Earth, who though they be void of reason, and do nothing but
Quantum sensu mouentur yet of a certain natural inclynation, they have pity
upon man in his misery and do relieve him in his distress.

The Lion (of all beasts the most fierce and cruel) finding Androdus or
Androcles the bond man in the wilderness and ready to perish, Aulus gellius li.
5. ca. 14.
did not only keep him and defend him: but also fed him daily for three years
together, with me at sufficient for his sustenaunce. The she ravening Wolf
gave suck to King Cirus, and was a nurs unto Romulus. Justinius. lib. 8.43.
Jonah. 1.
The VVhale or graeat leuiatha^, when Jonah the Prophet was cast over the
boorde in to the Sea to be drowned, he took him in to his mouth and carried him
safe to the land. The Delphin, Gellius. lib. 16. cap. vlt. Plinius. lib. 9 cap.
8. 1. Kings. 17.
or Porpose, when Arion the harper at one time, and Temelaus at one other
time, were cast in to the Seas, he took them upon his back, and brougt them
safe to the shore. Eliah the Prophet being in the wilderness, and without all
food, a Raven brought him bread and flesh every morning, Gesner. lib. 2. de
quadrup. in lac^rto.
and every evening. The Lisard vvil not suffer a man to be bitten with the
Serpent, nor to be stung with the Adder. Nam vbi fecit serpentem insidiari
circum cursat per collum et facie^ hominis, nec finem facit donec pruritu
scasptuque vnguium excitetur. What shall I trouble you with the resitall of
brute beasts, and seem to persuade you by the xamples of unreasonable
creatures, when that you your selves being wise and reasonable men, do right
well and sufficiently consider the same, and yet for your better direction, not
vvanting many examples, and infinite presidents of all other countries, and well
governed Cities and commonvvelthes, as of the Persians, the Macedonias, the
Athenia^s, the Romans, the Spartanes, and also the City of London, with
which Cite if you be not equal: you are not inferior nor in antiquity, nor in
the zeal which may suffice to further you in any good actions, especially for
the provision of the fatherless children. And herin you should do very well,
and I would vvish you to follow the order and manner of the Romans, whose
use ^e was, that if they at any time did hear or understand of any new
devise, or strange thing, practiced in any country or place which they had
not, they would with all speed get a patron thereof, and frame it to their
common wealth. Quicquid enim vspiam gentiu^ vel terrarum cognitu dignum
inueniebant: Patric. de regno libr. 3. tit. 14,
quam primum literis co^mendabant et in remp. suam transferebant, vnde
disciplinas mores, leges instituta artesque omnes ab alijs in proprias tares
deferebant, paruoque temporis curriculo remp. suam meliorem reddid erunt.
which thing, I know you have done in some things, as the order for orphans,
you have taken from London, and for the erecting of an hospital, it has been
likewise well meant of you to follow the order of London, and partly some
practices and devises have already been attempted, therein which are appare^t
arguments and signs, of your mi^des well bent and disposed. And albeit, the
same have not as yet so good success as so good a thing deserves: yet
despair not, for all good attempts have for the most part: hard beginning,
and the better the enterprise: the more impedimentes. Est enim in initio ardua
virtutis via, and yet nevertheless there is nothing so hard, quod improbus
labor non vincat, and which a well vvilli^g mind cannot compass.
Nevertheless I know many stu^bling blocks vvil be laid in your way, and
many adversaries shall Iehuda, and Benjamin have to hi^der the building of Gods
temple, but let this comfort you. God vvil prosper the trauelles of Zor^babell
and overthrow the devises of Sisennes, 1. Esdras. 5.
the Godly in the end shall prosper, and the wicked shall be overthrown, in
their own imaginatio^s. Samuel. 17. Esther 7. Psalm. 7.57.37.1.
For as Achitophel received the revvard, and fruit of his own wicked
counsel, and Hamon perished in his malicious devises, and as the wicked
alvvaies fall in to the snare which they do prepare for others: so GOD
delivers the just and prospers his doings, 1. Corint. 3. Phili. 2.
and whatsoever he takes in hand, it shall go well vith him. For when Paul
planteth and Apollo vvatereth GOD gives always the increase for he it is
qui operatur in nobis velle, and he it is qui operatur in nobis perficere, as
he gives us the grace to have the vvil to do good: so of his goodness he
blesses our doings to good effect. And although God of his goodness does thus
deal with us, and so well prospers our good dooi^gs: yet we may not as
careless men, reject to his care and providence, nether yet to be so simple,
as to distrust nothing, Math. 10.
for as there is a simplicity of the Dove required in us: so are we also
willed to be wise as the Serpent, Isodo. etym. libr. 12.4.
and politic as the Aspis. The Aspis when she perceives the inchaunter to
be busy about his charming, Psalm. 58.
vvherby to make her to serve his turn: she puts foorthvvith her tail into
one care and clappeth the other fast upon the ground, and so her ears being
stopped, she hears not the voice of the inchau^ter though he be most expert
in charming. So must you the magistrates turn the deaf ear, and not liste^ to
the charmi^g speech as of the flatterer, nor be carried with the smoothe
words of the dissembler, and as wise Ulysses, Bocacius Certoldus de
genealogia. deoru^ lib. 11. cap. 40.
be not seduced nor carried away with the pleasant (but most perrillouse)
so^gs of the Sirens, but as he did, so do you stay and bind your self to the
mastes of vvisdo^e, and not to be discoraged nor disuaded from the folovvi^g
unto effect, of so good and godly enterprises. And yet let not your ears be so
stopped, Vptonus de officio militari.
but that your eyes be as open, and learn of the Lion, who sleeps alvvayes
with his eyes open, and whensoever he is avvaked, he forthwith gets up to
the top of so^e Hill, Gesner. dequadrup. libri. 1. in leone.
and there looks abroad to view, and see whether any advarsaries be abroad,
or whether any engi^ or snare be laid for hi^, vvherby is signified his
continual care and diligence, as well to preserve that which he has in
charge, as also a redines to remove and with stand the impediments laid and
prepared for him, which are conditions and qualities most necessary in a
wise magistrate and a circumspect governor, who is alvvaye to be looking
abroad, Isodor. etymolo. lib. 11. cap. 6.
and to be circumspect in his doings, especially when any good act is to be
taken in hand. For be he assured, he shall not want great store of
aduarsaries, which by one means or other, vvil do what may be doo^, to stop
the course of the same. Pluatar. Sympos. 2. questione. 7. Gesner. lib 4. de
Aquatib. in Echenidc. Bellonus. li. 4. de aquatilibus
The vvriters of natural things, do affirm that there is a fish in the Seas,
named Echeneis or Remora, he is but of a small quantity: but yet of great
power and strength, for a Ship being under sail, in all her ruff, and having
vvinde weather, and all things at will, yet this Remora sticking and cleuing
to her keele, or bottom, does so stop her course, that she cannot move nor
make any way at all, but lies still as though she were in some harbor,
Plinius historiae nature. lib. 32. cap. 1.
or at anchor. Ruant licit venti seuiantque prosellae imperat Remora furori
vires tantas compescit cogitque stare nauigia, infrenat impetus, domatque mundi
rabie^ nullo suo labor non retine^do nec vllo alio modo quam adherend^^^. And
for proof heerof, Pliny allegeth certain examples, as how the ships of
Antonius, of Cayus and of Periander were stayed at the Seas, by the Remora.
And as these remorae, do stop and stay ships at the sea from their due
course: so there are also certai^e, and the like Remorae at the land, which
sticking and cleuing to the ship of the common wealth, do what they can to
stop and hinder the due course of good government. At the seas there is but one
kind of remora, but at the land there are many, even a thousand for one, and
although sundry and diverse: yet all tending to one end, and vvoorking to one
effect. One and the cheifest of these, Ambition.
is Ambition or pride, which is an immoderate affection of the mind, breeding
Philautiam, or a self love in man, vvherof proceadeth an immoderate desire of
honor and superiority, envying the superior, disdayning the equal, and
contemning the inferior. And this is the most naughty vice which is or may
be in any common wealth, and the fovvlest folly that ca^ be in man. Miserrima
omnio est ambitio, pessimum in Ciuitate numen, maximumque inter homines malu^,
neither has there been nor yet is any one thing which more impaireth the state
of man, Jude. 1.
over throvveth Cities and common vvelthes, and dissolueth the common society.
The Angels in pride and ambition, climing and seeking to sit in the throne of
God: lost their habitation, Genesi. 3.
and are reserved in everlasting chains. Adam, ambicious to be as God: Numer.
16.
was driven out of Paradise. Corah, Dathan, and Abiron, disdayni^g the
government of Moises, and ambiciously clayming to the same: the earth opened
and svvallovved them up, with all their families. The ambicions of Scylla,
Marius, Po^peius, Caesar and others, did spoil and destroy more Cities and
people of Rome: then did all their forain wars and conquests. Carthage through
ambicion was destroyed, and Pompeius overthrown. Bladud King of this land,
Gaufrede. Grafton.
a man very well learned, yet being of Dedalus climing mind, would needs
flee up in to Heaven, and have his seat there, and therefore framed unto
himself vvings to flee, but he was no sooner mounted up toward his journey:
but that he fell down and brake his neck. Ambicion brought Antichriste in to
the Church of God, 2. Thessal. 2.
and exalted the son of perdicion above God. Ambicion raised up the
unpreaching Pashur, against the preaching Jeremy, and the wicked Amaziah,
Ierem. 2. Amos. 7. 1. Esdras. 6.
against the godly Amos, and the envious Sisennes, against good Esdras.
Ambicion has been the only cause of so many and of the infinite tragedies,
which from age to age, and from time to time, have been within this realm of
England, vvher of the histories and Chronicles of the same, are full fraughted
and replenished. And therefore to conclude: Insolens res plenaque
intemperantiae, Omphalius de propugreip.
cupiditatis, violentiae atque omnium malorum est ambitio dominandique libido,
quae nullis legibus constringi nullaque virtute potest retineri. Then if
ambicion be so dangerous and foul a vice, being not to be brideled by any
law, nor ruled by any virtue: it is the part of every private man, much more
of him which bears rule and is in authority, that although he do excel in
wisdom, knoledge, learning, and other the good gifts of the mind, or do
exceed in riches, substance, and possessions, and other the gifts of Fortune,
which as the Prophet says, do make men to svvel, Diuitiae si affluant
apponunt cor, yet that they do not exalte them selves, nor be high minded, nor
yet disdaining all others ambiciously, to seek dominion and to rule the roste,
for such men being very unmeet to rule, and unfit to govern, shall and will be
Remorae, and hinderaunces to good government. There is another kind of Remora,
which is named Avarice or covetousness, Avarice.
and this is an infaciable desire of the mind, to gather and heap up riches,
wealth, and possessions, making no conscience how, or by what means, the
same is gotten, Cicero. 3. Paradox.
but alvvaies careful to get, and fereful to loose. And in this avarice, there
be three things co^currant, an insaciable desire of filthy lucre and gain,
using and seeking all the means and ways they can, be it by right or by
vvrong, they pass not so they have it. The second is tenacitie, and a greedy
mind, to keep, hoord, and lay up in store that which is gotten, making it as
it were a GOD, and whereupon the whole mi^de is fixed and set, Math. 6. Ephe.
5. 1. Timoth. 6.
as the Scripture says, vbi thesaurus ibi et cor. and this man being in the
wickedness of his greedy affection, a plain Idolater, makes shipvvrack of his
faith, and is drowned in utter destruction. The third is, illiberalitie,
which is a pinching and a spare spending, pretending always a want and
scarsitie, unless it be in an evel cause, or to an euel end. The man possessed
with this wicked spirit or affection, is named avarus. Quasi auium aven^,
continually languishi^g and thirsting for gold and riches, and never
satisfied. Isodor. etymolo. lib. 10.
Sed quantum plus habuerit tantum plus cupiat, vvanting that which he has, as
that which he has not. Quitilianus eccles. 10. Sal. in catalina. Cicero in
Parado
Tam deest auaro quod habet, quam quod non habet: vvherof the wise man says,
the eye of the covetous man is never satisfied, and his mind is like unto hell
which is never filled: Semper infinita, et insatiabilis etque neque copiane
(...) and therefore as Cicero says, there was never a covetous man found: Cui
quod haberet satis esset. Such a man by the judgment of some men, is most
like and best to be compared to a hedgehog, named in latin, Echinus, or
Erena^^^: in name he varieth not much from the (...) and in form is very like
the Pig or hog, saving that insted of here his body is full of prickles except
on his belly. Pingui^ animal^ Echinus, Gesner. de quadr. in Echi^o.
et (...) modu^ forma^ que exprimit spinosus aute^ (...) in ventre: The
hedgehog lives by the grapes of other men's vineyards, and by the apples and
fruits of other men's orchards and gardens, and whensoever he comes to my
vineyard, orchard or garden, if their be no fruits already fallen down for hi^
he beats some down with his feet, and then roleth himself round upon the
same* spinisque confixa ex cipit: and so lade^, he trudgeth away with it, and
is not to be discerned from the fruit which he bears: and if in the way he
do perceive that every prickle have not his lading, or that any thing is
fallen down he vnladeth himself of all the rest, ut omnes aculeos repleat:
and is never satisfied, until every prickle have his fruit and he full laden,
and being come home to his den: he hoordeth up his store, sparely spending, and
greedily keeping that which wickedly he has gotten. And so is the covetous
man, and this greedy Echinus who storeth him self with other men's goods, and
enricheth himself with other men's wealth, he sheareth every man's herbs, and
beats down every ma^s apples, he (as a wicked Achab) is in love with*
Naboths vineyard: he is never satisfied until every prickle of his wicked
affection be laden, 1. Regum. 21.
and his coffers be stored, he increases his wealth by the spoil of others,
and every man by him is devoured, he is neither beneficial to a common wealth,
nor profitable to a private man, but altogether as a Pig still vvallovving in
volutabro caeui sui: and nothing profitable before he be dead. (...) very
prudent and wise) had a fair and a large house, and he very greedy and
desirus to have thesae: came to the Serpent in the cold vvinter, and
pretending great poverty, beggeth some releef, and desires lodging, and
although he were denied: yet as a shameless person so continevveth his suit,
and with his importunacie, fair words and smooth speech, he so bewitched
and enchaunted the Serpent: that he at length obtains his suit* and a little
corner of the house was granted unto him, for his lodging, upon condition
that he should not molest or disquiet the Serpent. This Echinus, was contented
to yield to all conditions, and promised to parfourme all couenaunts, but being
once entered in to the house: it was not long before he had forgotten all
promises, and practices all the ways he may: how to obtain his purpose,
wherefore he buskleth up himself, and by little and little goes about the house,
and at length full boldly seeks every place, and sercheth every corner, but
the Serpent, whose dainty and soft skin could not abide the sharp prickles of
this churlish hedge hog: is driven to leap from corner to corner and
notvvithstanding she hisseth at him, and challenging her promises: does burden
hi^ with vnki^dnes, yet it avails not, for she is so long driven from
corner, to corner: and from place to place, that at length she is clean shifted
out of the doors and sent packi^g to seek a new lodging.

And so fares it with all such as do or shall deal with a greedy covetous
man, and a churlish hedgehog, for be a man never so prudent poletique and well
adourned with virtues and honesty, let him deal never so friendly courteously
and liberally, yet if the couetouse man do ones season and take hold of hi^ he
vvil as sure as the hedgehog by one means or other under mind him of his
possessions, bereft him of his thrift, and in the end drive him out of his
house and home, for he is like unto the Ivy, whose nature is to begin and to
take root first under the root of a tree, which at the first being but little,
and the leaves gentle and small: springs up without any harm felt thereby
and girdeth the tree round about, never ceassing until he come up to the top,
and the^ having thus entered under the root, guirded the body and seized upon
the top, be the tree never so great and mighty: the Iuie ouercometh him, and
he dies. And so this covetous Iuie begi^neth as it were humbly and lowly,
with smooth words, and offers all courtesies, but by little and little, he so
bevvrappeth the yung gentleman with his money, and girdeth him with his
bo^ds: that in the end he has the mastery, and the yung gentle man of a tree
is become a small stick, to raunge the feeld and to tip daysies being now in
his doublet and his hose, ready to trip a pauian in Hamons court, and to dance
a galliard in Tibornes bovver. This is the nature of this churlish Echinus, of
this creeping Iuie, and of this pernicius Echineis whose delight and only
felicity is set upon heaping up of the wicked ma^mona eue^ to th'uter ruin of
so many as shall deal with hi^. And still as a wicked Echineis is sticki^g to
the keel of filthy lucre and gain. And heerin he has one other special
quality or property of the Echineis: for as Pliny vvriteth, if he be kept in
salt, as the Adamant of natrue draws Iron unto it: so vvil it dravve gold
out of any water be it never so deep. Plinius. lib. 9 cap. 25.
Ea est enim vis Echenidis asseruati in sale vt aurum quod deciderit in
altissimus puteos, admotus extra hat. And so the greedy covetous man, for lucre
and gain, vvil diue in to the bottom of the deep waters, clime up to the tops
of the highest rocks, and creep up to the highest part of the mightiest trees,
he vvil search and seek out all the corners of the world, and such are his
subtle sleights, that no City is so strong, no place so well defended nor
closet so secret which can keep him out, and having ones his vvil: of all
beasts is the most churlish and cruel, for he spoyleth town and country,
skimmeth land and seas, spares nor Church nor religion, forbereth nor friend
nor foe, nor regards the common society, nor pitieth the private family.
But as the Grasshopper or Caterpiller of Egypt, deuoureth the fruits, the Moth
eats the garment, and the rust corrupts the metal: so does he consume,
devour and spoil all that ever is with out remorce, consideration, or pity.
Fama pudicitia, Salus. de rep. ordinanda. Psalm. 14.
liberis opibus atque pare^tibus cu^ctos mortales spoliat, and as the Prophet
says, he eats and deuoureth the people as it were bread, wherefore be you
assured, where this ca^ker is once entered, and where this veni^ is once shed:
there is vertevv exiled and all godliness banished. Nullae ibi disciplinae
nullae bonae arts, neque ingenium vllum pollet, sed omnia vilia, fides
probitas pudor atque amicitia.

And such me^ may be compared to a certain kind of Svvallovves, named Apodes,
or Depodes, as who says, birds without legs, not because they vva^t
legs: but because they use them not, and these in english are called the
bank martinet, or svvallovve, but the harroldes, as also Sir Thomas Eliot name
them Martlets. The nature of these is to be alvvaies fleeing upon the
waters, and commonly no ship saileth so far at the seas, but that these
Apodes, or Martinet, is also there fleeing. Nunquam enim tam long ta^que
continuo cursu, Gesner. lib. 3. de auibus in Apode. Hirundine et drepauide.
recedunt naues a terra vt non circumuolitent eas Apodes. He is alvvaies
fleeing and never takes rest nor sits as other birds do, but when the
dead sleep takes him: he hangs by his legs. Pedibus dependens somnum
capit, of all birds he is indocilis as Pliny says, and not to be framed or to
be taught to any thing. They do flee meeting one the other, as it were
enccountri^g to fight, but indeed nothing else the^ to hunt for flies, which
is their only meat and food. Insidiantur mus^is atque culicibus quarum
venationem sibi proponunt et quibus volando pascuntur, They are seen only in
the somer season, for in the vvinter they are gone. they do breed in such
holes as they ca^ find already made, in the bancks, for nestes they build not.

And such an Apodes is the covetous rich man, who though he have legs: yet
for to do good wants the^, for to visit the sick, to relieve the poor, to
contribute to the oppressed, to redeem the captive, or to do any good thing:
he is lame and he cannot go. But for gain and proffit, has vvings to flee as
far as any ship can sail. He cannot sleep nor quietly take his rest, because
his mind is so pensive and careful for his muck, and from the greedy love
vvherof, he by no parsuasion or reasons to be dissuaded: nor yet framed to do
any good thing, for he is indocil and not to be framed thereunto. He is
vvelpleased to be harbored in every other man's house, and to be fed at other
men's tables, but to harbor others he has no skill, and to keep hospitaltie,
is against his vvil: and notvvithstanding, his toyling, and turmoyling: he
flees but after flies, and that which in the day of the Lord shall little
avail him. James. 5.
But as Saint James says: their gold and silver shall be cankred: and the rust
of them shall be a witness against them, and shall eat their flesh, as it
were fire.

Then if this be so foul a vice, so heinous a fault, and so horrible a sin,
in a private man: how much more intolerable is it in a magistrate and a
gouenour. For the higher a man is in authority: the greater is the offense
which he commits. Quanto quis conspectior. ta^to maius in se^ crimen habet
qui peccat. Offic. lib. 2.
And in whom cannot be a worse vice then Avarice. Nullu^ vitium says Cicero,
est tetrius quam a uaricia prefertim in remp. gubernantibus: For he which is
graueled with couetous^nes, and choked with avarice, and measures all things
by money, cannot discern the truth nor minister Justice: Esaias. 5 Deutro. 16.
because (as says the Prophet) he justifies the wicked, and gives sentence
for rewards.

God, therefore commands that none should be a ruler in Israel, but such as
should judge the people rightuously, and not wrest the law, nor respect any
person, nor take any revardes. For rewards blind the eyes of the just and
pervert the words of the rightuous. VVo vvorth then to that warren, where
the Polcat is the vvarriner, to that flock vvherof the Wolf is the Shepherd,
and that common wealth where the carmorose and insaciable covetous man, is the
ruler and governor. For such men be the Remorae which sticking and cleuing to
the keele of the ship: vvil not permit or suffer the common wealth to proceed
and prosper in good government. These be the Adamant stones which can do
nothing but dravv unto them the cancred mettalle of filthy lucre and gain,
which shall in the end as much avail them: as did the great store unto Midas,
and the great plenty unto Tantalus. The one of them having infinite treasure,
was yet so insaciable: that he prayed GOD that whatsoever he touched, might
be Gold. And having his request: the meat and drink vvhervvith he should be
fed, the apparel vvhervvith he should be clothed, and finally, whatsoever he
touched: was turned to Gold, and so miserably thirsting for Gold, and
hungring for riches: he was famished in abundance, and perished in
plenteousnes. The other likewise abounding in wealth and riches, and yet never
satisfied: is fained by the Poets, to stand in a goodly River in hell, up to the
hard chin, and over his head, a treeful of all delectable fruits, even falling
in to his mouth. And yet reaching to take an apple, the tree rises up and
goes from him. And likevvse, when he puts down his mouth to drink: the
river shrinketh and fleeteth from him, according as it is written by the Poet.
Tantalus a labris sitiens, fugentia flumina captat: which verses of Horace
Alciat, by changing of words does thus note, Alciatus. Emblem. 84.
Heu miser in medijs stans Tantalus vndis.
Et poma esuriens proxima habere nequit.
Nomine mutato te de id dicetur auare.
Qui quasi non habeas, non frueris quod habes.
And so having all things enioieth nothing: but lies tormented, in perpetual
hunger and famine. Of these both, Palingenius vvriteth. Aurum cuncto precor
(meaning Midas) fiant quae corpore tanquam. Palingenius in Zodiaco de Tauro.
Nox petijt stolidus, primis contraria votis.
Quum cibus in vacuum nullus descenderet aluum.
Talis auare tibi fortuna est pessime qui cum.
Plus habeas semper eges vt Tantalon vndis.
In medijs cruciat sitis arida.
Such is the revvard of covetousness, and such is the end of greedines. Job. 27.
Luc.. 12. Psalm. 28.
And yet when they have heaped, and gathered never so much and do build new
barnes to receive their store: yet shall they carry nothing a way with them.
Dives cum interierit nihil secum auferet, Luc.. 16
but suddenly, and in his most security: they shall come and take his soul
from him. And then according to the works of his inuencio^s, he shall be
carried in hell, and there to remain with the couetouse rich man.

Many and infinite examples might be resited, as well of particular me^, as of
public states: which through covetousness have perished, and through avarice
have been consumed. Luke 6. 1 Timot. 6.
But let this suffice, that the scriptures command us to bevvare of
covetousness, because they which will be rich: shall fall in to temptations,
snares, and in to many foolish noisome lusts which drovvn men in to perdicion,
and destruction, for the desire of money: is the root of all evel. Galenus de
curandis animi affectibus.

Idem quod medicus sit Philosophus.


And as Galen says, covetousness is with out measure, and alvvaies desires
more then need requires, and is the only cause of all sorrow, sadness and
heuines. Est inexhausta cupiditas pluraque expetit, quam vsus postulat: homines
inexplebiles reddit vnicaque omnis maeroris et tristitiae est causa: na^
quicquid facinoris audent patrare homines auaritiae persuasu patrare solent.
And therefore as that water, which issues out of a venomous spring or
fountain, cannot be wholesome: no more can that government be good and
prosperous, which is directed and comes from a covetous magistrate, and a
gteedy governor.

If therefore, you vvil have your government to be assured, your City to
prosper, and your good devices to take effect and good success: take heed and
bevvare of this Remora and let him not be suffered to stick and cleue to your
ship, nor have place in your counsels.

There is also a third kind of Remora, and is named anger malice, or
displeasure, Anger.
which is a malicious disposicion of the mind, not liking nor pleased: but
grieved, and offended either for some injury and offense done or supposed to
be done: and therefore is altogether set to be revenged seeking by all means
how to compass the same, by device or by word, or by act or by all. Which
being so euel an affection, and so far from right reason: Plato defines to be
a violent force of an unreasonable mind, with out all order or reason. Est
enim Ira ceu concitacio animi impertus vilentus animae irrationalis absque
ratione ceu ordine mentis. Plato de difinicionibus.
This affection as the Philosophers say: has his seat and being in the heart,
for unto the soul, they do attribute three faculties. The first is reason,
which is placed in the head. The second is that which wants, and is
without reason: and is named anger, Plutarchus de ^omero.
and that is placed in the heart. The third is appetite or lust, and that is
placed in the parts which are near the belly. The sa^e also vvriteth Gallen,
who has these words. Galenus de placitis lib. 5.6. et. 7.

Idem de locis affect. lib* 3. Alciat. Emble. ^7, Galenus de sanitate tuenda.
decausis morborum. de causis pul^s^um.

De placitis. lib. 6. Allciatus. Emblem* 84. Galen. de art curandi.


Tres sunt animae facultat^s, corpus nostrum regentes, rationalis, Irassibilis
et appetitoria. Also in his book of places affected, he has these words,
Porro rationalem animae vim in cerebro, virilem irascibilemue incorde ap
petitoriam in ^ecore sitam esse nemini non persuasum existimo. This euel
disposicio^, or effect of the mi^de, and which is thus placed in the heart:
comes and proceeds of the feruency, inflammation or enkendling of the blood
about the heart, for there are in man (as the Phisicions say) two humors
inge^dred of blood, the one is named Bilis flaua* or melancholy, and has his
seat in the liver and spleen. The Other: is named Bilis atra or choler, and has
his seat in the heart, and this is engendered of the blood about the heart, being
distempred and inflamed a^oue his just temperature. And as Gallen says, is of
all humors the hottest, omnium humorum qui sunt incorpore est callidissimus.
And of this faruencie comes anger, and men become vvrothful, ex nimia coloris
abundancia et feruore incorde fiunt homines iracundi, and therefore Isodorus
says Iracunda comes of the words Yr, which is flaming and of Yra,
which is inflamat, that is to say, a fire or a flame which burns and
inkindleth. Lib. etymolog. 10.
This perturbatio^ or euel affect of the mind, having in it so^e part and
portion of all other evil affections. Pluta. de fra.
Nam omnium per^urbationum semina, in iram videntur confluxisse, is of such a
malign and naughty disposition, that who soever is troubled therewith: is
for the time as it were a mad man, and is carried with a kind of madness. Qui
enim Iracu^diae morbo labor^t, parum admodu^ a furiosis secernu^tur: Patri. de
inst. reip. lib. 2. tit. 9.
impetusque irati animi ab infania vel furore nihil differt, and if in time the
same be not compressed and stayed: it becomes and is very madness as Patricius
says* Si non comprimantur an tequam liberius vagentur, Gale. de currand.
animi affectibus. Patric. de reg^no. li. 4. tit. 9*
ad insaniam atque furorem compellu^tur. And being brought to this extremity
are void of all reason, set upon mischief and never satisfied but with
revenging. And therefore such men for the time and until they be recovered and
come to them selves again: are to be shunned out of all Councels, and
sequestrated out of all assemblyes. Proverb. 22.
Make no freendship (says Solomon) with the angry man, nor keep company
with the furious: lest thou receive destruction to thy soul. For the angry
man is as the fire, which the more it is: the more it burns, for why?
Ecclesiastic. 28
he vvil agree with no man, he is singular to him self, and vvil have every
man dau^ce after his Pipe, or else the common state vvil be disturbed and the
civil society disceuered, vvherof do commonly ensue spoils, murders,
conspiracio^s, seditions, and all such other detestable vices. Quibus status
omnes publici atque priuati, solent labefactari. And as this affection or
perturbation of the mind proceeds from the blood being inflamed and
ouerhet, which as say the Physicians, it makes men vvhot and fiery. Homines
accendit ac igneos reddit, Galenus de animi moru^ et corporei temparementi
consequentione.

Alciat. Emble. 36. Genes^. 4. 2 Kings. 21. Math. 2.


then for the most part they are all set in blood, and ar delighted in
slaughter. Lutea cum surgit bilis crudescit et atro,
Fell dolor furias excitat indomitas,
Cain in his malice slew his brother Abel, and Manasses in his fury murdered
his father Isaiah, and filled the streats in Jerusalem with innocent blood
Herod in his rage spilt the blood of his innocent children, of two years of
age. Periander of Corinthe, in his fumes murdered his wife, being great with
child. Marius and Silla, in their outrages: made hauoke of the Citisens of
Rome, Salust. Hall. Grafton.
and filled all Italy with blood. Richard of Gloucester, in his raging heats
and furious flames: embrevved him self with most heinous murders, and
horible bloodsheds. Such are the fruits of raging minds, and such are the
effects of furious heds, which does so alter and alienat a man from the right
use of reason: that of all brute beasts he is become the vvorst.

Turpius irato quid posses cernere vultu
Allciatus. Emblem. 63.
Cum fluit arabido ^pum^n^ ore liquor
Non hominem dicas, feruens quem concitat ira.
Infurias versus incipit esse fera.
And the same rising by degrees, are at the first easily to be compressed, and
without difficulty to be stayed, for albeit (as says Galen) a man cannot be
clean, and altogether exempted from that affection of the mind: Galen. de
curand. animi affecti.
yet he may stop the extreme feruencie thereof. Nam abira prorsus liberari nemo
simul ac velit continuo potest: perturbationis tamen intemperantiam, atque
insolentiam, co^primere po^est* for at the first, it is but a mocion and a
disposicion of the mind unto anger, and then as he does slack and que^^^ the
fire, which does not maintain and norish it with matter apt for the same:
so does he drive and put away anger. Qui eam in initio neque alit neque sese
inflat. Plutarc. de Ira cohibend.
But if a man not giving place nor yelding to reason, do wax vvarme and
following the humor, be inflamed, and so malicious: then they in the end, do
become furious and void of all reason, and not easily to be reclaymed. Patric.
de regno. lib. 4. tit. 8.
Animus enim ira effrenatus virtutis ac rationis habenis non regitur. It is
lamentable therefore, yea and very dangerous, as well to the private man as to
the public state, when a magistrate or a Senator, standing to much in his
own opinion, either by reason of his authority, wealth, knowledge, and
vvisdome, or other good gifts: vvil be so fickle and uncertain that with the
vvagging as it were of a straw, and for every trifling and light matter:
will be moved and wax vvarm. And as the vvilde Bore out of the vvood, vvil
buskel up himself to be bevvreked, and have his vvil: thinking then to use his
authority and rule best when he can rage most. But as the svvord is not to
be put in to the hand of the furious: no more is government to be committed to
the hasty. Qui enim animi perturbatione laborat, Cicer. offic. lib. 1.
inutilis prorsus est reip, et in caetu hominum importus habetur. S. Paul
makes an argument a minori, that the priest, or Bishop which cannot rule his
own hovvshold: is very unfit and unmeet, to have the charge and government of
the Church of God. 1. Timo. 3.
Siquis domui suae prae esse nessit comodo dei ecclesiam curabit. And so the
magistrate, if he cannot rule and direct himself in that sobriety, gravity,
and vvisdome as to him appertains: how shall he be able rightly to govern,
and well to direct the common state and public wealth? It is requisite
therefore, that he abooue all others be wise, sober, gentle, and pacient, and
free from those angry and furious dispositions: that the common wealth be not
by him hindered, and that he himself non incidat in morositatem inutilem et
odiosam: and so altogether unable to do any good, for the man fretized with
anger, and choked with choler: does nothing well, and therefore says Cicero
absit ira procul, cum qua nihil recte, nihil considerate fieri potest. Cicer.
offic. lib. 1. James. 1.
For man in his anger can accomplish no good thing.

If therefore you vvil have your counsails to take effect, your good devises to
proceed, your good government to proceed, and your common wealth to flourish and
increase: take heed and bevvare that the hasty and soon vvarmed man, be not
privy of your secrets nor sit in your counsels, for he vvil without all
fail, be such an Echineis or Remora, that he vvil not only stay the ship of
the common wealth from his due course: but also put him in perril of
subversion, and in the danger of the ravening Leuiathan.

There be also sundry other vices which proceed from an evil affected and a
corrupt heart, as adulteries, thefts, drunke^nes, conte^cions and such like:
which do pollute and defile a man, making him very un apt, and unfit to have
government. For it is not enough for a magistrate to be patient and free from
an angry mind: but he must also be otherwise honest, good and upright, neque
enim fat esse putes ab ira vna dun taxat liberum conseruare nisi etiam ab omni
edacitate vinolentia nequitia duriositate inuidia alijsque malis affectibus te
purum atque integrum conserues. Galen. de curand. animi affectibus.
Wherefore as when the weeds be rooted up: the herbs do grove, when the
VVasp or bomel Be is expulsed out of the hiue: the Bees make good Honey, and
when the Remora is removed: the Ship makes his way. So these naughty
disposicions ones removed, and the common wealth rid from the same: your good
attempts vvil prosper, your good devices vvil proceed, and your hospital vvil
be farthered. Romans 8*
For to them that do love God and do all things well* Omnia cooperantur in
bonum. All things shall go with them, and whatsoever they take in hand it
shall prosper.

And as you for your parts, as good fathers and prudent governors, have been
and yet are very careful and studious to do what in you lies, for the
erecting of an hospital: a thing in respect of the poor destituted and helples
children necessary and expedient to be done: so am I in good hope of your like
affection, zeal and good will, for and in the erecting, and establishing of a
free gramer school with in this city, a thing no more needful then most
necessary for the general education of children, of all sorts and degrees in
learning. But here I vvil rather suppress in silence, then in uttering to
prognosticat the evil euen^ which for want thereof, is in time like to ensue.
And yet the matter so serves, the time so requires, and necessity so urges:
that it is more the^ high time the same were considered, and vvherin I would
gladly use some speches, saving that I mind not, and am very loathe to produce
my speech, vvherby to be tedious unto you, or offensive unto those to whose
office, duty, and calling the same appertains. But to my purpose, as there
appears an ernest zeal and good affection, that the hospitallment might come
to effect* so dout you not but that every honest and good citezen will be as
ready, for his part and portion to do the like. For it is the part, and
bounden duty of every good citesen, omni studio atque prouidentia certare in
curandis reip. commodis, Plutarc. de reip. gerende precept.
et probe co^sultata, recte perficiendi occasiones suppeditare atque in reip.
gloria atque vtilitate augenda magistratum adiunare, every good citisen vvil
contend and strive the one with the other, to help and further the common
wealth in all good and profitable things, as well in giving his advice: as also
give and contribute of his own vvherby to help the magistrate, in the
furtheraunce of the proffit of the common wealth. And therefore for as much as
you have given the attempt in so good a cause, and some good hope is conceived
of your good continuance and forvvardnes therein* distrust not but that GOD
vvil send good success. For although your beginings be hard, and have many
Sisemies which do what they may to hinder the same: yet you know that of
hard beginnings come good endi^gs, and good attempts have good success.

Experience teaches you, how that in this your own City, such things as
do chiefly advance, and maintain your own common wealth, were
vvithstanded, maligned, and resisted at the beginning.

And for as much as the order for th'orphans, already by your industry and
means, brought to pass, does conserne and appertain unto all your citisens,
or the most part of the^, and the same being a law to bind the^, their
ignorance cannot excuse them. ^gnorantia iuris non excusat. I have thought it
(under your favor) very meet and expedient, that the same should be so set
forth and published, that every man might understand and know the same.
Wherefore presently, I have collected and drawn out the whole order in as
perfect manner as I can. And first I have begun with the charter and grant
made by the Queens most gracious majesty that now is. Then follows the
act of parliament, confirming the same. And after it; all the orders and
ordinances by you the Mayor and common counsel decreed, ordained and
established for the same. And then the offices duties and fees of every
officer, and all such other things as are incident to the said order. And
lastly the manner of all recognisances, and other writs for process concerning
the court for Orphans. Which my travails, such as they are: I do offer and
present unto you, not to the end nor yet meaning to teach and instruct you: but
to remember you of your own doings, and to teach and instruct the residevv
of your citise^s, whom the same specially do tovch and concern, and for
whose children the same are done and provided. And all be it, I have perhaps
used here in more words then reasons, more speeches then good sentences, and
more talk then becomes, and so have ouershot my self: yet there wants not
in me a ready and a good vvil to do the best. Voluntas quidem prompta est,
facultas autem nulla aut Difficilis, Plato legum dialogo. 1.
wherefore I am to pray you to pardon my rudenes, and to bear with my
vvekenes. For matter as me thought, offered it self ple^teously, the time (...)
me and the ^^eering pen vnvvares (...).

The (...) in their counsels (...) elders: direct your counsels* guide your
doings, and prosper your gouernmentes, that as this ancient city, flourishing
under the good and prudent government of your ancestors, and predecessors,
Lhuyd in the breuiary of Britain.
was called Augusta that is to say flourishing and increasing: so the same by
you directed in all wisdom, Justice, and good order, may prosper and
increase more and more, and be magis Augusta: and in the end, when the living
GOD shall renevve, and restore the same to a most perfect, absolute, and happy
estate: the same may be maxim Augusta, and you to have your seats among the
xxiiij. elders, and be crowned among them in the everlasting City and
heavenly Jerusalem of the immortal, eternal and euerlyuing God. Exon. iiij.
Iubj. 1575.

Your worships to command John Vovvell alias Hooker.

The Charter for the order for the Orphans within the City of Excester,
granted by the most gracious Queen ELIZABETH.
ELIZABETH deigratia Angliae Franciae et hiberniae Regina fidei defensor. etc.
Omnibus ad quos presents literae per venerint salute^. Sciatis quod ob amore^
et intimum fauorem quibus dilectos subditos nostros Maiore^ balliuos, et
communitatem Ciuitatis nostrae Exon prosequimur: cupientes et multum
desiderantes remp. et communitatem dictae Ciuitatis nostrae indies in melius
reformari, gubernari et augme^tari. Necnon volentes fidem, obedientiam et
seruicium dictorum Maioris, Balliuorum et co^munitatis dictae ciuitatis nostrae
praecharissimo fratri nostro Edwardo nuper regi Angliae praestita, et facta, in
quadam rebellione and obsidione, versus cameram nostra^ dictae ciuitatis
nostrae motis per quosdam in partibus Deuon, et Cornubiae tunc rebelliones
suorum fidei et obedientiae immemores in obliuionem trahi, sed potius vt eorum
fides obedientia, et veritas in perpetuam obseruetur memoriam, tam de
praedictis, quam de aliis considerationibus, nos mouentibus, de gratia nostra
speciali, et ex mero motu nostro, omnes et singulas antiquas libertates,
consuetudines, priuilegia, franchesias iurisditiones praeminentias et caetera,
omnia et singula quaecunque, Co^firmatio libertatum.
quae in aliquibus Chartis aut literis patentibus aliquorum progenitorum seu
antecessorum nostrorum Regum Angliae dictis Maiori, Balliuis et communitati
co^itatus dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon, et eorum successoribus dum Mayor,
Balliui et co^munitas comitatus dictae ciuitatis nostrae existeba^t ac Maiori,
Balliuis et co^mu^itati dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exo^, et eoru^ successoribus
du^ Mayor, Balliui et co^mu^itas dictae ciuitatis nostrae Exo^ existeba^t: ac
Maiori, Balliuis et ciuibus dictae Ciuiiatis nostrae Ex^o^et eoru^
successoribus, dum Mayor, Balliui et Ciues existebant, Ciuitatis praedictae vel
quocunque alio nomine aut quibuscumque alijs nominibus, dictis Maiori Balliuis
et co^mu^itati, ante haec tempora facta et co^cessa: dictis Maiori, Balliuis et
co^mu^itati Ciuitatis nostrae Exon, et eorum successoribus imperpetuu^ pro
nobis haeredibus et successoribus nostris, acceptamus, approbamus et
ratificamus: et pronobis, haeredibus et successoribus nostris, quantum in nobis
est tenore presentium confirmamus Et insuper volumus et pro nobis, haeredibus
et successoribus nostris concedimus et confirmamus Maiori, Balliuis et
co^mu^itati Ciuitatis nostrae Exon praedictae, et eorum successoribus
imperpetuum: quod habeant, gaudeant, vtantur, et fruantur omnibus et omnimodis
libertatibus, preuilegijs, potestatibus et Iurisditionibus infra limits et
bundas comitatus Ciuitatis nostrae Exo^ praedictae, in tam amplis modo et
forma, prout co^tinetur in aliquibus chartis aut literis patentibus vllorum
progenitorum seu antecessorum nostrorum quondam regum Angliae. Et adeo plene
libere et integre ac si omnia et singula in eisdem aut eorum aliqua, contenta,
essent, modo in hijs literis nostris patentibus peculiariter, et verbatim
expressa declarata et contentata. Et vlterius de vberiori nostra gratia et ex
mero motu et scientia nostris damus et concedimus pronobis haeredibus et
successoribus nostris, praefatis Maiori, Mayor co^stituitur Escaetor infra
comitatum Ciuitatis Exon.
Balliuis, et co^mu^itatis Ciuitati nostrae Exon praedictae et eorum
successoribus imperpetuum quod Mayor ciuitatis nostrae, praedictae et
successores sui imposterum pro tempore existentes, imperpetuum sit Escaetor
noster haeredum et successoru^ nostrorum, detempore in tempus, infra comitatum
Ciuitatis nostrae Exon praedictae. Ita quod iuramentu^ praestet corporale in
Guihalda Ciuitatis praedictae, tempore admissionis suae in officium Maioratus,
quod officium Escaetoris fideliter exerceat. Et quod nullus alius Escaetor
nostrae haeredu^ vel successorum nostrorum infra dictam Ciuitatem nostram aut
fines et limits comitatus eiusdem ciuitatis, aliqualiter se intromittat,
aliquo tempore infuturum. Et quod vicecomes noster haeredum et successorum
nostroru^ infra comitatum dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon imperpetuu^, Vicecomes
custodiet duo sua turna.
in quolibet anno habeat, teneat et custodiat, duo turna cum curia
visusfranciplegij infra comitatum Ciuitatis nostrae Exon praedictae, temporibus
in alijs comitatibus regni nostri Angliae consuetis et vsitatis pro eisdem.
Vicecomes co^stituet suu^ subuicecomitem.
Et quod quilibet Viceco^es noster haeredum et successorum nostrorum Comitatus
Ciuitatis nostrae Exon praedictae imposterum pro tempore existenti imperpetuum
faciet, constituet et habebit de anno in annum vnum subuicecomitem de et pro
exercitione et occupatione officij subuicecomitis infra comitatum Ciuitatis
nostrae Exon praedictae, tali modo et forma prout civitates nostrae London et
Bristollia seu eorum altera habet aut habuerit. Et quod praedicti
subuicecomites, clerici et officiarij vicecomitis comitatus Ciuitatis nostrae
Exon praedictae, Subuicecomes potest officium continuare de anno in annum.
pro tempore existentes, possint et valiant continuare et exercere officia sua
praedicta de anno in annum quemadmodum ceteri subuicecomites clerici et
officiarij vicecomitu^ nostrorum in Ciuitatibus nostrae London et Bristoll, seu
earum altera possint et valiant absque vlla forisfactura, paena seu penalitate,
aliquo statuto, ordinatione seu prouisione in contrariu^ non obstante. Et etiam
volumus et per presents pro nobis haeredibus et successoribus nostris
co^cedimus praefatis Maiori, Mayor et xxiiij. possint statuta et ordinationes
facere.
Balliuis communitati Ciuitatis nostrae Exon praedictae, et successoribus suis
imperpetuum quod Mayor et viginti quatuor de co^muni consillio Ciuitatis
nostrae Exo^ praedictae, vel eorum mayor pars qui pro tempore erunt pro meliori
statu et gubernatione co^itatus aut Ciuitatis nostrae Exo^, actus ordinationes
statuta et prouisiones pro communi vtilitate comitatus aut Ciuitatis nostrae
praedictae et in habitantum eiusdem, de tempore in tempus imperpetuum ordinare
facere et statuere ac eade^ alterare mutare et reformare ad eoru^ libitum
possint et valiant, modo eadem leges ordinationes et statuta aut eoru^ aliquod
sieve aliqua non sit nec sint legibus et ordinationibus huius regni contraria.
et vlterius de vberiori nostra gratia volumus quod praedicti Mayor et Balliui
Ciuitatis nostrae Exo^ praedictae, Mayor et Billiui habeant gubernationem
omnium indigenoru^ et misteriorum.
qui pro tempore erunt de tempore in tempus imposterum habeant scrutiniu^,
gubernatione^, superuisu^ et punitione^ omnium Indigenorum et alienigenoru^,
omniu^ et singuloru^ ciuium et aliorum in habita^tium infra comitatum Ciuitatis
nostrae Exo^ praedictae quoquo modo vtentium seu exercentu^ aliquibus misterijs
infra comitatu^ Ciuitatis praedictae seu aliqua re eisde^ aut alicui eorundem
pertinente tam in emptionibus, scissuris, operationibus, mensuris et ponderibus
quam in quacunque alia re ad dicta misteria seu eorum aliqua quoquo modo
spectante seu pertinenti. Mayor et Balliui habent punitionem omnium personarum
de aliquo misterio.
Et quod dicti Mayor et Balliui Ciuitatis praedictae qui pro tempore erunt
habeant superuisum, punitionem et correctionem tam de omnibus et singulis
personis quam de misterijs praedictis ac de omnibus delictis factis fiendis
perpetratis et perpetrandis infra comitatum Ciuitatis nostrae Exon praedictae,
totiens quotiens et quando ipsis visum furit: ita quod huiusmodi correctio,
reformatio seu punitio cuiuslibet delinquentis seu delinquentum, fiat per
dictos Maiorem et Balliuos qui pro tempore fuerint secundum leges ordinationes
et statuta huius regni Angliae aut consuetudines dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon.
Et vlterius volumus et concedimus pro nobis haeredibus et successoribus
nostris, praefatis Maiori, Balliuis et co^mu^itati Ciuitatis nostrae Exon,
Camerarius Ciuitatis constitue^dus.
et eoru^ successoribus imperpetuum quod de caetero sit et erit in Ciuitate
nostra Exon praedicta, perpetuis futuris temporibus vnus camerarius Ciuitatis
nostrae Exo^ praedictae, qui quide^ Camerarius et quilibet successorum eius pro
tempore existens, de tempore in tempus erit eligendus nominandus et
praeficiendus modo et forma sequentibus, Camerarius qua^do presiciendus et
eligendus.
videlicet quod Mayor et viginti quatuor de communi concilio dictae Ciuitatis
nostrae Exo^ aut illorum mayor pars pro tempore existenti ad eorum libitum et
placitum in guihalda dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon quandocunque voluerint
imperpetuum de te^pore in tempus eligent et nominabunt vnum de ciuibus eiusdem
Ciuitatis nostrae Exon qui liber infra eandem ciuitatem adtunc fuerit,
Camerarium Ciuitatis nostrae praedictae, habendum et exercendum oifficium illud
quamdiu fuerit in dicto officio, ac quousque idem Camerarius ab officio illo
per Maiore^ et praedictos viginti quatuor de co^muni concilio, aut illorum
maiore^ partem ob aliquam causam rationabilem fuerit amotus, aut ab illo
officio sponte recesserit aut morte preueniatur* qui quidem Camerarius sic
electus, nominatus et prefectus et successores sui qui pro tempore fuerint et
eorum quilibet cum electi, creati et prefecti fuerint coram Maiore et Balliuis
dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon in Guihalda praedicta, Sacramentum camerarij.
dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon sacramentum praestabit corporale, quod ipse
officium camerarij eiusdem Ciuitatis nostrae Exon ac omnia quae ad illud
officium pertinebunt ad faciendum et exersendu^, qua^diu illud officium
habuerit et exercuerit been et fideliter faciet, exercebit et exequetur. Et
quod quilibet Camerarius dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon de cetero, eligendus et
nominandus, cu^ in camerarium eiusdem Ciuitatis nostrae Exon electus praefectus
et nominatus fuerit habeat successione^ perpetuum quodque ipse et omnes
successores sui imperpetuu^, Camerari successio est perpetua.
Camerarij dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon nominentur et vocentur: Camerarius
sigillu^ pro officio habere debet.
habeantque et eorum quilibet habeat sigillum pro officio Camerarij dictae
Ciuitatis nostrae Exon ac pro negotijs et officio camerarij dictae Ciuitatis
nostrae Exon pertinens deseruituru^. Et quod Camerarius dictae Ciuitatis
nostrae Exon ac omnes et singuli succecessores sui imposterum eligendi et
preficiendi imperpetuum habeant et eorum quilibet habeat cum in officium
camerarij Ciuitatis nostrae Exon electi, praefecti et iurati fuerint,
Authoritas Cam^rarij.
consimiles authoritatem et potestatem faciendi et exercendi ac omnia et
singula facient et exequentur infra comitatum dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon, et
libertates ac procinctus eiusde^ tales et huiusmodi quanta et qualia camerarius
Ciuitatis nostrae London infra eandem Ciuitatem nostram London facere vel
exercere potest aut facere et exercere consueuit. Et quod praedictus Camerarius
et omnes successores siui imposterum eligendi imperpetuum Camerarius potest
placitare et implacitare.
per nomen camerarij Ciuitatis nostrae Exon et eorum quilibet pro tempore
existenti coram nobis haeredibus et successoribus nostris in Cancellaria nostra
haeredum et successorum nostrorum necnon coram Iusticiarijs nostris haeredum et
successorum nostrorum de commu^i banco et coram Thesaurario et Baronibus de
Scacario nostro haeredum et successorum nostrorum quam coram quibuscunque
iudicibus sieve Iusticiarijs nostris haeredum et successoru^ nostroru^
quibuscunque alijs iusticiarijs sieve Iudicibus nostris haeredu^ et successoru^
nostroru^ in quibuscunque curijs locis et plateis placitent et implacite^tur,
placitare et implacitari, responderi possint in quibuscunque actionibus,
sectis, quaerelis, et dema^dis realibus perso^alibus et mixtis, negotia
co^munia dictae Ciuitatis sieve orphanoru^ eiusdem sieve eo aliquod, quoquo modo
tange^tibus. Et quod praedictus Camerarius dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon et
successores sui, et eorum quilibet detempore in tempus omnia et singula
reuentiones prouentiones proficua et emolume^ta quaecunque quae idem Camerarius
vel successores sui tempore quo Camerarius dictae Ciuitatis extiterit vel
extiterint ad vsum et proficuum Maioris, Balliuorum et co^mu^itatis Ciuitatis
illius receperit vel pereperit, necno^ omnia onera et omnimodas chartes,
euidentias, scripta obligatoria et munime^ta quae ide^ Camerarius et omnes
successores sui imperpetuum imposterum eligendi pro tempore existenti durante
tempore quo ipse Camerarius vel aliquis eius successorum Camerarius Ciuitatis
nostrae Exon praedictae extiterit, Camerarius omnia que ad vsu^ Ciuitatis
reciperit fideliter seruab^t et expendet ac de anno in annum fidele^ co^potum
reddet.
ad vsum dictoru^ Maioris, Balliuorum et communitatis dictae Ciuitatis nostrae
Exon aut successorum suorum receperint seu habuerint seu recipiet, habebit ad
vsum dictorum Maioris, Balliuorum et communitatis dictae Ciuitatis Exon et
successorum suorum durante termino quo ipse Camerarius vel aliquis successorum
eius, officium Camerarij dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon exercuerit, been et
fideliter custodiet et custodiri faciet ac prouentus, reuentiones et proficua
huiusmodi sic recepta^ ad vsum et proficuum eorunde^ Maioris, Balliuoru^ et
co^mu^itatis dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon et successorum suorum applicabit
expendet et persoluet ac de omnibus et singulis receptis et habitis, bonum et
fidelem compotum quolibet anno infra rationabile tempus illi per Maiorem et
viginti quatuor de communi consilio dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon coram
huiusmodi auditoribus Ciuitatis praedictae ad hoc per Maiorem et xxiiij. de
communi consilio aut maiorem partem eiusdem Ciuitatis nostrae Exon pro tempore
existente assignandi, Auditores de audie^do Camerarijco^ poto per Maiorem et
xxiiij, sunt assignandi.
been et fideliter reddet et faciet. Et quod praedictus Camerarius dictae
ciuitatis Exon et quilibet successorum eius pro tempore existenti qui ab
officio Camerarij Ciuitatis illius vt praedictu^ est amotus fuerit ob aliquam
causam rationabilem per praedictos Maiorem et xxiiij. de communi consilio
dictae Ciuitatis nostre Exon vel per maiorem partem eorundem: aut recesserit ab
officio praedicto aut morte preuentus fuerit, quod tunc post rationabile tempus
per praedictos Maiorem et xxiiij. de communi consilio aut maiorem partem
eorundem prefigendum postquam sic amotus fuerit vel recesserit ipse executores
vel assignati sui sufficientem et fidelem compotum de omnibus et singulis per
ipsum preantea receptis et habitis ad vsum praedictorum Maioris, Balliuorum et
communitatis coram auditoribus per praedictos Maiore^ et xxiiij. vt prefertur
assignandis reddet et faciet et reddi et fieri faciet. Et vlterius de vberiori
nostra gratia cupientes prouidere pro tutela defe^cionae et regimine Orphanorum
etinfantium qui iam sunt et imposteru^ in Ciuitate praedicta erunt et fore
contigerint quod bona et catalla eorundem de caetero, Bona orphanoru^ ad eorum
optimum vsum conferenda.
imperpetuum et de tempore in tempus fideliter et just custodiantur sine
destructione seu spoliatione eorunde^. Et quod bona et catalla eadem
conferantur et disponantur ad optimum vsum et proficuum eorundem Orphanorum et
Infantium: de gratia nostra speciali et ex mero motu nostro volumus et per
presents pro nobis, Camerarius debet custodia^ habere omnium bonorum
orphanorum.
haeredibus et successoribus nostris concedimus praefatis Maiori, Balliuis et
co^mu^itati Ciuitatis nostrae Exon et eoru^ successoribus imperpetuum quod
praedictus Camerarius dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon et successores sui
imperpetuum cum consensu assensu, et aduisamento dictorum maioris and xxiiij.
de communi consilio dictae Ciuitatis Exon aut eorum maioris partis qui pro
tempore fuerint, recipere possint et eorum quilibet recipere possit ab
omnibuset singulis cui vel quibus custodia bonorum seu catallorum omnium
huiusmodi orphanoru^ et pueroru^ co^missa fuerit de eoru^ Manucaptoribus
recogniciones seu obligationes de et pro huiusmodi pecuniaru^ summis ipsis
Orphanis et pueris debitis seu debendis certis terminis soluendis ac easdem
pecuniaru^ summas in recognitionibus sic per recognitores praedictos recognitas
de terris tenementis bonis et catallis ipsorum custodum et Manucaptorum suorum
quorumcunque in co^itatis Ciuitatis praedicte existentibus leuentur ad vsum
dictorum Orphanorum ac puerorum ad quorumcunque manus terrae et tenementa illa
deuenerint, ac eadem eisdem Orphanis seu pueris libere tenenda vt liberum
tenementum suum iuxta formam Statuti de eiusmodi recognitionibus apud
Westmonasterium editi liberent seu liberari faciant. Camerarius gubernationem
habere debet omnium otphanorum.
Et quod idem Camerarius dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon pro tempore existenti et
successores sui habeant de caetero imperpetuum custodiam et gubernationem
omnium et singulorum Orphanorum quorumcunque ciuium infra dictum comitatum
Ciuitatis nostrae Exon. Camerarius potestatem habet collige^di omnia quaecunque
sunt Orphanoru^.
Et quod idem Camerarius dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon et successores sui
habea^t et habebu^t authoritate^, facultate^ et potestatem recipiendi, leuandi,
colligendi, seisendi, custodiendi et custodiri faciendi in co^muni thesauro
Ciuitatis nostrae Exon praedictae oi^a bona, catalla, debita et legata
quaecunque infra co^itatu^ Ciuitatis nostrae Exon praedictae contingentia,
emerge^tia, inue^ta seu existentia quorumcunque Orphanorum aliquorum ciuium
Ciuitatis praedictae imposterum obire contingentium et eadem bona, Camerarius
et Mayor cu^ co^sensu 24. omnia bona orphanorum ad eo ru^ co^odu^ debent
exponere.
catalla, debita seu legata dictoru^ orphanoru^ ad meliora opus vsum commodum
et proficuum eorundem per Maiorem et xxiiij. de co^muni consilio pro tempore
existenti aut eorum maiorem partem et Camerarium dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon
conuertantur et exponantur, prout in Ciuitate nostra London est et consuetum.
Et quod eadem bona, catalla, debita et legata eisde^ Orphanis soluent et
deliberent ad huiusmodi aetatem ac eisdem modo et forma in oi^bus prout in
Ciuitate nostra London ante hac in hac part vsitatum et consuetum fuit. Et
quod dictus Camerarius dictae Ciuitatis nostrae Exon et successores sui pro
te^pore existenti habeant omnia huiusmodi actiones, sectas et remedia pro
subtractione et raptu aliquorum Orphanorum infra comitatu^ dictae Ciuitatis
nostrae Exon contingentibus, ac pro recuperatione aliquorum bonorum,
catalloru^, debitorum et legatorum eoru^dem omnes tales et huiusmodi
officiarios pro meliori gubernatione et preseruatione dictorum Orphanorum ac
bonorum, Catallorum, debitorum et legatorum suorum quae et quales in praedicta
Ciuitate nostra London habere ante hac vsitatum fuit aut debuit. Camerarius
Exon omnia potest exequi que potest camerarius Ciuitatis London.
Quodque omnia et singula alia quecunque huiusmodi orphanoru^ et puerorum bona,
catalla, debita et legata eorundem tangentia Exequantur et fiant que^admodum in
dicta Ciuitate nostra London exequi fieri et peragi ante hac vsitatum fuit.
Quae omnia inuiolabiter obseruari volumus per presents. Et eo quod expressa
mentio de vero valor annuo aut de aliquo alio valor seu certitudine
premissorum sieve eorum alicuius aut de alijs donis sieve concessionibus per nos,
vel per aliquem pro^enitorum sieve praedecessorum nostrorum praefatis Maiori,
Balliuis et communitati Ciuitatis nostrae Exo^ praedictae seu eorum alicui ante
haec tempora facta in presentibus minime factum existit. Aut aliquo Statuto,
actu ordinatione, prouisione, proclamatione seu restrictione inde in contrarium
ante haec tempora facta, edita, ordinata seu prouisa, aut aliqua aliare, causa
vel materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cuius rei testimonium has
literas nostras fieri facimus Patentis. Test meipsa apud Westmonasteriu^
vicesimo primo die Februarij. Anno Regni nostri tertio.

Per breue de priuato sigillo et de data predicta authoritati Parliamenti.

An Act of Parliament for the confirmation of the Charter of the City of
Excester for the order of the Orphans within the same.
ELIZABETH A DEI gratia Angliae, Franciae et Hiberniae Regina fidei defensor.
etc. Omnibus ad quos presents literae peruenerint salutem. Inspeximus tenorem
actus Parliamenti nostri nobis in cancellariam nostram virtute breuis nostri
missi et in filacijs eiusdem cancellariae nostrae residentis in haec verba. In
Parliame^to tento apud Westmonasterium xij. die Ianuarij anno Regni serenissime
ac excellentissime Dominae nostrae Elizabethae dei gratia Angliae, Franciae et
Hiberniae Reginae fidei defen soris quinto communi omnium Dominorum tam
spiritualium quam temporalium et co^itatis assensu et dictae Regiae Maiestatis
tum presentis consensu inter alia sancitum inactatum et ordinatum fuit presens
hoc Statutum videlicet.

For the confirmacion of diverse libertyes granted by letters Patents to the
City of EXCESTER.
WHere our most gracious Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty by her letters
Patents under her great seal of England bearing date at Westminster the xxj.
day of February in the third year of her highness reign, for the love and
favor which she did bear to her loouing Subjects the Mayor, Balifs and
Communaltie of her City of Excester wishing and much desiring the common weal
of the Mayor, Baylifs and communaltie of her said City, daily to be reformed,
governed and augmented, and also willing the faith, obedience and service of
the said Mayor, Baylifs and communaltie of her said City to her most deer
brother Edward, late King of England, performed and done in a certain Rebellion
and siege against her Chamber of the said City moved by certain then Rebels
against their faith and obedience, in the parties of Deuon and Cornwall, not to
be vnmindefully forgotten, but rather that their faith, obedience and truth
should be kept in a perpetual memory as well for the before said, as for other
considerations her moving of her special grace, mere motion and knowledge,
among other things has granted for her, her heirs and successors, to the
said Mayor, Baylifs and communaltie of her highness City of Excester before
said, and to their successors.

Every Shirif may have his under Shirif.
That every Shirif or Shirifs of the County of her said City of Excester from
thencefoorth for the time being for ever, shall make, constitute and have from
year to year one under shirif, of and for the execution and occupation of
the office of under Shirif within the County of Excester aforesaid, in such
manner and form as her Cities of London and Bristol or either of them has or
has had.

And that the said under Shirif, Clarks and Officers of the Shirif of the
County of the said City of Excester for the time being, may continue and
exercise their offices aforesaid from year to year as other under Shirifs,
Clarks and officers of her Shirifs in her Cities of London and Bristol or in
either of the^, might and may without any forfaiture, pain or penalty, any
Statute, ordinance or provision to the contrary notwithstanding.

And where also her most excellent Majesty by the same her letters Pattents
among other things of her mere abundaunt grace desiring to provide for the
education, bringing up, defense and governance of Orphans and Infants which
then were, or hereafter shall happen to be in her said City of Excester, that
their goods and cattels from henceforth for ever and from time to time for
ever should be faithfully and justly kept without spoil or destruction of the
same, and that the said goods and cattels should be employed and disposed to
the best use and profit of the same Orphans and Infants. Of her special grace
and mere mocion willed and by her said letters Patents for her, her heirs and
successors granted to the said Mayor, The Chamberlain / Mayor and xxiiij. may
receive Recognisances for the true answering of Orphans goods.
Baylifs and communaltie of her highness said City of Excester and to their
successors for ever. That the Chamberlain of the said City of Excester and his
successors for ever, with the concent, assent and aduisement of the said Mayor
and xxiiij. of the common council of the said City of Excester, or the more
part of them which for the time shall be, may receive of all and singular
persons to whom the keeping of the goods or Cattels of all such Orphans and
children shall be committed and of their mainpernors, Recognisance or Obligations
of and for such sums of money to the same Orphans and Children, due or to be
due at certain terms to be paid.

And that the same sums of money in the Recognisaunces so by the Recognitors
before said recognized, contained of the Lands, tenements, and cattels of the
same Gardians and their mainpernors whatsoever within the County of her said
City, The lands and tenements of every Recognitor making default of paime^t to
be delivered to the Orpha^s.
being so leuyed to the use of the said Orphans and Children to whose hands
so ever those lands and tenements should come, and the same shall deliver or
cause to be delivered to the same Orphans or Children to be freely as their
free hold according to the form of the statute made at Westminster concerning
such Recognisances.

And that the said Chamberlain of her said City of Excester for the time
being and his successors shall have from henceforth for ever, the keeping and
governance of all and every the Orphans of what so ever Citizens within the
said County of her City of Excester.

And the same Chamberlain of the said City of Excester and his successors,
shall have authority, faculty, and power to receive, The Chamberlain has
power to cease and keep all Orphans goods to the use of Orphans.
leuy, gather, sease, keep, and cause to be kept in the common Treasury of her
City of Excester before said, all the goods, cattels and legacyes whatsoever
within the County of the City of Excester aforesaid, happening, arising,
found or being of what soever Orphans of any Citizens of the said City from
thence forth happening to dye. And the same goods and Cattels, dets or
legacyes of the said Orphans to the best use, comoditie, and profit of them by
the Mayor and xxiiij. of the common council for the time being or the more
part of them, and by the Chamberlain of the said City of Excester to be
turned and employed as in her City of London it is used and accustomed.

And the same goods and cattels, dets and legacyes they shall pay and deliver
to the same Orphans at such age and in the same manner and form in all things
as in her City of London heertofore in that behalf has been used and
accustomed. Orphans to be fully answered of their goods at their full age.


And that the said Chamberlain of the said City of Excester and his successors
for the time being shall have all and such actions, The Chamberlain to have
his action for the e^oyning or rauishing of any Orphan.
suits and remedies for the withdrawing and rauishing of any Orphane within the
County of the said City of Excester happening, and for the recovery of any
their goods, cattels, dets, and legacyes and all and such officers for the
better governance and preservation of the said Orphans and of their goods,
cattels, dets and legacies, as in ye City of London heertofore has been used,
or ought to be used. All things concerning Orphans to be done in Excester as it
is used in London.
And that all and every other thing whatsoever touching the said Orphans or
their goods and cattels, dets and legacies shall be executed and done as in the
said City of London before time has been used to be executed done and
performed.

Be it enacted, ordained and established by the Queens MaMaiestie our souerain
Lady, by the assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that all
and every the graunts, Confirmation of the Cities Charters and libertyes.
libertyes and articles contained in the said letters Patents to the said
Mayor, Baylifs and Communaltie of the said City of Excester by our said
souerain Lady, granted and made, mentioned and recited in this present Act, to
be to the same Mayor, Baylifs and communaltie, and to their successors by
authority of this present Parliament ratified and confirmed in all points.

And that the said Mayor, Bailifs and communaltie, and their successors for
ever shall and may quietly have, use, do, exercise and enjoy all and every
the graunts, libertyes, privileges, powers, authorities, Jurisdictions,
actions, vsages and other things what soever to them by the said letters
Patents granted as amply and in as large manner, form, sort and degree as
the true meaning of the Queens highness was by the said letters Patents, any
Act or Acts before this time had or made, or any other thing or matter what
soever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always that this Act or any thing therein contained shall not in any
wise extend, This grant not to extend to any the Queens Majesty's wards the
Bishop / Deane and Chapter.
be preiuditiall or hurtful to the right of any lawful ward or wards of the
Queens highness her heirs or successors, or to the lawful ward or wards of
any other person or persons, nor to the Bishop of Excester or to his
successors, nor to the Deane and Chapter of Excester, nor their successors, for
or concerning any their liberties, privileges, leetes or franchesies
whatsoever, being within the limits and bounds within the County and City of
Excester aforesaid, but that they and every of them shall and may have, hold,
use, exercise and enjoy the same libertyes, privileges, courts, leets and
franchesies and every of them in such like form and condition to all intents
as they or any of them heertofore lawfully had, occupied or enjoyed, or might
lawfully have had, occupied or inioyed before the making of this present Act,
in such manner and form as if this Act had never been ne made, any thing in
this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it enacted by the authortie before said that all
Recognisances which hereafter shall be taken and knowledged by any person or
persons within the County of the said City of Excester touching or concerning
any the said Orphan or Orphans goods or cattels, All Recognisances to be taken
before the Mayor and xxiiij. of the City.
shall be taken and acknowledged before the Mayor and xxiiij. of the common
council of the said City or the more part of them, and that every such
Recognisance so taken and knowledged to any person or persons shall extend and
be of force, validity and effect, in law to all intents and purposes as
Recognisances touching or concerning Orphan or Orphans goods and Cattels, taken
or knowledged within the City of London has been here tofore used or
accustomed, and of no greater force, strength and effect any thing heerin
contained to the contrary not withstanding.

Nos autem tenores dicti actus Parliame^ti nostri ac omnia et singula in eodem
contenta ad requisitionem Maioris, Balliuorum et Gomitatis Ciuitatis Exon
duximus exemplificandum per presents. In cuius rei testimonium has literas
nostras fierifecimus Patentes test meipsa apud Westmonasterium tertio die
Maij, anno regni nostri, quinto.

The Statutes, decrees and ordinances, made decreed and established by the
Mayor and the xxiiij. of the common council of the City of Excester, for and
concerning the ordering of Orphans and of all such goods and Cattels as to them
appertains, within the City of Excester and libertyes of the same.
FIrst it is ordained that what soever benefit does grow to the Child of any
free man of the City of Excester, whether it be by lands, All the goods and
lands appertaining unto any are wholly in the governance of the Mayor and xxiiij.
or goods, or legacyes, or whether it be from father or mother, or strangers,
or whether the Parents living or dead, the same shall be wholly in the order and
governance of the Mayor and xxiiij. of the common council.

Also within one Month after the death of any free man the Executor or
Administrator shall be warned by an Officer therefore appointed (called the common
Crier) to appear before the Mayor and xxiiij. at the next Court day to be
holden, The Executor or Administrator to be warned to bring in the Testament by
a day.
and then and there shall be bounden by Recognisance to bring into the Court at a
certain day by them, then to be appointed, the last will or Testament and
Inuentory of the Testator and that before the Executrix (if she be a Widow) do
mary.

Also if the Executor so warned by the common Crier to appear at a certain day
appointed before the Mayor and xxiiij. do it not, or refuse to do it, The
Executor refusing to appeer to be committed to prison
that then he or they so refusing and not appeering, to be committed to Prison
and there to remain until he do enter in bond or Recognisance with sufficient
suretyes to bring in the Will or Testament and Inuentory in manner as is before
declared.

Also it is ordered that when any Inuentory is to be made Praisers to be
appointed and sworn by the Aldermen of the ward.
the Praysers of the goods of every such Testator shall be appointed by the
Alderman or his Deputy of that ward in which the Testator dyed and dwelled,
and which Praysers shall dwell also in the same ward and before they do make
any praiseme^t, they shall be sworn to value and praise the goods indifferently.

The Executor is to be sworn that the Inuentory is true.
Also the Inuentory being brought in by the Executor or Administrator at the
day and time prescribed the said Executor or Administrator shall be sworn that
the Inuentory is just and true which oath is to be ministered by the common
Sergeant.

The manner of the oath to be exhibited to the said Executor or Administrator is
this. The oath of the Executor.
You shall swear that you have truly presented and showed forth to the
Praysers by the Alderman or his Deputy of the ward appointed, all such goods,
cattels, money, plate, Jewels, household stuf, wares, merchandise, Leases and
what so ever other goods as were your last Testators, you have left out no
money, you have charged him with no dets to be (...) or desperate, which you
do think in your conscience to be good dets, but you have done all things
uprightly and truly, as an Executor ought to do. So God help you and by the
contents of this book. And if he, she or they do refuse to be thus sworn,
that they by the Mayor be committed to ward.

Also when the Inuentory is received together with the will or Testament, The
common Sergeant is to deduct all the dets and funerals out of the whole goods.
which is also to be brought in and exhibited. The common Sergea^t shall deduct
out of the whole Inuentory, the dets, and so much funerals as according to the
substance is allowed, and that done: shall divide the whole residue into three
parts, whereof the one third to be to the wife, one other third to the Children,
and the last third reserved for the performance of the will of the Testator.

The Testator having no wife the goods must be divided in to two parts.
Also if the Testator had no wife at the time of his death, then the goods
shall be divided but into two parts, whereof the one moitie shall be reserved to the
Children, and the other moitie to be reserved to the Testator. The like is if
the testator be a widow.

Also when the common Sergeant has thus divided the third part or the one
moitie for the Children, The common Seargeant is to examine the will for the
legacyes / if any be given to any Orphan.
then he has also to examine and peruse the Will and Testament for Legacyes,
and if he find any to be given to the Children or to any of them over and
abooue the third part due unto them, then shall he give that in charge, and
shall demand and require suretyes as well for the legacy as for the Orphanage.

Also in taking of Suretyes there may be no fewer then four to be taken in
every Recognisance for every Orphanage or Legacy if the sum thereof do amount
and be one hundred pounds. Four suretyes to be taken in every Recognisance of
an hundred pound.


And there shall not be abooue one hundredth pounds in any ^ne Recognisance,
Every surety must be worth the principal.
and every Surety taken shall be by the consideration of the Court worth the
principal.

Also every Recognisance to be taken and acknowledged must be taken to the
Chamberlain for the time being, Every Recognisance must be taken to the
Chamberlain but before the Mayor and xxiiij.
but before the Mayor and Common council, who must be advised of the state and
ability of every Surety.

Also if the funerals do pass and surmou^t the portion appointed for a man
of that substance, Funerals more then ordinary (...) they be to be (...).
then the overplus which was not deducted of the whole Inuentory: shall be
deducted out of the Testators part as the Legacyes be. And if such overplus of
the funerals do surmount the Testators third part, then every one which is
to receive and have any Legacy, shall bear his part and portion after the
rate.

Provided nevertheless that the funerals do not exceed nor surmount the
ordinary appointed.

Also every year on the Monday next after Midlent Sunday there shall be kept
before the Mayor and Common council of the City, the general court of
Orphans, A general Court of Orphans to be kept yearly on the monday in mid
Lent.
at which all sureties upon any Recognisance shall be called and if they make any
defaulte so that no one surety do appear, for every one Recognisance, that
the^ the surties to pay ij d. for every pound of so much as they stand bounden
for. And then the Mayor and common council, or the more part of them may at
their pleasure upon reasonable causes of default of ability to cause them to
put in further Suretyes.

Also if any Orphane do mary before full age without lycense of the Court,
Every Orphan married with out license is to be deducted of some part of the
portion for a fine.
then there shall be deducted out of every pound due by Recognisance, or of so
much money as shall remain in the custody of the City xij. d. and the same to
be forfaited to the use of the Chamber, and if any woman child being an
Orphan and under the age of xxj. years, after the death of her father, do
either contract and insure her self in marriage, or do perfectly consumate and
solemnise the same with any free man without consent of the Mayor and Court,
that then for every such default so committed being sufficiently proved by
two witnesses or confessed by the parties, or otherwise well known to the Mayor
and Court, shall forfait, forgo and lose of every pound due to her for her
Orphanage the sum of xij. d. to the use of the Chamber of the said City. And
if any such contract or Marriage be had and made with any foreign, and not
being free of said City at the time of the said contract or marriage, that
then the Orphan to forfait and forgo of every pound of her portion iij.s. of
which one xij. d. of every pound to be to the use of the Chamber, and the other
ij.s. of every pound to be to the use of such other Orphan or Orphans as shall
then remain unmarried, being the brothers sisters or compartenes with the said
so married or contracted Orphan, and for such default to the next of the kindred.

Children married and having been aduau^ced are not to have any childs part.
Also all such Children as are married in the lifetime of the Father and have
accepted any aduau^cement, shall not be partakers of any portion after the
death of his father, except he, she or they, have the fathers hand or mark in
writing to the contrary. And in that case, he, she or they, shall have so much
to that which they had already received as to make up therewith a whole part,
which they are to recover of the Executors, by bill or plaint before the Mayor
and common council wherein no wager of Law, protection. etc. Provided that what
soever the Testator gives to his wife in Iointer or to his Child unmarried is
not to be accounted for any advancement, unless the father do by express
words give it to his Child as for his full Childs part and portion.

Also every Orphan demanding and requiring his part and portion, Every Orphan
is to prove his age before he do receive his portion.
is first to prove his full age of xxj. years unless he or she be married, and
the age justly before the Mayor and common council or the more part of them
being duly proved, then he or she to receive his or her portion.

Also every Orphan receiving his or her part and portion shall at the receipt
thereof knowledge and confess before the May or and Chamberlain a full payment
and satisfaction, Every Orphan receiving his portion / is to confess
satisfaction.
and then the Recognisances taken in his or her behalf for the said money, is
to be cancelled by crossing the same over with a pen.

And if the Orphan be a woman and married before she be of the age of xxj, An
Orphan married she and her husband at the receiving of her portion must confess
satisfaction.
years then at the receipt of her part and portion, her husband and she
together, shall in the Court confess and acknowledge satisfaction, and then
the Recognisance to be canceled as is before declared.

Also if the Mayor and Council shall suspect the Executor or any other person
or persons to convey any such goods out of the liberty of the City, then the
Mayor may cause and will the common Crier which is a Sergeant at arms in that
case to sequester the same in safe keeping.

Also the Mayor and Common council shall bring all the goods unto ready money,
as also the Plate and Jewels, All the goods must be reduced into ready money and
according to that same suretyes are to be taken.
and bring the same to one certain sum, and then the disposition of the Orphans
parts, is as shall please the Mayor and common council, and to appoint the
same to whom they think good. Nevertheless if the Executors or administrators
will or do make request and put in good and sufficient Surties for the true
answering thereof at the age or marriage of the Orphane, they are to be heard
and have the preferment. And then the same Executors or Administrators shall
have the use of the same part and portion until the full age or maryages. And
yet this notwithstanding, the Mayor and common council may retain all, half
or so much in their hands as they list and may deliver to the Executors or
administrators what part and portion them pleases.

All legacyes given to Orpha^s shall remain ^n the custody of the Execu^ors or
Admi^istrators if ^hey do put in ^uretyes.
Also for and concerning any thing given and bequethed in Legacye to any Orphan
that shall fully and wholly remain and be in the distribucion of the Executor
and administrator, so that he do put in sureties for the answering and paying
of the same unto the Orphan. And if the thing bequethed be a Cattle in
remaind, they must and are to put in sureties not to alter the same.

The Mayor may appoint the custody of every Orphan to whom he pleases.
Also the custody of every Orphane shall be committed to such person or persons
as the Mayor and common council shall appoint to be the Guardians.

Also it is ordered that the Orphans of all and every Testator which dyed here
tofore not understanding the contents of this Act of Parliament, shall not
demand by virtue of this Act any more for their parts or portions but only
the third parts any Legacy notwithstanding.

Any Orphan having inordinatly used him self* to be excluded of a child's part.
Also if any man child or woman child, shall maliciously go about or attempt
to do or cause to be done, any bodily harm, death or destruction to his or
her Father or mother. Or if any Man child within the age of xxj. years, do
mary or contract marriage in the life time of his Father without his consent or
against his will by whom he will claim any portion. Or if any man child be a
Thief or a fellon, or a common whorehunter, or a common Barrator, Dicer, or a
common player at unlawful games notoriously known. Or if any woman child do
hereafter mary or contract marriage in the life time of her father or other
parent, by whom she will claim any portion, before the age of xviij. years,
without the concent of her said father or such other Parent, by whom she will or
shall claim any portion. Or shall hereafter commit any whordome, or be a
thief, or a common picker. That every such person so offending, shall be barred
and excluded to have any part or portion.

Provided nevertheless that if the father or mother of any such Child or
Children do give and bequeth in Legacy to any such child or Children, A
legacy given by express words unto any inordinate child is sufficient and
goodly order.
so much as the portion of such a Child so offending should or may amount unto
by the costome of the City: that then the said Child or Children shall be
enhabeled to demand and have the same portion or Legacy, so that the same gift
or Legacy be contained in his or their Testament in writing and not otherwise.
And the said Child or children shall be admitted and restored to claim and
demand such legacies any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Also if any Orphan do dye within age, The portion of every Orphan dying / is
groing to his administrator.
then his or her part shall accrue and grow to the Administrator of the said
Orphan.

Also that the wives part nor the Childs part being once divided shall
no more after be divided. A part once divided shall no more be divided.


Also all Legacyes and bequests are to be paid and answered at the times by the
Testament appointed saving unto Orphans who are to receive the same at their
full age or marriage. Orphans to receive their portions only at full age.


Also no woman's goods is to be divided according to the custom, but yet if any
thing grow to any Orphan by or from any woman, the same is to be ordered as any
other goods which grows unto any Orphan.

Also if the Widow of the Testator who is made Executrix or is the
Administrator, The Executrix marying before she has yielded a true Inuentory /
to lose viij.s the pound
do mary before she have exhibited a true and a just Inuentory, she shall lose
viij.s. of every pound of her own third part to the use of the Orphans.

Also the Chamberlain, the common Sergeant, The Chamberlain / the common
Sergeant and the common Crier have authority as is used in in London.
the common Crier, and every of them for the time, shall and may do all such
Act and acts, thing or things, in and about the premises and have like
authority, and take such ordinary fees and advantages appertaining to their
several offices, as is used in the City of London.

All things to be done in Excester as is in London concerning Orphans.
Aso the manner of Orphans and of their goods and all other suits, things and
doings thereunto appertaining, are to be used in the City of Excester in all
things as in the City of London.

The wife being never so unnatural cannot be deprived of her third
And further more if a man dye, his children being within age and has an
unnatural wife and leaves to his Children all his goods being worth ij.
hundred pound, but gives to his wife only x. pound and his household stuff,
she shall notwithstanding have the third part of her husbands goods without
denial: nevertheless if she be lunatic or become any Idiot, the Mayor and
common council are to commit her and her portion to be ordered by such as they
shall think good, and this they may do by custom.

Children beei^g Executors may sew or be sewed.
Also if a man make his Children (being within age) to be his Executors they
(by the custom) may sew and be sewed as Executors but not otherwise: but for
the better preferment of the Orphans, the Mayor and common council if they
thinck it so convenient may pray and request the Ordinary for the
administration: who thereupon is to commit it and commonly does commit the
administration to the Chamberlain or to some other whom the Mayor and Court of
the xxiiij. shall think good: which said Administrator may then sew to the best
behoof and use of Orphans. And if it be not the Chamberlain to whom the said
Administration is granted, then the said Administrator shall be bound by
Recognisance to be taken and acknowledged before the Mayor and common council
that he shall truly sew to and for the use of the Orphans, that he shall in
the end of his suits render a perfect account to the Mayor and common Counsel
of his said suits. And that he shall not do nor procure any thing or things,
Act or Acts tobe done to their hinderance, prejudice or damage. Provided that
the said Administrator must be always a free man.

What so ever of any Orpha^s goods does rema^n in the Cities hands no profit
is to be allowed thereof
Also whereas by the order, the Mayor and xxiiij. of the common council may
retain all or what they list in their custody of any Orphans goods, or to
dispose it to the Executors as them pleases then this is the order. Of every
hundredth pound or of so much as in the hands of the Mayor and common council,
there shall be nothing allowed unto the Orphans toward their finding of that
portion, because it is intended yt their money lies upon some good
consideration in their hands, and for their better surety, without any
commodity or profit to the Chamber. But for every hundred pounds which lies
in the Executors or any other persons hands there shall be allowed as follows.
For the first hundred pound, to pay for every pound xij. d. For the second
hundred pound, to pay for every pound viij. d. For every third hundredth pounds,
to pay iiij. d. for every pound. And if the Orphanage do amount unto more,
then shall Recognisances be taken reserving such several allowances as
according to the rate. Provided that if he be a free man or Citizen which has
the use of any Orphans portion, he shall pay no more toward the finding of the
Orphan then does the Executor or Administrator.

Also who soever has the use of any Orphans portion, What profit so ever
grows of a childs part / goes to the use of the same Child.
and what soever gain, profit or commodity grows by the use thereof, no
profit shall grow unto the Chamber of the City, but all to the use of the
Orphan.

Also if any freeman dye having Orphans at Nurse out of the libertyes of the
City, If any forainer which has any Orphans goods / will not come before the
Mayor and deliver the same or be bound according to the order / a bil is to be
exhibited against him into the Court of the Chancery.
and his goods be lying in sundry or several parts of the Realm, and the
administration is granted by the Ordinary unto a stranger or forrenner which
is not free of the libertyes of the City, and do also take the goods which
they find within the libertyes of the City into their hands and dispose it at
their will and pleasure, the Mayor and common council in this case cannot of
them selves make any process to compel them to come in, but a bil of petition
is to be made to the Lord Chau^celer or to ye Lord keeper: upon which bil so
preferred a Sub pena is granted against the party, to compel him to appeer in
the Chauncery. And then he which is so complained upon, is there bound to
appeer before the Mayor and common counsel, and to abide their order according
to the ordinances and customs of Orphans

Also the like order is when any person being not free and not within the
City do withholde any Orphans goods there is no other process to be had
against him but by a Bill before the Lord Chaunceler or Lord Keeper as is
before said.

The Bil to be made to the L. Keeper must be in the name of the Mayor.
Also all and every Bil to be preferred to the Lord Chaunceler or Keeper, must
be made in the name of the Mayor and common council as Gardyans to the Orphans
within the said City.

Every forrener having any goods in his custody / growing to any Orphan / if he
come within the libertyes of the City may be committed to ward until he do
pay or take order for the same.
Also if any person not being free of the City, nor inhabiting within the
same, have any goods in his hands of any free man dying Testate or intestate
which has any Orphans: and detaineth and keeps the same out of the
liberties, and does dispose the same at his will and pleasure, whether he be
the Executor, Administrator or what soever else. If he chance to come within
the liberty, the Mayor and common council by their privilege, authority and
commandment, may commit and send him to ward or prison, there to remain
prisoner until such time as he shall deliver all ye same goods as be or were in
his hands at the time of ye death of ye owner decessed, or at ye discretion of
the Mayor and xxiiij. shall put in sufficient sureties to do the same by or at
a certain day therefore then to be appointed. And the Executor or Administrator
shall before his delivery, deliver and put in a true and just Inuentory, or
shall put in suretyes so to do by a day. And then the Inuentory being put in
and exhibited, he shall swear that the Inuentory is just and true, and also
put in sufficient suretyes or be bounden by a day so to do, for the true
answering of the Orphans parts and portions. But if any such person, Executor
or Administrator, do not come wtin the City or libertyes of the same, then a
Bill is to be preferred to the Lord Chaunceler declaring the substance of the
matter (as is aforesaid) Upon whieh bil so exhibited, the Lord Chaunceler or
Lord Keeper takes order that the party complained of, shall by a day appeer
before the Mayor and common council, and to satisfy and do all, and all manner
of things to the behoof and use of the Orphans according to the good orders,
vsages and customs of the City.

Also if the Executor or Administrator of a free man be a forener and not
dwelling within the City refuses to bring in any Inuentory and comes not
within the Libertyes of this City, and that no Bil at all is exhibited against
him. The administrator of a free man being a foryner / may be sewed by the
Orphan for his part at the common law.
The Orphan at his full age may bring his action De rationabili part bonorum at
the common law against the Executor or administrator, and declare upon the
custom of the City. And thereupon a Cerciorari is directed to the Mayor and
common council to certify the custom in that behalf, which certificat is to
be made under their common Seal. And the same is always allowed and is the
best remedy in such cases.

Also what soever is before said of or concerning any man withholding any
goods, What so ever is spoken of a man being an Executor or administrator is
also meant of the woman.
or being an Executor or Administrator, the same is also meant and to be
observed of the wife, which is the Executrix, or do administer her husbands
goods, or do other wise keep and withholde any goods growing to any Orphan.

Also when any Recognisances be taken, they which have the use of the money,
that is to say, the Recognitors, A Recognisa^ce knowledged / the Recognitors
are to pay the fees / but at the discharge he who receives is to pay.
are to pay the Officers feees out of their own money and Purses, but when a
Recognisance is discharged, and satisfaction knowledged, the Orphans are to pay
and must satisfy to the officers the fees appointed, according to the sums
and rates therefore appointed. And if the said fees be denied, ye officers may
bring their action of det as the Atturneys at the Common law do and may do
for their fees, declaring that time out of mind such fees have been used to be
paid, and now the same denied to their damage.

Also if the Recognitor or Executor do not bring in a perfect Inuentory, at or
by the day to them appointed, If the Inuentory be not brought in by a day / a
scire facies is to be awarded in the name of the Chamberlain.
then a Scire facies is to be awarded against him or them in the Chamberlains
name, or else if you list he may be arrested upon the Recognisance.

And it is also further provided, that if the Son of a free man being of
lawful age, do mary with (...) consent of his Father, or if a foreyner do
mary with a free (...), by and with the consent of her Father and at the time
of the Espousals or marriage or at any time after do confess before witnesses,
A free m^ns Child marying with the consent of his parent and confessing at any
time a satisfaction of his portion is for ever excluded to demand the same.
or by their hand writing, that they are full satisfied and paid of their part
and portion, or if they do at any time acquit, releace and discharge the said
Father, having also other Children being yung and within age, he and every
such child so confessing, acquitting or discharging, shall for ever after be
unable to demand or have any further part or portion, but shall be deemed and
reputed to be fully paid and satisfied.

The form and manner of the Recognisances.
MEmorandum quod viij. die mensis Iulij anno Regni dominae Reginae Elizabethae
dei gratia Angliae, Fra^ciae et Hiberniae Reginae, fidei defensoris. etc.
octauo. Galfridus Thomas et Anthonius Thomas Draperij et Ciues Ciuitatis Exon
venerunt in curiam dictae Dominae Reginae in camera Guyhaldae Ciuitatis Exon,
coram Iohanne Wolcot Maiore et xxiiij. de Communi consilio eiusdem Ciuitatis et
recognouerunt se et eorum quemlibet per se pro toto et insolidum debere Iohanni
Vowel alias Hoker generoso Ciuitatis praedictae Camerario centum libras bonae
et legalis monetae Angliae, Soluendas eidem Camerario aut successoribus suis
Camera rijs ante dictae Ciuitatis, per viam Recognitionis. Et nisi fecerint et
eorum quilibet per se fecerit, concedunt et eorum quilibet, per se concedit
quod summa praedicta de terris, tenementis, bonis et cattallis suis et
cuiuslibet eorum leuetur performam seu viam Recog.

The Condition.
THE condition of this Recognisance is such, that if they abooue bounden
Geffrey Thomas and Anthony Thomas or any one of them or any other person or
persons for them or for any of them, do pay, deliver or cause to be paid and
delivered into the Court aforesaid, unto ye abooue named Chamberlain or his
successors for the time being, the full sum of xxxvij. l.ij.s.ij. d. lawful
money of England, to the use of Edmund, Jasper, Elizabeth and Alis Bridgeman,
the children and Orphans of Edward Bridgeman late Citizen and Draper of the
City of Excester decessed, that is to wit to every of them ix. l.ij.s.vj. d.
at such time and times as they or any of them shall come and be of lawful age
according to the custom of the City of Excester, or if the foresaid Elizabeth
and Alis do happen to marry before such age: for a portion dew unto them out
of the goods and Cattels of the foresaid Edward Bridgeman. And if any of the
said Orphans do dye in the mean time, that then if they pay and deliver to
the said Chamberlain the part and portion of every of them so decessing to be
disposed according to the custom of the said City. And do also pay and
deliver unto the said Chamberlain and to his successors for the time being,
into the foresaid Court all and every such sum and sums of money as by any
manner of m^nes shall be received, recovered, due and appointed to the use of the
said Orphans. And also if the said Recognitors or any of them, their Executors
or Assigns do find or cause to be found to the said Orphans and every of
them, meat, drinck, cloth, and all other necessaries during the time of their
Orphanages, and every of them at the proper costs and charges of the said
Recognitors. And do not bind them nor any of them an Apprentice nor mary
them, nor eloygn them without the said City, without the license of the Mayor
and common council for the time being given in the Court. And also if any of
the said Recognitors happen to dye or to fall in decay or to eloygn his goods
out of the said City, or to dwell out of the same, or of the libertyes thereof,
that then if the other the^ living do bring in one other able and sufficient
person to be bound in the like sum, within one month after such thing or
matter so happened. And also if the said Orphans and every of them be hereafter
justly and truly satisfied and contented of all their part and parts, and
portions of all such dets of the aforesaid Edward Bridgema^s as shall be
recovered and be due unto them, and also if the said Recognitors or any one of
them do yearly appeer at the Orphans Court, to be holden yearly at the
Guildhall of this City, the Monday next after midlent Sunday. That then this
Recognisance to be void, or else to stand and to remain in his full strength.

The order of a Recognisance to be taken when the Executor or Aministrator has
a day appointed to bring in the Inuentory.
MEmorandum quod ad curiam Orphanorum tentam cora^ Nicholao Martin Maiore et
xxiiij. de co^muni consilio, xvij. die Aprilis Anno Regni dominae Reginae
Elizabethae xvij. Gilbertus Staplehil de ciuitate Exon Mercator, executor
testamenti seu vltimae voluntatis Walteri Staplehil de dicta Ciuitate ciuis
nuper defuncti venit in propria sua personae et Recognouit se debere Iohanni
Vowel alias Hoker genesis Camerario dictae Ciuitatis ducentas libras.

The Condition.
THe condition is, that if the abooue bounden Gilbert Staplehil, do, at, or on
this side the last day of May next ensuing the date heerof, personally appeer
before the foresaid Mayor and common council, and then and there bring in and
deliver a true and perfet Inuentory of all the goods, Cattels, rights, credits,
and what so ever else which were the foresaid Walter Staplehils at the time of
his death, as well within the City or liberties of the same as without. And do
not in the mean time eloin nor convey any part or parcel of the said goods
out of the liberties of the City, that then. etc.

The order of a Recognisance to be taken for the bringing in of Sureties.
MEmorandum quod ad curiam tentam xij. Septembris anno Regni dominae Reginae
Elizabethae xiiij. coram Thomae Bruerton Maiore et xxiiij. de communi consilio
dictae Ciuitatis. Henricus James ciuis de Ciuitate Exon comparuit et Iuratus
exhibuit hic in curia inuentorium omniu^ et singulorum bonorum, cattalloru^,
creditoru^, quae fuerunt Arnoldi Reynoldes de eadem Ciuitate ciuis ac
cordenarij defuncti et adtunc et ibidem Recognouit se debere Ioh. Vowell alias
Hoker genesis dictae Ciuitatis Camerario trecentas libras legalis monetae. etc.

The Condition.
THe Condition is, that if the abooue bounden Henry James do personally appeer
before the foresaid Mayor and common council, at the Court to be holde^ before
them at the Guildhall of the said City, at and upon the vj. day of October
next ensuing the date heerof, and do bring in four good and sufficient
Sureties, and such as the Court shall allow of, for the true answering of such
goods and Cattels of the foresaid late Arnolde Renolds, which are coming,
growing, or to be due to Richard and William the sons and Orphans of the said
Arnolde decessed, and do not in the mean time co^uey nor eloyn the goods of
the said Arnolde, nor any part thereof out of the lyberties of the City, that
then. etc.

The order and form of a writ of Scire facias against any Recognitor for the
breach of his Recognisance. PER MAIOREM.
RIchardo Bartlet seruienti ad arma salute^. Cum Willielmus Grigge de Ciuitate
Exon praedicta, Baker et ciuis, venit in curia^ dominae nunc Reginae in camera
Guihaldae ciuitatis Exon xxi. die Ianu. anno Regni dominae Elizabethae xvi.
cora^ Willielmo Trivet tunc Maiore et xxiiij. de co^muni consilio dictae
Ciuitatis et recognouit se debere Iohanni Vowel alias Hoker generoso ac eiusde^
Ciuitatis tunc Camerario xl. l. soluendas eidem camerario aut successoribus
suis Camerarijs ante dictae Ciuitatis pro tempore existenti per viam
recognitionis. Et nisi fecerit concessit quod summa praedicta de terris,
teneme^tis, bonis et cattallis suis leuetur per formam et viam recognitionis
prout per eandem illius Recognitione^ patet et before liquet: praedictus tamen
Willielmus dictas xl. l. seu aliquam inde percellam praefato nunc camerario non
soluit, licet sepius fuerit requisitus, sicut ex ipsius camerarij informatione
accepimus. Ideo tibi praecipimus quod per probos et legales homines dictae
ciuitatis Scire facias praefato Willielmo quod sit hic in curia dominae,
Reginae nunc in camera Guihaldae Ciuitatis praedictae coram nobis prefatis
Maiore et xxiiij. de co^muni consilio xij. me^sis Februarij iam insta^tis
proxime futuri tenenda ad oste^dendu^ et demonstrandum si quid pro se habeat
quare praedictus camerarius executionem praedictaru^ xl. l. versus eum habere
non debet si sibi viderit expedire. Et habeas tunc ibidem nomina illorum per
quos. etc. Et hoc praeceptum et cetera. Datum in Camera Guihaldae Ciuitatis
praedictae secundo die Februarij Anno dictae dominae Reginae. xvij.

Then if the said party or Recognitor do not appeer upon this summons, or if
he do appear, he do not satisfy the Court: then a writ of Fieri facias in
the like form is to be granted and sent out against the said Recognitor.

The entry to be made when any Orphan receives his part and portion.
AT the Court holden before Nicholas Martin Mayor and the xxiiij. of the
common council of the City of Excester, the xx. of April in the xvij. year
of the reign of our souerain Lady, Queen Elizabeth, John Maunder the Son of
Henrye Maunder late Citizen of the City of Exon, came and knowledged him to be
fully satisfied and contented, of all his part and portion or of xl. l, ( if
it be a sum certain) dew to him by the custom of the City of his fathers
goods, and therefore clearly does discharge this Court and the Recognitors.

But if it be a maiden Orphan and she married: then the entry must be made in
the name of her husband and of her self, and both of them must be present in
the Court and confess satisfaction, that is to say. Walter Edmu^ds of the
City of Excester Tailor, and Anne his wife, the daughter and one of the
Orphans of Thomas Lambert late of the City of Excester Citizen and Apothecary
decessed, came and knowledged them selves to be satisfied of her portion,
being vj. l.xiij.s.iiij. d. etc.

The duties which by every Officer are to be done and excuted.
THe Chamberlain has the general charge and oversight as well of any thing
appertaining to any Orphane as also of every other Officer, and of his Books
and accounts concerning any Orphane, and in his name all Recognisances for
Orphans are to be taken.

The common Sergeant is to cast the rates, divide the portions, examine the
Legacyes, to see the will to be entered and the Recognisance orderly to be taken,
and all other things concerning the Court, he must enter the Recognisances,
make out all process and precepts of Scire facias or Fieri facias and what so
ever appertains to the Court of Orphans.

The common Crier is to present the death of every free man of the City having
yung Orphans unto the Mayor and Court. He is to summon all manner of persons in
all things touching the Office of Orphans, he is to execute all writs of Scire
facias or Fieri facias and all other processes for the same.

The form and order of a Supplication to be exhibited to the Lord Chaunceler
or Lord keeper of the great Seal.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR Nicholas Bacon, Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England.
IN their most humble manner showing unto your good Lordshippe, your daily
Orators the Mayor and xxiiij. of the common counsel of the City of Excester.
That where at this present and time out of mind, your said Orators have been
governors and defendors of Orphans, being the fatherless children of
Citizens decessing within the City, which said Children have been virtuously
brought up and instructed by the order appointed of your said Orators, and
their goods, Cattels, lands and tenements, safely preserved and kept by their
discretion and care, to the use and behoof of the said Orphans, until their full
ages of xxj. years according to the custom of the said City, which said
laudable custom has always been obediently observed and kept, to the great
commodity and safety of the said Orphans, their goods and portions.

Not withstanding now of late (Right honorable good Lord) so it is that one
R.L. a Citizen of the said City lately decessed leaving certain Orphans,
remaining at the time of his death in the Country out of the liberties of the
said City, and making one E.Y. a foreign from the liberties of the said City
his Executor, which E.Y. having the custody and possession as well of the Orphans
and Children of the said R.L. as also of their said Fathers goods. Albeit he
has been lawfully and duly warned to appeer before your said Orators, and to
bring in as well the said Orphans as also the Testament and true Inuentory of
their said fathers goods that your said Orators might according to the ancient
custom of the said City take sufficient suertie for the sure payment of the
said Orphans parts at their lawful ages, and also for their virtuous and
honest education and bringing up in learning and knowledge.

Nevertheless he refuses to do the same, whereby the said poor Orphans and
fatherless Children, as well for their own parts shall be destituted of
knowledge and good education, as also shall be in danger utterly to lose and to
be defrauded of their parts and Legacyes, and also the good and lawdable
custom ever more observed and obeyed within the same City, shall be broken
and violated to the no small damage and hurt of all poor Orphans and
Fatherless children.

In tender consideration whereof, may it please your Lordship to cause a Sub
pena to be awarded out of this honorable court of Chauncery against the said
E.Y, commanding him thereby to appeer in the said Court before your Honor at a
certain day by your good Lordship to be appointed, and him to inioyne to abide
such order and direction as your said Orators according to the custom of the
said City shall appoint, and determine in the premises, and your said Orators
according to their bounden duetyes shall daily pray to the Almighty GOD long
to preserve your Lordship in honor and prosperitye.

The Rates and fees which are due and to be paid to the Officers upon the
charge, discharge or new taking of any Recognisance.
The charge and fees for every Orphanage of one hundredth pounds and upwards.
To the Chamberlain, iij.s.iiij. d.xvj.s.iiij. d To the common Sergeant,
v.s.xvj.s.iiij. d To the common Crier, v.s.xvj.s.iiij. d To the Master town
Clark, ij.s.xvj.s.iiij. d To the Clark xij. d.xvj.s.iiij. d
The charge of every Orphanage of xx. l. and upwards under an hundredth pounds
To the Chamberlain, xx. d.ix.s.viij. d. To the common Sergeant, ij.s.vj.
d.ix.s.viij. d. To the common Crier, ij.s.vj. d.ix.s.viij. d. To the Master
Town Clark, ij.s.ix.s.viij. d. To the Clark, xij. d.ix.s.viij. d.
The charge of every Orphanage under xx. pound.
To the Chamberlain of every pound, ob. To the common Sergeant of every pound,
ob. To the common Crier of every pound, ob. To the Master Town clark, ij.s. To
the Clark. xij. d.
All which several sums are to be paid by the Recognitors of their own
money and Pursses without any allowaunce of the Orphanage or Orphans portion.

The dicharge of every Orphanage of one hundredth pounds and upwards.
To the Chamberlain, iij.s.iiij. d xv.s.iiij. d. To the common Sergeant, v
s.xv.s.iiij. d. To the common Crier, iiij.s.xv.s.iiij. d. To the Master town
Clark, ij.s.xv.s.iiij. d. To the Clark. xij. d.xv.s.iiij. d.
For the discharge of every Orphanage of xx. l. and upwards under a C. pounds.
To the Chamberlain, xx. d.vj.s.viij. d. To the common Sergeant,
ij.s.vj.s.viij. d. To the Master town Clark, ij.s.vj.s.viij. d. To the Clark,
xij. d.vj.s.viij. d.
For the discharge of every Orphanage under xx. pound.
To the Chamberlain for every pound, ob. To the common Sergeant ob.quam. To the
common Crier, ob.quam. To the Master town Clark, ij.s. To the Clark, xij. d.
All which several sums are at the discharge and upon knowledging of
satisfaction to be paid by the Orphans.

For taking of new Suretyes.
When any new Surety is to be taken and a new Recognisance to be knowledged,
the Clark is to have of the said Surety. ij. d.
The fees to be (...) upon (...) or pro^es.
For every Scire facias sewed out by the Orphane upon the forf^cture of any
Recognisance or otherwise the Clark is (...) of the Orphans. xij. d. Also for
every (...) sum, xij. d. And (...) of Scire facia^ (...). xij. d. The like
(...) upon every Fieri facias. xij. d.
The Rates limited and appointed for funerals
A man worth declare his (...) shall be allowed for his (...) i.C. l. A man worth
(...), l. l. A man worth (...) ^ A man worth (...), ^ A man worth (...) ^. l. A
man worth i.C. l. and under ij.C. l. v. l. A man worth l. l. and under i.C. l.
l.s. A man worth xx. l. and under ^. l. xxx.s. A man worth x. l. and under ix.
l, xx.s.
But for as much as the great expenses in funerals are now by alteration of
Religion ab^t^d, there is to be allowed so much for funerals as by the Mayor
and common council (...) reasonably (...) good.

FINIS.

