A TESTIMONY OF THE TRVE Church of God CONFJRMED AS WELL BY THE DOCTRINE AS
LIVES OF SUNDRY HOLY MEN, BOTH PATRIARCHS, AND PROPHETS, AND ALSO BY THE
APOSTLES AND THEIR TRVE SVCCESSOVRS.

WHEREIN IS MANIFESTLY SHOWED HOW THAT GOD has in all ages raised up some, yea
even in most horrible darkness, which have been faithful Stewards, and true
dispencers of his will, with a Catalogue of their names.

TRANSLATED OVT OF French by William Phiston.

AT LONDON Printed by H.M. for Thomas Charde at the sign of the Helmet in
Paul's Church yard.

TO THE WORTHY, AND RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL M. A. Nowell, Deane of Paul's. William
Phiston wishes the enjoying of all true felicity
IF that Philosophy, which is but an obscure and imperfect knowledge of things
natural and moral, has been so highly esteemed amongst the Paganes, not
only with those nations which were holden for civil and best governed, but
also with those of the barbarous sort, like as witnesses Diogenes Laertius
writing of the lives and sentences of Philosophers: that the Persians had their
Magi, the Babylonians and Assyrians their Chaldaei, the Indians their
Gymnosophistae, the Gauls their Druidae, which were also called (...), etc.
whom these nations honored and held for their knowledge in great price, why
should not we much rather, who live not only under a very temperate Climate,
and are a nation, not only accounted amongst those which are called civil,
but whereas Philosophy (I mean not that of things natural or moral, such
as was used and esteemed among the heathen) but whereas the Christian and very
true Philosophy is professed all abroad, and of some (I doubt not) embraced,
reverently esteem the memory of such as be or have been wise philosophers
and profounde expositours and instructers of the true divine, and right
spiritual and heavenly knowledge? which doctrine we ought withal earnest
diligence to seek, and with most joyful hearts to embrace, chiefly for the
excellency there of, which is exceeding all humane science as far as the
heaven is distant from the earth: and also in respect of our own benefit,
because it makes us partakers of the very divine and spiritual knowledge of
Gods omnipotent goodness, showing us the way to eternal felicity, for which
doctrine and spiritual philosophy, and our profit received thereby, although
we ought to attribute the whole and chiefest glory and thanks unto God alone,
the only author thereof, yet it will be profitable to register imperpetuall
memory the names of some godly setters forth of the said truth, whose
memorial may serve to incite others to follow the like zeal and godly
virtues, not that they should be esteemed Gods, and to have won heaven with their
merits, after the judgment of heathen infidels, nor yet to be prayed unto,
for as (Calvin truly reports) God alone will have the seignieure, and will
be exalted in his people, as indeed of right he is most worthy, in as much as
he is the Lord of all, and our only benefactor and patron. In consideration
whereof I have demed it not amiss (right worthy and worshipful) to be cause
of publishing this present discourse, partly to the end that such as have not
either money at will to buy it, or not sufficient laysure to read over M. Fox
his book of Martyrs, and would willingly seek for the antiquity of the same
faith and religion that true Christians now hold and embrace, may have for a
small price wherein to find the same somewhat effectually, and partly for that
men may see how that in other realms, whereas great persecution and tyrannies
have been begone and cruelly executed, and especially in the countries of
Allemaigne and France, yet unto this day many do resist against (as their
forefathers have some in all ages done) and withstand the rage of Antichrist
and his hirelings, and that notwithstanding the vprors caused in France of late
years with the great effusion of blood moved by Satan against the flock of
Christ, besides the innumerable multitude of other valiant souldiars and
professors of Christ's truth, some have (maugre the heard of Gods enemies)
published the worthy gestes of Gods true servants through al ages, to the
encouraging of their godly successors, and to the opprobrie and condemnation
of the wicked: as may appear by John Crespin and others me^troned in this
present discourse. Which discourse I have thought good to offer unto your
worship, as to a true patron of godliness and virtue, beseching you to accept
herein of my simple good will.

Tui obseruantiss. W. Ph.

SIMON DE VOYON TO ALL THOSE THAT DESIRE TO BE OF THE SAME CHVRCH AND, TRVE
RELIGION OF GOD THE which has been from the beginning of the world, and shall
be for evermore, health and peace through our Lord Jesus Christ.
ALbeit that many good and learned men have made mention in their books of the
doctors of the Church of God, yet I have been of this opinion, yt it will not be
a thing unprofitable at this present to publish vp^o the like matter this
present discourse, being collected out of diverse authors, and compiled in
one: after the manner and fashion that you see: deeming that it will be
profitable to many who have not leisure at will to read much, to see hereby and
understand of a continual order of good doctors wh^o God has raised up from
the beginning of the world until this present time, and how God has
everlastingly collected for himself a perpetual Church, through the word of
the gospel, from this mass of sin, that is to say, of men: amongst wh^o
the gospel which we hear at this present, has at all times shinned in the
midst of most thick darkness.

And hereby we may see and understand, that there never has been any manner of
religon, neither can be, which has continued so long, and has had such
efficacy and virtue, so continual an order, such and so wonderful a doctrine
contained in the holy scriptures, as has the Church of God had, the which,
like as shall be showed in the discourse following, God himself has minded
ever since the beginning of the world to teach and declare by the voice of his
own son, after yt he has sent his doctrine before by the ministry of the holy
fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Governors, Priests, and Apostles: and lastly
has conserved the same by a singular grace and goodness until this present
time, through faithful Bishops and good pastors, and doctors of the Church
of God being sent from time to time, and still placed in the roumes of others
their predecessors, the which same shall be conserved also, and defended by a
singular grace and goodness of God, even unto the glorious coming of his son
our lord Jesus Christ.

And thus, seeing that God himself has established blished and ordained the
ministry of his word, which we at this present do follow, we need not to dout
but that he does and will always maintain the same, as may easily be
understood by the effects of all times. For although that the devil in his
enchantmentes has at all times found out a rage more then horrible against the
Church and faithful doctors: like as here is manifested by Abel, who was
slain by Caine, being moved thereto by a deuilish envy: by the persecution
and oppression of the people of Israel, by the high priests, who were slain
by Saul, by Isay and Jeremy, who were put to death: by the captivity of the
people, when they were carried away into Babylon: likewise by John Baptist, by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Apostles who have been cruelly slain, and
by so many millions of Martyrs: yet notwithstanding ye Church has continued
through out all ages, and there have been always doctors divinely raised up
in the places of others, for to set up again and to conserve the light of the
doctrine, to make it shine in the midst of those peoples and Realms that God
would have it. It has then been always conserved and defended: for God is
the protector and gardein thereof who makes it to withstand all such
assaults. And for this cause Satan in his illusions of these times has
suggested and put in practyce the most cruel torments that could be
devised: but all in vain. There have been kindled fires great and small.
There have been set up also for the true Christians Scaffoldes etc. some have
been cast into the bottomes of ponds and rivers: and to conclude, Satan has
by sword and force used all sorts of most cruel violences, for to cause that
ye holy service of God might be altogether extinct and buried, but he never
could, neither ever shall be able to do it. We must then consider and
understand, that true religion has of GOD an efficacy and virtue more great
and wonderful then any thing that can be, or ever has been, seeing that so
mighty an enemy as satan, the prince of the children of this world, has so
often and strongly besieged it, and yet could never hinder, but that always
thorough the goodness of God it should be set up.

Now to speak of other religions which have been, and be, what continuance
have they had? what steadfastness and assurance of the truth have been found
in them? what number amongst so many as were professors of the same have ever
been so steedfast in their religions, that they would ever suffer most cruel
tortures therefore, like as have done an infinite multitude for the assurance
and steedfastnesse that they had in the truth, which no man is able to number,
by whom God would be glorified? So many and such manner of religions as have been have they had ever such order, such a doctrine, which has plainly showed
unto them the truth of the being, of the first original of things that have
been since the beginning of the world, and of things that have come to pass,
and that be daily accomplished, as God has made his to understand from time
to time, first by visions and oracles, and since even until this present time
by his Prophets and Apostles? Such and so many religions which have been,
how could it ever be found in them, as may be found in the true Church by
the holy scriptures how that the supernatural, he who is everlastingly, that
is the Lord Iehova, who of himself has his being, and not of any others, and
of him all things their beinges, has by his eternal word and spirit
created all things, made and fashioned them, and by him, not by our own force
and virtue, we have such dignity, and excellency above all creatures of the
earth, that we were made according to his own image, which excellency and our
first perfection was lost by our ingratitude in our first parents: and that
since that time we be and shall be restored thereto again in a more large
perfection by the only means of his only son, by which he has made us:
and that for the manifestation of his inestimable goodness and glory, by the
which he teaches us in his holy scriptures, and assures us by his spirit,
that we shall be everlastingly taken up to his glory, forasmuch as he is able
to do so, and will do it. So many and such sundry sorts of religion as have
been, had they ever yet since the beginning, of the world so continual an
order of good and faithful doctors, who being inspired with the spirit of god,
have constantly taught and maintained against all the rage of the world the
truth of his holy doctrine, as has the right religion of the protestants,
which is the very Christianity, done? Does not GOD thereby and by sundry
other means sufficiently declare the virtue and efficacy of the ministry of
his holy word, and true religion, which he from time to time has approved,
for as much as therein he has placed and set the true and pure infallible
verity, for to instruct and guide man even unto him who is the author and
creator of all things.

Now seeing that we have such a founder of our religion, who gives us also
grace to follow the same: let Satan invent as many means as he will for to
overthrow and extinguish it: Let him breath as many illusions and inchantmentes
into the minds of men as he can, for to persuade them, that this true religion
which we hold began but of late, and yt it shall soon decay again etc. It is
notwithstanding most evident that it has been ever since the beginning of the
world, and that we have testimony of him who has established the same, and
may surely repose our confidence in him, that like as he has ordained, that
whilst the sun and Moon shall give light to the earth, he will never fail
to help and asiste his: and that finally we shall be with our head and Lord
Jesus Christ. And hereof we do assure our selves, and do feel of the same in
our selves a certainty proceeding of the spirit of God, that so it shall come
to pass at the time which God has ordained: neither is this religion that we
hold false or wicked (as some yet say) inasmuch as it is grounded upon yt pure
word of God, according to the which we labor and are willing to serve God,
without mingling therewith any thing imagined by our own brain (like as we be
slaundered to do) for to make a religion of our own devising. And therefore
let such understand that this our religion had not the first beginning at
Luther or John Hus, and that it was never heard of before, as some falsely
say, and that it shall not therefore long abide. For notwithstanding that
thorough the great ungodliness and evil that has been and yet is amongst
some men of the Church, and thorough the outrage of carnal affections, with
carelessness and not regarding the glory of God or his truth, yea through the
very contempt and falling away from God and all truth, the doctrine which he
had published and set forth before by his Prophets and Apostles, and by his
son he has suffered and been willing that this true religion should be by
his most just judgment obscured and hidden from men so as they might not
discern it according to any outward appearaunce, neither that it could be
redressed by the good doctors: yea the truth was so darkened, that to the
view and outward judgment of the worldly there could be seen no tracke or
step of God in the Church, and that according to world men's fantasy, it
seemed that God had forsaken his Church, and given it utterly to the spoil,
seeing that all was turned to ydolatrie and superstition, which God in his word
shows, yt he misliketh and most villy abhors, yet even the^ he had
reserved some in his Church, that had never bowed the knee before the idol
Ball, before this Antichrist, for to consent unto, or believe his doctrine,
being directly against the pure word of God, as came to pass in the time of
Elias when the confusion and ungodliness of the people was such, that there
was no semblance of the Church seen, in-in so much that this holy Prophet
thought that all had been utterly given over unto the worshipping of images
and to idolatry: but he was deceived: for God has reserved seven thousands,
which never had bowed the knee unto Baal. And in like manner, if after the time
of the primitive Church the like also proved, that for the wickedness and
unthankfulness of the people GOD suffered the like confusion and idolatry to
reign: yet we must understand, that forasmuch as God is one and the self
same God, as well now as he was in the time of the Apostles, that he has
reserved unto himself through all ages seven thousand (yea an infinite
number) which never bowed their knees before this stately ydoll, before this
man of sin this son of perdition, who sits in the temple of God. The
faithful, I say, have not sought for salvation in his doctrine: but rather
forsaking and renouncing that, have been assured in their heart by the spirit
of God, to obtain redemption by the alone mean and merits of Jesus Christ
our only savior.

They therefore be of a wrong opinion, which judge and esteem the Church of
God according to their fantasy, not to have continued always. If the
doctors, who were very godly and righteous, have not well discerned the
ministry and true religion of his Church: and moreover, if that this
excellent Prophet, who was filled with the spirit of God so abundantly, was so
much deceived when he would according to human judgment reckon the people
of GOD: what may we think shall happen unto us, whose judgment (for the most
part) is altogether imperfect. They are also deceived and do foolishly and
presumptuously which judge the number of the elect acording to the capacity
of their senses: for God has a mean, to him nothing difficult, but to us
unknown, by the which he may conserve his elect marueilously, then when all
seems turned vpside down and spoiled. Well may the elect then be persecuted,
but never confounded, nor the Church extinct, insomuch as it has God for the
founder and defendour, and the elect have God the creator of heaven and earth
for their gardein and protector: like as he has never failed to help his at
all seasons with the assistance of his holy spirit making even seen and
known to the world his great love and care toward them throughout all ages,
as has been evidently seen. Let us not doubt therefore of the truth of him
who has promised to abide with us until the end of the world, of which his
promise we see and feel daily effects albeit yt we are unworthy thereof.
Thus much have I thought good to speak concerning the continuance of the true
Church, whose founder is Christ. Now will I show briefly the order of the
discourse following, which is this: That all the government of the Church
which has been from the beginning of the world until this present, is
comprised in five orders: the first this present, is comprised in five orders:
the first of which contains the first fathers, to wit, from Adam, who was
instructed by the son of God etc. The second of the Patriarchs, and begins
at Abraham. The third of the Prophets, and begins at Samuel. The fourth the
high priests and governors, and begins at Iosue otherwise called Jesus,
and at the conductour Zorobabell. The fifth and last begins at John Baptist
and our Lord Jesus Christ, and at his Apostles and their disciples, Bishops
and Pastors that succeeded after them, and even unto the Bishops whom God has
raised up also in these last times, for the mainteinance of his Church, and for
to correct the errors and abominable traditions of men which do infect the
true and pure doctrine of God, the which he has conferued and will conserve for
ever, for the true instruction of his Church. For the which also O Lord I
beseech thee, that thou will now daily more and more send good and faithful
doctors, true setters forth of thy word thorough out all the real mes and
provinces, to the ruin and destruction of the kingdom of this man of sin,
Antichrist: and to the establishing of the kingdom of thy son Jesus Christ
our only savior and Lord Amen.

A TESTIMONY OF the true Church of God: Confirmed as well by the doctrine as
lives of sundry holy men, both Patriarchs and Prophets, and also by the
Apostles and their true successors.
THE ARGUMENT.
Here is first declared, how that man was created in all perfection of
beauty, righteousness, and purity, and that he has despised the
commandment of God, and his truth, through the persuasion of satan, to
whom he with all his posterity became servant and slave, and was spoiled both
of his understanding and al beatitude: and therefore he had need to be
instructed, to the end he might discern, and be fully assured of the mean of
his deliverance and perfect restoration, the which the eternal son of God
has manifested unto him, and has vpholden perpetually his Church.

GOD, after that he had created Heaven and Earth, and all things comprehended
in them, created last of all man, according to his own semblance and
likeness, that is to say, wholly good, pure, full of perfection, without sin,
in all equity of heart, of justice and understanding: and placed him with Eua
his wife in earthly Paradise, for to live there in a blessed estate. Then the
occasion which might make them abide in this estate, was, that they should in
humbleness submit them selves daily before the majesty of God, magnifying him
with giving of thanks, and that in them selves they should not seek their
own proper glory: but considering that all things proceeded from above, they
should therefore have their affections fixed on high, for to glorify God
alone, unto whom al praise and glory is due.

But immediately after, when they had cast the commandment of God behind
their backs, and despised it, in eating (through the persuasion of the
Serpent) of the fruit that was forbidden them, they lost then the whole
dignity and excellency of their first creation, and were quite spoiled of ye
great glory, wherewith they were before endowed, and were made servants and
bondslaues to him, who by subtle sleights and wiles had so entangled them, that
he caused them to give credit unto him, and to withdraw them clean out of
the way of al felicity and truth, and to fill them with all errors and
wickedness, that he might make them in all things and by all things like
unto him self, who in like sort through his ingratitude had fallen from all
beatitude and goodness which GOD had first placed in him.

And thus God in the beginning has made our first parents in all integrity of
heart, in truth, and righteousness, good, pure, and perfect. And the same
devil speaking by the mouth of the serpent, was in the beginning pure and
good. For as Moses wrote (being inspired with the spirit of God) in the first
chapter of Genesis, at the end of the chapter. GOD saw all that he had made,
and behold, it was exceeding good. And hereby we may see and know, how that
this craftiness and wickedness in the serpent was not so created and made in
him: and that the devil of his maliciousness and subtlety, undertook
through deceits, full of lies, to beguile and to allure unto him. Adam and Eua,
as in the end he did in deed, through the just judgment of God. And that
because they cleaued not fast to the commandment of God, but rather were
willing to stick unto the persuasion and counsel of satan, who, for because
he might put the same in effect, had power to make the serpent speak, one of
the most craftiest beasts in the fields: not that he was such by his own
nature, but made such through the instigation of satan: who not only had for
that present time permission at the hands of God, so to frame his words in the
mouth of this beast, but afterward unto many other brute beasts, as the
profane histories do bear witness of such as have spoken.

Whereupon we have to consider, that the devil seeks from time to time, by all means that he possibly can, for to beguile men, and to make them give
credit unto lies, wherein he takes great pleasure, dimming all the eyes of
their understanding by certain privy and secret means, that he may keep
them still under his subjection and thraldom. Behold here from whence do come
so many false persuasions, so many untrue and wicked thoughts, full of
leasings, whereunto men do more lean, then to the truth of God. Mark here the
chiefest fountain of all disorders and woes, which ever happened unto the
world: mark the way which our forefathers took, by which they fell from that
high degree of felicity, of peace, of rest, and of joy: whereunto they were
first appointed by God, and by what means they with all their posterity are
falen, and are tumbled headlongs into this great disorder and confusion, in
which we until this day see our selves remain, in as much as we follow after
them the same counsel that they did.

Therefore, for as much as we know the fountain or first original of the
malady, why should we not labor to cure the same by contrary remedies?
seeing that wickedness has begun to take root, we must follow the counsel
and will of God, and not regard the persuasions of satan, but let us forsake
him with all his counsels and imaginations, and let us go with prayers,
fastings, and humble intreatings, to require at the hands of God, for his
counsel, and that he would instruct us according to his will, and that we may
follow the same. And we may thus assure our selves, that we shall feel a
wonderful understanding of the truth of God, and of his good will, which he
has declared in the doctrine of his holy Prophets and Apostles, of whom
satan would that we should have no knowledge, but rather that their memory
should be wholly extinguished, for as much as he sees that in them is declared
the way of equity, the mediator by whom we have deliverance out of the gulf
of all horror and evil made manifest. The devil now seeing him self to be
deprived of this excellent glory of God, which shined very clearly in him at
the beginning of his creation: he in likewise has assayed from our first
parents, to deprive us eternally of this excellent glory and felicity:
whereunto he sees no means offered him by God, how he may be any more
restored.

But God, who had created mankind, to the end he might be glorified thereby,
was willing to redeem him again, although he was so alienated from him, he
would not so confound, destroy, spoil, and throw him down to hell, nor give
him so over wholly to the devil, for to let him deal with him as him lusted:
but through his most great goodness, mercy, and grace, he has sustained and
vpholden Adam and Eua, showing unto them, that he who is the enemy unto all
truth, justice, and true felicity, they shall have once in their powers to
bruise his head, albeit that in the mean time by his just judgment, he suffered
and was willing that he should sting and afflict them with diverse assaults.

Now, to the intent that Adam and Eua, should be assured of their
restoration, even in like sort as GOD by his divine word and spirit, had
created, made, and fashioned all things in their being: so also by the same
word God has decreed, that the seed of the woman should break the head of
the serpent, and by consequence, should be delivered utterly from all his
thraldom.

This word then being almighty, subsisting in the essence of GOD from all
eternity, by which the world and all things had been made, called unto
repentance Adam and Eua, giving them time and leisure to return, and to
reform them selves again unto the obedience from which they had erred.

And thereby may we clearly understand, that it has from the beginning of the
world, instructed and taught Adam. For this word, the son of GOD, which
reproved Adam for his fault and offense, and which declared, that the strength
and force that was in the serpent, should be broken: has also taught and
rebuked him for his misdoing, letting him well understand how abominable a
thing sin is, and how many mischiefs it causes, the death and everlasting
participation in all ignominy and shame with this wicked and crafty wretch,
that had brought him into such slavery unto him self: and that through him
self or any other creature, a full deliverance from this subjection or perfect
satisfaction, for the abominable sin that he had committed against God,
could not be made, but by the only means of this promise: by which alone Adam
and Eua had knowledge that they were freely pardoned, without any mediation of
their own works or merits. And in all these things had they some sight and
knowledge of, by the inspiration of the same spirit of him whose voice they
understood: who, for as much as he would teach them, knew also very well, that
all should be said in vain, if they were not inspired with this spirit of
knowledge and believing. And thus this eternal word, the son of GOD, has
from the beginning taught the first man Adam.

Whereby we must mark, that God has continually assisted, and does assist his
Church, and instructs it, and maintayneth it, and governs it, as is
evidently to be proved: and manifest experience declares, that the Church and
his doctrine could not have had power to continue so long time against such
horrible assaults of satan, of tyrants, and of wicked men, if the Church had
not had these guarders and defenders. Which always were accounted the Fathers
and Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: which Jacob being governor of the
Church of GOD in his time, has made plain demonstration of the true Messiah
(so many times before promised) to be his guarder. And therefore he says in the
48. of Genesis, in the 16. verse. The Angel that has guarded me from all
evil, bless these children. Thus we may see in this place and in many others,
how he calls the Messiah (that is to say, the son of God) Angel, calling
him his guarder or keeper, attributing unto him the power and authority for to
be able to bless him. That which he understood only of an Angel, he has not
so fully spoken, being as it were plucked back with the spirit of God, because
he had attributed that unto an Angel, which was due unto God, unto whom alone
Jacob continually ascribed all power, blessing, honor, and glory, as unto God
alone it does belong.

And in like sort, Esaie being moved by the same spirit that Jacob was, said
in the 63. chapter, verse 9. The Angel of his face has saved them, the same
has redeemed them, through his love and mercy has holden them up, and exalted
them continually.

Also, for to give likewise to understand, that in this divine essence the holy
spirit is resident, and that he will always thereby assist his Church, in the
59. chapter, verse 21. he says. Behold mine aliance with them, says the Lord.
My spirit which is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall
not slide out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed for ever. And
infinite places be there, where is given to understand, that God has always
assisted his Church, as well by his holy spirit, as also promising all favor,
comfort, and blessing, by the mediation of him, through whom he had made all
things, whom he had promised to send at his appointed time, to the end that by
him he might purchase unto him self a holy people, being by him sanctified,
which should be clothed with his holiness, as he promised that all such shall
be as do believe and put their trust in him, and that they shall remain so
eternally through him.

And for this purpose also, because it is not in our faculty and power to
believe: he promised and does promise (as has been before declared in Esaye)
the assistance of his spirit, without which ye preaching of the word is
unprofitable.

And thus we must understand, that all the Fathers and Patriarchs have
infallibly known and believed: who were instructed through visions or Oracles,
and also were somewhat taught from hand to hand, as were consequently the true
faithful people their successors, having had (by the operation of Gods spirit)
unprinted in their hearts such an assurance of doctrine: Neither is it to be
doubted, but that God has always ratified this holy instruction: the which
for that it might the better continue in strength from age to age, and for to
help better the memory of men, he has willed to be put in writing by Moses,
who was for to write these matters called and elected, and that he should set
them forth before their eyes, like as he had understood and truly known
through the spirit of God, who created man in such purity, and when man had
sinned, called him to repentance, by this same word, by which he had made him,
promising and assuring him of satisfaction for his sin. And for this cause
the ancient Doctors said, that the son of God is called the word, for as
much as it has spoken to the Fathers. Behold what Tertullian says in his
book against the Jews, in the first chapter. Then Jesus said unto Cain: where
is Abel thy brother? And Iraeneus writing against heresies in the 14. chapter,
says: The son from the beginning, assisting and helping his handie work,
makes manifest the father to all them that he will, and when he will, and how
he will.

To conclude, we see how that from the beginning of the world, God by his
son and spirit, was made known to the first man, giving him understanding of
his good will, the which he made more and more to understand and know thereof
to all them of his Church, of the which Church ensued the chief and principal
Doctors.

After that Adam had been taught of the Son of God.
1 Adam was ordained a Bishop and Doctor by the promise made of the seed of
the woman, he has instructed his posterity of all the articles of the doctrine
of the time, that he lived in. He lived 930. years. And undoubtedly Adam had
good ability to teach what the excellency and worthiness of man was before that
he had transgressed, what sin is, and how horrible a thing it is, and how
great the wrath of God is, how that his mercy is excellent, that he would by
the means of his son redeem mankind from eternal death, wherein it was
plunged through their own proper fault.

He then taught others, to the end that being warned by his example, they
might take heed that they did not fall into sin, and ye through faith they
might lay hold upon the promise made of the seed of the woman, by which seed
mankind being lost of it self, might be forthwith restored again unto life,
unto blessedness, and to everlasting righteousness.

From this Doctor all good sciences, and all humane wisdom is issued, as out
of a fountain: this is he that appointed names to all the beasts and birds
of the air, and to all living creatures in the field, and gave them names
agreeing to their nature.

With Adam was his Son.
2 Abel a true and faithful seruitour in the Church offered unto God of the
first borne of his flocks. Genesis Chap. 4. verse. 4. This does sufficiently
declare, that father Adam instructed his sons in the true service of God.

But Caine was an hypocrite, presenting unto God outward sacrifice, and
nothing inwardly in spirit, wherein does consist the true service of God,
wherefore he displeased God so as he regarded not his oblations. Then Caine
being inflamed with anger rose up against his brother, and being led with a
devilish envy slew him.

In this place began the persecution of holy personages, and this is a dreadful
show: for this murder happens for no other cause, then for the service of
God, which when it is done purely, the devil can in no wise abide it: and for
this occasion he pricked Caine forward, to put his brother to death, to the end
that by that means the word of God, and his pure doctrine might be
extinguished.

And this deed shows sufficiently how vehement the ire, anger and rage of
this subtle Satan is, how great envy it is that he has borne to our first
parents, so that Caine being moved by him, conceived the same anger against
his brother. Now here God gives us always to note what care he has of those
that be his, which although he seems to give over into the hands and will of
the wicked, and that whilst there is no body brings evidence or accusations
against the wicked for their misdealinges, yet he works, so that by one mean
or other the revenge of his servants is wrought.

3 Seth was substituted in Abel his room unto the ministry: and had a son,
whom he called Enos, and then did men begin to call upon the name of the
everlasting. Whereby we have to understand that this word D'inuoquer, to
invoke, or call upon, does comprehend all the true service of God.

Then is it very true that God was before that time called upon, honored, and
served: but the true religion went to wrack through the Cainish Church, and
there was then no more any semblance of the true Church, the which was
redressed in the time of Enos.

Seth was borne in the year of Adam, and Eve 130. And lived with Adam his
father 800. years, and Seth lived 912. years. Gene. 5.

4 Enos was borne in the year of his Father Seth 105. He lived 905. years.
Adam his grandfather lived with him 695. years. Cainan was born in the year
of Enos 90. He lived 910. years: and Adam lived with him. 605. years.

Malalehel was borne in the year of Cainan or kenan 70. He lived 895. years,
and Adam with him 535. years.

Iared was borne in the year of Malalehel 65. He lived 962. years. And Adam
with him. 470. years.

5 Henoch was borne in the year of Iared 162. He lived 365. years, and was
transported by God, out of this miserable life to an everlasting life. God
would that ye faithful should learn hereby to wait for another life,
whereunto they shall be translated.

The scriptures do bear witness, that this man was one of the most exellent
Doctors of the Church amongst the fathers, and that he published with great
feruencie, a far of, the promise of the seed of the woman, and that he
sustained great combats against the mischievous doctrine of the Cainishe
Church, and against the superstitions and idolatries then used: in as much as
they do give him great praise, and do bear of him one excellent testimony
above others the fathers, where as it is said: he walked before God, and was no
more seen.

Likewise the Epistle of Saint Jude does show well, with what vehement zeal
and ardent affection, he exhorted men in his time unto repentance, and
reproved the sins of the wicked: for mark what S. Jude says, Enoch ye
seventh man after Adam, prophesied two years, saying: Behold the Lord will
come with his Saints, which are by millions, to execute judgment upon al men
and to reprove all the ungodly for all the works of wickedness that they have
wrought unfaithfully, and for all the filthy words that the unbelieving
sinners have uttered forth against God. Adam lived with this Henoch. 308.
years.

6 Mathusalem was borne in the year of Henoch his father 65. He lived 969.
years. There was no man that lived so long as he, since the creation of the
world. He dyed in ye year of the universal flood. Adam lived with him 243.
years.

7 Lamech was borne in the year of Mathusalem 187. Genesis 5. He lived 777.
years. Adam lived with him 55. years.

These before named, great and excellent personages, were in the time of Adam,
and helped him in the works of the Church, and to set forth and publish the
doctrine of the promise made of the seed of the woman, and to instruct the
true servants of God. Thus Adam governed the Church of God together with his
new workfellowes, the space of 930. years.

After them succeeded in the government of the Church.
8 Noe was borne in the year of his father Lamech 182. Genesis 5. This man ought
of right to be named amongst the principal Doctors and Bishops of the Church
of God. It is easy to be considered, what disdain, what injuries and
persecutions he has abidden for to maintain the doctrine of God: for at that
time men did greatly begin to be multiplied upon earth, and to wax froward,
and to excel in all manner of sins and iniquities. And as it is said in
Genesis chap. 6. verse. 5. That God saw the malice of man, that it was very
great upon earth, and that all the imaginations of his heart was at al times
none other but evil.

By this the^ is declared, that they lived dissolutely in dishonest manners, in
despising the word of God and his service, applying themselves unto leacherie,
adultery, and tyranny, and to all sorts of wickedness.

For this cause did the Lord God threaten the world, and purposed to confound
and destroy it by a deluge of waters. And one hundredth years before this thing
came to pass, Noe preached unto them, to the end that they might convert and
be saved. Now when Noe with his wife, and his three sons, Sem, Cham, and
Iaphet, and their wives were entered (as God had commanded them) into the Arc,
with some of al sorts of living creatures, the inundation or flood came and
slew, and destroyed the residue, both of men and beasts. And there were after
the creation of the world until the flood, one thousand six hundred fifty
and six years.

What man is there able to express the bitter dolours that this good and
mighty personage has endured, when he saw before his eyes all mankind to
perish through the deluge of waters, and how that only he with a few more was
saved, and further after that this so horible and dreadful a punishment, men
forgetting all the evils that were passed, fell again into all impiety, and
into all manner of mischiefs and abominable beastlines? For he lived after the
flood 350. years. Thus we may see that these Fathers were greatly martyred,
and have suffered grievous torments, through the impiety of the wicked.

9 Sem was borne in the year of Noe his father 500. Like as Noe was a true
Doctor of the Church of God: so there is no doubt, but that Sem his son was
also a true Doctor in his room: for that he had instructed his children in
the true doctrine of God, of the promise already made (from the beginning of
the world) concerning the Messiah to come. And moreover, he has been able to
declare also that which he had seen before his eyes, to wit, the just
judgments that God had wrought-vpon the whole face of the earth, washing men
from their hortible and abhomible sins, the which they had unreasonably
committed. He also was able to show forth the great goodness and mercy of
God, in that he would not that all mankind should be drowned and destroyed.
All the time that Sem lived, was 600. years. Genesis 11.

10 Arphaxad was borne the second year after the flood, in the year of his
father Sem 100, Genesis 11. He lived 438. years.

Sale was borne in the year of his father Arphaxad 35. He lived 433. years.
Genesis 11.

Heber was borne in the year of his father Sale 30. Genesis 11. He lived 464.
years.

Phaleg was borne in the year of his father Heber 34. He lived 239. years.

Reu was borne in the year of his father Phaleg 30. He lived 302. years.

Sarug was borne in the year of his father Reu 30. He lived 230. years.

Nachor was borne in the year of his father Sarug 30. He lived 148. years.

Their was borne in the year of his father Nachor 29. And when he was seventy
years old, he begat Abraham. He lived 205. years. Genesis 11.32.

Now these be here recited by Moses, as being the chiefest of those that were
in their time, whereas we may understand, that although ye world was filled
with all impiety: yet notwithstanding, God still has wonderfully conserved
some ye have kept the instruction of the true heavenly doctrine, to the end
that the Church, and the promise made thereto should not be wholly extinguished:
which doctrine was also immediately renewed unto Abraham their successor.

This is the first order of the Doctors of the Church of God, that is to say,
of the Fathers, whose government endured about ye space of 2023. years.

The second order of the governors of the Church of God, is of the Patriarchs.
11 Abraham was borne in the year of his father Their 70. Genesis 11. He went
from his country and from his kinsfolk in the year after the flood 367. and
in the year of the world 2023. He with his posterity bare rule and governed
the Church.

In his time was the promise of the seed of the woman renewed, which is the
redeemer and deliverer of mankind, and it was declared by manifest promises,
that this deliverer or redeemer ought to be looked for of his posterity.

Furthermore, Abraham being of the age of 99. years, Genesis 17. received
Circumcision, the sign of the aliance betwixt God and him: which sign
represents to the Church two things, to wit, that al what so ever is of man
is vicious, and must be cut away: and that salvation must proceed from the
root of Abraham. He lived 175. years. Genesis 25.

Isaac was borne in the year of Abraham his father 100. Genesis 21. of whose
seed is borne our Lord Jesus Christ. Isaar lived 180. years.

12 Jacob was borne when his father was 60. years of age, Genesis 25. This man
was a Prophet of the Church of GOO, and he took that heavenly doctrine from
his predecessors, and of his father Isaac: at whose hands also he obtained the
blessing of God: he was surnamed Israel, Genesis 32. And for this cause they that
descended of him, were called the people of Israel.

Jacob being 130. years old went down into Egypt, Genesis 47. whereas he might
teach the true doctrine of God. He lived 147. years.

After this, the twelve Patriarchs with their children and successors governed
the church of God in Egypt, by the space of 215. years. Leui was borne but a
few years before Joseph. He lived 137. years. After his death the children of
Israel were in Egypt 121. years. And after the death of Leui until the
nativity of Moses, was 41. years. In which time Cahat the son of Leui, and
Amram the son of Cahat, and father of Moses, did govern the Church.

13 Under the guyding of Moses the son of Amram, of the house of Leui, ye
people was brought out of Egypt. Exodus 12.

Then was the Law given and published divinely, great miracles wrought, yea
such, as the like had not been seen nor heard of before amongst ye people.

The laws also of cere moneys were given them by God, by the hand of Moses: so
were all sorts of oblations, sacrifices, and burnt offerings.

Whereby is to note, that the Ceremonies appointed by God to the Fathers, were
as a preaching and secret kind of doctrine, for to instruct them into what
condemnation they were fallen by reason of their sin, and how that there was
no hope of deliverance and blessing, except they had always in their hearts a
certain regard unto the mercy of GOD, declared in the promise of the seed of
the woman, promised aforetime to the first parents, and shortly after renewed
to the Fathers their successors, that by the said seed all the nations of the
earth shall be blessed, as it is written in the 12. chap. of Genesis. And thus
the mercy of God was more and more manifested unto them, by mean of the
Messiah, whose office was figured and represented in the said ceremonies, with
the whole mystery of our redemption. Moses then with his brother Aaron, who
was older then he, governed ye Church. And God in many sorts and by diverse
means, declared how greatly he liked the ministry and charge to them
committed. For as it is written in the 16. chapter of Numbers, After that
Corah, Dathan, and Abiron, and 250. men of the children of Israel, had murmured
against Moses, refusing to be governed by him, they were all swallowed up
quick.

Likewise the people beginning to murmur against Moses and Aaron, as though
they had been cause of the punishment sent upon them. GOO revenged the
outrageous grudging of them by fire sent from heaven, wherewith a great number
were devoured, to wit, above fourteen thousand.

This is an example worthy to be remembered, of the wrath of GOD against rebels
and seditious persons, which enuyed and grudged at, not so much Gods servants,
as against God him self.

Aaron lived 123. years, and Moses 120. years: he (being inspired by the
spirit of God) composed five Books, the which be called until this day, The
five Books of Moses.

14 Iosue was borne in the year of Moses his age 42. He lived 110. years, and
after the death of Moses he was ordained guide of the people, through whose
conduct they entered into the land of Canaan, the inhabitants whereof he
vanquished and put to foil: and lastly, he divided the land amongst the
tribes of Israel. He governed ye people by the space (...) has heard, neither
could the understanding of man at any time comprehend: to wit, the full
possession and enjoying of glory in the triumphant kingdom of our Lord Jesus,
the everlasting Priest and King, of whom may be seen in his Psalms many good
and excellent propheties.

Under this King and Prophet, as well the ecclesiastical government as the
civil, was most worthily guided and ordered.

Lo, those that were with him, committed and deputed for the governance
Ecclesiastical, were these, to wit, the Prophets, Nathan and Gad, and the
high Priest Sadoc and Abimelech, with them a great company of holy and wise
personages, of whom is witnessed in the books of the Psalms, as Asaph the
son of Chore, Haman, Ethan and others.

19 Solomon the son of David succeeded his father: by whom he had left him a
great deal of costly stuff, wherewith he began to build (in the fourth
year of his reign) a Temple for the Lord, the which in seven years after
was finished. He wrote the books of the Proverbs, of Ecclesiastes, and the
book called Cantica canticorum: he kept the government by the space of 40.
years: lastly, the kingdom was divided and brought to confusion, because of
his adulteries and such other wickedness.

Then, albeit that the true doctrine of God and his right service were darkened
and polluted, and that abominable idolatries were brought in by Solomon, being
now old, and corrupted through the entisements of women, which abominations
were afterward maintained also and augmented by the wicked and unfaithful
Kings of Israel, as Jeroboam, Nadab, Baasa, Ella, Simri, Amri and Achab: and
furthermore by the wicked Kings of Judah, as, Roboam and Abias; yet
notwithstanding the Lord did not suffer his Church to be unprovided for: for he
raised up still some good men, as in the kingdom of Roboam was the Prophet
Semeia, who instructed both him and the Princes of Judah of the will of the
Lord. The Prophet Ado was also in that time. 1. Kings. 12.2. Chron. 12.

Jeroboam offering sacrifice unto the golden Calves. 1. Kings 13. Was reproved
by the prophet Iadi, of whom is made mention. 2. Chron. 9. chap. verse. 29. In
the same time was also the prophet Ahias, who speaking unto the wife of
Jeroboam, told her that the king her husband did provoke the Lord unto anger
with his idolatries: he showed also of the vengeance that would light upon him
for his sins. 1. Kings 14.

Azarias the prophet exhorted Asa the King of Judah to put idolatry away out of
his realm: which thing the King did in deed. 2. Chron. 15. Hanani seeing
this, reproved the said Asa, for because he did put his trust in the king of
Syria, and not in God. 2. Chron. 16.

Iehu the prophet, by the word of the Lord, threatened Baasa the king of
Israel, because he walked in the way of Jeroboam, causing the people to sin.
1. Kings 16. To conclude, other good prophets were raised up by GOD, for to
conserve and maintain his true service, for to rebuke also the Kings and
people for their idolatries and abominable misdoings: as were Elie the
Thesbite, and Iosue the son of Nun, of whom mention is made in the fifth book
of Kings, chap. 16. at the end of the chapter.

20 Elie the Thesbite was in the time of Achab the King of Israel, and was
divinely raised up for to purge again the doctrine: and to kindle again the
light thereof. This man sustained terrible combats and battles against king
Achab, a man full of hypocrisy and unfaithfulness, and against the cruel
Queen Iezabel, and against the priests of Baal.

He wrought great miracles: he through his prayers shut up and opened again
the heavens: he also raised again men from death: and lastly, after that he
had governed the Church more then 40. years, and had sustained many and great
dangers, was divinely carried up into heaven with a whirlewinde.

This now was done in the middle age of the world: for Elias was raised up
when the world had continued 3000. years after the creation.

By this God would have us to understand, that he has reserved an other life
for his faithful servants, whereunto they must be translated.

21 Eliseus was substituted in the room of Elias, who sustained great and
marvelous dangers, and wrought miracles, discovered the ambushments of the
king of Syria. 2. Kings 6. Having governed ye Church almost 70. years. He dyed
in the time of Ioas king of Israel.

The prophets of his time were Micheas, which was before him, whose prophecy
we have amongst us until this present time, after him was Zachary the son
of Ioiada the priest, in the time of king Ioas.

22 Isaias or Esaias succeeded immediately after, who began to prophecy in the
days of Ozias, Ioathan, Achas, and Ezechias, teaching purely the truth of
God, with admonitions, reproves, threatenings, consolations: applying the
doctrine, as a sovereign medicine, according as he saw the people have need.

He set forth faithfully many good prophecies and revelations, which he had
received of God, concerning the promise of Christ, his office and kingdom the
favor of the Lord toward his Church, the calling of the Gentiles, and the
fellowship of them with the Jews, like as is sufficiently set forth and
declared in his book, the which is a collection extracted of the Sermons that
he made unto the people: even as be the books of the other prophets: for the
custom was amongst the prophets, after that they had expounded and declared
unto the people the doctrine and will of God, to compile a brief summarie of
their preachings, and to set them up on the gates, which were afterward laid
up, and reserved for a perpetual memory, like as may be gathered out of the
second chapter of Abacuc, and out of the eight of his book.

Thus the Lord, (through his providence) has conserved in his Church, by the
means of his ministers of the Temple, the doctrine that at appointed times was
put in the mouths of his prophets, to the intent, that as he has always
been and is always one and the very same God, always one and the same spirit,
constant and unchangeable: so one and the very same doctrine being pure and
steadfast, should continue in his Church for ever.

The prophets which were in his time, are Jonas, Amos, Micheas, Osee. Now
Esaias, after that he had done great things, he governed the Church about 80.
years. In his time the kingdom of Israel was destroyed, because of the
ungodliness, and they were carried away captive by Salmanazar king of Assyria.
It is found by writings, that the king Manasses caused Esaias to be cut asunder
in ye midst.

23 Jeremy, endued with the spirit of God for to prophecy, beginning, by ye
commandment of the Lord, in the 13. year of Josias, continued ten years under
his reign: afterward he abode three months under Ioachaz, 11. years under
Eliacim surnamed Ioacim, other three months under Ioacim, and lastly under
Zedekias 11. years, even until the carrying away unto Babylon, and the
deliverance of him 70. years after.

He also foreshewed the destruction and overthrow of many kingdoms and
nations, and how they should be brought under the power and obedience of the
Babylonians: and finally, he foretold of the decay and bringing to confusion
of proud Babylon, with all the tyranny there used: and that this should by
brought to pass by the hands of the Medes, and of the Persians their near
neighbors.

Moreover, the said prophet used very good exhortations and instructions
amongst the people, in setting before their eyes the threatenings of the
Lord, and the execution of his justice which drew near, because of the
obstinacy and stubbornness in their iniquity, he ministered also consolation,
in showing their deliverance and comfort that the Lord would send them after
their afflictions, and this did he for to strengthen the faith and confidence
of the faithful, the which he sent principally unto Christ, as unto the
fountain of all deliverance, and to the felicity of his kingdom and coming,
of whom he also made mention in many places of his book.

He governed the Church more then 40. years, and lived after the desolation of
Jerusalem. He then seeing this desolation, and abiding many troubles and
persecutions: he had foretold thereof, and afterward saw it with great
anguish of heart, when he was old. He was led away into Egypt, whereas he
rebuked boldly the people and their principal governors. He was afterward
stoned by Tahaphnes, and died.

The prophets that were in his time, were, Sophonie, Abacuc, Abdias.

24 Daniel being but young, was in the time when Jeremy was old, and was
instructed under him. He was carried away to Babylon with ye king Ioacim in the
third year of his reign, and in the year since the creation of the world, 33
44.

The Lord who had defended him from danger, willing to have him serve for ye
profit of his Church, adorned him with many graces and excellent gifts, and
amongst other gifts, with the spirit of prophecy, as appears by that that
is contained in his book, whereas he declares the revelations which he had
received of GOD, touching the estate of the world under the four Monarchies,
until the end thereof. He foreshewed also the time of Christ's coming, the
excellency of his kingdom, the power given unto Antichrist for to annoy the
faithful children of GOD, and the time how long this power shall continue:
lastly, the judgment that shall be executed by Christ, a King triumphant for
the exaltation and glory of his faithful servants, and for the ruin and
destruction of the wicked.

Now, after that this Daniel had wrought great things in Babylon, as well
concerning the order of the Church, as the civil policy and government, and
having given a great light to the true doctrine of God amongst his people. He
governed about 90. years.

25 Ezechiel began to prophecy in the time of king Ioacim surnamed
Iechonias, showing him the danger that he was in, in declaring to him that
which the Lord had determined to do, concerning the destruction and ruin of
Jerusalem, because of the sins of the people, that had provoked the wrath and
judgment of GOD against the same city, the which Nabuchodonozor the king of
Babylon did at that time besiege: and forced the people afterward to yield
them selves captives.

He foretold also and declared, what was to come, as well to the Jews as to
other nations thereaboutes.

26 Osee the son of Beeri began to prophecy in the times of Ozias, Ioas,
Achas, kings of Judah, and in the time of Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of
Israel: and as a true prophet, he showed unto his people (which was the
kingdom of the ten tribes) their sins and iniquities, and he reproved them
every one of their execrable idolatry, whereby they heaped up against them
selves the wrath and vengeance of God, showing unto them that the rod of his
justice was stretched out against them, and exhorting them to repentance and a
true conversion. He foretold them of their captivity into Assyria. Afterward
he added a consolation for the faithful, assuring them of their deliverance,
by the mean of the deliverer promised by ye Lord unto his Church.

27 Of Joel, the Hebrews be uncertain in what time he was a prophet. Some
judge that he was in the time of Manasses. But we need not be so curious in
seeking out that matter: for if it had been so necessary, it should not have
been omitted by the holy Ghost, which inspired this prophet to exhort the
people unto a conversion and true repentance, and incited them to have recourse
to the grace and mercy of God, in contemplation of the only bounty and free
liberality, grounded upon the Messiah and true anointed of the Lord, of
whose kingdom he made demonstration) with the excellent riches thereof, which
be the gifts and graces of the spirit of god, the which he has foreshewed
that they must be bestowed and distributed unto faithful servants, whom God
shall have appointed for the dispensation of the ministry of the said
kingdom, as S. Peter expounds, Acts 2.

28 Amos being a shepherd and a simple man, was wonderfully instructed by the
Lord, and moved by his spirit in the time of Ozias king of Judah, and of
Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel. He declared and showed unto the
Church of GOD, the mysteries touching the displaying of sins, and exhortation
to repent and amend, and a sure hope of salvation by the mean of the Messiah,
whose coming and kingdom he spoke of before.

He prophesied first against the unfaithful nations which dwelt near to the
people of Israel: afterward against the kingdom of Israel: to wit, of the
ten tribes, and then consequently against the kingdom of Judah, and the
Temple of the Lord, foretelling of the afflictions that would happen unto
them, because of their iniquities.

29 Of Addias the prophet, some do judge that it was he, who in the time of the
persecution caused by Achab and Iezabel, did hide in a cave an hundred
prophets. 1. Kings 18.3. Others think that he was an Idumean, and that he gave
wholly him self unto the Lord in receiving his law.

In this matter we need not be greatly scrupulous: but rather in the doctrine
and prophecy that he had received of the holy Ghost, the which in as much as
he in his book threateneth the Idumeans, does teach us of the vengeance and
judgments of God against the adversaries of his Church, and of the deliverance
and conservation thereof, of ye which he prophesied, and of the kingdom of
Christ.

30 In Jonas may be seen the doctrine set forth in the Church, concerning the
death and resurrection of Christ, and the publishing of the Gospel, the which
must be wrought among the Gentiles after the said resurrection: even as Jonas
showed and declared after that he came out of the whales belly, publishing the
word of ye Lord in Niniuie, the chief city of the Monarchy of the Assyrians.

And like as Jonas profiting not amongst his own people, was sent unto
strangers and Infidels (the people of Israel continuing blind) so the Lord
has transported his Gospel from his own peculiar people, who contemned it,
and has given it to the Gentiles, leaving that people in blindness and
obstinacy, because of their contempt.

It appears by that which is written in the first of the Kings 14.15. what
Jonas was, and in what time he prophesied, to wit, in the time of Jeroboam, the
son of Ioas king of Israel, in whose time were Osee, Amos, Joel, in Israel:
and Isaie in Judah. So as he has set forth before other prophecies, the which
be not manifested: and that which we have in his book amongst the prophecies,
is only kept still for the profit and edifying of the Church.

31 The propket Micheas began to prophecy in the time of Ioathan, Achaz, and
Ezechias, kings of Judah. The which prophet was an instrument of the spirit of
God, like as were also the other prophets, for to reprove the people of their
sins, and to exhort them unto repentance, and for the consolation of the
faithful that were astonished at the judgment of God.

Micheas the prophet applied his prophecy unto the two kingdoms of his
people, foretelling the destruction both of the one and also of the other,
because of their iniquities, and especially for their idolatry.

He reproved the cruelty of the people, the tyranny of princes, and of the
great men, and the abuses of false prophets. He published before hand a very
good and manifest prophecy touching the coming of Christ, his kingdom, and
the happiness of his Church.

This Micheas is not he of whom mention is made 2. Kings 22. which was in the
time of Achab king of Israel, and Iosaphat king of Judah.

32 Of the prophet Nahum, there is no certainty in what time he was: some
suppose that he was in the time of Manasses king of Judah. The doctrine that he
published in his time by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, contains, that
the Lord did pardon the people of Niniuie, when they by repentance converted at
the preaching of Jonas: but they returned again afterward to their vomit,
provoking the wrath of God against them because of their sins. Wherefore the
Lord has destroyed both that city, and all the whole Empire of the Assyrians
(whereof Niniuie was the chiefest city) and this was done by the hands of
Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon. Of which destruction and ruin was made the
prophecy of Nahum, instructing the Church thereby, for as much as he showed
that the providence of the Lord is extended over all realms and seigniories:
and that he is a just judge, bringing all men to the balance of justice.

33 Abacuc being amazed at that which the most holy and faithful servants of
God have been sometimes: that is to say, because they saw the wicked and
ungodly flourish in this world in all joy and prosperity. And on the contrary
part, the innocent to be abused by them, and to endure all kind of misery: as
though God suffering it to be so, had taken pleasure in iniquity.

Now Habacuc being in this dismay, received a revelation by the secret
judgment of God through a vision: in which was represented to him the
exaltation and magnificence of the Monarchy of the Babylonians to come, and
the captivity of his people under their yoke: but so that in the end the elect
should be oppressed, and all the ungodly destroyed.

On the contrary part, those which had been just and righteous, should be
delivered and comforted. Which thing is entreated of in the prophecy of his
book of the destruction of Babylon and of their Monarchy, in the deliverance
of the people out of captivity, when they should return again into the land
of their rest. It is uncertain in what time this prophet was, like as it is of
Nahum.

34 Sophonie before seeing the arm of the Lord stretched out, and his wrath
ready bent against Judah, because of their sins, declared unto them their
judgment and condemnation, the destruction of the city, and of the kingdom,
and of the transmigratio^ of the people into Babylon. Wherefore he exhorted
them unto repentance and amendment of life, and comforted the faithful by a
certain hope of their deliverance, declaring and setting forth unto them the
great mercy and loving kindness, which the Lord used toward his Church, by
free remission of sins in Jesus Christ, who (he said) was sitting in the
midst thereof, for to be the protector and defendour against ruin and
destruction, and against the persecutours and adversaries thereof, of which he
prophesied especially against the Philistines, the Moabites, Ammonites,
Ethiopians and Assyrians.

He prophesied in the time of Josias when Jeremy prophesied publicly, and in
the synagogues and assemblies.

35 In the second year of king Darius, the prophet Agge, moved by the spirit
of the Lord, rose up and willed the people for to take in hand again and go
forward with the work of the Temple, rebuking them for their negligence, and
because that they had no more regard to the work and service of God, whereby
they provoked his anger, and therefore were compelled to suffer great evils
and mishappes, of which mention is made in his first chapter. He prophesied
also of the coming of Christ, under the person of Zorobabel, and of the
calling of the Gentiles.

36 Zachary was in the same time that Agge was, as it is written in the first
of Esdras, and he used the very same argument in his book, that he did, in
exhorting and persuading the people, being at that time returned from
captivity, for to reedifie and build up again that that the enemies had
destroyed: but Agge incited them more to the building again of the Temple, and
Zachary of the city, whose prophecy may be seen more largely in his book:
By which he teaches us under the name of earthly Jerusalem (which was a figure
of the Church of the Lord, and his people) what diligence the Pastors,
Ministers, Masters, and Architectes of this building ought to use and bestow
to the edifying of this city, which is a permanent city, holy, and peaceable,
situated and founded upon a sure rock which no force can prevail against.

He foreshewed also the restoring again of this city, which should happen by
the hands of the Apostles, the abundance of riches, and the great spiritual
and everlasting treasures thereof: the coming of Christ, and the mysteries of
his kingdom, under the name of Zorobabel and of Iosue the high priest for that
time.

Also of the coming of Antichrist the adversary of the Church, and of the
last judgment which shall be executed by Christ against the enemies and
persecutours of his Church, to the joy and perpetual consolation of the
faithful.

37 Of the prophets among the Jews, Malachie was the last of all before the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And as Aggee had persuaded the people to the
building again of the Temple, and Zacharias to the building of the city: so
did Malachie apply his doctrine to the restoration of the priests office, he
reproved the faults and iniquities of the high priests, and to set forth an
instruction for to lead the people unto the pure and true high priest, only
pleasing to the lord, and who alone is fit to make intercession for his people,
to wit, Jesus Christ, whose coming he foreshewed in his Church, with
abundance of treasures, joy and felicity, and he said that this his coming
should be signified by his Heralt and forerunner, who should come in the virtue
and spirit of Elias.

This now is the third order of the Doctors of the Church of the faithful,
that is to say, of the Prophets: whose government endured about 600. years.

The governors and high priests be in the fourth rabble and order of the
doctors of the Church of God, after the return from the captivity of
Babylon, even until Jesus Christ the son of God, which is the true king and
everlasting high priest of the people of God.
38 Mardocheus, who yielded him self captive unto Babylon with the king
Iechonias: he was exalted unto dignity in the 12. year of king Assuerus,
which was in the year after the creation of the world 3453. as Philo recites.
Mardocheus lived 197. years.

39 Iosue or Jesus, who returned again into Iewrie with the conductor
Zorobabel 536. years before the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, he
governed in the room of an high priest 36. years. Philo thinks that it is
he that compiled the book of Judith.

40 Ioachim succeeded his grandfather, and governed by the space of 48. years.
Some there be that say it was but 28. years. This man is reported to have
written the history of Hester.

Esdras governed with these men before named, who was sent back again with
the people to Jerusalem, for to build up again the Temple and city, and that
was in the seventh year of Artaxerxes, which is in the year since the creation
of ye world. 3505.

Moreover, Nehemias governed with them, who in like sort was sent back again
to Jerusalem in the 20. year of Artaxerxes, for to reedifie and build up the
Temple and city. It is thought that he lived more then 120. years, as
appears by his history: for he lived until the time of great Alexander, and
in the 12. Chapter he speaks of Iaddo the high priest, who received Alexander
into Jerusalem. Furthermore, in his time the high priests began greatly to
abuse their office and authority, making them selves great and mighty men:
and for this cause they were sharply reproved by Nehemias.

And after this followed a great and horrible confusion and tyranny in the
dignity of priesthood, for as much as they applied them selves rather to heap
up riches, and to get honors, then to serve in the Temple and to worship God,
and they sought the alliance of such kings as dwelt near about them. We must
therefore let pass such monsters, and only make mention of the faithful, by
whom the true doctrine of God has been guarded and set forth.

41 Now in that time amongst others that administered best in their charge,
were Simon and Eleazar two brethren, the sons of Onias. In the time of this
Eleazar more then a hundredth thousand Jews, which were captives in Egypt, were
set at liberty by Ptolomeus Philadelphus, for every head of whom he paid at
his own cost 12. crowns.

This king Ptolome caused three score and ten men to come out of Iewrie into
Egypt, the which translated the books of the old Testament into the Greek
tongue, whose translation is unto this day called, The translation of the
seventy interpreters. And after that he had rewarded them with great
presents, he sent them home again to their own houses. It is reported that
this translation was finished and made perfect in the 17. year of Ptolomeus
Philadelphus, which was in the year since the foundation of the world 3694.

42 Simon the just governed 28. years. Jesus the son of Syrach praised and
esteemed him greatly, who did write his book in the time of this Simon, which
is called Ecclesiasticus, about the year after the creation of the world 3735.

The religion and holiness of this Simon the son of Onias the great, is
praised in the second book of Machabees, Chap. 3. This man was slain in
pursuing his brother Menelaus, which was called Onias the younger, who seifed
upon the office of the high priest by force, having displaced his other brother.

43 At this time Mattathias was high priest in the stead of Ioarib, who was of
Jerusalem, the father of the Machabees: in which time Antiochus Epiphanes
exercised terrible cruelties against the Jews: as these things are largely
described in the books of the Machabees.

Then began this furious beast Antiochus to reign, in the year of ye
Greeks reign 137. which was in the year after the creation of the world
3769. Through the holiness and virtue of this Mattathias, the cruelty of
Antiochus Epiphanes was repressed, and the true doctrine maintained, and the
true services of God ordained in the law kept inuiolate. These things were
done 165. years before the nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ.

44 Judas Machabeus, the first of the Hasmoniens or Simonensiens, governed the
public affairs 6. years. His deeds and the deeds of his brethren also be
written in the first book of the Machabees.

Then for as much as, like as Daniel had foreprophecied, that the people should
be miserably afflicted about this said time, therefore the Machabees were
divinely raised up, to the intent that by this mean the people might be
somewhat refreshed, and find some succor, Daniel 11.

45 Ionathas the brother of Judas Machabeus succeeded him: who was governor
18. years: because of the wickedness and negligence of the priests, the
dignity of the priests office fell into his hands with the government
civil: for Ianneus surnamed Hircanus the second, was the last governor of the
tribe of David.

Ionathas was called to the dignity of ye priesthood, in the 9. year of his
government, and in the year before the nativity of our Lord Jesus 150.

46 After that Ionathas had been cruelly slain with his two sons, by
Triphon, his brother Simon the third son of Mattathias was elected in his
place, in the year before the Nativity of Jesus Christ 140.

The acts of which Simon be described in the first book of Machabees, from
the 14. chapter unto the end of the book: he continued governing about eight
years.

Thus then the pure doctrine and true services that God had ordained, were
maintained and kept safe among the people, until the coming of the son of
God, the Lord Jesus, through the virtue and religion of these four
Hasmoniens, Matathias and his three sons: so as it may easily be known when
and of what people the Messiah must be looked for.

47 John Hircanus the great, of whom mention is made in the end of the first
book of Machabees, succeeded Simon his brother in the office of priesthood,
and in the civil government.

In his time came up the sects of Pharisees, Saducees, and Esseniens, by whom
the doctrine was darkened.

This man did great things: for he destroyed Samaria, with the temple of
Garezim in the time of Alexander the great. He wan Idumea and many cities of
Syria, he governed 31. years.

After his discease great chaunges and horrible confusions happened many times,
and the people of the Jews were grievously formented with continual wars.

48 Whilst these great mischiefs continued, these sects were begone, and
confusions bread, when there were but a very few that kept still the heavenly
doctrine, lo, then came Mathan ye grandfather of the Virgin Marie, who was
borne about 100. years before Christ.

And after him Ioachim, which is also named Elie, the father of the Virgin
Marie: who was borne 60. years before the Lord Jesus, which was the same year
that Pompei conquered Jerusalem, and that Iewrie was made tributarie to the
Romans, and brought into the manner of a Province: to the end that men might
know assuredly, how that the time of the Messiah was at hand, of whom the
Patriarch Jacob had prophesied, saying: The scepter shall not be taken away
from Judah, nor a Lawgiuer from his feet, until that Silo come, and to him
shall the nations be gathered. Genesis 49.

49 About this time were ayding to the conservation and keeping of the Church,
Simeon, Anna the prophetisse, Zachary, Elizabeth, with others: and the Virgin
Marie, the mother of the son of God our Lord.

The government in the Church of this fourth range or order of the high
priests and governors after their return from captivity lasted about 500
years.

The fifth and last order of the Doctors of the Church of God, is that which we
begin at John Baptist and our Lord Jesus Christ.
50 John Baptist the son of Zachary the priest, began to preach in the 15.
year of the Empire of Tiberius Caesar, when as Pontius Pylate was governor in
Iewrie, and when Herod was Tetrarch in Galilee, and he preached baptism and
repentance, that is to say, that every one should repent and amend, that they
might receive remission of sins, through Jesus Christ, which thing he
confirmed by the sign of baptism.

He taught the people of all estates how they ought to live: He bare witness
of the Lord Jesus. And baptizing the people, he baptized Jesus also: upon whom
the holy Ghost descended in bodily shape, and God declared from heaven that he
was his son.

John having reproved Herod the Tetrarch, because of Herodias his brother
Phillips wife, and for all the other evils that he had done, was cast in
prison, and at length beheaded.

51 In the 24. year of the reign of Augustus, the eternal son of God was
borne (having taken upon him humane flesh of the Virgin Marie) in Bethlehem a
town of Iewrie.

This is that seed which has broken the head of the serpent, and has
delivered us from his deadly sting: This is the sovereign head of the Church,
without which the body can have no due proportion and shape, he has a special
care thereof, and will make it feel effectually of his presence: and he will be
in the midst thereof called upon, served, honored, and glorified.

Now as soon as Christ, the true anointed of God was borne and made known
unto the world, Herod stirred up great persecutions: the occasion thereof
began, for because that the wise men came from the East, who brought news of
the Messiah unto the people of Jerusalem. He caused all the children within the
precinct of Bethlehem to be slain, as many as were two years old and under.

His execrable dealings abode not long time unpunished. And it shall be
necessary that we consider somewhat of the worthy end of this tyrant: Joseph
in ye eight book of his Antiquities, Cha. 17. writes thus: The sickness of
the king did rage more and more, and God showed openly that he punished him for
his ungodliness: for he was burned with a pining heat, and this heat could
not be perceived outwardly, but he felt it wtin his body, in as much as it
gnawed and tormented his bowels.

He was so hungry, that he took no laysure to chawe his food: but swallowed
up greedily that entered into his mouth: and was at all times casting meat into
his mouth. His bowels were corrupted and full of ulcers: he was also tormented
with the colica passio: His feet were swelled with flegmatike humors: his
privy parts were rotten and full of worms: His breath was so stinking that
no body durst come near him.

And in the 21. chapter of the first book of the Jews war, the said
historiographer wrate this which follows. All his body was entangled with
diseases, and he was vexed with sundry dolours: he had a burning and
intolerable gnawing wtin him.

The colicke tormented him incessantly, and the and his feet were swollen in
the skin and flesh. He adds moreover, that he assayed to shorten his life,
and calling for a knife, he lifted up his right hand for to have killed him
self, which thing Archicab his cousin german perceiving, ran and stayed his
hand. He dyed five years after that he had put Antipater his son to death:
when he had enjoyed the kingdom by the space of 34. years after he had put
Antigonus to death, and 37. years after that he was declared king by the
Romans. Jesus Christ the sovereign Bishop, Doctor, and Pastor of his
Church, was 30. years old when he was baptized: and then began he to preach
unto the people of the Jews the word of the Gospel, which he had brought from
his father, according to the promises that had been made before time, and he
wrought miracles. After three years then following, he was offered up a
sacrifice for to redeem ma^kinde, he suffered his death and passion in the
eighteenth year of Tyberius the Emperor. He rose again from death the third
day after his passion, a vanquisher and triumphant: and showed himself unto
his Apostles, and to many other men and women, with great approbations, being
seen by them by the space of of 40. days, and speaking of the kingdom of
God, Acts 1.

And after that he had given commandment to his Apostles that they should go
throughout all the world, for to teach the doctrine to all nations, and to
baptize them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost: instructing them to keep al what so ever he had commanded them,
promising to continue with his Church until the end of the world.

He ascended up into heaven, sitting at the right hand of his father, and has
sent down his holy spirit upon the Apostles, the which went forth all abroad,
for to kindle and spread forth the light of the Gospel.

Now we must set in this fifth order the Apostles and Evangelists, the
Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors: whom the son of GOD has raised from time to
time in all ages for the conservation and maintenance of the ministry.

The Apostles be the first in the fifth order.
Now here we must mark in what places, and how far the word of the Gospel
has been spread through al parts and countries of the whole earth, and what
Pastors and Doctors have succeeded, and in what places.

52 Peter the Apostle declared the Gospel in many places, as may be at large
seen by the history of the Acts of the Apostles. Origin in his thirds tome
upon Genesis, says: that Peter preached in Pontus, Galatia, Asia, Bythinia,
and Cappadocia, amongst the Jews that were dispersed.

He had a Church in Babylon, as he him self witnesses in the fifth Chapter of
his first Epistle, likewise in Phenicia and Syria, in Lyre, Sidon, Selencia,
Cilicia, Pamphilia, Pisidia, Attalia, Lycaonia. Also in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinia, Mysia, and Phrigia Saint Peter has written unto
these.

The seven Churches of Asia be named in the Apocalypse, that is to say,
Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardus, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.

Above all others, the Church of Antioch had the same whereas the disciples
were first named Christians.

Hierome, Nicephorus, Euthalius the Deacon, and and others do say, that Peter
was crucified the 14. year of Nero, which was the 37. year after the
conversion of Saint Paul. How then can it be, that Linus Bishop of Rome
succeeded him in the seat Apostolic (as some would maintain even until this
present time) seeing that Linus was martyred a year before Saint Peter? For a
simple restorer of the Papacy does thus write, who has made two great books
of Councels, the which were composed in the city of Colloine. Hereby may be
seen how firm the foundation of the Papacy is. If Linus were chief Bishop
of Rome in the time of Nero, it is most certain that Peter was not.

53 Andrewe the brother of Peter preached the Gospel unto the Scythians, and
unto the Sogdiens and Satians, as Saint Hierome writes.

54 James the just, the brother of our Lord Jesus (as S. Hierome writes)
governed the Church at Jerusalem three years, that is to wit, until the 7.
year of Nero, and he was cast from the top of the Temple down by the
commandment of the son of Annas then high Priest, after was stoned, and
lastly slain with a fullers beam.

55 James the son of Zebedee, brother of John the Guangelist, as Saint
Hierome writes, preached the Gospel unto the tribes of the Jews that were
dispersed. In this time great persecution arose by Herod Agrippa against the
Christians, in which James the brother of John was beheaded, Acts 12. Peter
was cast in prison: but the Angel of the Lord wonderfully delivered him thence.

56 Matthewe, who from a Publicane was called by Jesus Christ to the office of
an Apostle.

He first wrote his Gospel in Iewrie in the Hebrew tongue, for those that were
of the Circumcision: and afterward it was translated into Greek, as appears
at this present. He preached the Gospel in Ethiopia. Bartholomewe in India.

Matthias in the other Ethiopia, whereas the river Asper does enter into the
port of Hiss.

Phillip preached in Samaria, whereas was a Church gathered together again
after the death of Stephan. In Azotus he assembled a Church, and thence he went
to the cities and towns by the sea coast.

57 Thomas (as it is found written) preached the Gospel to the Parthians,
Medes, Persians, and in Germany, to the Hircanians, and to the Bactrians and
Magians.

Saint Hierome also writes, that Simon Cananeus, surnamed Judas, brother to
James the just, succeeded his brother James in the government of the Church at
Jerusalem, and that he lived 120. years: notwithstanding, Eusebius, according
to Egesippus, says: that Simon the son of Cleophas was substituted in the
room of James. He says, that he lived 120, years, and that he was crucified
in the days of Traiane the Emperor.

58 John the Apostle the son of Zebedee, governed the Church at Ephesus: of
which thing Ireneus has also made mention. True it is, that the Church at
Ephesus was founded by Paul, but it was edified by John, who abode in the
government thereof until the time of Traian. S. Hierome says, that John died
66. years after the passion of our Lord Jesus in the city of Ephesus, and
that he was buried there.

59 Paul the Apostle being before time a persecutour and blasphemer, was
converted to Jesus Christ, the very same year that Jesus Christ ascended into
heaven: that is to say, about the end of the 19. year of Tiberius: in which
year also he began to preach the Gospel in the city of Damasco.

Afterward (as he him self recites in his Epistle to the Galathians) he went
into Arabia: from thence he returned to Damascus. Consequently, he sowed the
Gospel through a great part of ye world, having passed through Iewrie,
Cilicia, Cyprus, Pamphilia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, Galatia, Mysia, Ionia,
Macedonia, Grecia and Achaia. After this he was lead prisoner unto Rome, to the
Emperor Nero, where he was kept two years. After wards (as it is found in
writing) being let loose, he preched the Gospel 10. years: and lastly, by the
commandment of Nero he was put to death, in the 13. year of the said Nero,
and in the 36. year after the resurrection of the son of God. He preached
the Gospel by the space 36. years.

The second of the fifth order, be the disciples of the Apostles.
60 The Apostles then had great store of disciples, especially Paul and John,
of whom is many times mention made, as well in the Acts, as in the Epipistles
of S. Paul. Amongst the said disciples the chiefest were these, Barnabas, who
was also called an apostle, act. 14.14. Epaphroditus was also named an Apostle
of the Philippians, Phil. 2.25. Andronicus and Iunia be also named notable
amongst the Apostles, in the 16. to the Romans. Simon that was called Niger,
Lucius Cyrenensis, Manahem, Judas, Barsabas and Silas. Saint Luke in ye Acts
13. and 15. calls them Prophets and Doctors: amongst which it is said,
that Lucius Cyrenensis preached first the Gospel along by Danau in the reign
of Liberius, which they call Ratisbone, and that Mark the disciple of Paul
preached in the city of Passeau, which stands over Danubius, Crescence at
Mayence, and to the Gauls, Clement at Mets, Trophim at Arles.

61 Luke was a familiar companion with Paul, whole Gospel we have, the which
Gospel he wrote according as he had received it of Paul and the other
Apostles, and one other book wrote he, which is named the Acts of the
Apostles. Saint Hierome makes mention that he lived 84. years, and that he
was buried at Constantinople.

62 Mark wrote his Gospel, having received it, as it were at the mouth of
Peter, and he governed the Church of Alexandria in Egypt: where also be was
burned for the Gospel sake, in the 8. year of Nero, and 33. years after the
resurrection of our Lord Jesus.

The third of the fifth order be the Bishops.
63 Now we must understand that the name of a Bishop in the ancient Church,
was attributed unto one of the ministers in every assembly, only for to
observe an order, and not that he had any domination over others.

Furthermore, the office both of the Bishops, and also of other Priests or
Ministers, was, that they should apply them selves wholly to the preaching of
the word and administration of the Sacraments.

Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, and was martyred in the time of Traian the
Emperor, about the year of Jesus Christ 101. In that time were likewise other
Bishops, as Titus Bishop of Crete, and others, of whom mention is made in the
Acts, and in the Epistles of S. Paul: that is to wit, Apollo, Aristarchus,
Gayus, Derbee, Jason, Erastus, Sosipater, Tychicus, Secundus, Syluanus,
Tertius, Quartus, Sosthenes, Epaphras, Jesus the just, Demas, Archippus Bishop
of ye Colossia^s, Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Artenas, and Zenas, and Dionifius
Areepagita Bishop of the Athenians.

64 In the year 65. Annianus was ordained Bishop of Alexandria, and he
governed the Church 22. years: look the history Ecclesiasticus, book 2.
chapter 23.

In the year 66. began the first persecution, which was in the 10. year of
Nero, and it abode until his death. By the commandment of this tyrant, the
city of Rome was set on fire, and for to shun the report of such an act, he
laid the fault upon the Christians, and caused them to be executed with sundry
kinds of death. Those that named the^ selves Christians (which name was the^
so odious, as if they had been enemies to all mankind) and those that were
accused hereof by the prisoners, besides the other hurtes and abuses that they
suffered, abode this approbrie, that being clad in beasts skins, they were
bayted and torn in pieces with dogs, some were attached and hanged on ye
cross: others burned in the fire: so as of them were kindled fires for to give
light in the night. Thus Cornelius Tacitus witnesses.

65 Ignatius, a disciple of S. John the Evangelist, was ordained the second
Bishop of Antioch, he was carried prisoner unto Rome, for to be cast amongst
the wild beasts, and to be made a spectacle unto the people. He going through
Syria to Rome, and passing through the country of Asia, preached in all places
where he went to the people and to the congregation the Christian faith: and he
exhorted the Christians to persevere in the truth, and to beware of the
infections of heretics which then began to budde, and that they should
keep diligently the doctrine that they had received of the Apostles.

The cause of this persecution, was, for that having reproved in Antioch the
idolatry of Traian, he was apprehended as a seditious person, and as being
culpable lesae maiestatis: and he was delivered in charge to ten soldiers,
or rather tormentors, for to be carried to Rome, and to be delivered to the
Lions. Whereof Ignatius him self says, I have fought against beasts, from
Syria unto Rome, by sea and by land, night and day among ten Leopards etc.
Ireneus in his 5. book speaking of Ignatius condemned to be cast unto beasts,
affirms that he said. I am the wheat of Jesus Christ, and I shall be ground
with the teeth of beasts, so as I may be made the bread of God.

66 In the time of Domitian the Emperor, who raised up persecution against the
Christians, Clement Bishop of Rome, which was martyred under Traianus,
instituted in his time Notaries, for to write the acts of the martyrs, their
constancy and patience, for an example and perpetual memory.

In the year of the Lord Jesus 88. Albilius was ordained Bishop of Alexandria,
and was Bishop there twelve years.

67 Anacletus Bishop of Rome, of the nation of Greeks, an Athenian, governed
the Church three years and two months. He ordained that Ecclesiastical
persons should twice in the year have a Synod or congregation for the
affairs of ye church. He by his writings exhorted the people amongst other
things, that they should honor and reverence their ministers. Who so speaks
evil of the ministers (says he) speaks evil of Christ, and he iudgeged him
separated from Christ. He was martyred in the reign of Traianus. Look the
first volume of Councels.

68 Euaristus Bishop of Rome, who was martyred in the last year of the
Emperor Traian, ordained, that there should be elected seven Deacons in every
city, the which should mark and watch the Bishop in preaching and teaching to
the people: and these he ordained for a testimony of the word of God: and to
the end that none should lay to his charge that he had preached evil, and
against the truth.

He ordained, that marriage should be openly celebrated in the Church: That the
Church should obey the Bishop, and that the Bishop should never forsake his
Church so long as he lived, no more then the husband should forsake his wife,
or the wife her husband.

69 Quadratus Bishop of Athens, a disciple of ye Apostles, presented a book of
Apology to Adrian the fifteenth Emperor, for the defense of the Christian
faith.

Aristides an Athenian Philosopher, being a faithful man, composed a like
book. Whereupon Adria^ sent to Minutius Fondanus deputy in Asia, that he
should no more persecute the Christians: but that if they did any thing
contrary to ye laws, he would that judgment should proceed according to the
quality of the crime. That if any body accused the^ slanderously, he willed
such a one should be punished for his maliciousness, and that they should have
no harm.

70 Polycarpus the disciple of John the Evangelist and Apostle, was Bishop of
Smyrna in Ionia, which is in Asia the less, beneath Ephesus, he lived till he
was very old. Ireneus says, that he was ordained Bishop there by the
Apostles: it is very likely in deed, that he began his ministry in the
second or third year of Traian. S. Hierome in his catalogue, says, that he
was sent by Saint John the Evangelist, he offended in the 68. year after the
passion of Christ, as it is reported. Ireneus says of him, that one day as
Marcion met him, he said unto him: Take counsel and knowledge with us:
Polycarpus answered him again, I know that thou art the chiefest son of
Satan. The remnant of the life of Polycarpus was in the time of Marcus
Antonius, and of Lucius Verus the Emperors. The chiefest governors of ye
Empire did then stir up such persecution against the christians, yt it
extended to them of the city of Smyrna, whereof Polycarpus had been Bishop
long time, and there he was burned, when he had served the Church of God about
70. years: this was in the seventh year of this said Emperor. As some say,
he was 80. years old.

The prayer of Polycarpus that he made before his death is in the fourth book
of the Ecclesiastical historyes.

71 In the time of Antonius Pius in the 10. year of his reign, Mark coming
from the Gentlyles, was elected bishop of the Church at Jerusalem, the which
city after the sacking and spoil made by Tytus until yt of Adrian had
succeeding by order five chief Bishops: Eusebius makes mention of them in his
third book and first chapter.

Then after the spoil made by Adrian, there was no more any Church and
congregation gathered together there, save of the Gentyls, and they appointed
Bishops amongst themselves: for ye Jews then bearing arms against the
Romans, were at the last discomfited: and there were killed at one only
battle 58. thousand men, as Nicephorus says: Anselme speaks of 50.
thousand, and of fifty fortresses that were taken, and 985. Villages destroyed,
both by famine and fire and bloudsheade. And all the rest of the Jews were
driven away from Jerusalem and sold into all parts of the world.

So terrible a destruction as they had by Titus might sufficiently teach them,
that the kingdom was taken away from them, like as the Prophets had foretold
them: but it came so to pass that they felt almost as great a punishment at
the second time as they had at the first.

Then many Christians of the Gentyles gathering themselves together, elected
(as before I was telling) Mark for their Bishop, who was the 16. and Cassianus
the 17. Publius the 18. Maximius the 19. Gayan the 21. Symmache the 22. Caius
the 23. Julian secundus the 24. Capito the 25. This is recorded of Eusebius
lib. 5. Chap. 12.

For as much as the Church of the Gentyles had then their habitation there, the
Lord would declare that the true Messiah was already come, and that they
ought to look for none other.

72 In the time of Marcus Aurelius Antonius about the year 160. after the
nativity of Jesus Christ, Melito borne in Asia was Bishop of Sardis, he wrote
to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius concerning the Christian faith.

Theophilus bishop of Antioche wrote against Marcion. Apollinaire, Denis
bishop of Corinth, Iustus bishop of Vienna, were Martyrs for ye faith.

There were also Philip bishop of Creete or Candie, Egesippus, Justin the
Philosopher, Modestus, Musan, and certain others, of whose books we have but
few, Eusebius does partly, and Hierome partly rehearse the books written by
them.

73 Eleutherius borne at Nicopolis in Greece, governed the Church of Rome 15.
year and more in the time of Marcus Aurelius the 17. Emperor, and in the
year of Christ 179. he gave commandment against the Seueriens herisie yt
then reigned.

Also that no Christian for any ceremong should forsake any kind of meats
accustomed to be eaten 1. volume of counsels.

74 Ireneus the scholar of Polycarpus was ordained bishop of Lions after that
Photin bishop of the said Church had suffered Martyrdom when he was 90. years
old, and with him a great many more Frenchmen. He was in the time of Prince
Commodus about 170. or a 180. years after the nativity of our Lord Jesus. It
is said that he was put to death in the city of Smyrna under the reign of
Maximine. He lived above fourscore years.

There was great persecution in the Church about that time, and it lasted very
long. For the Paganes were offended, because that the Christians reproved and
sought to abolysh their old accustomed manners of worshipping, and the
Religion of their ancestors.

And for this cause a great multitude of Christians were put to death, all
abroad, in diverse countries and regions: and especially above all others, the
Doctors, Bishops and Pastors of the Churches.

Now during these venomous rages and horible cruelty of the Devil, God
preserved some faithful Doctors, and prolonged the lives of some others, to
the end that by them the pure doctrine might be conserved and publyshed
abroad: amongst which were Polycarpus, Ireneus, and others.

75 About this time, or shortly after, lived Theodotion bishop of Ephesus, of
Alexandria, Pautene, Miltiades, Appollonius, Serapion, and Policrates, of whose
lives Eusebius and S. Hierome make larger demonstration, and of their books
also. All the which sustained sundry combattes against many heretykes, to wit,
Marcion, Montanus, Valentinian, and the Hermogenians, and diverse others.

76 Victor bishop of Rome governed the church 10. years in the time of Didius,
Iulianus, Milancius, Emperors.

He ordained, that those which would not reconcile themselves, should be
deprived of the table of the Lord.

77 About 200. years after the nativity of our Lord Jesus, in the reign of
Seuerus Pertinax and Antonius Carcalla, Emperors, was Tertullian of Africa,
of the city of Carthage. His books be now extant, in which Cyprian took so
great pleasure, as saint Hierome writes, that he would not pass over one day
without reading some of his works. It is written of him that he lived until
the last age.

78 Leonides the father of Origene was martyred for the faith, he had his head
cut off in the persecutions stirred up against ye Christians by the Emperor
Seuerus in the tenth year of his Empire. Origene his son being then young,
of 17. years of age, said, my father, take heed, that in no wise you change
and swerve from the truth you have begone.

This Origene after that the goods of his Father were confiscate for the faith,
kept and maintained his mother* and brethren with teaching schole, and being
but eighteen years old, he was called by the Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt
to the office of a Catechiser, for to instruct children and strangers. Out of
his school came many Martyrs.

If any would see what was his life, his manners, exercises, writings and
books, let him have recourse to Eusebius, in the ecclesiastical history in
the sixth book. He lived until the time of Gallus, that is, until the 70.
year of his age. Amonius the philosopher was his master, who perseuered in
the Christian faith until he died.

Origene was 255. years after the nativity of our Lord. Suidas says that he
was buried in the city of Cyr.

In that time was also Tryphon, Minutius Felix, yt was a Romain, Berillus,
Hippolitus, Alexander bishop of Cappadocia, Julius Affricanus, Gregory bishop
of Pontus in Nercesarea, Dionise bishop of the city of Alexandria, all which
for the most part had been the scholars of Origene.

79 Vrbane a Roman, Bishop of Rome, governed the Church 8. or 9. years in
the time of the Emperor Heliogabalus. Damasus says that he was of a holy
life, so as he drew certain Gentlemen, as Tyburtius, and Valerian the
husband of S. Cecil to the Christian faith.

Moreover Damasus says, that he ordained, that the Churches should possess
lands, farms and other possessions, and yt the said goods should be common
and distributed for the sustenance of the mynisters, the poor, and the
notaries, called the protonotaryes, who wrote the acts of the martyrs.

80 Cyprian of the country of Africa, bishop of Carthage, suffered martyrdom
under the empire of Valerian and Galerien, in the year after the nativity of
our Lord Jesus 260. Now in that time, that is to say in the reign of
Dionisius the Emperor arose great persecution, and thereof Nicephorus says in
his fifth book and twenty Chapter, that it is as easy to number the multitude
of those that suffered in this persecution, as it is to number the sand of the
sea.

Alexander bishop of Jerusalem, honorable because of his piety and age, was
brought before the seat judicial in Cesarea, and after that he had made
confession of his faith, he died in prison.

Babyle bishop of Nicomedie, Asclepiades of Antioche, Germane, Theophilus,
Cesarius, Vital, Polichronius bishop of Babylon, Serapion, Apolline the virgin;
and others infinites were martyred in this horrible persecution.

Passing all other cities, Alexandria was then as a scaffolde, in which the
faithful were brought to the view of the world. Look Eusebius. liber 6. Chap.
40.

Sundry kinds of torments then used against ye martyrs are recited by
Eusebius: as sharp pricks of rose bushes thrust against their faces and eyes:
then bruised with stones, burned, their entrailles torn, they cast down from
high places, their flesh rent with cards of iron, rackings, they cast unto
brute beasts, condemned to be whipped. To conclude, the most horrible and
cruel torments that could be imagined was executed upon them.

S. Cyprian being then in exile, wrote letters of great consolation to those
that suffered such afflictions, and like as Tertullian in his time defended by
writing the Christians against Scapula: even so did Cyprian against Demetrius
the Pagane governor, showing that the calamities of the world be falsely
imputed to the Christians.

Dionisius Alex. writes yt after the publishing of the edict made by Decius
for confirming of this horrible persecution, many of the most excellent showed
themselves cowardes, and of their own accord made abiuration, and did offer
sacrifice unto idols. Cyprian made a sermon of them that fought hardily, that
is, of those that perseuered in the confession of Jesus Christ. He then set
down examples of the punishment of those that had made abiuration, and
affirmed that many of them were tormented with evil spirits. He said that
there was one who became dumb immediately after he had abiured. Also of a
maiden that was possessed with a devil soon after, and cut a sunder her
tongue with her teeth. Also there be of late years examples memorable of the
punishments happened unto those that made abiuration, as well Italians,
Flemings, Germans, Frenchmen, as of other nations. For some of them (after
that they had denied the truth) lost imediately the taste both of meat and
drink, without being able to receive any comfort at the hands of their
parents and friends, and were entangled with madness, tormented day and night
because of their horrible sin, the which was always without ceasing present
before their eyes. And some others were tormented in their consciences so as
they cast themselves down into the bottomes of ryuers and pondes: and others
cried and howled as though all the Devils had been assembled and possessed
their bodies and souls: others even of the most learned and wise, fell into
despair, so that one of them openly said these words (as Luther makes mention
on the Epistle to the Galathians.) I have denied Christ and therefore is he
now before God the father who accuses me. For he was before time so grounded
in this persuasion, and Satan by his illusions and temptations had so
imprinted in him this despair, that he received no consolation nor admonition
which could be given him, having still in his mouth the foresaid words, in
such sort that in this miserable despair he woefully killed himsefe.

Lastly the examples of many the judgments of God are very notable and
worthy to be marked, the which were written by people worthy of credit, and
were imprinted at Lions, of some that are past and some that are to come.

To conclude it is a horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living GOD,
who notwithstanding would not enter into judgment with all those ye denied
his holy truth: but has suffered them looking for their amendment,
steadfastness and constancy, the which we ought daily to crave for, that we
may finishe our course to the mainteinance of the kingdom of our only Savior
and Redemer Jesus Christ.

81 Xistus an Athenian, in the time of Gallien the Emperor, about the year
after the nativity of our Lord Jesus 264. was ordained bishop of Rome by
the election of the clergy, coming back again out of Spain, where he had
preached.

Bergomensis and Sabellicus do witness that Xistus labored greatly for to
take away the heresies of the Sabellians.

At the last he was accused by the^ before Gallien, and was by his
commandment beheaded, and six Deacons with him. Saint Ambrose in the first
book of his offices Chap. 41. says, that as he was going one day to prayer,
Laurence the Deacon spoke to him in this sort: father, do you go without your
son: and Xistus answered him: son I leave thee not, there draws near
unto thee yet greater combats for the faith, thou shall follow me within three
days: in the mean space if thou have any treasures, distribute them to the
poor.

This Laurence was the first of the seven Deacons of Rome, who had the dealing
with the goods deputed for alms.

The governor of Rome being then hungry of money, was persuaded that the
Church had gold, and moueables of silver, and he would needs compel Laurence
to show him where those treasures were. Laurence having three days term
appointed for to do this, distributed in the mean time all that he had to the
poor, and gathering together in a troop all the impotent and lame that were
succored with alms: he at the day appointed, prayed the governor that he
would go up to that place, and showing him all the poor, he said, lo here
the moueables of silver, behold the talents set in order: take them, and with
them thou shall repair the city of Rome, and shall enrich the reuerenue of
the Emperor, hold it. The governor seeing that he was mocked commanded that
there should be made ready a hot burning grydyron, whereupon they laid
Laurence, who with great courage calling upon the Lord, gave up his soul most
happily. Prudentius a Christian Poet in his book de coronis described this
martyr:

82 Archelaus Bishop of Mesopotamia confuted the errors of the Manichees in
the Syrian language, and his confutation was afterward translalated into the
Greek tongue. For Manes or Manichee was of Persia. Archelaus was in the time
of the Emperor Probus, about the year 284. after the nativity of Jesus
Christ. Anatholius lived also in that time.

83 In the time of Dioclesian the Emperor, and in the 300. year after the
nativity of our Lord Jesus, Authimus bishop of Nicomedie, after that he had
made confession of his faith, was beheaded with a great multitude of Martyrs.
Serena the wife of Dioclesian constantly endured martyrdom: so cruel was this
persecution that they spared none, look Hermanus Gig.

In Europe, above all other, at Rome was a great multitude of martyrs. The
Provost Rictiouarus in France made great havoc, especially at Collogne, at
Treues, and toward Mosella.

Beda writes, that the persecution extended even unto England, then when as
saint Albain, a man greatly renoumed received the crown of a martyr. After
that time they began to invent diverse kinds of torments: but so much the
more horrible as they were, so much the more exquisite seemed the constancy of
the martyrs. Eusebius says, that he was a beholder of the persecution that was
at Thebaida, and says, that the swords of the executioners of so great a
slaughter were bent, and and they wholly wearied, so that the Christians with
ioyfulnesse of heart, singing psalms, offered themselves unto the death.
Sulpitius in his divine history lib. 2. says that the Christians did then
earnely crave for martyrdom, that the ambition of the Clergy did not
afterward crave for any Bishops. Look Beda de temp. rat. and Drosius lib. 7.
Chap. 25.

84 In the same time, that is to say, in the time of Dioclesian and Maximian
Emperors. There were also these good and holy personages Arnobius, Pierius a
minister of the Church of Alexandria, Melitius, Lucian minister of the Church
of Antioche, Phigeas an Egyptian, excellent men and Doctors of the Church: and
this was about 302. years after the nativity of our Lord Jesus, amongst the
which Phileas and Lucian were martyred during ye persecution of Dioclesian. At
yt time also flourished Lactantius Firmiauus the disciple of Arnobius.

Constantius the father of Constantin the great, as Eutropius makes
description of him, was very excellent, civil, meek, gentle, liberal, and
desirous to be good to those that had any private authority under him. This
man had not the desire of great and mighty dominion, and therefore parted he
the Empire with Galerius, and would rule but in France, Britain, and Spain,
refusing the other kingdoms for the troublesome and difficulte government of
the same. He was a great supporter and mainteiner of the Christians. He was the
first that gave the^ license to live after their accustomed manner. This
wonderful act of his following besides other does show, that he was a sincere
worshipper of GOD and of the Christian religion.

Those which bare the chief offices among the Ethnikes, drove out of the
Emperors court all the godly Christians: whereupon this ensued, that the
Emperors them selves at the last were destitute of help: when such were
driven away, which dwelling in their courts: and living a godly life, powered
out their prayers unto God for the prosperous health both of the Empire and
Emperor: Co^stantius therefore minding at a certain time, to try what sincere
and good christians he had in his court, called together al his officers and
servants in ye same, faining himself to choose out such as would do sacrifice
to Devils, and that those only should dwell there and keep their offices,
and that those which would refuse to do the same, should be thrust out and
banished the court. At this appointment, all the courtiers divided them selves
in companies. The Emperor marked which were the co^stantest and godliest from
the rest: and when some of them said that they would willingly do sacrifice:
and other some openly and boldly denied to do the same. Then the Emperor
sharply rebuked those which were so ready to do sacrifice, and judged them as
falfe traitors to God, accounting them unworthy to be in his court, which
were such traitors to God, and forthwith commanded that they only should be
banished for the same. But greatly he commended them, which refused to do
sacrifice and confessed God, affirming that they only were worthy to be about
a prince, forth with commanding them, that thence forth they should be
faithful cou^sellours, and defendours both of his person and kingdom, and
that he meant to have them in more estimation, then all the substance he had in
his treasury. Eusebius in vita Constant.

Constantinus was son of Constantius the Emperor, a good and virtuous
Child, of a good virtuous father, borne in Britain, whose mother was named
Helena, Daughter to king Coilus. He was a most bountiful and gracious prince,
having a desire to nourish learning and good arts, and did oftentimes use to
read, write and study himself: he had marvelous good success and prosperous
atcheiuing of all things he took in hand, which then was (as truly)
supposed, to proceed of this, for that he was so great a favorer of the
Christian faith, which faith when he had once embraced, he did ever after most
devoutly and religiously reverence: and commanded by especial commissions and
proclamations, that every man should profess the same religion throughout all
ye Roman Monarchy.

He first entered into the Empire by the mercifulness of GOD, minding after
long waves of dolful persecution to restore his Church unto tranquillity and
peace. Au. 311. Eusebius accompteth in his Chronicle his reign continued, as
Eutropius affirms 31. years and two months: great peace and tranquillity
enoiyed the Church under the reign of this good Emperor, which took pain
and travel for the preservation thereof. First, yea and that before he had
subdued Licinius, he set forth many edictes for the restitution of the goods
of the Church, for the reuoking of the Christians out of exile, for taking away
the discension of the doctors out of the church, for the setting of them free
from public charges, and such like.

85 In the time of Constantine ye great, about the year 320. after ye nativity
of our Lord Jesus, there were excellent Doctors in the Church, to wit,
Eusebius bishop of Cesarea in Palestine, of whose doing we have very worthy
books, Rhetius bishop of Austun, Methodius disciple of Origene, who afterward
was a bishop. Athanasius bishop of the city of Alexandria: the which did
confute the errors of Arrius.

Athanasius after that he had procured the benefit of the Church 46. years,
and abidden sundry persecutions in great constancy and patience, dyed about
the year 367. After his death persecution was raised up in Alexandria by
Valentius. Hist. tripart. lib 8. Chap. 7.

86 In the year 326. after the nativity of Jesus in the 14. year of
Constantine, there was holden a council at Nice against Arrius, whereunto were
called 318. Bishops: amongst the which these were the principal, Eustache
Bishop of Antioch, Paphnutius of Egypt, and Maximus (these had their eyes
boared out for the faith) Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem, and many other
personages that suffered persecution under cruel tyrants. There was also
Spiridion bishop of Tremith in Cyprus, and Nicholas bishop of Mirrha in Lycia,
a very ancient man.

Also Athanase then Deacon of the Church of Alexandria, Theophilus bishop of
Alexandria.

Spiridion was he that in Lent offered fleshmeat unto a pilgrim going in his
journey, whereof he himself did eat, and caused him to eat, saying: that
unto clean Christians all things are clean. Hist. tripart. lib. 1. Chap. 10.

In the said council there was a very sharp and earnest contention on two
sides, the which the Emperor Constantine gave ear unto with great patience:
but at the last the Arrians fearing that they should be banished, they made a
countenance as though they would renounce their error, and to subscribe to
the determination of the fathers, excepting some, as Athanasius declares in
the decrees of the Synod of Nice: but the bishops after that they had
perceived their fraud, and how they disguysed and wrested the truth by words,
began to use the word of Essence and (...), that is to say, of ye selfsame
substance. Then the Arrians did contemn at these words (...) and essential,
as being strange and not used in the holy scriptures. The fathers showed that
they of necessity were constrained to use these words, for to signify that
the son was begotten of the substance of the father, according to the which
the son was consubstantiall with the father, that is of the same essence and
substance.

Moreover they would then have forbidden the ministers and Deacons for to
dwell with their wives: But Paphnutius, whom Constantine had in such reverence,
that he would cause him oftentimes to come into his pallaice, and embrace him,
yea he would even kiss the place whence he had his eye plucked out, he rising
up pronounced marriage to be honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled:
and he said that the company of a man with his wife is chastity: he persuaded
the council that they should set forth no such laws, which should give
occasion of fornication both to the men and to their wives.

The council liked his opinion, and they ordained nothing concerning this: but
left unto every one liberty to choose whither he would marry or not,
according as he should feel to be expedient for him or wholesome: whereby it
was lawful as before for the ministers to keep still their wives, and to
marry. But afterward Syricius and Gregory the seventh forbad such marriages:
which thing nevertheless the ministers of the East received not.

87 During the Empire of Constantius, the son of Constantine the great, in
the year 350. after the nativity of Jesus Christ, there were also these great
personages Doctors in the Church, Theodorus Bishop of Heraclia in Thrace,
Eusebius Bishop of Emesus, Hillarie Bishop of Poitiers of Aquitaine in France,
who made a book of the Trinytie against the Arrians, and many other books
which are very profitable.

88 Liberius a Roman borne, was elected bishop in the year of Christ (as S.
Hierome writes) 352. and about the twelfe year of the Emperor Constance. His
confession was agreeable to the Catholic faith: and he wrote very
Christianlike unto Athanasius, concerning God the father, Jesus Christ, and the
holy Ghost, as it may appear by his Epistle which is joined with the worke^s
of Athanasius.

Athanase does record in his Epistle made of them that lead a solitary life,
that in the time of Constance the Emperor he sent to Rome one named Eusebius,
an Eunuke, with letters, by which he threatened him exile, and on the other
part offered him great gifts to allure him by that means to consent with
Arrius, and to subscribe unto the condemnation of Athanasius: but Liverius
despised both the threatenings and rewards, as a sacrifice of blasphemy:
Whereupon the Emperor caused him to be brought out of Rome, and coming
toward him, he menaced to put him to death. But Liverius stoutly answered him
I am ready to abide any thing rather then of Christians we should be called
Arrians. What art thou, then said the Emperor, which with one naughty
fellow troublest all the world. Liberius said unto him, The word of faith
depends not upon a multitude. He was then sent away again by the Emperor
Constance into Berchee which is a City of Thrace, whereas when he had been
two years, he was called for again, as witnesses Theodoretus.

His restitution, as some say, was agreed unto by the Emperor, at the request
of many of the city of Rome, and of the Bishops of the Weast. The said.
Athanasius says in his Epistle aforenamed, that Liberius after the two years
of exile, being brought in fear by threatenings, and fear of death, yielded and
subscribed to the condemnation of Athanasius.

89 Basile bishop of Cesarea was also in ye time of Valentinian and Valens,
Emperors: whilst Valentinian lived the East Church was in rest, and agreeing
to the decrees of the Synod of Nice: but Valens made bulwarks for to advance
Arrianisme withal against those that were called Homousiastes, that is, the
true Catholics: and he styrred up great persecutions especially in Antioch
and in Laodicea.

His brother Valentinian reproved him therefore, admonished him by letters, as
Zonoras writes: but he was the more angry therefore, and minded to drive out
of the country Basile bishop of Cesarea, because that he would not at his
commandment communicats with Eudorius bishop of Constantinople, an Arrian:
but the Lord sent a sickness to his only son, the which he knowing to be
the vengance of God, converted from his wicked purpose, and gave ear certain
days unto the sermons of Basile.

90 Damasus borne in Spain, a Bishop of Rome, succeeded Liberius in the year
363. in the reign of Valence the Emperor: for the writing of Damasus look
Suidas, and Hierome in his Epistle to Custach, tome. 4. which makes mention of
Damasus. Of virginity he says, read the books ye Damasus composed both in
verse and prose.

He held in reverence the Synod of Nicee, and condemned Auxentius Bishop of
Millain, an Arrian. Theodor. lib. 4. Chap. 30. says that with saint Ambrose
he strove valiantly against heretykes condemning openly Sabellius, Arrius,
Eunomius, the Macedonians, Marcellus, and the heresy of Apollinaris.

Hierome in the apology against Iouinian, calls Damasus a singular man and
well learned in the scriptures and doctors of the church.

Athanase in his Epistle unto the Bishops of Africa, calls Damasus his
most dear companion, praising his diligence for that he had assema Synod at
Rome against the Arrians.

In the same time also was Anthony, who being a hundredth and fifty years
old, dyed.

He saw in a dream, as it were hogs, which trod under their feet the
altars: and waking said, that the Church shall be once again spoiled and
dispersed by whoremongers, adulterers and monstrous men.

Melanchthon notes this prophecy to be against the leacherous and voluptuous
life of Priests and Monches.

91 Vulphilas Bishop of Goths, in Sarmatia, hist, tripar, lib. 8. translated
the Bible into ye Goths language for the use of his countrymen, ye like
Hierome did in the Dalmatian tongue for the profit of the people there. And in
Croatia (which is the lower Pannonia) the Churches then, and the bishops used
the holy scriptures translated into their vulgar languages.

92 In the reign of Theodosius and Valentinian Emperors, in the year 386.
Ambrose was Bishop of Milain: His election was such, that Aurentius an Arrian
Bishop being gone from Milain, there arose a great sedition betwixt ye Arrians
and the catholics concerning the election of the Bishop.

And at that time Ambrose being a Citizen was proconsul: who considering this
uproar, because of his office, went hastily unto the Church whereas the people
were assembled: and after that he had used many persuasions for to revoke the
people to a concord, there rose up suddenly a common voice with one consent,
that Ambrose must be Baptized (who was already cathechised) and that after
they should consecrate him Bishop: whereunto he would not agree: but by the
commandment of the Emperor Valentinian, who incyted him thereto, he took
the office upon him, and then the Emperor gave thanks unto God, for that he
had called this man from the government of bodies unto governing of souls.

Such was the election of the Bishops by the people.

Then within a while after Iustine having drawn his son Valentinian into his
error, assayed to have allured Ambrose also thereto: but it was in vain. And
albeit that one day a band of soldiars did beset the temple, for to make
Ambrose come out: he not withstanding was constant, and made them a Bishoplike
answer, saying unto the^, that he would not not so easily depart from that
place, neither that he would leave ye flock unto the power of Wolves, nor yet
the Temple unto blasphemers. That and if they were purposed to kill him, they
should do it within the Temple, and that he would be content to dye. Look
Theodor. lib. 5. Chap. 3.

93 Vigilantius Bishop of Barcelon in Spain was in the reign of Theodosius
the Emperor: he stood in defense against the idolatry and worshipping of the
bodies of Martyrs like as S. Hierome writing to Riparius makes sufficient
demonstration, and says, that whilst we live we should pray one for another:
but after that we be dead our prayers cannot be heard. Moreover he said,
The commandment of continency or to abstain from marriage is heresy and the
seed of whooredome.

94 In the year 380. was Appollinaire of Laodicia Bishop of Syria, who wrote
thirty books against the madness of Porphirie, and as Suidas says, he
translated into Heroic verses the most part of the Hebrewe writings. Some do
hold opinion that he did the like also with the Psalms.

95 In the year after the natinitie of our Lord Jesus Christ 390. was saint
Hierome, the son of one named Eusebius, of the city of Stridon: who made
many books, homilyes, and commentaries upon the holy Bible, whose translation
thereuppon we have until this present time. He dyed when he was 91. years
old.

The debate that was then betwixt Hierome and the aforenamed Vigilantius bishop
of Barcelon in Spain, shows ye superstition began long before.

Of which matter we may see enough, how Vigilantius and other good Doctors of
that time avouched that the adoration of the Saints was drawn from the
superstition of the Paganes.

In that time were also Seuerien, who above all other things, is praised unto
the people because of his eloquence and worthy sermons made unto the people,
also Theodorus a Moncke, Lucian a Priest of Jerusalem, Martin bishop of Tours,
and Seuerus Sulpitius.

96 About the year 402. after the nativity of our Lord Jesus, and in the
reign of Arcadus and Honorus Emperors, was Chrysostom borne at Antioche, the
disciple of Libanus the Philosopher, he was an Auditor of Andragatius the
Philosopher, who forsook the estate of an advocate and followed Euagrius with
his other two companions Theodosius and Maximius, who were afterward bishops,
after that they had profited well in the holy scriptures, in the Monasteries.
For in those days the Monasteries were common schools, and the Abbots or
Priours that were presidents there, did teach publyckely the holy scriptures.

Chrysostom was bold and free in rebuking sins, especially in his public
sermons: and for that cause was he hated of the Clergy. He withstoode Gainas,
who requested of the Emperor that he might obtain a Temple at Constantinople
for his people. Look Hist. tripar. lib. 10. Chapt. 6,

Whosoever list to see the life of Chrysostom, Palladius has composed it.

97 S. Augustine was Bishop of Hippo, and was raised up by the power of God
for to refute the errors, as well of the Manichees, as of the Pelagians, who
said that Adam hurt only but himself in sinning, nothing his successors.
Then Satan by this subtility made them through cloaking their disease, to be
incurable. But heretics being vanquished by manifest testimonies of ye holy
scripture, that sin was descended from the first man into all his posterity,
they cauelled that it was descended by imitation, and not by generation.

Wherefore the holy men of that time, and amongst the rest S. Auguistine, was
forced to show how that we are not corrupted by the wickedness which we draw
from others by example: but that we bring our peruersitie even from our mothers
womb.

Furthermore, whereas they said, that we are not justified by the mercy of God
thorough Jesus Christ without our own merits, and that by our own works and
natural virtues we do purchase true and entyre justice before God: It does
appear how Saint Augustine showed, that by faith alone we be justified,
forasmuch as faith does embrace him that justifies, to wit, CHRIST our LORD,
with whom it unites and conioyneth, us in such sort that we be made partakers
of him, and of all the goods that he has: and that all good works ought to
come thereof, that is to say, of Jesus dwelling in us, by the free force and
efficacy whereof, we begin to will that which is good, and to apply our selves
thereto.

Now in what price and estimation we should hold the books of Saint
Augustine, the reader may sufficiently discern.

He dyed being 76. years of age, in the time when the city of which he was
bishop, that is to say, Hippo, was besieged by the Vandales. He governed the
said Church 40 years.

Whosoever will see his life, Possidonius has written it.

98 Under the Emperor Theodosius the younger, about the year 430. after the
nativity of our Lord Jesus, there were governors in the Church these good
men, Possidonius of Africa, Bishop of Calm.

Celestine Bishop of Rome, who sent Palladius a Grecian and Patricius into
Scotland and Ireland, for to preach the faith.

He sent also into England Saint German Bishop of Auxerre against the
heresy of the Pelagians.

He ordained that no should not meddle in the parish of an other.

Also that no Bishop should be elected contrary to the will of the people,
but that the consent both of the clergy and of the people should be required.

The Church in that time was greatly troubled, and specially in Africa: the
chiefest men of the church were sent to exile, and martyred by Gensericus king
of Vandales.

Moreover in that time was holden the council at Ephesus, in the which was
Cyrillus bishop of Alexandria chief, and Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople
was condemned by two hundred Bishops, who forged two persons in Jesus Christ,
the one of man, and the other of God, and he could not abide that men should
call the Virgin Marie the Mother of God, by communication of properties.

This council was holden in the tenth year of Theodosius the younger, and in
the year after the nativity of our Lord Jesus. 437.

99 Sedulius, Possidonius Sozenus, Socrates, and Theodoritus, were also in the
time above named, who set down in writing the Church matters.

Cassiodor us also made a brief collection of their books, and of the books
of Theodorite, the which have been changed by Epiphanius a schooler: and he
of these three has made one history, which is named Tripartite.

100 In that time also was Eucherius bishop of Lions, who wrote many books and
commentaries, amongst others upon Genesis, and upon the books of the Kings,
which books are found extant until this present.

101 In the year 440. or there aboutes after the nativity of our Lord Jesus,
and in the reign of Valentinian the Emperor, Victor bishop of a city in
Numidia, which is in Africa, called in latin Cartena, composed a book
against the Arrians and presented the same unto Gensericus king of the
Vandales, Arrian.

Polichronius Bishop of Jerusalem was at that time driven away out of his
country. He sold in the time of famine all his substance, and gave the price
thereof to the poor.

Archadius, Probus, Paschasius were also at that time in great price and
reputation with the forsaide Gensericus: but he seeing that he could not
persuade the^ unto the sect of Arrianisme, after that he had cruelly abused
them, caused them to be at the last martyred with others: some bishops he
displaced, and the books of religion and christian faith were burned.

102 In the year 476, Honoricus King of Vandales stirred up great
persecution in Africa against the Christians, and four thousand nine hundred
seventy and six were sent to exile, without sparing either age or sex:
afterward in diverse times and by sundry kinds of torture they were put to
death.

Some had their hands cut off others their tongues. Within a while after
under the shadow of council, he caused all the bishops to be assembled, the
doctors, and other catholics who to the number of thee hundreds tweenty and
four, as P. Diaconus wrote, or as others witness, four hundreds forty and
four, were sent to exile, and caused the Catholics to be shut in the
Temples, and gave them to the Arrians. One Bishop named Latus was burned, that
he might give example unto others.

Eugenius the Bishop of Carthage with more the^ five hundreds of the Clergy,
after grievous tormentinges were committed to exile: but within two years
after the said Honoricus died miserably with vermin, and Gonthamundus
succeeded him. This Gonthamundus sent for Eugenius the Bishop of Carthage
again, at whose request all the residue were called home again, and then the
Churches also were open.

103 In the reign of the Emperous Martian, Leo, Zeno, about the year after
the nativity of Christ 490. were these good personages, to wit, Proterius
bishop of Alexandria, Paschasius, Peter de Rauenna, Gennadius minister of the
Church of Marseille, all which did confute the errors of Eutiches.

Also, Prosper, Saluian, Sidonius, and German Bishop of Capua, Vaast Bishop
of Arras, Fulgence Bishop of Raspe in Africa, Autius Bishop of Vienna, Solenus
who preached Christ, and was bishop of Charters. Boethius a learned man, who was
put to death by the commandment of the Empepour Theodorike, an Arrian.

Also in ye same time was Epiphanius Bishop of Pauie, a very ancient man, who
brought into co^corde and good quietness the people of Liguria, he also brought
with him from Burgonie many captives as well for money, as by his good and holy
life, by which he obtained the redeeming of six thousand captives. Paul the
Deacon, and Nauclerus after him.

104 In the time of the Emperor Anastasius and in the 494. year, Gelasius of
Africa governed the Church of Rome 5. years: His father was bishop named
Valericus, Nauclere. Some do attribute unto him the distinction of the
Authentike books, and of the Apocrypha.

He made mention of many books of Apocripha, as the book called the
assumption of the virgin Marie. Also the Canons of the apostles etc. Look the
first volume of Councels.

He composed five books against Nestorius and Eutyches.

Also two against the Arrians, and one treatise of excommunication. He restored
again Messenus the bishop, after that he had known his penitence.

He excommunicated the Emperor Anastasius, because that he favored Acatius
and other heretics. He commanded the Ministers, that they should minister the
communion, but under both kinds, not under one alone.

He declared at Rome in the midst of the council, that in the Eucharistie
neither the substance of the bread and wine, nor yet the nature were changed:
but that therein as in an image, the flesh and blood of our Lord was
represented: and that in the sacrament they both were exhibited unto ye
faithful.

He declared there also yt those ought to be excommunicated which did not give
and take the sacrament of the Eucharistie whole. Look the fist volume of
councels.

Gennadius was in the time bishop of Marseille.

105 In the year 518 Hornusda borne in Freselande in the city of Campania,
governed the church of Rome nine years.

He ordained that marriages should be celebrated publicly and solemnly. Suppl.
Chron.

At that time was holden a council at Rome against the Eutychians, in which
also it was ordained that he which had made an honorable amends, should not be
admitted to the ecclesiastical ministry. Suppl. Chron.

Many Munks corrupted with ye Nestoria^ heresy, because they would not be
persuaded by the exhortations of Hormisda: but rather sowed noisome and
slanderous speeches against him, were banyshed out of Rome, against whose
hypocrisy he wrote.

He solicited by letters and Messingers John bishop of Constantinople, the
companion of Acatius, and the Emperor himself for to leave the sect of
Eutiches: but Athanase not only despised his admonitions, butsent his
Ambassadors back, saying, that it belonged to the Emperor for to command,
and not to the bishop of Rome.

Paul the Deacon adds of the Emperor besides all that, that he made them
go homewarde again by sea into Italy in a ship that was light and
vnbalassed, forbidding them to take land in Greece, but that they should pass
straight on being light without any carriage.

Anastase supporting the error of Eutyches, when he was 80. years old dyed
being stricken with lightening in the 25. year of his Empire.

Hormisda is renoumed for having done great alms deeds for the poor, and
for that he condemned the heresy of the Manichees, which had begone to hudde,
and for burning their books.

106 In the time of the Emperor Justinian, about the year 530. after the
nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, was Arator who composed the Acts of the
Apostles in Hexameter verses: and Gregory bishop of Langres, who was married.
Fascicul. Temp.

The council of Tours was holden at that time.

At the said council in the fifth chapter it was ordained, that every city
should nourish the poor strangers as much as it was able, so that the poor
might not be constrained to beg from place to place.

In the third chapter, that every bishop should keep his wife like as his
sister, and that he should govern both his house and family as well as the
Church: so as there might be no suspicion of him.

107 In the reign of the Emperor Mauritius in the year 591. the Wisigots
were converted unto the catholic faith: they left the heresy of the Arrians,
by the means of of Recardus, or Richard their king, and Leander bishop of
Seuile. The confession of their faith was sent unto the council of Tolete.

There happened in ye time a great controversy about the primacie, of the
church: for John Bishop of Constantinople was pronounced and declared in the
whole Synod of the Greeks, universal Patriarch: and Mauritius the Emperor
commanded Gregory bishop of Rome to obey the said Patriarche of
Constantinople: but Gregory would not abide that any Bishop should be
universal above all the rest: whereof it came that they called themselves
servauntes of the servants of God. Look Gregory in the 32. Epistle to
Mauritius, and 28. to John the Patriarche. Look John Calvin his Institution of
Christian religion. lib. 4. chapter 7. section. 4.

Some would name this Gregory to be one of the four Doctors of the Church,
with Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose: but histories do make sufficient
demonstration what a Doctor he was, seeing that he has brought in a rablement
of superstitions contrary to the word of God. Concerning which matter I will
not say that the others had such purity of doctrine sucked and drawn out of
the holy scriptures as they ought.

To conclude, in the time of this Gregory the ecclesiastical doctrine had
almost lost his purity, for it was imbrued and darkened with human
traditions: for monkerie did then take rote and begin to flourishe, and many
and sundry kinds of superstitions were daily brought in. And after the time
of Gregory the great there grew on still more horible and bitter darkness,
notwithstanding the Lord has always raised up some good persons, that men
might understand that all ought to be cut away and forsaken that is contrary to
the holy word of God.

About this said time was Serenus Bishop of Marseille, who caused the images of
saints and of our Lord Jesus Christ to be broken, because he saw the people
worship them. Then Gregory reproved him for breaking them, but he praised
him for that he forbad the people to honor them. Look the register or book
of his Epistles 10. part. Epistle 4. and Polidore Virgill lib. 6. chap. 13.

108 During the reign of the Emperor Phocas, and in the year of our Lord
604. the primacie of the Pope was established: a little before that the
abominable sect of Mahomet began to spread the horns abroad in Asia, which
being once published abroad far over, did corrupt, obscure and deface the
true doctrine in many places, and regions.

Then albeit that after the time of Gregory the great there arose up great
multitudes of Monks, some of them being more careful of their bellyes, then
to labor for to understand by the holy scriptures the purity of that true
service which GOD requires of us: and although the wrytings of so great a
multitude have brought great plenty of darkness, rather then of light into ye
Church: I will nevertheless (in speaking of other good men in their order)
make mention of the most discreet amongst them, who had some judgment and
doctrine with them: in which notwithstanding were some errors, by reason of
the confusion of doctrines which had then great liberty.

Isidorus the younger, Bishop of Hispalis, composed many books. He flourished
in the year of our Lord 630.

Within certain space after was Beda a priest and moncke, who was an English
man, he left behind him a great multitude of books, and made commentaries
upon the most part of the books of the holy scripture.

109 In the year 684. and in the reign of the Emperor Constantine the
fourth, was holden a general council at Constantinople of 289. bishops
against the Monothelites, who denied two wills and natures in Christ. George
bishop of Constantinople forsook his heresy. But Macarius Bishop of Antioch
did not leave it: wherefore he was driven from his bishoppricke. In this
council the discension that was betwixt the East church and the West church
was appeased.

There it was permitted unto the ministers of Greece for to have wives
lawfully, and to live in marriage, but not to ye ministers of the west church.

The author of the book entitled Fasciculus temporum, yeldeth a reason
thereof, saying, that they had vowed chastity of their own accord under
Gregory: but what shall they do then that have not the gift of continency? And
moreover can they vow for others that come after them. Furthermore they vowed
by constrainte and authority of the councels, as it appears here before.

It was there also ordained that none should carry any infant to be baptized,
except he knew the Lords prayer and the belief of the faithful. Look the
second volume of councels.

Also that they should make no vow against marriage: and that the priests who
did separate themselves from their wives because of their orders, should be
excluded from the communion. Look Peter Viret in his Dialogue to them of Orb.

In that time was Theodore Archbishop of Rauenna, who was a great alms giver,
and sought how to keep the clergy in good manners: for which cause he was
hated of them. Naucl.

Ledger bishop of Authun was also at that time: whom Chrion prince of the
Pallaice of France, in the time of Theodoricus, caused his eyes to be pulled
out, ye soales of his feet to be cut, his tongue and his lips to be mangled,
and after he caused his head to be taken off. Naucl. and Chron. Sig. This
Chrion cast down Lambert from the Bishopprick of Vtrech. Aim bishop of Sens
was banished by Chrion. Chron. Sig.

110 In the year 694. after the nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in
the reign of Justinian the second, the Saxons being yet Paganes, received the
Christian Faith by the mean of Sergius Bishop of Rome, according to ye saying
of Sup. Chron.

The said Sergius sent Vmbred unto the Frysons, for to convert them to the
faith.

Rabod their Duke would not thereto agree, alleging that it was better to
follow many then a few.

But afterward he being vanquished in war by Pepin great master of France,
the Frisons received the faith, being taught by one Willebroc a bishop, or by
Clement, as some say.

111 In the reign of Constantine, the fifte Emperor of that name, and about
the year 742. was holden a council in France by Boniface archbishop of
Mayence, Burcardus Guntarius, and other bishops, which had not been fourscore
years before: insomuch that it was said that religion in France was cast
under feet and wasted, so says Naucl.

There it was ordained that they should every year have a Synod in France,
the church men should carrye no armor, They were forbidden hunting, that they
should keep no manner of hounds or hawks.

That every Priest and bishop should keep himself within his parish, and
there should labor to root out old heresies of Paganism and the errors of
sacrificing for the dead, the deuinations, sorceries, and other immolations
that were used after the manner of the Pagans, about the churches, under the
names of Martyrs and confessors, vide Naucl.

At Constantinople was assembled a council by the aforenamed Emperor, in the
fourteneth year of his Empire, whereas were 300. and thirty bishops, there
was commandment given that all the images of saints should be taken away
and burned.

Also the Emperor made his subjects to swear that they should no more
worship any image of God nor of saints: but condemned to the death al those
that should call upon the virgin Marie for help, and those that should have
in their houses any relics of saints.

He commanded the Monks to marry, and the Nonnes to follow the estate of
marriage Sig.

Afterward he sent to ye Pope the conclusions of this council, commanding
him to cast the images out of Churches.

Sabin king of Bulgarie caused all the images in his kingdom to be beaten
down after the example of Constantine, whereupon he gat favor with the
Emperor. Naucl.

112 In the year 782. or thereaboutes, after the nativity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, wa^s Alcuin, otherwise called Albin, the disciple of worthy Beda, a
monk, and afterward Abbot of S. Martins in Tours, master to Charlemaigne,
he composed three books of the trinity, and many other books.

At that time reigned Constantine the sixte of that name, the 76. Emperor of
Constantinople, the son of Leo the fourth: who against the will of his mother
Hierene, caused the images of ye temples to be beaten down, about the which
not long before, she had assembled a council at Nice, at ye request of Pope
Adrian and of Therasius Archbishop of Constantinople, as Sig.

In this council there were 325. bishops. Naucl. And there it was decreed not
only that they should have images: but also that they should of right be
worshipped, and that all the gainsayers should be excomunicated. But this
decree was shortly abolished by Constantine, as is before said. Chron. Eusebius.

Moreover within a while after, that is to say, in the year 792. was holden a
Synod in Spain, in a city called Elyberis, or Granato, whereas did assemble
ninetene bishops and thirty and six priests or ministers. Felix Bishop of
Aquitaine was there president.

There it was concluded, especially amongst other points, that that there
should not be in Churches any images or payntings.

113 During the reign of Charlemaigne king of France, who was Emperor,
though that he had not gotten the imperial crown: in the year of our Lord
Jesus Christ 801. was Ansegisus the Abbot, who made four books of the decrees
of Charlemaigne, of Lewis his son.

Amongst all other things, and above al things, he would that the Bishopps
should preach unto the people the true doctrine gathered out of the holy
scriptures, and no otherwise: alleging therefore the saying of Gregory, That
a minister who is without the sun of preaching, kindles against himself the
wrath of the hidden judge.

He also ordained that no person should make profession of Monachisme, without
license of the king, for to shun many deceypts.

He would that there should be but a few feasts ordained: he repressed the
superfluity of ministers, ordeyning that they should be nourished with the
revenues of the Church with the poor.

Furthermore in the time of Charlemaigne, and in the mean time whilst he
passed his Winter at Francfort, upon the Meine a Council was holden of a great
multitude of Bishops, in which the decree of the council of Nice, concerning
worshipping of images, holden by Hierene (as is aforesaid) was pronounced
false and condemned of all men, etc.

Charlemaigne caused to be published a book in his name against images, the
which agreed with the articles of the said Council. Furthermore he made
answer to two books, which were found to have been written by Adrian the
Pope to Therasius the Patriarch, and to the Emperor of Constantinople. By this
writing Charlemaigne taxed, and secreatly condemned Adrian without naming of
idolatry.

There was also one council holden at Cauaillon under Charlemaigne: in which,
amongst other superstitions that were there condemned, the going of Pilgrimage
for religions sake was sharply repressed in the 45. Canon, alleging the
saying of S. Hierome. No man ought to be praised for that he has seen
Jerusalem, but for that he has lived well, etc.

It is said of Charlemaigne, that he reproved the Archbishop of Mayence,
named Boniface, because he had a cross all covered with gold, beset with
precious stones: for occasion so offering, he checked him and said, that it
was rather the furniture of an Emperor then of a pastor.

114 Haymo Bishop of Albastat, scholar of Alcuinus, did write upon all the
books as well of the old as of the new Testament, as is evident yet at this
present. He dyed in the reign of the Emperor Lewis the son of Charlemaigne
in the year of Christ. 834.

In his time was also Rabanus, who was first a Monk of the order of S. Benit
and Abbot of Fulden, afterward he was archbishop of Mayence, who was also a
disciple of Alcuinus, he also made commentaries upon all the books of the
Bible. He dyed in the year of our Lord 855.

Strabus was his scholar, of whom it is found written, that he was the first
that collected the ordinary gloss of the writings of the fathers and doctors,
the which gloss was afterward augmented by many others who added sentences
thereto.

115 Bertrand a Priest, a learned man and well instructed in the true
Godliness flourished in the time of the Emperor Lotharie in the year 840. He
wrote many good works: of which it is said that they did not come all to our
hands.

He wrote a very commendable work to King Charles the brother of Lotharie,
that is, one book of predestination, and one other of the body and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

The cause why he composed that book, wherein he writes very learnedly of the
supper of ye Lord, was by the advice and commandment of King Charles le
chauue, that he might bring the people into one and the true opinion, who were
then divided touching the said mystery.

So that one sort said, that Christ was therein taken and eaten in mystery,
and was figured under the Elements of bread and wine: some said on the
contrary, that all that which was seen in the said mystery was changed and
converted, and as many do say unto this day, transubstantiated into the body
and blood of Christ.

Some said that it was figuratively or evidently, this was the proper body of
Christ which he took of the womb of the virgin Mary, and with the which he is
ascended into heaven: others said that it was the spiritual body, that is,
the mystery, representation, figure, understanding and spiritual apprehension
of the proper body and blood of Christ, delivered to the death for our
sins, and risen again for our justification.

All which opinions are found remaining till this present: for some hold
still transubstantiation, others impanatio^, others a metaphore, but somewhat
real.

Others there were who acknowledged nothing else but mere bread and wine: all
which doubts be in the said book briefly dissolved under these two questions,
to wit, whether Christ be there in mystery and figure, or according to the
truth.

Whither this body of Christ be the proper body which he took of the womb of
the virgin Marie, or not. The which two questions he debateth as well on the
one party as on the other, affirming concerning the first, as well by natural
reasons, drawn from common understanding, as by evident testimonies of the
holy scriptures, and ancient doctors, that the body and blood be therein
taken under the veil and couerture of bread and wine, figuratively, and
shadowed, not visibly and evidently, (the which he calls, according to the
truth.) Also not clearly and openly, but secreatly.

Concerning the other question, by one and the same process he shows by
infringible and invincible arguments that in this mystery is the spiritual
body: that there is a mistical and spiritual understanding thereof, and not
the very same body that he took of the virgin Marie.

He says verily that the body of Christ is there, inasmuch as the spirit of
Christ is in the sacrament, that is to say, the power of the word of God: the
which does not only feed the soul, but also purges and cleanses it.

For to see this matter more at large you may read the book that is at this
day extant in French and published abroad.

116 In the year 964. Huldricke Bishop of Auspurge in Allemaigne did greatly
withstand the decrees of Pope Nicholas; he wrote unto him one Epistle, showing
among other things, that he did amiss, when he went about to compel the
Clearks (whom he ought to have exhorted that they should keep the chastity
of marriage) by force and vyole^ce to abide in continency.

Saying also that this is deemed of all men violence, when any body is
constrained to keep any particular decree contrary to the institution of the
Gospel, and against the doctrine of the holy Ghost.

He showed plainly that the Lord in the old Testament has constituted and
ordained marriage for priests, and that we do not read that afterward he
forbad it.

That every one following the saying of the Apopostle in the 7. Chapt. to the
Corinthians, ought to have his wife.

That hypocrites do corrupt this sentence, and falsely say, that it
appertains only to the lay people, and yet notwithstanding they make no
difficulty of conscience, in any holy order whatsoever they be placed, to
abuse other men's wives.

Also he shows that this sentence of the Apostle, that is, that every one
should have his wife, excepteth no person, but him that makes profession of
co^tinencie, or him that has determined to persevere in virginity, according
to the Lords will.

That the vow of man cannot break the commandment of God. That he who
cannot contain, ought to marry. 1. Cor. 7.

He also alleges the Canons, that is, that the Bishop or minister ought in no
wise put away his wife under a color of Religion: and that if he forsook her,
he should be excomunicated: and that if he abode in that obstinacy, he should
be utterly dismissed and cast of from his calling.

That the bishop must be unreprovable, and the husband of one wife, and how
that the Apostle (to the end that none should convert this sentence to one
Church or congregation alone) added consequently, He that knows not how to
govern his household, how shall he govern and guide the church of God? and he
also shows yt the gloss of those is false, who will expound the Church to be
the only wife.

Also that those which allege for their patron and defendour S. Gregory, be
ignorant, not understanding that perilous decree made by S. Gregory, which
was afterward purged by a worthy fruit of repentance: for it is said that on
a certain day as the said Gregory sent to his poole for fish, he had drawn
up out of the said poole, which he saw, above six thousand heads of young
children, whereat he being moved with true repentance, began to weep: and
confessing that the decree that he had made concerning the continency of
Priests had been cause of such a murder, he then amended his fault (as it is
said) by a worthy deed of repentance. And after that he had condeemned his
said decree, he praised the council of the Apostle, to wit, that it is better
to marry then to burn, adding more on his part, that it is better to marry,
then to give occasion of murder.

In the end he confounded by many testimonies of ye holy scripture the horror
of vowing continency, and following the saying of S. Paul 1. Timo. 4. he
declared, that it is the doctrine of Devils to forbid marriage.

Whereby we must note, that the Lord in the midst of the fury and madness of
the world rayseth up some faithful ministers for to withstand the horrible
spoils of the adversaries. He that would see at large the said Epistle
published now in French, read the first of Crespin upon the estate of the
Church, out of the which I have gathered some part of these collections.

117 In the year 869. was Johannes Scotus (it was not John the Friar) a
learned man, who was sent for out of France into England, by Alfridus king of
England: who founded the School or university of Oxenforde, whereas the said
Scotus was president: but afterward becoming a Monk, he was slain by the Monks
of ye Convent as he was teaching the^. He wrote like as Bertrand did, touching
properly the body and blood of Christ in the supper.

In that time, or thereabouts, the Normands being vanquished, received the
faith. Naucl.

The king of Bulgaria also about this time received the faith, and willingly
forsaking public affairs he was made a Monk, and left the realm, to his
son, who rejected the faith: so that his father came out of the monastery,
and went against him in battle: and having gotten the victory, he caused
his eyes to be dug out, and kept him in prison, and gave the kingdom to
his younger son, and after he returned to ye Monastery again. Naucle. and
Sigeb.

Adrian the Pope sent three legates unto the Bulgarians, being newly converted,
to wit, Siluester, Leopard and Dominicke, for to institute ordinances
concerning the affairs of the Church, according to the Komaine form and
fashion: but afterward they being persuaded by the Greeks, rejected the latin
ministers, which thing bread great hatred betwixt the latin Church and the
Greek Church, and all the contention of the said Churches happened through
this Primate, and for the diversity of ceremonies. Naucl.

Edmund ye last king of the East Englishmen, was slain by the Paganes of
Denmark, in the year 871. and is canonised a martyr.

118 In the year 938. Ratherius Bishop of Verone wrote against the herisie of
Anthromorphites, which was renewed again in that time, saying that God had a
corporal form.

In the same time Spireneus Duke of Bohemia received the Christian faith,
thorough the persuasion of the Emperor Henricus. Suppl. Chro.

Aldebert of Bohemia bishop of Prague went to Pannonia for to preach the faith,
and baptized the king of Hungaria. From whence he went to Prusia, whereas he
was martyred.

119 In the reign of Henry the second of that name, Duke of Bauiere, who
obtained the Empire by election in the year 1005. Burchardus, first a Monk
of Lob, disciple of Albert before mentioned, was bishop of Worms he compiled
the old canons: which afterward were abridged by Gratian, or rather corrupted,
as it may easily be judged in conferring the one with the other. Rhenanus in
his annotations upon Tertullian.

120 In the reign of Henry the third of that name, and in the year 1039.
lived Berengarius a Doctor, borne at Tours, Archedeacon of Angres, who
maintained the opinion of the foresaid Johannes Scotus, and Bertran concerning
the Eucharistie.

And in the year of Christ, 1051. Pope Leo assembled a council at Verseill,
whereas was first handled the opinion of Transubstantiation (albeit that this
word had been invented not long before) and there was condemned the opinion of
Johannes Scotus and Bertran.

Berengarius appeared not at the said council, but sent thither two clearkes:
and as they went about to excuse Berengarius, and to show reasons therefore,
they were beaten with fistes, and put in prison. Look how Decolampadius
reasons therabout.

Arnulphus Archbishop of Lugdune, Lived in the time of Honorius the second,
1127. as writes Hugo, Platina, Sabellicus. He was a man learned, zealous and
of great devotion, and a worthy preacher he came to Rome: in his preaching he
rebuked ye dissolute and Lascivious losenes, incontinencie, avarice, and
immoderate pride of the clergy: procuring all to follow Christ and his
Apostles in poverty rather, and pureness of life. By reason whereof this man
was well accepted and highly liked of the nobility of Rome, for a true
disciple of Christ: but of the Cardinals and the clergy no less hated, then
favored of the other. In so much that proudly in the night season, they took
him and destroyed him. This his Martyrdom (says he) was revealed to him
before from God by an Angel, he being in the desert, when he was sent forth
to preach, whereupon he said to them publicly with these words: I know
(says he) ye seek my life: and know, ye will make me a way privily. But why?
because I preach to you the truth, and blame your pride, stoutnes, avarice,
incontinencie, with your unmeasurable greedines in getting and heaping up
riches: Therefore be you displeased with me. I take here heaven and earth to
witness, that I have preached to you, that I was commanded of the Lord. but
you contemn me and your creator: who by his only son has redeemed you,
and no marvel if ye seek my death, being a sinful person preaching to you
the truth: when as if S. Peter were here this day, and rebuked your vices
(which do so multiply above all measure) you would not spare him neither. And
as he was expressing this with a loud voice, he said moreover: for my part, I
am not afraid of death for the truths sake: but this I say to you, that God
will look upon your iniquities, and will be revenged, you being full of all
impuritie, and play the blind guides to the people committed to you, leading
them the way to hell. A God he is of reuengeance. Thus the hatred of the
clergy being incensed against him for preaching the truth, conspired against
him, and laying privy wait for him, took him, and drowned him. Sabellicus
and Platina says they hanged him. Diverse and sundry articles he held, which
are set down in the two volumes of the general Councels.

121 About the year of our Lord 1110. Sigebert flourished, who (as it may well
appear) was a very expert man, like as his Chronicle yields testimony.

In the year 1126. Hugo of the Saxon nation, and surnamed of saint Victor the
divine of Paris, was in that time at Paris. Amongst his writings are found
many complaints against the disorders of the Clearkes in his time.

122 Bernard first Abbot of Claireuaux, a Burgonion borne, flourished about the
year 1140.

By the writings of S. Bernard we may know how yt in that time miserably
corrupted, he strove against ye impiety of the Pops and Churchmen. Look his
sermon 67. he calls them the ministers of Antichrist, in the sermon 57. to
Pope Eugenius and in the sermon 33. upon ye Canticles he says oftentimes how
yt the prelates are become Pilates. He reproved Eugenius, because he letting
alone the word of God advanced man's traditions.

Hugo a Cardinal, in his postille upon Saint John alleges, that S. Bernarde
says in a certain place thus, It seems, O good Jesus that all the
university of Christians professed have conspired against thee, and that those
be chiefest of the conspiration which do obtain the prymacy in thy church.

About the end of his days he declared sufficiently that he knew perfectly the
true doctrine of justification through Jesus Christ, whom alone he had for his
refuge, casting aside all other holiness and righteousness.

His writing do yield certain testimony of him: he died being 63. years old.
Nauel.

123 John of Saresburie Bishop of Chartres, was in the year 1157. Who
sharply withstoode the wickedness of the Popes and of the Clergy.

He wrote a book intytuled Obiurgatorium, Cleric.

In his book entitled Policraticus, he says thus: In the Romish Church be
set the Scribes and Pharisees, lading the shoulders of men with importable
burdens.

The high priest is heavy to all men, yea wholly importable, and past the
strength of man to bear: His legates do so disperse themselves abroad, as if
satan were come out from the presence of the Lord for to torment the Church.

Judgment against the people, none other thing but a very merchandise. They
tustifie the wicked for gold and silver, and delight in matters that are
ungodly. They eat the sins of the people: they be therewith clothed and
norished in all excess, whereas the true worshippers do worship the Lord in
spirit. He that sticks not unto their doctrine is either judged an heritike
or a schysmatike. etc.

There have been oftentimes good doctors in the Church, but they durst not say
nor write all that which was needful.

In a book entitled Speculum, it is said that this good Bishop John amongst
other complaints has sometimes ben heard say unto Pope Adrian the fourth (with
whom he was very familiar) on this wise. That the Pope has been truly
called a sernaunt of servants, because he served the Romans, that were
servants to avarice. The said Pope Adrian sometimes would say unto the said
Bishop John: That many Popes did succeed rather Romulus in murders and
parricides, then saint Peter in feading the flocks.

124 In the year 1127. and in the reign of Friderike Barberosse the Emperor,
Arnolde bishop of Bixta stood in contention against the administration of
civil matters and of the temporal sword, which the clergy had usurped. And
therefore R. Barns says, that after Adrian was elected Pope, he would never
go into the Church of Latran for to be consecrated, except the said Arnold
were first banished the city, calling him heretic, and a solicitour of the
people of Rome for to maintain their liberty.

In the same time was Peter de Blois, who by his writings touched the
wickedness of Churchmen: in a certain epistle that he wrote to an official
of a Bishop, he exhorts him to depart out of Babylon, detesting the tyranny
of Bishops, and of their officials, calling them hellishe harpies, who do
nothing else but pill and tear in pieces the Church of Jesus Christ. He
oftentimes named the eleargie Syria, Edom, the Calves of Bethel, Idols of
Egypt, the fat of Samaria, Priests of Baal, and judges that forge wicked
laws, and by other like names he called them. He said thus of Rome: all is
subverted at Rome through gifts, the Monks have all liberty for silver, and
redeem for yearly pensions all manner wickedness of the flesh.

Their filthiness begins to be song in the Tabernacles of Geth, and in the
streates of Ascalon. Thus did the prince of Sodom, and his disciples after him
be set in the chair of pestilence etc. He that would see more of him, let him
read his writings.

125 Then in the time before mentioned being covered with darkness and
horrible wickedness, as historiographers do credibly report. And then when
as the Locustes and Vermines were flocked abroad in so great multitudes, for
to devour and eat up that little greenenes that remained in the world: we see
yet that the Lord has raised up some good people for to go about to stop
such gulfes, in the midst of which reigned all infections and filthiness in
unrighteousness and ungodliness.

Whereupon we have to consider, that the Lord does not suffer such Monsters,
weout reproving them for their horrible misdoinges, and that he will not wholly
suffer the clearenes and purity of his holy word to be quenched, albeit that
the world deserve that it should be so, because of the wicked fruits that
the people do bring forth. And also we may mark how that by means in time
and place he brings again, as the dawning of the day, his true light, for
the which at this time Waldo of Lions was also raised up, whose history in
this place it shall be good to consider.

The history of Waldo.
126 In the year 1160. or thereaboutes, and in the reign of the foresaid
Emperor Friderike Barberosse: Peter Waldo a citizen of Lions, a rich and
learned man, was astonished and brought into a trance, in leaning to man's
frailty, by means of a certain man, who at that time was with the said
Waldo and other the principal men of the foresaid city of Lions, recreating
themselves, and talking together, who suddenly fell down dead in the presence
of them all. Which thing Waldo seeing amongst the rest, wondered greatly and
was stricken to the bottom of the heart, so as he thought with himself that
God did sufficiently declare to him by this example, and other like arguments,
that he ought not so to ground himself in earthly matters, which be
corruptible and frail, but that he ought (better then he had done before)
look up on high to the heavenly life, whereunto he felt himself called by
God. And therefore he purposed with himself to regard his life more narrowly,
and to repent, and to meditate upon true piety. And then he began to do many
alms deeds, and to open his house to all men, and to speak of repentance and
true godliness to every one that came to him about any business, what soever it
was.

This liberality drew many poor and needy, so as they began to come by
flocks unto him: and he daily expounded unto them somewhat out of the holy
scriptures into the vulgar tongue: for he was a learned man (as the history of
that time, and the Catalogue of the witnesses of the truth does testify.

The Bishop of that place and the prelates that do carry the keys (as they
say) and will not enter in themselves, nor yet suffer others to enter, began
to murmr thereat, that a lay or secular man (as they term them) should
handle and declare the holy scriptures in the vulgar tongue, and that he
should make assemblies in his house, warned him under pain of excommunication
to cease: but for all that the zeal ye Waldo had for the advancement of the
glory of God, and the desire which the simple ones had for to learn, was no
whit diminished: but on the contrary side the resistance and tyranny of
prelates gave occasion to discover the errors and superstitions of the Roman
see, which were hidden in darkness.

The like thing happened in our time, that is, when as the Pope and the
Priesthood would not only endure that Martin Luther should reprove their
indulgences: they themselves were cause that their errors were more narrowly
sought out, and their abominable blasphemies discovered.

It is easy then to consider that this trance aforenamed, which Waldo had,
was sent from God: and the fruit and end also showed the same: for the trance
that moved Bruno to seek for remedy and consolation at his own fantasy
without the word of God, was of the Devil, and proceeded from his illusions.

And for to go on further in speaking of Waldo, of whom the Waldenses took
their name.

He in the same time made a collection in his vulgar tongue of the places of
the ancient fathers: for to defend his adherents, not only by authority of
the holy scriptures: but also by testimony of the doctors, against the
adversaries.

It is very likely by the historians, yea by the writings of the adversaries,
that this assembly endured a certain time (as about the space of four or
five years) that Waldo taught in ye city of Lions before that he was put to
exile and banishment: for inasmuch as he was mighty and had friends, he was
not so sone entrapped with dangers, as after ward they were: and thus the name
of the poor in Lions began to be a byworde, they were called Waldenses,
Lyonnistes, Insabbati, that is to say, such as observe no sabbothes nor
feasts, and many other such names were devised against them, for to make them
seem detestable.

The doctrine of the Waldenses.
After that Waldo and his adherents were driven out of Lions, some of them went
back into Lombardie, whereas they multiplied: so that their doctrine began to
be spread thorough Italy, and came to Sicilia: as the patents of Frederike
the second, conde, set forth against them whilst, he reigned, do sufficiently
declare.

By the recytal of those that have written against them, and of Reinerius, who
lived and wrote shortly after that time, it may be gathered that their
doctrine was this:

That we must give credit to the holy scrptures only concerning matters of
salvation, without staying upon men. That they do contain al whatsoever is
necessary for salvation, and that none other thing ought to be received but
that alone which god has commanded.

That there is but one only mediator: and therefore they not ought to call
upon saints.

That there is no purgatory: but that all men that are justified thorough
Christ, go unto eternal life. That there is no third nor fourth place.

They receive and allow two sacraments only, Baptism and the Lords supper.

They say that all masses, and especially those invented for trespasses, be
damnable, and that they ought to be abolished.

That all human traditions must be rejected, and not be accounted any thing
necessary to salvation. That singings and rehearsing of offices, and fastings
tied unto a certain day, superfluity of feasts, difference of meats, so many
degrees and orders of priests, Monckes and Nonnes: so many blessings, and
consecrating of creatures, vows, pilgrimages and all the confusion and great
heap of ceremonies invented heretofore, ought to be abolyshed.

They deny the prymacie of the Pope, and especially the power that they usurp
over cyuill pollycies. And they allow none other degrees save of bishops
ministers and Deacons.

That the sea of Rome is the very Babylon, and that the Pope is at this
present the fountain of all evils.

That the marriage of ministers is good and necessary in the Church.

That those that hear the word of God, and understand it aright, be the true
Church: unto whom Jesus Christ has given the Keys for to let in the sheep,
and to drive away the Wolves.

Lo here is briefly the doctrine of the Waldenses, the which the enemies of
the purity of the holy scriptures, have impugned against, and for the which
(by their own testimony) they have been persecuted.

Mathias Illiricus in the Catalogue that he collected of the witnesses of the
truth, speaks of the consultations of certain aduocats of Auignon. Also of
the three Archbishops of Narbonna, of Arles, and of Aix, and likewise of the
Bishop of Albanie, about the rooting out of the Waldenses: written three years
past: by which it appears, that at that time and before were a great number
of the faithful dispersed here and there throughout all France.

It may also be gathered by the consultations of the said three Archbishoppes,
that as the number was great, the persecution also was very cruel: for in the
end of them it is found thus written. Who is so young in France, that he
knows not the condemnation of the heretics called Waldenses, executed of
long time so justly? A thing so famous, and so manifest, which at so great
costs and charges of the Catholics was sealed with so many condemnations, and
the deaths of those wicked infidels, can it be called in doubt?

It appears then what bouchery was used at that time with the faithful, what
cruelty the supposts of antichrist exercised then against the good which were
willing to maintain the purity of the holy and true service of God, like as
by his holy word he teaches us that he would be adored, served and honored.

I will also recite some thing of that which is written of Albigeois or Albois,
a people that had received a beginning of the light of the truth, and stood
in contention against the Idolatry of transubstantiation: which thing first
caused them to retire from the Romish Church.

They inhabited the country about Toulouse and Albi. S. Dominick, author of
that new sect, that call themselves preachers, came out of Spain and
persecuted them greatly both in word and deed.

Pope Innocent the third sent also in that time unto them a legate, Nicholas
bishop of Thusculane, who coming thither with four horses and two mules,
returned in short space with fifty and with great pillage which he brought
thence, having exercised great cruelty and tyranny against these poor
people, whom also he charged with horrible crimes, thereby to make them odious
to all the world.

The said Pope caused to be published a croisard against them, and gave full
indulgence and remission of sins unto those that would make war against
them. Simon Earl of Mountforde went against them, and destroyed a great
multitude of them near Tholous, a hundredth and forty were burned in the
diocese of Narbonna, and 4. hundreds in the diocese of Tholous, at sundry
times.

In this discomfiture of the Albigeois Peter king of Tarracon, who had favored
them, was slain in combat, Simon de Mountford pursued his victory: Look
Matthew Paris the English historigrapher who was in that time.

127 In the year 1240. was Peter de Vinea, Chauncelour to the Emperor
Frederyke the second of that name, who wrote at that time many letters in the
name of ye Emperor, of which some be in print till this present, wherein he
complayneth that all the world cannot content the insatiable covetousness of
the Pope: That the beastlynes of the Clergy is so filthy, that it is a shame
to be named.

He openly mainteyned that the Pope has neither by divine nor human right
any power of the sword.

Guillame le Orfeure also in his time showed that the Pope was Antichrist:
Rome, Babylon, and the prelates members of Antichrist. Cesarius in the 10.
Distinct. of his dialogues.

Then the fruit of the doctrine that the Waldenses at that time spread abroad
appeared in many who did set themselves against the frauds and abominations
in the sea of Rome.

Robert Grosted sometime bishop of Lincoln, 1253.
a man famously learned (as that time served) in three tongues, both Latin,
Greek and Hebrew, also in all other liberal sciences, whose works to this day
are extant, this Godly and reverent Bishop after diverse conflicts and agonies
sustained against the bishop of Rome: after the Example of Guliel. de saint.
Amor of Nico. Gallus and other before mentioned: at length after great labors
and travels of life, finished his course, and departed at Buckdoue, in the
month of October 1253. Math. Pariensiens. Of this Robert Grosted writes
Cestrensis in the seventh book of his history: that partly for that it
grieved him to see the intolerable exactions of the Pope in the Realm of
England, partly because he refused to admit a certain young Nephew of the
Pope to be canon of his Church. He therefore writing to the Pope, and
signifying that he could not admit any such persons into his Church, which
neither knew themselves nor the tongue of the people, nor the charges
committed unto them, was called up to Rome, and there excommunicated, who then
appealing from the Pope, shortly after departed in the year above written. It
chanced within two years after his decease, that Pope Innocent being a
sleep, a certain Bishop apparelled Bishoplike appeared unto him, and striking
him with his staff on the left side, said Surge miser, veni in iudicium, that
is, rise wretch and come to thy judgment. The next day after, the Pope was
found amassed and greatly troubled.

128 In the year 1260. flourished Guil. de saint Amor, a doctor of Paris, a
Chanon of Bauuais In his sermons (as he himself does witness) he especially
reprehended the Hypocrisy of Prelates, saying that this vice was most
dangerous of all others, wherewithal the Church was wholly infected.

He stood against the orders of monks, and especially the begging sort,
accusing and blaming them, for because they troubled the Churches: he alleged
testimonies out the scriptures, which made mention of Antichrist and of his
adherents, and applying it unto the time present, he proved by thirty and nine
tokens, that the begging Friars were false Apostles.

He expounded this place of the holy Gospel, If thou will be perfect go and
sell all that thou have etc. Matt. 19. Chap. verse. 11. Whereupon the begging
friars do found their order, and he gave to note that this place is not
understood of actual poverty (as the sophisters do argue) but in habitual:
that is to say, that Jesus Christ demands of us, not that we should cast
away and rid off that we have: but that we should be ready whenever the
confession of the name of God and the glory of Jesus Christ shall require to
abandon not only yt which we possess, but our own soul: and not only as it
is declared in S. Luke Chap. 14. verse. 26.) to forsake father and mother, yea
and to hate both them and our own lives in respect thereof.

To conclude Jesus Christ would that we should forsake all, when the confession
of the truth do require.

Matthew Paris an english historiographer writes, that in the same time there
was great contention in the university of Paris, against the monks, who by
multitudes would oppugn and beat down all that they lusted, having forged a
new book full of errors and blasphemies, the which they had renewed and
entitled Euangelium Aeternum, that is to say, the everlasting Gospel, which
book they would have published abroad.

Then for to appease this tumult, there were six appointed out of the schole,
who were at that time the most famous in all the university, amongst whom was
Guil. de sanct Amor, for to send unto Rome to the Pope, and to show the
insolency and blasphemy of the monks.

The monks sent also on their parts: and after great contention, their errors
touching their eternal Gospel was condemned. But the Pope with certain
Cardinals and Monks did not repress ye tyranny of these begging monks,
writing that it was greatly needful that such souldiars should become most
mighty all abroad.

These be the very words of Matthew Paris who was in the same time.

There is also a book found to have been written in the same time, entitled
de periculis mundi, that is to say of the dangers of the world, which the
papists attributed to Guillame de saint Amor, making him only of this
opinion: but it appears to have been written by many, and contains the
complaints against this new vermin of monks, with an advertisement to the
Church, that great evils will come thereby.

The said saint Amor was condemned for an heretic, whereupon rose great
ado between the scholars of Paris: but for fulfilling of the Popes
commandment, M. William was banished out of France.

Some hold opinion that certain of his books are until this present day in
the lybrarie of Sorbona, and many other Doctors have written the like.

To conclude we see that albeit the truth is daily rejected and banished, yet
notwithstanding it grows up every day more and more in time and place: For
what though it be rejected and banished, nevertheless for all the great
bulwarks that can be devised against it, they can in no wise hinder, but that
the truth will shine, yea in the midst of the most profounde and thick
darkness, in the tempests and outrages of our time. Whereupon we must
acknowledge, that it is no human work (for that it seems feeble) but that
it is of God, who in his time will bestow on us so singular a grace and
benefit.

129 Laurence an English man, a doctor of Paris, in the year 1275.
maintained the opinion of M. Guillam de saint Amor and wrote against the Monks
one book containing an admonition to beware of false prophets, and one other
book by which he defends the foresaid saint Amor.

The book that these Monks had set forth before of the eternal and
spiritual Gospel, was burned openly: and for to cover their filthiness and
impudency, they made the people believe that a certain monk, who was dead
long before, had composed the same.

Petrus Johannes was about the year of our Lord 1290. which taught and
maintained many things against the Pope: proving that he was Antichrist, and
that the sinagogue of Rome was great Babylon. He wrote upon Matthew, upon the
Epistles, and upon ye Apocalypse. Mention of this Petrus Johannes is made in
Nicho. Emericus in lib. Inquisitionum etc. And because the Pope could not
burn him alive before his death he caused his bones to be taken up and burned.

Robertus Gillus, who being borne of a right noble parentage, for devotion
sake, was made a Dominicke friar, about the same year of our Lord 1290. This
man, as appears by his visions and ye prophetie of Hildegardis, his visio^s
all tend against the spirituality of Rome. Where in the fifth chapter, he
calls plainly the Pope an Idol, which having eyes sees not, neither lusts
to see the abominations of his people, nor the excessive enormitie of their
voluptuosnes. But only to see to heaping up of his treasure: and having a
mouth, speaks not, but says: I have set good men over them (which is
sufficient for me) to do them good either by my self, or by some other. And
it follows in the same Chapter, woe be to that Idol, woe be to the mighty
and proud, who shall be equal in earth to that Idol. He has exalted up his
name in earth, saying: who shall bring me under? Is not my house compared with
mighty potentates of the land? I am higher then Emperors, kings, or princes:
knights on their horse back do service unto me. That which my fathers had not
before me, that have I done to me, etc. This godly man did forewarne (as in a
certain chronicle is declared) how God would punish the simonie and avarice of
the clergy with such plague, that rivers should run with blood etc. It is
said that there is remaining a great volume of his visions, which are not yet
abroad: for those which are extant, are but a brief extract out of his
visions and revelations.

Dantes an Italian writer, a Florentin, lived in the time of Lodouicus the
Emperor in the year 1300. and took part with Marsilius Patauinus against
three sorts of men, which he said were enemies to the truth: That is the
Pope: Secondly, the order of religious men, which count themselves the children
of the Church, when they are children of the devil their father: Thirdly, the
doctors of decrees and decretals. Certain of his writings, be extant abroad,
wherein he proves the Pope not to be above the Emperor, nor to have any right
or jurisdiction in the empire. He refused the donation of Constantine to be a
fained thing, as which neither did stand with any law or right. For which he
he was taken of many for an heretic. He complained moreover very much, the
preaching of Gods word to be omitted: and instead thereof, the the vain
fables of monks and friars to be preached and believed of the people: and so
the flock of Christ to be fed not with the food of the Gospel, but with
wind. The pope, says he, of a pastor is made a wolf, to wast the Church of
Christ, and to procure with his clergy not the word of God to be preached,
but his own decrees. In his canticle of purgatory, he declares the Pope to
be the whore of Babylon. And to their ministers, to some he applies two
horns, to some four. As to the Patriarchs, whom he notes to be the tower
of the said whore Babilonicall. Ex libris Dantis Italice.

130 In the year of our Lord Jesus Christ 1306 was Peter Cassiodorus, an
Italian, a noble man, and well instructed in the word of God: who wrote an
Epistle to the Englishmen, whereof because of the aduertisment and instruction
contained therein I judge it best I write it here down, by articles, as it
were for to give understanding the better unto the simple sort of that that is
contained therein.

First he shows that the Roman princes, to wit, the Pope and Cardinals, be
enemies to the Church, calling them Scribes and Pharisees that sit in Moses
chair: destroying the Church, lading it with sorrow: making their philacteries
larg, and desiring to enrich themselves with the Maribones thereof: laying
thereon importable charges: bringing it into all manner servitude, which has
been always free.

That the Pope did often call to remembrance this sentence of the Prophet:
(against ye sense whereof he applied himself to robbery. Isay 8. Take thee a
great volume, and write therein after the fashion of men, make have to spoil,
dispatch and be nimble in filching and pilling.

That it does nothing less belong to the Pope, then the saying of the Apostle
to ye Hebrews. chap. 5. that is, that the high priest being taken of men, is
constituted by men, for the things that belong unto God: That such a high
priest was not ordained for to apply himself to spoils and rapine, for to lay
tributes and yearly rentes upon men, nor yet for to kill men.

That it is not profitable to use the ministry of the Church in the synister
part (as the Pope and his do) but in the right part, by which ministry the
devil is vanquished, and a great many souls led unto Jesus Christ.

That none can serve both God and Mammon together, and to please his will,
cleave to the revelations of the flesh and the blood, and offer to Christ
gifts and presents such as are due unto him. And without doubt that pastor
that watches not for the edifying of the flock, does on the contrary
prepare a way for the roaring Lion, who seeks to devour every one.

That the Pope takes away from the flocks the good pastors, and that in the
room of them he sets his nephews and kinsefolkes, and other ignorant
persons, that are deaf and dumb, who understand not the bleating of the
sheep, and that do not regard the biting wolfes, that they deal like
hirelinges, reaping other men's haruestes: whose hands are fit to toss the
pot, their backs do they turn away from burdens.

Also that it does appear evidently that the office of Elders, which they call
priests, is left, and that the service due unto God is withholden, and that
the custom of giving alms is abolished, by which the holy devotion of kings,
princes and other Christians is brought to naught.

Also that the Pope stands in contention against Jesus Christ: For in stead
that he commanded to pay tribute unto kings for himself and for Peter: he
contrary to his will whose vicar he says he is, has neglected kingdoms and
the judgments of the world, labors to bring under his subjection kings
and princes, under title of his style.

That he takes away from the Church al what soever him lusts: and
notwithstanding he is not content to take ye tenth part of the lands thereof,
but he will have the first fruits of the benefits at ye ministers hands: to
the intent that as well for himself as for those that be of his blood, he may
constitute a new patrimony of the good wills of fou^ders.

Also that he enjoys his lakeyes, whom he sends into England that they
shall bring not only the liuinges and raiment of the Church, but also that
they shall tear their skins and flesh like dogs.

Also that the Pope may be justly compared to Nabuchodonosor, who destroyed
the temple, and robbed it of the vessels of gold. For look as hethen dealt,
even so does he also. He before named spoiled the ministers of the house of GOD,
and deprived them of that which was necessary for the service: this does even
as much.

That there is no sorrow like unto that that is in the Church. For already
because of the great dolor thereof, and for the tears that it has spread,
the face is become more black then coals, so as in some places it is no more
known.

That the Pope who says, that he is the father of the Church has brought it
into dreadful darkness, and that he has made it dronken with wormwood and gall.

After this the said Cassiodorus made an outcrie unto God, and said, O Lord
look upon the affliction of thy people, and hear their mourning, and come
down: for the heart of this man is more hardened then was the heart of Pharao,
who would not suffer the people to depart in liberty, but only by thy power.

Also that the said Pope does afflicte, not only on earth: but also after
death: for that after death he deuoureth the goods of all Christians generally,
under color that they be deceased without making testament.

Also, that the conspiracy of this man shall be cause of a new enemy
against England, and that because by his means the treasures do decrease.

That it is expedient for the health of the church, least it should fall into
a further misery, that the king and nobility of the realm, who have bestowed
very liberally upon the Church, would be diligent to maintain the Church,
and to withstand, the coniurations and conspiracies of ye pride and arroga^eie
of this man, who has no regard unto God: but for the things aforesaid, and
for to enrich himself and his kinsefolke, and for his neast, laboring to set
it up as high as the Egle, by such and other like cosening tricks he heapeth
up by a new domination all the money of England.

Also, that the simplicity of the world dissembling in this place is no cause
of the ruin of the Church and of the Realm, and that there is no great
remedy added.

That God takes away the veil from the heart of this man, and gives him an
humble and contrit heart, and makes him to know his true paths, by which
this man retyreth out of darkness, and endeavors to leave off his wicked
labors. And that the vine which the right hand of GOD has planted shall be
filled with good branches.

That he ought to take heed unto the word of God and to the Prophetie of
Jeremy chap. 22. for to withstand such interprises, who says thus, Thou O
pastor which have dispersed my people, and have cast them out of their
habitations, behold I will visit upon thee, the malice of thy enterprises and
there shall not be a man of thy seed which shall sit upon the seat of David,
nor shall have any more power in Judah: so that thy nest shall be a desert, and
ruinous as Sodom and Gomorra.

Also, that if it happen he be not dreaded by these words, nor leave off from
his enterprises, nor make restitution of that which he has taken, that they
finge for him, that is so wickedly hardened, the hundredth and eight Psalm. As
for us we will singe daily praises openly through Jesus Christ, to him unto
whom all things do obey.

For to see the course thereof more narrowely word for word, look the said
Epistle, the which has been written out, transtated out of an old book
found in England in the Church of S. Alban. He that would see it perfectly,
let him read the lives of the Bishops and Popes of Rome, taken out of the
great Catalogue of the writings of England, set forth by John Bale.

131 In the year 1314. or thereaboutes, there was a man named Dulcin of
Navarre, who blamed the vices of Churchmen, and was executed with his wife.
Those that be called Dulcins took their name of this Dulcin. Naucl. They
said that the authority which Jesus Christ has given to the Church was
expyred because of the wickedness of the Prelates: and that the Church of Rome
was reproved, because it was become a whore.

Also that they were the Church, and followed the rule of the Apostles.

That all the prelates since Pope Syluester have been preuaricatours, because
they lived not in true humility, and that therefore they ought to have no
tithes paid them.

Many of the adherents of Dulcin were taken about 144. persons dwelling in the
mountains of Piemount.

132 In the same time, to wit, 1315. and in the reign of the Emperor Henry
the seventh of that name, was a good and faithful man Arnoldus de villa noua,
an expert Physician and an excellent Mathematitian. Some say that he was of
Chalons, others of Narbonna. He was at that time judged an heretic, because he
said that satan had caused all Christian people to err out of the right way.

That ye faith of Christians then was none other but such a faith as devils had.

That those which be in the cloisters be out of charity, and do condemn
themselves in falsifying the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and leading Christians
unto hell.

That the divines have maliciously and wickedly mingled the songs of
Philosophers with the holy scriptures.

That in the sacrifice of the altar the Priest offers nothing unto God, and
that masses do neither profit the living nor the dead.

He proved by Daniel and by Sybilla Erithrea, that Antichrist in full tyranny
did persecute the faithful.

Furthermore in his books which he made of medicine, he wrote against the
Iacopins, that it was lawful to eat flesh: A cutting sword against the
Thomistes: an admonition of Jesus Christ unto the Christians: Of the
craftiness of false Prophets: Of misery of the Cymbals of the Church: Of the
consummation of the world, and other books.

He was judged an heretyke by the Iacopins of Tarracon. Lastly being sent unto
the Pope by Frederick king of Sicilia, he dyed in the way, and was buried at
Genes, being a true champion of our Lord.

In the year 1328. or there abouts, Pope John the 23. wrote unto the greeks
that there was but one only Church, over which he was the head and vicar of
Jesus Christ. To whom the Greeks answered in few words thus: We do verily
believe that thy power is very great over thy subjects: we cannot abide thy
extreme pride, nor satisfy thine avarice, The devil be with thee: for GOD is
with us.

By which brevity of words they declared what was all the manner of the Popes
living and his estate. look thou Maundeuile lib. 7.

Marsilius Patauinus compiled and exhibited unto the Emperor Ludouike, a
worthy work entitled Defensor Pacis: written in the Emperors behalf against
the Pope. Wherein (both Godly and learnedly disputing against the Pope) he
proves al bishops and Priests to be equal: and that the Pope has no
superiority above other Bishops, much less above ye Emperor. That the
word of God ought to be only the chief judge in deciding and determining
causes ecclesiastical. That not only spiritual persons but lay men also
being Godly and learned, ought to be admitted into general councels. That the
Clergy and the Pope ought to be subject unto magistrates. That the Church is
the university of the faithful, and that the foundation and head of the
Church is Christ, and that he never appointed any vicar or Pope over his
universal Church: That Bishops ought to be chosen every one by their own
Church and Clergy: that the marriage of priests may lawfully be permitted:
That S. Peter was never at Rome: That the Clergy and Synagoge of the Pope is
a den of thieves: That the doctrine of the Pope is not to be followed,
because it leads to eternal destruction: And the corrupt manners of the
Christians do spring and flow out of the wickedness of the churchmen, etc. he
disputes moreover in an other work of free justification by grace: and
extenuateth merits, saying that they are no efficient causes of our salvation,
but only fine qua non, that is to say, that works be no cause of our
justification, but yet our justification goes not without them, for which his
doctrine most sound and Catholic, he was condemned by the Pope. Anno. 1324.
by the Popes decree extrauagant, Chap. Licet intra Doctrinam. Concerning the
which man and his doctrine: I thought good thus much to commit to writing, to
ye intent men may see, yt they which charge this doctrine now taught in the
Church with the note of novelty or newenesse, how ignorant and unskillful they
be in the hystories, and order of times forepast.

Iacobus Misnensis, who wrote of the coming of Antichrist. In the same he
makes mention of a certain learned man, whose name was Militzius (says he)
which was a famous and worthy preacher in Perga. He lived about the year 1366.
long before Hus, and before Wicklieffe also. In the same his writing he
declares, how the same good man Militzius was constrained by the spirit of
God to go to Rome, and there publicly to preach, and that afterward before
the inquisitour he affirmed the same. That the same mighty and great
Antichrist, the which the scriptures make mention of, was alredie come.

He affirmed also that the Church by their negligence should become desolate:
and that iniquity should abound, that is by reason of Mammon, master of
iniquity. Also he said that there were in the Church of Christ Idols, which
should destroy Jerusalem, and make the Temple desolate, but were cloaked by
hypocrisy: further that there be many which deny Christ, for that they keep
silence: neither do they hear Christ, whom all the world should know, and
should confess his verity before men, which also wittingly do detain the
verity and Justice of God. He taught openly, that in the Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops, Prelates, Priests, and other religious men was no truth, but that
only he, and such as held with him, taught the true way of salvation.

Mathias Parisiensis a Bohemian borne, who about the year of our Lord 1370.
wrote a large book of Antichrist, and proves him already come, and notes the
Pope to be the same. In this book he does greatly eniue against the
wickedness of the clergy, and against the neglecting of their duty in
governing the Church. The Locustes mentioned in the Apocalypse, he says be the
hypocrites reigning in the Church. The works of Antichrist he says be these,
the fables and inventions of men reigning in the Church, the Images and feigned
relics that are worshipped every where.

Item, that men do worship every one his proper saint and savior beside
Christ, so that every man and city almost has his diverse and peculiar Christ.
He taught and affirmed moreover, that godliness and true worship of God are
not bound to place, persons or times, to be heard more in this place, then
in an other, at this time more then at an other, etc. He was greatly and much
offended with monks and friars, for neglecting or rather burying the word of
Christ, and in steed thereof, for celebrating and setting up their own rules
and Canons, affirming it to be much hurtful to true Godliness for that
Priests, Monks, and Nuns do account themselves only spiritual, and all
other to be lay and secular, attributing only to themselves the opinion of
holiness, and contemning all other men, with all their politic
administration and office, as profane in comparison of their own. He further
writes that Antichrist has seduced al universities and Colleges of learned
men, so that they teach no sincere doctrine, neither give any light to the
Christians with their teaching. Finally he forewarneth that it will come to
pass, that God yet once again will raise up godly teachers, who being fervent
in the spirit and zeal of Helias, shall disclose and refute the errors of
Antichrist, alleges the sayings and writings of the university of Paris,
also the writings of Guliel. de sanct. Amor.

Henricus de Hassia, an excellent learned and famous man. He wrote an Epistle
unto Iacobus Carisiensis Bishop of Normacia, inserted in his book de erroribus
Christianorum. In the same Epistle, the author does greatly accuse the
spiritual men of every order, yea the most holiest of all other, the Pope
himself, of many and great vices. He said that the Ecclesiastical
governors in the primative Church were compared to the Sun shining in the
day time, and the political governors, to the Moon shyning in the night. But
the spiritual men he said, that now are, do neither shine in the day time,
nor yet in the night time, but rather with their darkness do obscure both
day and night, that is: with their filthy living, ignorance, and impiety. He
cites also out of the prophecy of Hildegardis these words: Therefore does the
devil in himself speak of you Priests: dainty bankets and feasts, wherein
is all voluptuousnes, do I find amongst these men: In so much that mine eyes,
mine ears, my belly, my veins, be even filled with the froth of them, and my
breasts stand astrout with the riches of them, etc. Lastly says he, they
every day more and more, as lucyfer do seek to clymbe higher and higher, till
that every day with him more and more they fall deeper and deeper. He lived
Anno. 1371.

Nilus was Archbishop of Thessolonica, and lived 1380. He wrote a long work
against the Latins, that is against such as took part and held with the
Church of Rome. His book first being written in Greek, was after translated
into Latin and lately now into English, in this our time. In the first Chap.
of his book, he lays all the blame and fault of the discention and schism
between the East and the West Church upon the Pope. He affirmed that the Pope
only would command what him lusted, were it never so contrary to all the
old and ancient Cannons. That he would hear and follow no man's advise:
that he would not permit any free Councels to be assembled etc. In the second
Chapt. of his book he purposedly makes a very learned disputation: for
first he declares that he had no whit at all by Gods commandment, but only
by human Law any dignity, more then others Bishops: which dignity, the
Councels, the fathers, and Emperors have granted unto him: neither did they
grant the same for any other consideration more, or greater ordinance, then
for that the same city then had the Empery of all the whole world: and not at
al for that that Peter was there, or not there. etc.

133 In the year 1383. John wikliefe lived in England, who having of long time
made profession of divinity at Oxenforde a citte and university in England,
and he seeing that true divinity was vilely corrupted with much filthiness
of questions and inventions set forth by the Pope, he could not but lament in
his heart, and determined to remedy such a disorder.

He saw well that he could not without great trouble remove away abuses, and
that those that had so long time grown in the hearts of men could not easily
be rooted out on a sudden. And therefore he thought good to deal there with
by little and little.

First he made this assaye against the adversaries of the truth, that is, he
disputed against them of small matters, that by that mean he might open an
entry to great things: and amongst other he had to deal with a certain
monk named John kenyngham.

Of these small beginnings they came to higher matters. He at the last
disputed concerning the sacrament of the supper. Therein this good man had
great resistaunce, affirming openly in schools, that his principal intent was
to take away idolatry that reigned in ye Church concerning this matter.

But mark what mischief happened: a man could not so soon touth this
wound, without causing great sorrow to the world. The monks and especially
the begging fort were in a fury: the Bishops would have knowledge of this
matter.

He alleged the authority of the ancient Doctors of the Church, in those
points wherein they agreed with the holy scriptures, declaring that there is
no truth but that which is contained in them.

As for the decretistes he utterly rejected them.

He steadfastly maintained that in the sacrament of the supper the accidents be
not without the subject: that is to say, that the whiteness and roundnesse of
the bread be not without the bread: to wit, that contrary to transubstantion
(which the priests have forged) the bread abides bread, and the wine
contynueth in the proper substance.

Moreover the conclusions proposed by him at the town of Lambeth be these: If
that any Princes or Lords, or any others have made any donations unto the
mynisters of the Church, there is therein a secreate condition: to wit, that God
should be honored, and that the faithful should be edified.

And if this condition cease, then they may take away from wicked pastors
that which they had given them, any excommunication or other whatsoever to the
contrary notwithstanding. That if these dealinges of men were let alone, the
clergy which were of covetous persons will bring all the world into their
hands.

Also that the Pope may lawfully be reproved by those whom he keeps in
obedience under him, and that for the utility of the Church he may be accused
both of the clearks and lay people.

That the Pope as great a Lord as he reports himself to be, must think that
he is a brother unto others, and that if he sin he ought to be brotherly
corrected, and hear corrections brotherly. And when as by the holy scripture
his heresy or error is showed him he ought not to be obstinate.

And by many other conclusions he showed evidently the abuse of the Pope and of
the clergy, and how that their possessions of so great revenues be unjust.

To conclude, he was assaulted by many and amongst others, the begging monks
who rose against him by great flocks: But the Lord gave him for a protector
the King Edward, under whose reign he had some liberty to speak ye truth
Richard the successor of the said Edward, persecuted and banished him.

Within a while after he was called again from banishment, and returned unto
the parrishe of which he was pastor, and there, like a lusty champion of the
Lord, he aboade always constant even until the death, and he died in the
year of our Lord 1388. forty and one years after his death he was dug up
again by the commandment of ye Pope, and his bones were burned, and the ashes
thereof cast into the water: but Jesus Christ dies not in his faithful ones,
use the tyrants what cruelty they can.

He composed many books, the which were burned in the city of Oxenford in the
year 1410. there be certain notwithstanding reserved still, for to declare
that God has always some faithful servants, who do resist the errors of
the world. Amongst his writings there is an Epistle which he sent to Pope
Vrbane. He that would see more at large of him and of his history let him
look in the book of Martyrs.

134 In the persecution raised up against Wiclief, and in the year 1400.
Sautree a priest embraced with zeal of true and pure religion, craved and
requested in the full Parliament, ye audience might be granted him, for the
common profit of all the Realm.

Then albeit that his request was honest and civil, and that he gave to
understand that he could bring great profit, yet he was not heard: for the
bishops perceiving yt he came, caused him to be attached of heresy, and for
the seven articles condemned, disgraded and burned him. Look Fabius in his
Chronicles and John Crespin in the book of martyrs,

William Thorpe an Englishman was also a valiant martyr of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

He sustained great assaults of many prelates of of the Church of Rome, without
forsaking his vocation, which was to instruct the people according to the pure
word of God.

And therefore he would not agree to preach the superstitions and human
inventions, which he declared to be contrary to the institution of the holy
scriptures, he was condemned having yielded a testimony of his faith.

Now of many points well worth the noting, upon the interrogations propounded
to him, I will recite (for to avoid great prolixitie) one only: that is, that
he being demanded of the Archbishop of Canterbury, primate of England, and
Chauncelour of the whole Realm, what the Church did signify, he answered,
that it is Jesus Christ and the company of saints. Which thing the said
Archbishop confessed to be true in respect of heaven: but he demanded further,
what the Church was here below on earth. It is divided into two parts,
answered the said William Thorp, ye one of ye two parts, which is the better,
has obtained victory over the enemies, and triumphs now with Christ in
great joy: the other part fights here still on earth by the sword of faith,
against the continual bulwarks of Satan, of the flesh and of the world.
There is no strength so violent, no pomp so proud, no fire of afflictions and
persecutions so burning, no tyranny so cruel, no reasons of Doctors so
discording, nor opinions so diverse which can withdraw them from the right
rule of faith, and of the holy scriptures. For they be fortyfied by the word
of God in Christ, and firmly stablished as upon a sure rock that can not be
removed. Look John Crespin in his book of martyrs.

Within a while after the death of John Wiclief there arose great persecution
in England against the faithful for the truth of the Gospel, which then
began to take deep rooting. The worthiest men in the Realm were not then
spared: the lord Cobham a knight of the order and one of the peers of England
was there apprehended: but he was executed after these that we now speak off.
And therefore according to the order of time, we will hereafter speak of him
more at large: for he was an excellent martyr of our Lord Jesus Christ.

King Henry then by public ordinance made an edicte: and set forth through
the persuasions of the bishops and prelates terrible punishments for all
them that should follow the doctrine of Wicliefe, using so great severity
against them, that he held them not only for heretics, but also as guilty
of treason.

And for this cause it was ordained yt they should be punished with two sorts
of punishments, that is, that they should be both hanged and burned, and there
was neither freedom, nor any privilege, whereby they could enjoy profit:
so maliciously were they bente against the faithful, seeking all means
against them, and in that time they called al them Wicleffians who read the
scriptures in the vulgar tongue, and which made their assemblies in secret
places, in the dark, preaching in woods and bushes.

Then the Bishops being armed with this edicte of the king, exercised great
tyranny against many good people, and many poor innocents: and amongst
other against Roger Acton a knight of the order, and a true nobleman, adorned
with great virtues, he abhorred ye wicked traditions of the Pope, had his
affections withdrawn from him, and from all his assistants.

For that cause it is reported, that he was hated amongst the prelates, and
became odious: so as they could in no wise abide him.

Finally this seignieur Acton was taken and condemned by the said edict of the
king, and hanged, and burned.

There was executed also with him a gentleman one M. Brown. And M. John
Beuerlai a minister and preacher of the word of God. And that was in the year.
1413.

John Mayor witnesses in his Scottish history lib. 6. chap. 9. that about
this time many others to the number of 36, and all of a noble stock, were
condemned as heretics by the bishop and were burned according to that cruel
edict. This was in the very same year.

There were also two others, of whom Fabius in his Chronicles speaks, to
wit, John Claydon cordwayner, and Richard Turmin Baker: who also according to
the severity of the ordinance, were condemned and put to death.

To conclude we see that there is neither estate, neither order, nor condition,
whereof God is not skillful enough to draw some for to stand in defense and
to cry out against the superstitions and false traditions of prelates.

135 In the year 1405. or thereabout, the Lord raised up John Hus of Bohemia,
who having studied in the university of Oxeforde in England, and having read
certain books of Wicklief, began to publishe that which he had received
concerning the truth in a Temple of the Bohemians, whereas he was chosen for
the preacher, and Preached both of festival days and holy days.

There he commended the doctrine of Wicklief unto the people.

In the end the Bohemians being instructed with this doctrine, began to
judge of the Pope as he deserved, not esteeming him the most excellent any
longer, nor of any higher degree then other bishops: and thereupon they went
about to reform their doctrine by conclusions and articles following

That the dignity made not the minister or bishop the more honorable but the
holiness of life and good doctrine.

That the souls separated from the bodies, go straight way either to eternal
blessedness, or else to everlasting pains.

That there is no testimony in all the holy scriptures, by which it can be
proved that there is any purgatory after this life.

For to make oblations and sacrifices for trespasses is the invention of
covetous Priests.

That the images of God or of saints, the blessing of waters, and other like
things be forged by men contrary to the word of God.

That the order of begging friars were invented by devils.

That baptism ought to be administered with water, without adding of oil,
spittle or such filthi.

That the Temple of God is the world.

That those which build Temples, Monasteries, and oratories for to cloase him
in, do go about to lock up his majesty which is incomprehensible.

That the ornaments of Priests as the chasubles, corporals, chalices, platters
etc. are but vanity.

That in vain do men seek for help at the hands of saints, and that it is
but lost time to singe hours canonical.

That fasting does merit nothing.

That the eucharistie ought to be ministered under both kinds.

They rejected the Mass and kept only the communion of the supper, the word,
and the prayer, and many other articles drawn out of the holy scripture.

Thus as the most part of the scholars of the university of Prague did
follow John Hus with many more renoumed in knowledge, and so did the most part
of the nobility, the Pope having assembled a council at Constance, caused the
Emperor Sigismonde to fend for him, who sent him his safe conducte.

And being there, he was greatly solicited to leave off his opinion: but he was
constant, upholding his propositions and reasons, to wit, those which were
grounded upon the truth of the holy scriptures.

Saying that the end and principal scope of his doctrine was for to teach men
repentance and remission of sins, according to the truth of the son of
God, and the exposition of the holy doctors. That if any were able to prove
that he did the contrary, he was ready to acknowledge his faults: otherwise
rather to suffer death then lean unto men's traditions repugning to the
doctrine of the Gospel.

After many disputations, forasmuch as he allowed not all that them liked, he
was at the last condemned to be burned: and being beset with wood round
about, as the fire began, he cried thrice with a loud voice, O Jesus Christ
the son of the living God have pity on me, and thus he yielded up the Ghost.

His ashes were cast by commandment into Rhein, to the intent that nothing
of him might be left upon the earth, nevertheless his memory can never be
defaced in the hearts of the faithful, neither by fire nor water, nor any
manner of torments.

Whosoever would se thereof more at large, let him read John Crespin his book of
martyrs.

136 In the year after the nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ 1415. Hierom of
Prague a Bohemia^, being maruelously troubled for that he had heard that his
country was oppressed by houshoulde enemies and neighbors, and by many false
slanders, and that John Hus was vilanously used by the said council, he went
to Constance, and there being ad uertised yt the people went about to entrap
him, he retired back for certain days, unto a place not far off, for that
he might not seem to intrude him self wilfully into dangers.

He requested of the Emperor a safe conducte for to enter into the city, and
there to answer unto such crimes and misdeedes as should be brought against
him: and seeinge that he could get no safe conduit, he was going home again,
and was taken by the way by treason and carried to Constance, whereas in the
presence of the Bishopes and prelates he made open confession of his faith.

True it is that he having been altogether pined away with long keepinge in
prison, and through many horrible threatenings, he was vanquished by the
weakness of the flesh, partly dreadinge the horror of the torments, and partly
hoping to escape out of their vilanous and cruel hands, he recited publicly
before them all an abiuration which they had given him in writing.

Moreover he was enjoined to say that John Hus had been worthily burned: but for
all this he escaped not: but he returned again to the same stinking and
infectuous prison where he was before: being there no better handled then before
time.

Then did the lord who never forsakes his, cause him to seal in his
conscience his vile misdeed.

And therefore desiring to be brought again in to the whole assembly, he first
affirmed that he heeld with the Catholic and universal Church al things ye it
holds, which church abhors all errors an heresies, Lastly he adds this,
that of all the sins where with he ever had offended Gods divine majesty,
there was none that so much charged and grieved his conscience as did this
offense that he had committed in the chair of pestilence and execration:
whether he being fallen by infirmity, and by the horror of death, he was was
constrained to go back, and that he had subscribed to the condemnation of John
hus, and had said many things against that good man and against Wiclief, who
he said had openly manifested by words the detestable lives of the Bishops
and prelates, had touched them to the quick in their books having justly
written and spoken of their misdeedes and perverse traditions.

Wherefore he being now by ye grace and goodness of God brought to the same
chair again, he utterly repented of that horrible sin, and declared that
the subscription that he had made was void, for they had very wrongfully
burned that holy man.

In the end he being willed to recant then immediately, or else he should be
used as the other was, he chose rather to dye. And he was condemned to be
burned, having put on him a crown of paper like as John Hus had, where on were
painted devils round about. And he said that Jesus Christ for the love of him
a poor sinner had borne a greater pain, and that for the good will that he
had showed him, he also would go willingly to execution, and going he song
with prayers, himnes and calling upon God. And when the wood was set about
him, he cried with a loud voice, O Lord into thy hands I commend my
spirit. (if you would see further of him look Crespin in his book of martyrs.

The Bohemians understanding what was done at Constance against the doctors,
they sacked and spoiled the conuents and monasteries of that country, and set
them on fire, and then they withdrewe them selves from the subjection of the
Pope of Rome Look Naucl.

137 The Realm of France also at that time was not destitute of true
doctors, who faithfully executed their charge in declaring the light and the
day of the Lord, amongst whom Nicholas Clemangis a doctor of Paris, and
Archdeacon of Bayonna, in the year 1417. has left a certain testimony in
writing touching the corrupt estate of the church showing forth the fountain
of all mischiefs, oppressions and calamities that the Church has endured, and
that still it shall abide thorough the horrible violence, cruelty, tyranny,
and insatiable rigor of him, who calls himself the head on the the earth,
and of his members.

He said that the sects and seditions raised up against the Churches by the
furies of hell do declare what peace and fraternity they have amongst them. And
that the infernal and schismatic hydra, beginning at him that calls
himself head of the Church, and budding very abundantly, and spreading the
roots by the furies, has infected all the colleges and assemblies thorough the
seed of the Viper.

To conclude, I know not how in so few words I should comprehend, in what a
strange sort he speaks of this fountain, and the horrible confusion of the
Church of Rome.

He therefore that will see more of the wrytings of the said Nicholas
Clemangis, which are worthy to be read of all faithful Christians, let him
look in the last edition of John Crespin his book of martyrs fol. 60.

Whereupon I say we must note that albeit God does sufficiently declare unto us
by his holy word ye mean how to beware of ravening Wolves, clad in sheep
raiment: and how we may know them as well by their doctrine as by their works:
nevertheless he has always raised up some good men, for to warn his sheep
the more to take heed of false pastors.

138 There is no order nor condition of which god does not know how to draw
some to send them into ye field to battle, to encounter with false pastors
which would so stoutly and earnestly maintein superstitions and abominable
traditions repugning against his holy word. And amongst others of that time
1418. the history of one excellent Lord of England is worthy to be recorded
with the worthyest of the world, to wit, of John Oldeastel Lord Cobham, knight
of the order and one of the peers of England.

He was one of the chiefest doctors of his time who taught the courtiers that
they should serve Christ better then they did. He was adorned with excellent
virtues, and for his noble and virtuous deeds he was promoted to great
dignities and honors.

He had this gift most excellent that he cared not greatly for any glory and
honor of the world, the which does soon fade away, but he rather acrounted
it all his diguity and felicity, that he might undertake to do service to the
Prince of princes, which is Jesus Christ the son of God.

The instructions of Wiclief stood him in great stead. He had such an
understanding of the true religion and Godliness, that he made no difficulty
to receive under his protection al those ye maintained the good doctrine, and
were in danger therefore.

He sustained diverse times great assaults and dangerous, and chiefly the
Machinations and secreat practices of wicked Bishops.

King Henry the fifte loved him greatly, albeit that he knew the most part of
his dealing: but at the last he yielded to the Bishops thorough their false
reports, and forsook this noble knight as the furious appetite of the
Archbishops and his accomplices required.

He was once or twice cyted by the Archbishop: He of long time regarded not his
curses and excomunications. The king sent unto him an Herault, and immediately
he obeyed, and went unto the king.

He presented unto him his confession written, in which he recites by order
the articles of ye creed, and upon every article a briese exposition. The king
would not receive this confession. other artycles be found which he presented
to the Archbishop, contaning in sum four points, where of ye one is that he
believes, that in the sacrament of the supper we receive the body of Christ
under the kinds and form of bread and wine, the same body that was borne of
the virgin Marie, was crucified, dead and buried, and lastly rose again the
third day after his death, and was exalted to the right hand of the father
immortal, and tryumpheth now for ever with him, being partaker of his eternal
glory.

And as concerning the sacrament that they call penitence or penance, he has
written thereof word for word his faith, saying thus: I believe that it is
very necessary for every one that aspireth unto salvation, to wit, that he
must repent of his life passed by a true confession and contrition unsained,
and that in such sort as is set forth in the holy scriptures, otherwise there
is no hope of salvation.

Concerning their third sacrament he said touching images, that it does not
appertain to a true faith: true it is ye since Christian faith was brought
into ye world, they also were put in exercise through permission, to serve for a
calendar (as they call yt) to the ignorant, to the end that by the view
thereof they might the more easily see the passions and holy examples, as well
of Christ as of his faithful and holy servants: but sythens that there is
such abuse of that representation, and that men do attrybute unto the images of
Saints, that which is due alone unto him, whom all the saints must honor and
reverence, and do put their trust in them which ought to be transserred to God
only: and more over seeing they are so affectioned toward those images, that
they like better of and be more devout to one them then to another, mine
opinion is (said he) ye of such do commit Idolatry, and a deadly sin against
God, unto whom does belong all honor, glory, and praise.

Lastly he said, that he was thus persuaded, that there dwelled none here
below upon earth, but was in a pilgrimage, either to go unto life, or else to
tend unto torments. That whosoever does so order his life that he transgresses
the commandments and ordinances of God, whither that he knows them not, or
will not know them, he must not hope for salvation, albeit that he raunge
abroad to all the corners of ths world. Contrariwise he that shall keep the
holy ordinances of God cannot perish although he never make voyage nor
pilgrimage in his life unto any place, whither disordered men have used to go
on pilgrimage.

There be also found of his other principal articles, as of the two natures
in Christ, divine and human: and that like as his divinity was here beelowe
on earth hidden and covered under humanity: so in the sacrament of ye
Eucharistie there is bread and the body given us, to wit, the bread which we
see and the body of Christ which we see not, and thus expressed he his Faith
touching the Sacrament etc.

Also that it is not necessary for the obtaining of salvation, to confess his
sins to his own Curate or any other priest whilst he lives.

Also he denied not only the worshipping of Images, but also that which we
call the holy Cross.

Furthermore he said concerning the power of the keys, and touching the Pope,
Archbishoppes, Bishops, and other Prelates, that the Pope is very Antichrist,
and that these Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates, be his members, and
the friars the tail of Antichrist, like as the Pope is the head: to whom no
man ought to obey, that is to say, to the Pope, Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Prelates, except they be followers of Christ and Peter, in life and
manners and in conversation: and that he which is the best liver and most pure
in conversation is the successor of Peter, not otherwise.

It is reported moreover that the said Lord Oldcastel said with a loud
voice, stretching his hands abroad and persuading those that were present:
These who judge and would condemneme, will beguile you all, and lead both you
and themselves into hell: and therefore beware of them.

To make short, sentence of death was pronounced against him, not withstanding
he forbode a while after as it were banished, and was sent away by a wile. And
at the last he being taken again, and remaining constant without denying the
truth which he saw contained in the holy scriptures, was condemned to be
burned.

And thus this valiant Doctor and Martyr fynished the course of his life, and
recommending his soul unto God, and praying for his ennimies, after that he
had exhorted the people to apply themselves unto the true faith and pure
religion, yielded up his spirit unto the Lord.

He that would see of him more at large, let him read the book of Martyrs.

139 In the same time also, that is 1418. and 19. and 20. and so consequently
the Lord showed sufficiently that the blood of John Hus, and Hierome of
Prague, and of other good doctors and Martyrs of the Church fell not to the
ground for to be swallowed up and come to nothing, as some pretended: but it
did greatly fructify with an incredible commodity, not only in England and
in Bohemia, but also in Germany, and France, and generally in other realms,
countries and provinces.

For God has much more since that time showed a clearer change of things,
causing tongue to be renewed as messengers, and arts to be as forerunners to
Dame verity: who immediately came forth with the brightness of the most
clear sun, that is, the preaching of the Gospel, wherein many times they
have excelled, being fortified with all necessaries against darkness.

Many have dealt very valiantly, and have not only brought again divinity
to his natural and first purity: but have also endured martyrdom, for a more
ample witnessing thereof. Amongst others one named Grunfelder a priest, called
to the order of Jesus Christ, was burned in the city of Rinsbourg, in the
year of our Lord 1420.

William Tailor an English man, a master in arts, was also martyred.

The princial cause of the fury raised up against him, was because he had
composed a book against calling upon or praying to saints.

For that cause he was burned in the city of London in the year 1422. he
abode the fire very constantly.

Henry Radtgeber, of the order of Popish priests first did valyantly fight and
endured a cruel death for the profession of the Gospel in the foresaid city
of Rinsbourg. this was in the year 1423.

John Drandorfe of a noble house in ye country of Misne was executed at Worms
in the year following 1424.

Peter Toraw was afterward martyred in the City of Spira, anno 1426.

John Bale an English writer speaks hereof in his book of the famous men of
England.

140 In the year 1425. there was a Priest called William Wight, an English
man, who having used to read the sermons of Wicliefe, changed his life
wholly, and acknowledging the filthiness of his former life, he forsook his
benefice, whereby he had received large revenues. After that he following the
holy ordinance of God took a wife.

Being married he applied himself to study and teaching either publicly or
privately, laboring to profit all men.

At the last he was taken in the city of Norwich: and there they laid
against him thirty articles, for the which he was cruelly burned by the
procuring of the Bishop: and this was in the year 1428.

His wife, following the example of her husband, ceased not according to her
faculty for to instruct every body, and for this cause she was very hardly
entreated by the said Bishop.

Also in the year 1430. Richard Houenden an English man, and a Citizen of
London could by no means be withdrawn from the truth for any persuasions
that could be alleged, and therefore he was condemned to be burned near
unto ye tower of London.

141 Many good personages of diverse Realms have greatly been afflicted and
persecuted in the years following, because they spoke and maintained the pure
truth, and have spilte even the uttermost drop of their blood, God
notwithstanding assisted them, ye they might make the adversaries of the
purity of his holy and divine service the more ashamed.

In the Realm of Bohemia Paul Crau in the year 1431. was delivered to the
seculer power by a Bishop for to be burned, and that because he blodly
withstoode the wicked opinions of the people touching the Eucharistie,
invocation of saints, auricular confession and other articles.

Of the kingdom of France, Thomas Readon of the order of Carmelites, who
having knowledge of the truth was by occasion at Rome, whereas he perceived
to be naught else but filthiness and al manner hypocrisy in steed of perfect
holiness: proud paradises in stead of heavenly graces: in stead of ye fear of
God, execrable dissolutenes: in stead of doctrine, idleness and horrible
superstitions: in stead of Apopostolicall simplicity worse then barbarous
tyranny.

Moreover it is said that this good man amongst other things was greatly
grieved at the pride and intolerable ambition that he saw in them who ought
to show themselves more humble then others, seeing in Rome such abominable
things as are horrible to be named.

So that this good man could not refrain from speaking against such villainous
corruptions: albeit that he knew well that his admonitions and counsel would
not profit much. For it persuasions could have taken place, the books of
Wicliefe and of many others like might have sufficed.

The blood of John Hus and of Hierome of of Prague did still boil speaking
boldly against all those abominations.

Then to be brief nothing could hinder this good man from pursuing that which
he had entreprysed: but if need required, he was ready to spend his life.

He gate hatred by his preaching, sparing none: showing every body their
faults, and especially the horrible misdemeanour of the Cardinals.

Eugenius who was then Pope caused him to be shut up in prison, where he abode
much sorrow and evils, and after great and cruel tortures, he was condemned,
disgraded, and burned quick. That was in the year 1439.

In the Realm of England Roger Dule gentleman was hanged and strangled for
mainteining the truth anno. 1441.

Of the country of Ferraria Hierome Sauanarola a monk of the order of
Iacobins, an excellent man in life and doctrine, with certain of his
companions was burned at Florence, at the instaunce and by the commaundent of
Pope Alexander ye sixth, in the year 1491.

The accusations by process of Sauanarola be these: that he maintained ye
communion under both kinds in the supper: that he condemned indulgences, and
used to accuse very sharply the dishonest and infamous life of the Pope and
Cardinals: That he denied the primacie of the Pope: he taught that the power of
the Keys was not given to S. Peter alone.

Furthermore that the Pope did neither follow the life nor doctrine of Jesus
Christ, for so much as he attributed more to his pardons, indulgences, and to his
own traditions, then he did to the merit of Jesus Christ, and that therefore
he was very Antichrist.

He affirmed also that the excommunications of the Pope were not to be feared.
Look in the book of martyrs.

Some also do hold opinion that he composed certain meditations upon the
fifty Psalm and some others.

It will scarce be possible to gather to a heap all the histories of so many
doctors and martyrs of every estate, order and condition which the Lord has
raised up through all regions of the world, for to teach and preach his holy
truth: and which have been ready when need required to shed their blood
rather then to accept the tyrannical traditions and constitutions of men. And
considering also that you may have recourse to diverse books of martyrs etc. I
will not make any long mention of them: In the mean while I have thought good
to note certain for to show a continual order of good and faithful doctors
and martyrs, whom God has raised up in time, for to cry out against ye
horrible misdeeds of men, and against their abominable traditions repugning
against his holy will.

John Goose an Englishman, which in this time was unjustly condemned and burnt
at the Tower hill. 1473. in the month of August, this we find recorded, that
the said John being delivered to Robert Belisoon on of the Shriefes, to
seacute;e him burnt in the after noone, the Shriefe like a charitable man, had
him home to his house, and there exhorted him to deny (says the story) his
errors. But the godly man after long exhortation heard, desired the Shriefe
to be content, for he was satissied in his conscience. Notwithstanding he
desired the Shriefe, for Gods sake to give him some meat, saying that he was
very sore a hungered. Then the shrieffe commanded him meat: whereof he took
and did eat, as he had been toward no danger: and said to such as stood
about him: I eat now a good competent dinner: for I shall pass a little
sharp shower, ere I go to supper. And when he had dined, he gave thanks, and
required that he might shortly be led to the place, where he should yield up
his spirit to God. Ex Polychron.

Johannes de Wessalia, who flourished in the year 1476. was complained upon
unto Dietherus the Archhishop of Mentz, by the Thomistes, upon certain
Ariicles and opinions, gathered out of his books, which are as follows. That
all men be saved freely, and through mere grace by faith in Christ, free will
to be nothing. Only that we should believe the word of God, and not the gloss
of any man, or fathers. That the word of God is to be expounded by the
collations of one place with an other, That men's traditions as fastinges,
pardons, feasts, long prayers, peregrinations, and such like are to be
rejected. Extreme unction and confirmation to be reproved: confession and
satisfaction to be reprehended. The primacie of the Pope also he affirmed to be
nothing. Certain other articles also were gathered out of him: by his
adversaries, but in such sort, that they may seem to follow their own
malicious gathering, rather then any true intelligence of his mind. Ex
Munstero.

Weselus Groningensis, who was in the year of our Lord 1480. a famous and
learned man, borne in Phrisia, he was so notable and so worthy a man that of
the people he was called Lux mundi. that is, the light of the world.
Concerning his doctrine, first he reprehended the opinion of the Papists, as
touching repentance, which they divided in three parts, of the which three
parts, satisfaction and confession he did disalowe. Like wise purgatory and
supererogation of works and pardons he did disprove, both at Rome and at Paris.
He speak against the Popes indulgences, by the occasion whereof diverse of the
Popes Court, persuaded by him, began to speak more freely against the same
matter, then he himself had done. The abuses of Masses and praying for the
dead he disalowed: and likewise the supremacy of the Pope he utterly rejected.

Item that the precepts and commandments of the Pope and prelates be no
otherwise, but as the Councels and precepts of Physicians, binding no further
then they are found to be wholesome and standing with the truth of the word of
God. Item that the Pope can command no man under pain of deadly sin,
except God command him: before he says that the keys of the Pope and the
Prelates be not such, wherewith they open the kingdom of heaven, but rather
shut it as the Pharisees did. Concerning vows, he disputes that such as be
foolish and impossible, ought to be broken: That the hearers ought to
discern, and judge of the doctrine of their prelates, and not to receive every
thing that they say, without due examination.

141 In these latter times many errors have been corrected in the Church and
the pure doctrine of the true service of God has been restored again by
Martine Luther and by other good and true servants of God.

And concerning Luther who was borne of honest and renoumed parents in the
year 1483. and he was called Martin because he was baptized on ye day which
many do call S. Martins day.

He after that he had spent some time in study of the civil law, went
contrary to the opinion of his parents and friends to a convent of Augustins.

In that monastery he with fastings and prayers applied himself to the study
of holy scripturs. And within a while after he was called to read divinity in
the university of Wittenberge. Then while he was in this course. He in the
year 1517. withstoode the bull published by Pope Leo, promising absolution
from all sins and the kingdom of heaven, for a certain sum of money that
they should give.

For to handle his purpose the better, and with the more edification, he wrote
to the Archibishop of Mayence, giving him to understand what these questours
meant: and complained greatly that the people steedfastly believed ye after they
had bought these pardons, they could not choose but be saved: as though there
were no sin (how great soever it were) but the virtue of those pardons could
blot out: and as though the souls formented in the fire of purgatory should
then have been out of pain, and should fly straight away into Paradise, as
soon as the money was put into the chest.

He declared that the commandment of Christ was to teach the Gospel, and
that the proper office of Bishops is to instruct the people, praying the
Archbishop that according to his duty he would use his authority in
prohibiting certain books ye some had published in defense of the foresaid
fact, and that those preachers might follow a better kind of doctrine.

He sent also with those letters 95. propositions, the which he had not long
before published at Wittenberg for to dispute on: in which he treated largely of
purgatory, of true repentance, of the office and duty of charity, and of
indulgences and pardons: impugning the unreasonable sermons of the bribers: and
that they did all for to seek again the pure verity. The Archbishop answered
nothing thereto. Also he resisted and spoke against a Iacobin named Tekel who
caused indulgences and pardons to be carried and soulde al abroad in that
country.

He wrote also to Pope Leo, setting before him the follies that the bribers
taught, and the extortion they used in using or rather abusing his authority.

Lo here the beginninges in which Luther did not mean nor regard any change
of ceremonies, neither did he then wholly reiecte indulgences but only
requested that they would observe a mean.

But after that through understanding of the holy scriptures he had further
profited (by the grace of God) every day more and more, and had perceived that
the doctrine which he had begone to teach was agreing with the holy scriptures:
he sustained with a valiant courage all the assaults of the enemies, and all the hatred of the world: abiding as vmnoueable as a brass wall, and caring
for no danger.

He having had marvelous assaults and disputations, and having written many
books and received commandment and safe conduct from the Emperor Charles
the fifth, he refused not to appear before his majesty at Worms, and before
all the princes electours, and all the estates of the Empire, although many
would have diswaded him, because that his books had been there burned before
hand: alleging also what had happened to John Hus.

He answered worthily in that excellent assembly, yielding a good reason for
the books that he had composed: he prayed and besought the^ that if there were
any man that had ought to say against the doctrine whereof he made profession,
that he would not dissimule it: but that he would utter and show forth his
fault by testimonies of the holy scripture: that he would be no Schismatike,
but would rather be the first that should set his books on fire.

He showed that the truth is cause of troubles. And that our Lord Jesus
Christ said, that it is natural for the Gospel to move great debates and
alterations amongst such as stick over much to parents and to their
kinsefolkes.

Moreover he there warned the Emperor and all the princes to think gravely
and with aduisemente how they ought to deal and foresee, least in condemning
the doctrine offered them through a singular benefit of God they should cause
a great plague to hapen unto all Germany.

After many aduertisementes, and being demanded whither he would maintain his
books or not, he answered by and by, that he would not revoke any thing of
that which he had either written or taught, except he were vanquished by
testimony of the scripture.

The sentence of the Emperor was against him and so were the assembly of
princes, saying, that his ancestors had obeyed the Church of Rome, and so
would he, and yet in the mean while he kept his promise made unto Luther, so
he sent him again safe and sound to the place where he abode.

Luther was kept secret by certain of the worthiest princes. He was accused
that his books raised great troubles. He was threatened that if he stood
stiff in his opinions he could not soiourne in any place of German: but he
feared not any of their meaninges, nor for all the hurtes and offenses that
they said might by his means happen: submitting himself to endure death
rather then to forsake the word of God so apparent.

Then he pronounced openly that he had not reproved all the councels, as some
reported, but only the council of Constance, because that it condemned the
word of God, as appears in the article of John Hus, which was condemned:
that is, that the Church of Jesus Christ is the communion of the predestinate.
The council of Constance condemned this article, and so by consequence
condemned this article of our faith. I believe the holy universal Church,
protesting then that he refused not to spend his life and blood, so as he
might not be brought to this necessity for to deny the manifest word of God:
for in mainteining thereof he must rather obey God then men.

Concerning offense he answered, that is double, to wit, of charity, and of
faith: The offense of charity consists in manners and in life, and is
utterly to be shunned. That of faith or of doctrine, it lies in the word of
God, and it ought not to be feared, seeing that the truth and will of the
heavenly father in that he has commanded ought not to be dissanulled,
although the whole world should be thereat offended. Christ in the scripture
is named a stumbling stone, which thing does appertain to all those that
preach the gospel.

He said that he refused not to obey the laws and the magistrate, like as he
protested that he had always taught the people to do, and as his kooks did
witness how greatly he esteemed the dignity of laws: but that it was
otherwise of decrees and statutes ecclesiastical.

He answered also that he refused not to submit his books to the judgment of
the Emperor or to the estates of the Empire, and to the judgment of other men
so that they would judge by conduct of the word of God, the which he said
was best: that if they could not reprove him of error, he could not change
his opinion. For S. Paul commands us that we shall not believe an Angel
coming from heaven, if he bring any other Doctrine.

And to be short, he was solicited, menaced, and assaulted on all sorts, yea
even of all other Realms, countries and provinces. The king of England,
Henry the eight wrote against him, and chiefly reproved his judgment
concerning indulgences and other points. Luther answered him. Pope Leo
thundered against him a long process, and condemned him as an heretic. To
conclude, he suffered and abode with pain and travail the most bitter and
terrible assaults and combats that any man of his time did: saying always in
the end, that he was ready rather to loose his life, then to forsake the
word of GOD, which is so manifest, whereupon he grounded his reasons which he
uttered forth. That if any could show the contrary, all that he should
find not conformable and agreeing to the truth, he would be ready to revoke
in any part as well of his writings as Preachinges.

Therefore those do falsely accuse him, that say he was led with ambition and
fantastical opinion, whereby he might win praise, and please the princes of
German, so as afterward he might change also the estate politik. But is
this an ambition? a presumption? is this to seek to be in great dignity and
exalted to honor, and to live more delicately then within a cloister, when a
man knows that he must willingly go into a most dangerous were? into to
terrible and cruel torments of death, as this holy personage might well enough
know by the people and others good and faithful personages, who had come
thereto?

Others said that he was possessed with a serpentine madness that he might
inuenim the world with deadly poison: But I will not say any more to answer
such sclaunderers and backbiters who do gain say them who they do manifestly
perceive have sought the true doctrine of the word of GOD, the which they have
preached and written, and which have had the grace of GOD for to live and die
constantly for the mainteinance thereof.

But those men think in themselves, being inuenimed with the serpentine poison
of the deuilish spirit, as by their fruits and works stuffed with impiety,
vilanie and infection may easily be known, and that which is contrary to
the honor of God and to the truth of his holy word, to disgorge their
stinking vomit, yea all the mischief that they can devise by any subtle
mean, like as the devil puts into their heads so that what is it that
they dare not do.

A prayer that Luther used to say daily.
Confirm in us O God that which thou haste wrought: and finish the work which
thou have begone in us to thy glory. Amen.

I will not recite any more of this holy personage. He departed out of this life
in the year of our Lord 1546. having commended his soul into the hands of
God, and was buried honorably at Wittenberge.

He that will see further of his life and deeds, let him read the book of
Martyrs: also Sleidan and Melancthon have described his life and gestes.

Huldrike Zuinglius was borne about the year 1427. and when he had travailed a
long time as well in the liberal arts as in the study of Philosophy: He
employed his study to ye school of dyuinitie, he perceived that that was but
loss of time, and that thorough worldly wisdom, God and Philosophy were
brued together: so that of such prattling, barbarousnes, vain glory, and other
like things were risen and did grow, and no hope of sound doctrine could be
hoped for thereby.

He abode there notwithstanding, as one that had espied the camp of his
enemies, until the people of Glaris chose him for their minister, before that
he entered orders which he gat afterward, for then he had not knowledge of the
truth.

Having entered into the ministry he gave himself wholly to study,
especially of the holy scriptures: for he then esteemed not human wrytings
but so as they might stand with the holy scriptures and for preachings.

He was purposed for to learn Valerius Maximus without book, because of
memorable examples that be therein.

He saw that these be things required of a minister, that he has charge to
teach the flock of Christ, that he be adorned with knowledge of many things,
and above all with divine knowledge, then with the grace of speaking well, for
to expound all things fitly, according as may serve for the utility and
capacity of every body.

For discharge of his duty he was daily expounding the old and new
Testament, showing the proprieties of the text, and applying them according as
he saw profitable for them of that country.

He applied himself to the knowledge of languages, and learning at Saint
Peter, that the holy scripture is not understood by one particular
interpretation, he lifted up his eyes on high, craving for the holy ghost to be
his teacher, and praying daily that he might obtain the grace that he might be
able to have true understanding by sense of the holy spirit.

He judged of the Catholic Doctors as they judged of themselves, that they
must be read with judgment and be examined by the canonical scriptures, as by
the touchstone: that otherwise by mingling with them Philosophy and human
reasons, they were commonly so corrupted, that there is no mean how to make
them agree with the authority of the holy scripture.

Then he put his knowledge in practice so that he interprised the battle
against the greatest wickedness. Thereof came hatred, raylings, clamors,
ambushmentes of the children of this world against the holy servant of God
Zuinglius.

He went thence and afterward was sent for from Zurich to Suissa to be the
Pastor, and being placed, he immediately after uttered forth in the chapter
of the Chanons that which he had determined to teach the people: to wit, the
history of our Lord Jesus Christ after S. Matthew, to the intent that the
virtue of him, whose title ought to be advanced, should not lie buried, to
the detriment of the glory of God, and to the salvation of souls.

He protested that he did not expound it by humane sense, nor yet being bound
to the method of any interpretour, but by conference and a diligent collection
of the holy scriptures and by understanding of the spirit: the which he hoped
to obtain by praying heartily unto God.

Moreover it is reported of him that he kept a very good order in preaching,
and that the simple might as well profit thereby as the best learned, so as
the hearer could hardely go away but being more wise and enriched with
knowledge of the Lord then he had before.

And like as he taught the truth openly and with great diligence, so was he
hardy and earnest to reprove vices, crying against the oppressions of the
poor, against idle persons, dronkards, gluttons, and others living in
pleasures and vain delights, and superfluities.

Shortly after was sent thither from the Pope a preacher of pardons named
Sampso^ Millanois, for to bribe and poll, against whom Zuinglius stood
stoutly, and proved him a deceiuer and naughty fellow.

Zuinglius was menaced, and the ill will of the enemies of the truth inuenimed
daily more and more, that many as well in the city as in the country, in their
sermons diffamed his doctrine, as being wicked and not catholic. And amongst
others the Iacobins were the chief. Zuinglius contrariwise maintained it
conformed to the holy scripturs, and went about to set it forth.

And therefore the Senate of Zurich sent about the year 1523. to all the
ministers of the Churches within the jurisdiction to appear at the said city
ye 29. of January, for to accord of certain dissentions about religion:
promising ye every man should be heard so much and so long as should be
requisite.

Also the said Senate did friendly entreat by letters the bishop of
Constance to come thither or else to send some of his people.

After that a great multitude of people were gathered together at the day
appointed, and also John Faber the Bishops great Vicar come, The Consul carved
up the matter, saying, that the assembly had been cyted because of the great
dissension of doctrine that was raised up: to the intent that if any body
would say any thing against the doctrine of Zuinglius he should willingly
utter it forth. And ye must note ye before this time Zuinglius had co^prehe^ded
his doctrine in 70. and seven articles: and had published the^, to ye intent ye
they might al come well fortified to this asse^bly and disputation. The consul
for co^cluding of his purpose, bad them confer and dispute together.

Then the said Faber after that he had declared wherefore he was sent, labored
to persuade them ye there was no place to decide those matters: but ye it should
be done in ye counsel which should be kept there.

Zuinglius on the contrary pressed them on, that they should make no delay if
he had any thing to lay against him.

To whom he answered ye he would refute his opinions by writing.

And after much ado on both sids, when as none would offer to begin the
disputations, they left the assembly: and then ye Senate caused to be proclaimed
thorough all that country, that forsaking man's traditions, they should preach
sincerely thegospell, the old and new testament.

Then were great contentions amongst the Suisses about religion: hatred burned
then every day more and more, in such sort that the other parts sent to Zurich
by embassage giving the^ to understand of their ill case.

The men of Zurich made answer showing the^ the inestimable benefits and
graces that God did amongst other people bestow upon them.

And that seeing they had the word of God granted them, they should not fear
any threatenings. They gave commandment that throughout all the precinct of
their jurisdiction all the images should be taken away and burned, which thing
was done without any tumult the 13. day of June, in the year 1524. Within a
certain while after those that be called Chanons made certain parts or
couenantes with the Senate, and it was consulted how the goods and revenues
of the chapter should be employed.

And about the 13. of April in the year 1525. by the commandment of the
council, the mass was utterly abolished at Zurich, and through all that
seignieurie: and in steed thereof the Lords supper was instituted. Ceremonies
also were changed to reading of the prophets, to prayer and to the preaching
of the word. Whoredom and adultrie was forbidden; and judges deputed for to
know she affairs of marriage.

The priests and monks etc. were cast out of the doors: many labored by
sundry means to put Zuinglius to death: his house was besette in the night
time for to have taken him.

He was assaulted on all sids as well by writing, as otherwise: He withstoode
the opinions of the Anabaptists, ye which in his time began to spring up.

He composed many books and commentaries upon the holy scripture.

He died in the battle that was raised up because of linings betwixt the five
small coasts and the people of Zurich. For the custom of ye inhabitants of
Zurich is such, that when they march to battle the chief minister must be in
the troop. Look Sleidan and Oswald Micorinis who have written his life and
acts at large.

141 Oecolampadius of German being of a convent of Monks of the order of S.
Bridgide, and demanding liberty for his study and faith, besides certain
sermons that he wrote, he published also a book of confession very christian
like, and therefore intolerable amongst themarchants of ceremonies. For
because of this book one that was a confessor of the Emperor brought him
into great danger when as the estates of the Empire were assembled at Worms.

He departed out of that cloister and went unto a noble and worthy man Francis
de Sickingen: he began to amend again the abuse of the mass, and translated
certain fragments out of Chrisostom:

Afterward he was at Basile, thinking to have put in print that he had
composed. There by the will of the Senate and council of the city,
notwithstanding the clamoures of Sophisters, he began to read I say
publikelie: and shortly after at the request of the Curate of S. Martins, he
took in hand the charge of a preacher in his room, not without great despyte
of those that maintained the traditions of the Pope.

He preached the holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ five years without
wage either of Curate or preacher. He had great knowledge in diverse languages,
as the works of Theophilactus, Cyrillus; and Chrisostom upon Genesis do witness.

There happened in that time a disputation about the eucharistie, and being
requested to say his opinion thereof, he did it modestly according to the
judgment of the Elders, whom he alleged faithfully: whereupon grew a great
debate, by mean that others did not take that which he had written in such
sort as he meant.

Faber Eclzius and others appointed a disputation against the Suisses to be
holde^ at Bade, whereas he alone sustained the cause of the truth against the
adversaries.

He made many good commentaries upon Esaias, Jeremy, Agge, Zachary, Malachie,
Daniell, Job, Ezechiel, upon the Epistles of S. Paul to the Romans and to the
Hebrews, upon the Gospel of S. John and upon the Canonical epistle.

He departed out of this life at the end of Noue^ber in the year 1531. Whosoever
will read more largely of his life let him read Simon Gryneus, Wolfgangus, and
the book of Martyrs.

Bucer a learned man was also in the time of Luther and Zuinglius, he gave
also great light throughout all Christendom, not only by pure doctrine, but
also by holiness of life. John Calvin in the preface of his comentaries upon
the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, speaking of certain good deuines of
that time, and naming expressly Bucer, says of him in these words.

This man besides the profounde and excellent knowledge that he had in many
matters, besides the fine wit, and that he had read much, and besides many and
sundry virtues that he had, in which none at this present does excel him, yea
few comparable to him, had this praise proper and particular, that none of his
time applied himself more to the interpretation of the holy scripturs and that
with greater diligence then he.

He was sent for from Strausbourg to refourme the Churches of Colloine. He
preached to the godly being in great danger amongst the Spaniards: at that
time the Emperor came down through Rhein who by his ambassadors did earnestly
entreat the Archbishop to give him liberty.

He for religion fled into England whereas he was courteously entreated and
had the charge of interpreting the holy scriptures in the university.

He was diligent in writing Comentaries, and sundry works. And amongst
other toward his latter years he composed a book of the kingdom of Jesus
Christ our Savior, which he gave to the worthy king of England: showing
the way how the reformation of true Christian religion must be had, and how a
Realm and Christian common weal ought to be governed according to the will of
God. A book worthy to be read of kings, princes, and Lords.

The seven and tweentith day of February in the year 1551. Bucer departed
this life at Cambridge, and was honorably buried, and praised by Epitaphes of
learned men. Look Sleidan in his history of religion and of the common weal,
and in the book of Martyrs.

145 Phillip Melancthon an excellent man in doctrine, prudence and piety, was
borne in the year 1497. in a city called in latin Bretta, appertayning to the
Prince Palatine. He was a doctor in the Church and university of Wittemberge.

He disputed against the adversaries of the purity of Gods true service diverse
times with lively and infallible arguments, by which he showed what good true
foundation he had upon the holy scriptures, whereby he confounded all the
adversaries.

He made and composed diverse books as well of humanity, as also Commentaries
and common places upon the holy scripture which be extante at this present. He
lived 63. years and died in the year 1560. and was honorably buried.

Peter martyr a Florentine, a doctor and professor in divinity, in a Church
of Zurich in Suisse wrote the Cathechisme in Italian, that is, the exposition
of the principal articles of Christian religion He made a treatise of the
sacrament of the Eucharistie, and many Commentaries both on the Epistle of S.
Paul to the Romans and to the Corinthians, and also upon the Judges, and
Samuel, with others.

Augustine Marlorate having a certain time exercised the function of a good
and faithful pastor in the seignieuries of Berne was at the last elected
minister of the Church of Rouan, in which he faithfully discharged his duty:
and therefore was taken and hanged: he dyed constantly, yelding up his spirit
to the Lord, in the year 1569.

He had a great dexterity in collecting the opinions of the Doctors as well
old as new upon Esaias, Genesis and the Psalms, and on the new Testament also,
whereunto he added his own, he made certain pretty treatises, and amongst
others one of sin against holy the Ghost.

Musculus a German a Doctor in the Church of Berne made diverse good and
large commun places upon the holy scripture, and also good commentaries that be
found til this present. He dyed in the said city of Berne and was honorably
buried. 1563.

147 Amongst al others the books of John Calvin minister of the word of God at
Geneua can sufficiently testify, with what faithfulness, singular gifts and
graces God had adorned him according to the necessity of the time: And what
constancy he had in mainteyning the Lords quarrel.

To be short in as much as his works be yet extant and his memorial rife, I
will make of him no further discourse, referring the reader to his works that
he has written.

Now ye may see by this discourse, how God has from the first creation of
Adam and Eve had and conserved his Church, and has thorough all ages raised
some up and given them knowledge of his truth, and has by weaklings of the
world overthrown whole garriso^s of ye wicked worldlings to the end that all
men might know that the Lord alone is almighty, that his light is
unquenchable, his power infinite, his mercy toward his unspeakable, and that
although he suffers wickedness to flourish for a time, yet he will when he
sees time make his kingdom triumph over all: To which God, three persons and
one eternal deity, be all praise, honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A Table containing the dinumeration, or catalogue of the Doctors of the
Church of God, of whom mention is made in the discourse following.
GOd by his son and spirit instructed Adam and Eve, and from time to time
made him to have understanding in his church. Adam was ordained a Bishop and
Doctor, thorough the promise that was made of the seed of the woman. 1. Of the
sons of Adam were Doctors of ye Church Abel. 2. Seth was substituted unto
the ministry. 3. Enos. Cainam. Malaleel. Iared. 4. He noch an excellent
doctor amongst the fathers, who also was transported unto God out of this
miserable life to an everlasting life. 5 Mathusalem. 6 Lamech. These nine
before named being excellent personages were helpers unto Adam in the Doctrine
and work of the Church, for to teach and instruct the true servants of God. 7
After them succeeded in the government of the Church Noe. 8 Sem the son of
Noe a Doctor of the Church of God. 9 Arphaxad the son of Sem. Sale. Heber.
Phaleg. Reu. Sarug. Nachor. Their the father of Abraham. This is the first
order of the doctors of the church of God, to wit, the order of the fathers,
whose governance endured about the space of 2023. years. The second order of
the governors of the Church of God is of the Patriarchs. Abraham with his
posterity bare rule and guided the Church of God, and Isaac succeeded him. 11
Jacob a bishop of the church of God for his time. And afterward did succeed
the twelve Patriarchs, and Cahat the son of Leui. Amram the son of Cahat
and father unto Moses governed the church. 12 Moses and Aaron great and
excellent restorers of the church of God. 13 Iosue and with him was in the
government Ecclesiastical Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest. Othoniel
being dyuinely stirred up at ye prayer that the people made unto God. And
likewise governed in the church. 14 Debora a prophetisse and Barac had the like
governance. 15 Gedeon and others that followed by order, the number of whom ye
may find in the book of ye Judges. The governing of the patriarchs endured
about 850. years. 16 The Prophets be in the third order of the doctors of
the Church of God, and began at Samuel. 17 David a prophet and king and with
him were deputed and appointed to the government of the church of God the
Prophets. Nathan. Gad and the high priests. Sadoc, and Abimelech. 18 Solomon
the son of David succeeded his father. Semeia the prophet. Ado the prophet.
Iadi the prophet. Ahias the prophet. Hanani the prophet. Azarias the prophet.
John the Prophet. Iosue the son of Nun the prophet. All these prophets have
reproved the Kings and people for their Idolatries and abominable misdeeds.
19 Elie the Thesbite raised up by the power of God for to purge doctrine
again, and forthwith to kindle ye light thereof. 20 Elizeus substituted in the
room of Elie. 21 Isaias succeeded immediately after Elizeus, and in his time
were the prophets, Amos, Micheas, Osee. 22 Jeremy governed the church more
then 40. years, and in his time also were governors the Prophets Sophonie,
Abacuc, and Abdie 23 Danyell was instructed by Jeremy and governed the Church
in his time. 24 Ezechiel the Prophet. 25 Osee the prophet. 26 Joel the Prophet.
27 Amos the Prophet. 28 Abdias the Prophet. 29 Jonas the Prophet. 30 Micheas
the Prophet. 31 Nahum the Prophet. 32 Abacuc the Prophet. 33 Sophonie the
Prophet. 34 Aggee the Prophet. 35 Zachary the Prophet. 36 Malachy was the last
propher that was amongst the Jews before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
This is the third order of the Doctors of ye church of God, to wit, that of
the Prophets: the government of whom endured about 600. years. 37 The
governors and high priests be in the fourth rabble and order of the the
Doctors of the Church that were after the return from the captivity of
Babylon until the coming of Jesus Christ the son of God. Mardocheus. 38
Iehosue or Jesus with the conductor Zorobabell. 39 Ioachim. Esdras. Nehemias
and others that governed in the Church. 40 Simon and Eleazar, being brethren
and the sons of Onias. 41 Simon the just. 42 Matathias ye high Priest. 43
Judas Machabeus being raised up by the power of God. 44 Ionathas the brother of
Judas Machabeus succeeded him. 45 Simon the third son of Matathias. 46 John
Hircanus the great 47 Mathan the graundfather of the virgin Marie. Ioachim who
also was named Elie, father of ye virgin Marie. 48 Simeon. Anna. Zachary the
high Priest. 49 This is the fourth rablement and order of the governance of
the Church since the return from the captivity even until Christ, and this
endured about 500. years. The fifth and last order of the Doctors of the
Church of god, is that which we begin from John Baptist and our Lord Jesus
Christ. John Baptist the son of Zachary the Priest. 50 Jesus Christ the
son of the eternal God took humain flesh upon him of the virgin Marie, etc.
51 Now here be placed in the fifth order the Apostles, their disciples, the
Bishops, the pastors, the Doctors, and ministers, the which the son of God
has raised up in short space after unto other ages for the conservation and
maintenance of the ministry of the word and of his Church. The first are the
Apostles. Peter the Apostle. 52 Andrewe the brother of Peter, the Apostle. 53
James the son of Alphee, the Apostle. 54 James the son of Zebede, the
Apostle. 55 Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist. Bartholomewe the Apostle.
Mathias the Apostle. Phillip the Apostle. 56 Thomas the Apostle. 57 John the
Apostle and Evangelist. 58 Paul a persecutour converted unto Jesus Christ and
made an Apostle. 59 The second of the fifth order be the disciples. Amongst many
Disciples of the Apostles these here named haued have been the principal.
Barnabas who was also named an Apostle. Epaphroditus who was in like sort named
an Apoof the Phillippians. Andronicus and Iunia were reputed, notable amongst
the Apostles. Simon which was called Niger. Lucius Cyreneus. Manahem. Judas.
Barsabas. Silas. S. Luke called them doctors and prophets. Crescence. Clement.
Trophimus. 60 Luke the Evangelist and companion of S. Paul. 61 Mark the
Evangelist and disciple of S. Peter. 62 The third sort that were of this fifth
order be the Bishops. Timothy bishop of Ephesus. Titus bishop of Creete.
Apollo. Aristarcus. Gayus. Derbe. Jason. Sosipater. Tychicus. Secundus.
Syluanus. Tertius. Quartus. Sosthenes. Epaphras. Jesus the just. Demas.
Anthippus bishop of the Colossians. Eubulus. Pudens. Linus. Artenas. Zenas.
Dyonise Areopagita bishop of the Athenians. 63 Annianus the first bishop of
Alexandrie. 64 Ignatius the Disciple of saint John the Evangelist, and second
bishop of Antioch. 65 Clement bishop of Rome 66 Anaclete bishop of Rome. 67
Quadratus disciple of the Apostles bishop of Athens. 68 Euaristus bishop of
Rome. 69 Policarpe disciple of S. John the Evangelist, was bishop of Smyrna. 70
Mark being come of the Gentiles was elected bishop of Jerusalem, after the
saccage made by Titus. These succeeded then afterward. Cassianus. Publius.
Maximus. Symmache. Caius. Julian the 2. Capito. 71 Melito of Asia bishop of
Sardis. Thophilus bishop of Antioch. Apollinare. Dyonise Bishop of Corinth.
Iustus bishop of Vienna. Phillip bishop of Crete or Candie. Egesippus. Justin
the philosopher. Modestus. Musan. 72 Eleutherius bishop of Rome. 73 Ireneus
scholar to Policarpus bishop of Lions. 74 Theodotian bishop of Ephesus.
Miltiades. Apillonius. Serapion. Policrates. 75 Victor bishop of Rome. 76
Tertullian of the country of Africa, that is to say of Carthage. 77 Leonides.
Amonius. Origene. Tryphon. Minutius. Felix. Berille. Hyppolitus. Alexander
bishop of Capadoce. Iules the Affricane. Gregory bishop of Po^tus. Dyonise
bishop of the city of Alexandrie: all these almost were the discyples of
Origene. 78 Vrbane bishop of Rome. 79 Cyprian of the country of Affrike bishop
of Carthage. Whereas is spoken of those that in his time made abiuration,
denying again the truth of the holy gospel, and what the judgment of God
against them was, and in like sort of them in our time. Alexander Bishop of
Jerusalem. Babile bishop of Nicomedie. Asclepiades of Antioch. Theophilus.
Cesarius. Vital. Polichronius bishop of Babilone. 80 Xistus of Athens bishop of
Rome. Laurentius the first of the seven Deacons of the Church of Rome. 81
Archelaus Bishop of Mesopotamia. Anatholius. 82 Anthimius Bishop of Nicomedie.
Albine greatly renoumed, who also received the the crown of a martyr. 83
Arnobius. Pierius. Melitius. Lucien. Phigeas the Egyptian. These here mentioned
were excellent doctors of the Church of their time. Lactantius. Firmicane the
disciple of Arnobius. 84 Eusebius Bishop of Cesaria in Palestine. Reththius
Bishop of Authun. Methodius. Athanasius Bishop of the city of Alexandria. 85
Eustache Bishop of Antioch. Paphnutius of Egypt. Maximus. Macarius Bishop of
Jerusalem. Spiridion Bishop of Tremithe in Cyprus. Nicholas Bishop of Mirrha in
Lycia. 86 Theodorike Bishop of Heraclia in Thrace. Eusebius Bishop of Emesus.
Hillarie Bishop of Poityers in the Dukedom of Aquitaine in France. 87
Liberius Bishop of Rome 88 Basile Bishop of Cesarea. 89 Damasus borne in
Spain, Bishop of Rome, succeeded after Liberius Anthon. 90 Vulphilas Bishop of
Goths in Sarmathia. 91 Ambrose Bishop of Milaine. 92 Vigilantius Bishop of
Barcelon in Spain. 93 Apollinare of Laodicea Bishop of Syria. 94 Hierome the
son of one named Eusebius of the city of Stridon. 95 Chrysostom borne at
Antioch and the disciple of Liberius. Euagrius. Theodolus. Maximius, were
Bishops 96 Augustine Bishop of Hippo, was divinely raised up, for to confute as
well the errors of the Manichees, as of the Pelagians and others. 97
Possidonius of the country of Affrike, bishop of Calm. Celestin bishop of
Rome. Palades the grecian, and Patricius were in Scotland and in Ireland, for
to preach the faith. German Bishop of Auxerre. Cirillus Bishop of
Alexandrie. 98 Sedulius. Sozomenus. Socrates. Theodoritus. Cassiodore. 99
Eucherius Bishop of Lions. 100 Victor Bishop of a city in Numidia, which is in
Affricke, called in latin Cartena. Polichronius bishop of Jerusalem. Archadius.
Probus. Paschaius. 101 Laetus, bishop. Eugenius bishop of Carthage. 102
Proterius bishop of Alexandrie. Peter of Rauenna. Gennadius an elder of the
church of Marseille. Prosper. Saluien. Sidonius. German bishop of Capua.
Vaast bishop of Arras. Fulgentius bishop of Ruspe in Affrike. Autius bishop of
Vienna. Solemus bishop of Chartres. Boethius a learned man. Epiphanius Bishop of
Phania. 103 GElasius of Afric bishop of Rome. 104 Hormisda borne in Frese
land in the city of Campania, governed the Church of Rome. 105 Arator.
Gregory bishop of Angres. 106 Leander bishop of Seuille. Serenus bishop of
Marseillus. 107 Isidorus the younger bishop of Hispalis: Beda an English man.
108 Theodorus Bishop of Rauenna. Ledger bishop of Authun. 109 Willebroc bishop
of Frisons. 110 Boniface Archbishop of Mayence. Burcardus. Guntarius bishop.
111 Alcuin Beda his scholar. Felix bishop in Aquitain. 112 Ansegisus who made
4. books of the decrees of Charlemaigne and of Lewis his son. 113 Haymo the
third Bishop of Albastat, the disciple of Alcuinus. Rabanus. Strabus who
collected out of the writings of the fathers and of the doctors the ordinary
gloss. 114 Bertrand a priest, a learned man and well instructed in the true
godliness. 115 Vldriche bishop of Auspurge in Germany, which greatly resisted
against the decrees of Pope Nicholas. 116 Johannes Scotus (not Ihon ye fiyer) a
learned man who wrote properly like as the foresaid Bertrande did, concerning
the body and blood of Christ in the supper. 117 Ratherius Bishop of Verone.
Aldeber of Bohemia Bishop of Prague. 118 Burchardus bishop of Worms, who
compyled the ancient canons. 119 Berengarius borne at Toures Archdeacon of
Angers, mainteyned the opinion of the said Bertrand and Johannes Scotus. 120
Sigebert who made a chronicle. Hugo of the Saxon nation. 121 Bernard of the
country of Burgonia. 122 John of Saresburie Bishop of Charters stood in
defraunce against the wickedness of the Popes and of the Clergy. 123 Arnolde
bishop of Byxta. 124 Waldo of Lions of who^ the Waldenses took their name:
like as of Luther came the Lutherians. 125 Peter de vinca, Chauncelor to the
Emperor Fridericke the second, did write many letters in the name of the
Emperor, complaining therein of the insatiable covetousness of the Pope. 126
William de saint Amor a Doctor of Paris, a channon of Beauuais, in his
sermons cried out against the hypocrisy of the prelates and other such like
matters. 128 Laurence an Englishman, a doctor of Paris, wrote a certain book
against the monks, ye contents of which book was, that men should take heed
of false prophets. 129 Peter Cassiodorus an Italian, well instructed in the
word of God. 130 Dulcine of Navarre who reproved the vices of the Churchmen.
131 Arnoldus de villa nova, who said, that in the sacrifice of the Altar the
Priest did offer nothing unto God 132 Wickliefe, who seeing true divinity to
be corrupted with a great many of rude questions and human inventions, was
moved to remedy such a disorder. 133 Sautree a priest inflamed with and pure
religion. 134 John Hus of Bohemia. 135 Hierome of Prague a Bohemian, who was at
the council of Constance whereas was also John Hus. 136 Clemangis a doctor of
Paris and Archdeacon of Baion wrote touching the corrupt estate of the church.
137 John Oldcastel knight of the order and one of the peers of England, who
taught the courtiers a better manner of serving Christ Jesus then they used 138
Grunelder of the order of priests. Taylour an English man. Radtgeber. Drandorf.
Toraw. All these were martyred for the maintenance of the truth of the word
of God. 139 Wight an Englishman. Richard Houenden an Englishman martyred for
ye truth of the gospel. 140 Paul Crau of Bohemia. Rhedon of the order Car
melites in the kingdom of France. Roger Dule Gentleman. 141 Sauanarola, al
these were burned for mainteining the truth. 142 Luther necessarily raised up
to reform the church. Zuinglius minister of the church of Zurich. 143
Occolampadius minister of Basile. 144 Bucer professor of divinity in England.
145 Melancthon professor of Divinity at Wittenberge. 146 Peter Martyr
professor of divinity at Zurich. Musculus at Berne. Marlorate minister of the
Church at Roan. 147 Calvin minister of the Church at Geneua. 148
FINIS.

