CLASMATA.

H.W.

Medice Cura teipsum.
Whilst on the Worlds brave Theater I look,
And Times and Man's Vicissitudes bemoane;
My musing Thoughts in Error gross I took,
That of those bad my self not mended one:
For Ills one should be less, If I were none.
O let me rather my self Rectify,
Then sympathize thus in Antipathie.
It Is true, I lived in the Golden days
Under the Candor of a fulgent Sphaere,
Where seldom Sun obscured his Brightest Rays:
If now it shines not Radiantly so clear,
Or that more Clouds or mistie fogges We fear:
If I, THOU, HE, return that are estranged,
We need not cry O How the World is changed.
Estranged I mean from HIM that Rules All,
Both Sun and Its subordinated Stars;
Let I, THOU, HE, before Him prostrate fall,
Imploring Him to set in tune the Jarres;
For I, THOU, HE, it is, all the Fabrik marres.
And I, first person of the Three and Worse,
Purpose by Grace Divine to change my Course.
Lament. Ierem. 5.21. Turn us O Lord, and we shall be turned.
NOw to begin my change the surest Way,
I Will use that form This Prophet used before;
Turn me O Lord, that Wholly turn I may:
I cannot turn one foot, but wrong go more;
Thou must both bring me back, and in at door.
THY SELF'S the Door, Lord let me in by Thee*
And give me all that Thou Command me.
Some think they can convert and turn at pleasure,
Repentance is at hand and in there Power:
Poor Adams Sons, what is your weight and measure?
LORD turn Thou me, first, second, and last hour;
If Thou holdst off, Then down droupe I and lowre.
Therefore (as Austens was) my Prayer is,
Lord DA QVOD JVBES, JVBE then QVODVIS.
Non est Mortale quod opto.
THen stay not there, for wishes not avail thee,
If but to mortal Glory thou aspire;
Sauns Fortitude and Labor They will fail thee:
Immortal is ten thousand Grees yet higher,
Who aims at that shrinks not at blood nor fire.
Clog not thy self for this lives brevitie,
But spend thy spirits for Eternity.
Nugas Luge.
NOw mourn my cheerful Heart, abandon mirth,
It makes my Mind more trivial then ought.
The sapid speech that has a pleasant birth
Sowreth by night (me thinks,) and savours naught:
That Sweetly lasts, which is Sober wrought.
Gravely pass time, Thou were not merry born:
Mourn in thy life, thou may not dye to mourn.
To one that asked why he often times was so sad.
Nunquam minus tristis quam cum pertristis.
MY Fancies driven and snared in a Toil,
My Mind within as Lady Empress sits,
But Metorlike, They whirle and keep a coile,
And are too nimble for my swiftest wits,
Turning my calm Thoughts, into flashing fits:
My Theories does Sadness safest keep;
My Mind works best when Sense and Fancy sleep.
Nor is it a Paradox, for mark thine Eye,
Thine Ear, thine Hand, thy dainty Taste and Smelling;
How every object meeting to complie
Its proper sense, in Fancy sets a swelling,
Right reason Wildly to and fro dispelling,
Most in their strength is both my Mind and wit,
When most of Sense and Fancies vigor quit.
Vita petit mortem repetit quia mors mihi vitam.
LIght heart, my life (more then I like) makes longer,
Nor sad heart shortens much, the strings are stronger:
Then live, but daily dye, that so deaths hour
May be (when it comes) than sweetest life, less sower.
I will not dig for Death, but life so carry,
That I for Death, not Death for me shall tarry.
Faxit Deus.
Homo Microcosmus.
AM I a little World, what is my Fraught?
Pride, Folly, Lusts, Humors, and surging Broiles,
Changes, Chances, Purpose, and Project naught:
Plenty, Want, Sorrows, Pleasures, Ease, and Toils;
Honors, Disgrace, Conquests, Contempt, and Foiles.
Thus balast is This little World for store,
As is the Great, though in the greatness more.
But Piety, Love, Wisdom, Grace, and Peace;
Sanctity, true Glory, Virtue Divine:
Fullness of Joy, which needs no increase.
High Felicities, never that Decline,
Are of the Crystal World, Are not of mine.
LORD Almoner of Heaven, Deal me Thy Dole,
Some pieces Here as Symbols of the Whole.
Periculum probat.
SOme Boast aforehand Confidence in God
In times of troubles, and their Great distress,
How quietly They will embrace His Rod;
And bear all Crosses stoutly do profess:
Be not to Bold, I thought my self no less.
So Peter on his Courage set a Etiam si moriar etc. Mat. 26.35.
price,
'Till Chantecler had checked him once or twice.
In Calmes no Cares, No Trialls where no Crosses;
Jobs messengers when they beset thee round,
When Storms within, Tempests without thee tosses.
If then in peace Thou manly stand'st thy Ground,
Thou giv'st some proof, thy Faith and Hope is sound.
Lord Awe me in my largest Liberties,
Thou may enlarge my straightest miseries.
What is it to know how to abound or want Philipp. 4.11.12.

More then to be all ONE in Cases all?
In Plenty not to full, in Need content;
This tottering World gives not That man a fall:
For as he was he is, and so he shall.
For in each Change, by Christ he holds fast,
O Lord (though late,) Now teach me This at last.
Upon sad tidings.
Ecce me, faciat mihi pro ut bonum videtur in occulis suis. Sam. 2, 15.26.
Besieged with Troops of fears as with an Hoaste,
Tumults of Thoughts Irrushing on my mind:
Plagues of ill Happs posting from every Coast;
Like blustering Storms, more coming, more behind.
And when no End, nor hope of End I find:
I say as He who in the like Case stood,
LORD Here I am, Do with me what think good.
Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor.
DImme-sighted man Can see and not avoid?
Cloze up those eyes that lead thy foot awry;
Those Carnal Sights leave not till all be stroyde,
And in their Room get one Spiritual Eye;
One Single Heart, which may with it Complie.
Then look thine Heart keep clean, and clear thy sight,
So shall thou see, approve, and follow Right.
Remember me my GOD for This, Nehemiah 13.22.
MY GOD says Nehemie Remember me:
I dare not call GOD ( mine) my Soules's afraid,
Yet I have found GOD Good in my degree;
As largely Good as he that (My GOD) said,
Why then to cry My GOD am I dysmaid?
I cannot say Remember me for This,
That This makes odd between my Case and His.
Josua 14.15, in versus calce.
Iosue Protests he would serve the LORD,
Though none else would, yet He and His alone:
Exhorts All in general accord;
He with the first Cont ends to be one,
And in GODS Courts will Second be to none,
Place of precedence in Iosues Condition,
Strive for in GODS Name, It Is a safe Ambition.
The love of GOD to Man.
MAn more then Angels Thou did love O LORD,
Thou talk with him when he did disobey:
Thou threwst Them down, vouchsafst Them not a Word,
But chained Them up until the Judgment day.
The Man Thou chid'st, but sav'dst another way.
O Depth of Mercy to this Man of Dust,
When to those Angels Thou were only Just.
O GOD what is Man, whom Thou did so Regard?
Thou made Him twice ( as't were) to make him sure,
Renewd'st Thine Image He so fowly mar'de:
Stamped in Thy self that so It might endure,
Were Man Thy self that Manhood might be pure.
Thus GOD the Man sets full at Liberty,
Steps in his stead, And is his Suerty.
O Second person in the Trinity,
Lord Jesus Christ, the Horn of our Salvation;
That wroughst in Man by Theoanthropie,
More Integrall then at his first Creation:
Keep me within the Tower of that Station.
Then stronger mine shall be then Adams Case,
For He stood by himself, I stand by Grace.
Deo Gloria.
Tremor Cordis.
THine Holiness, O GOD, I apprehending,
And Justice so Exact for least Transgression:
How Thou from Heaven threw'st Angels down offending.
And cast out Man from Paradise his Session,
O then my Soul comes trembling to Confession.
I am a Lump of Sin, not one spot free,
All over sinful, what becomes of me.
Recording then Thy self becam'st a man,
And were made Sin for Man's sins Expiation;
Did die for Sin in Sinners Room: O than
Against Devil and Hell I get Refocillation.
And calling Faith to this high Admiration,
Believe GOD made Himself a Man to Dye
For Greatest Sinners, Sinners such as I.
Spiritus, ubi vult spirat.
What Is Spirit Spirit is, what is Flesh is Flesh,
Thou Breathest where thou please, O Holy Breath.
GOD breathed Life at first, Breath Thou afresh:
Else all Life long I do but live in Death.
So is all Life, (but what is from The) Beneath.
Draw me O GOD to CHRIST, O Draw me still,
Methinks I come like one against his Will.
Etiam Pater, quia Tibi ita placuit, Math. 11.26, et Luke 10.21.
Even so O Father, for it pleased Thee so,
The Son of GOD on GODS own Will does rest:
The Sons of Men will farther Reasons know,
As though GODS Will of Reasons were not Best;
Cause of first Cause Thou seek'st to have expressed.
For still thou say There Is Reason of that Will,
Be It so: But far beyond thy Reach and Skill.
Luke 21.19. Possess your Souls in Patience.
THy Soul in Patience labor to possess,
The LORD His own Disciples Counsail'd so.
This fluctuant World is busy more ore less
By change or chance to machinat thy woe;
Tumbling thy best Endeavors to and fro.
To Patience then Lay Anchor in Her Road,
Then Let thy Ship float where it will abroad.
O Son of GOD that were the Son of man,
Poorest of All, Yet Lord of Allwert borne,
First laid in Cratch, so basely life began;
Hunted by Herod, felt the Scourge and scorn,
Thy shoulders bare the Cross, Thy Head the Thorn.
O CHRIST (whose patience did more increase:
In most Extremes,) Bind me unto Thy Peace.
I will show mercy, on whom J will show mercy. Exodus 33.19.
Thou will show mercy, Lord, on whom thou will.
Remember me then in Thy mercies Will,
And though most Monstrous be my Sin and guilt
My Pardon shall with Glory, mercy fill,
Mong'st Those Thou pardon'st, Lord, then me imbill
To put my name into Thy Mercy-rolles
Above the third Heavens Mercy it extolls.
Justice as Great as Mercy is. How than?
Thy Justice, LORD, Thy Son has fully paid;
(GOD answers GOD, No man nor Angel can)
And in His Blood has all my Score defraid
And does quite claim what can by Law be laid.
Then Thou O GOD may seal my Pardon sure,
Justice and Mercy Both kept Even and pure.
Come unto me All ye that are laden, And I will refresh you, Math. 11.28.
LAden (O LORD) laden I am with Sin,
The heaviest Weight that ever Earth did bear:
Crushed down without, contunded more within;
Nothing but Wrath and Horror does appear;
My trembling Soul in shivers shakes for fear.
I come to Thee, thus laden (LORD) thus broken,
Ease me, as in Thy Gospel Thou have spoken.
Luke 10.34.
O dear Samaritane Bind up my Wounds,
My Souls Soar runs like a Rotten Boil:
In Thee such Virtue and such Grace abounds,
As Thou can heal me with a Drop of Oil,
Pour it into me and my Soul assoile.
Thy Blood's the Oil, LORD Bathe me in that Unction,
And wash me clean * Heb. 9, 14.15, and 10, 12.14.
It is Thy Blessed function
How unsearchable are the Judgemens of GOD, and His Ways past finding out,.
Romans 11.33
GOD drowns the World, yet spares Noe and his,
Esau He hates, But Jacob dearly loves:
Who dares find fault or Reason ask of this?
If He rejects me and thee approves;
I Will silence keep, for so it me behooveth.
Submit thy self to GODS own Sacred Will,
Not meddling, Why He sends here Good there Ill.
And (for no Angel dares make Indagation
Into GOD'S Ark, where His close Counsels lie:)
Get thou a Copy of thine own Salvation.
Why others shall not study not to pry,
GOD can and Will His own Ways Justify.
What thou must learn is wrote in GODS own Story,
What is concealed, is sealed up to his Glory.
I nothing LORD deserve but wrath and Ire,
(Let not my Humblings make me worse to fare:)
Most Just of all must Mercy needs Require,
And Me most vile, if Thou be pleased to spare?
What Is He that murmer against that Mercy dare.
Quit me O CHRIST, no more but speak the Word,
For of thy Mercies Thou Thy Self art LORD.
His Souls phancie.
IF that my Catyffe Soul did walk on Ground,
And visibly were from the body known;
Which GOD at first Infused so purely Sound:
Now by my flesh so vild and loathsome grown,
My Fancy is, GOD could not know his own.
Expurge (O CHRIST) my Souls foul Inquination,
Then GOD again will know His own Creation.
His Souls comfort, Math. 18.21, and Luke 17.4.
NOt seav'n, but seav'nty seav'n times Peter shall
Forgive his Brother by His Masters Will;
And if seav'n times a day he sins, and call
Seav'n times for pardon, he must pardon still.
When all Hopes flag* This Hope (LORD) mounts the Hill.
Thou will forgive as often, and much more too,
Then what Thou bidst Thy Servant Peter do.
His Souls Rest. Deus Tranquillus tranquillat omnia.
IF Thou be pleased O GOD to be at peace,
With Thy poor Creature, in Thy Blessed Son;
Then shall my Faintings, Doubts, and Terrors cease,
And Combat with that Horrid Host be done,
And toward Heaven my Soul walk safely on.
Speak peace then LORD, and Resecat by Grace,
My fleshly fetters that Implex my pace.
Or despisest thou the Riches of His Mercy that leads thee to Repentance,.
Romans 2.4
WHo not observes how by Sweet Mercies side
Justice close stands, gyrded with its Sword;
May suddenly into Presumption slide:
Danger of Dangers all, to be abhorred;
As which Indulgence, to all Sins affor'd.
Mercy Right weighed, Repentance does begin;
Not Right, a Torrent opens unto Sin.
Not to Repent, and Mercy to despice,
Seems by this Text to Me, to go as One:
If Mercy does from True Repentance rise,
Where no Repentance, Mercy can be none:
Those woeful Privatives go not alone.
Who Mercy seeks, and Paenitence exclude,
Plainly Himself, And would his GOD delude,
Repentance seems in Order first in place,
Mercy in Nature does praecede before:
LORD, Both at once flow freely from Thy Grace;
And Both at once, my Soul on knees Implore,
Repentance That, Repentance need no more,
And Mercy That, I so converted be,
Luke 15.7.
In Heaven The Angels may Rejoice for me.
Lent.
IF all the sins, all Sinners, did Confess,
Were to mine Ears ( to lessen mine) propounded;
As much in weight, And not in number less*
Confess I must, though therefore were Confounded;
Yea (LORD) sins I know not, Thou knowst'd abounded.
Not one as I, his days have so misspent:
Confession must begin first part of Lent.
Now, could I sterve my lusts so proud within,
Bar Adams out, And CHRIST my LORD retain;
Worlds Courses leave, and Hav'n on Earth begin:
Temperance unto my Profession chain,
For my Souls Health Surfets in Sin, restrain.
Through Faith in pure Conscience, Repent;
Then acted is the second part of Lent.
THe least of these (LORD) is not in my power,
Only from Grace proceed both Will and action:
I can Confess, cannot amend an hour;
Begin perhaps, as soon begun, a Fraction:
Soul and Souls faculties, all, in distraction.
LORD, what I ought to do, and what is not done,
Set it on him did Do for me, thy Son.
H. W. Aetatis sua 76, 1626. Jud. 14. Ecce venit Dominus. etc. Behold the Lord
comes with ten Thousand of His Saints to Judgment.
THat Heavenly CHOIRE o Christ that at thy Birth
Did sing ( aloft,) Glory to God on Hie,
Mercy and Peace (Below) to men on Earth;
Shall at thy second coming change their Cry,
Sounding with Trumpet Judgment through the sky.
And shake as with a mighty Rush of Thunder,
Foudations of the UNIVERSE, a sunder.
Lord, All Thou do is just, and Just is Good,
Thine Agents, Angels are Caelestiall:
Though Wicked Ones may murmur in their Mood,
And Cruelty Thy pure Justice Call,
Imprecating Mountains on them to fall;
For what Eye can in Thy Great day of Doom
Behold that MAJESTY wherein Thou Come?
Or what strong Words can Blazon Thine Assize?
Act. 2.19, 20.
The Stars shall fall, the Heavens shall melt away,
All Living must stand forth, All Dead must rise;
The Sun grow dark, Moon turn to blood that day:
Fire, vapors, Smoke, All over fear and fray.
Yet (Lord) in all this Horror, Flame and Dread,
Thou Bid'st The Elect to lift up then their Head.
The HOMOLOGIE. Luke 21.28.

Poor is my knowledge, But I Aimed to know,
My Realls are yet lesser then mine Art:
The Theorie Infatuats me so,
I played the Trevant in the practique part,
O Lord forgive, And Innovate mine Heart
To know, and know to do, and not to look,
To be saved so, as Felons by their Book.
Absit.
Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.38. ad finem usque.
IN Magdalens Heart there a Limbeck was,
Distilled her Sins into a flood of Tears;
Which got her Pardon in such Terms to pass
As her LORDS Mercies in the FULL appears,
To comfort all poor Sinners Hearts and Ears:
His feet She washed in Paenitentiall water,
Her Memory is blessed for ever after.
My stony Heart no Tears can melt nor bruise,
O Thou That out of Stones can Children raise
To Abraham, Thy Souppling Grace Infuse
Into my Soul, I may my latter Days
(THOSE PAST O PERDON) tread in straighter ways:
So may with MARY whole on CHRIST Repose,
And with those Words these papers up I cloze.
FINIS.

