THE VOICE OF THE LORD IN THE TEMPLE OR, A most strange and wonderful Relation
of Gods great Power, Providence, and Mercy, in sending very strange sounds,
fires, and a Fiery Ball into the Church of Anthony in Cornwall near Plimmouth,
on Whitsunday last, 1640. To the scorching and astonishing of 14. several
persons who were smitten. And likewise to the great Terror of all the other
people then present, being about 200. persons.

The truth whereof will be maintained by the Oaths of the same persons; having
been examined by Richard Carew of Anthony, Esquire; and Arthur Bache, Vicar of
Anthony.

Imprinted at London by T. Pain for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Marigold in Pauls-Church-yard. 1640.

THE VOICE OF THE LORD IN THE TEMPLE.
GOD in all ages has given Testimonies of his power, and particularly of that
power which is able in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that do not know
and obey him, even the power which the Excellent Singer of Israel thus
expresses, Psalm. 29.
The voice of the Lord is powerful; The voice of the Lord is full of Majesty,
The voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire.

But here have we notice, not only of his power but his goodness; so as we
may say with the Prophet, The Lord is jealous, and the Lord revengeth; Nahum 1.
yet withal, the Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, his way is in the
whirle wind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. For
here we see God in the storm, threatening judgment, yet showing mercy; yea,
Mercy triumphing over judgment: And indeed his judgment leads to Mercy by
leading to Repentance; For whiles it calls to Repentance, it forewarnes to fly
the wrath to come: Whereas without Repentance, this will be but a pattern and
forerunner of eternal fire. But if like wise children burnt with this
temporal fire, sinners by penitence escape the everlasting burnings of
eternal fire; then may they sing Mercy and judgment, even judgment turned
into Mercy: And then may they break out into thanksgivings, for the judgment
which has brought them by Repentance to Mercy, and did now terrify them, but
not destroy them; and did terrify them now, that it might not hereafter
eternally destroy them.

On Whitsunday last a fair morning began, but by the desert of sin, turned
into black darkness, and was shadowed about 8. or 9. of the clock with a
cloud, and this cloud was followed with some (not extraordinary) darkness,
claps of Thunder, and flashes of Lightning; but afterward when Divine Prayers
and Sermon were ended, and Administration of the blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper was near accomplished, there came a very vehement fire, far more
bright than Lightning; and this fire was suddenly attended with a terrible and
unspeakable sound, to the great amazement and astonishment of the people then
present in the Church. The terror of this strange fire and fearful sound,
drew from some pitiful cries, caused in others a dead silence, their senses
being stupefied and overcome by that which they saw, heard, and felt.

More particularly, while the holy Communion was administering, and when as many
as came to a first and second Table had received, and those that came to a
third had received the bread, Light came in at the Chancell window, and was
seen in the Chancell by diverse persons, in the form of a fiery Ball, the
bigness of a Bowl, and did strike diverse persons which were kneeling and
expecting the Cup.

Diverse hurts by diverse persons were then received, of which my self was one,
who thought I had the hair of mine head burnt off, and the outside of my left
leg scalded, and could not in mind be otherwise persuaded, until I was
informed the contray of the one, and mine own eyes saw the contrary of the
other. In which give me leave to express unto the Reader (and that with hearty
thanks to my mighty Preserver) my great deliverance, and that only by Gods
good providence toward me; I received the blow at my very turning toward the
Communion Table, to take the Cup to administer the Wine, and I was no sooner
removed from the place, but instantly a Ball of Fire came into the same place
where I stood before, as is testified by diverse persons then present.

For my own part I call to mind that I saw a great flaming fire about my
body, and heard a terible sound in mine ears; and the blow which came with it
(according to our sense) if it had lighted on my person, must needs have proved
mortal. And my wife Elizabeth Bache, sitting in her seat after the receiving
of that holy Sacrament, being astonished, partly with the greatness of the
sound, partly with the terror of the fire, and partly vith the cry of the
people, supposing some one had been struck dead, asked of some of her
neighbors by her, whether that were her husband which was killed? Reply
was made her; not, thanks be to God, for he is comforting John Hodge, one of
the distressed, and astonished persons. Master Antony Furlong the younger, was
stricken in the soles of his feet, and likewise in the legs as it had been
with Gunpower, and so he saw the fire vanish away in the manner of sparkles.
John Brusie likewise saw at the same time, as it were a Ball of fire desending
from above; which when it came to the ground, dispersed abroad with a deadly
Sound; and he felt his legs and toes extraodinary hot therewith; but when
he returned home, and looked upon them, they were only very red, but he had
no other harm. William Sargent, a Masters mate of a ship, kneeling under the
Chauncell window, was stricken on the chine, as seemed to him with a bullet:
The blow was so grievous, as that he thought his body had been cut in two
pieces; yea such was the violence of the blow, that it caused his water
forthwith to issue from his body; and for a time lost his sight and senses, but
soon recovered them again; which Sargeant for two or three years before
feeling oftimes a great pain in his chine, was hereby so cured, as that he
felt no pain there since. John Gendle a servant unto Richard Carew Esquire. was
smitten against the fore part of the right shoulder, where he kneeled upon his
knees, with a great violence, that (hearing as it were the hissing of a great
shot) he thought he had been stricken therewith, and his shoulder had been
carried clean away: he was turned almost round about where he kneeled, and
exceedingly astonished with the blow. Anthony Peeke was fearfully smitten, in
all the lower part of his body, as if it had been made dead; and felt the
water in his bladder, as it were boiling hot; he supposed he had been shot
through; he was set up upon the form, by which he was kneeling, himself not
knowing how. Dorothy Tubbe who was then kneeling to receive the Communion,
was so smitten with this Lightning, that it seemed to her that her legs and
knees were stricken off from her body, vvherevvith she was astonished for a
while, but afterward recovering her senses, felt extraordinary pain, and
heat therein, which by little and little went so away, as it left only a
little numnesse in them, during the most part of that day; but in the end she
was (by the blessing of God) perfectly freed thereof. Ferdinando Reepe of the
Church-towne, was stricken in the sole of his left foot, with such violence,
as he thought it had been split in pieces; and with the same blow was for the
time deprived of his senses. John Hodge was smitten in his knees, and thighs;
and so as if every joint of the lovver part of his body had been unjoynted;
he feared greatly he should never have been able to stand again; it forced
from him, a bitter and most pitiful cry; he likewise savv the ball of fire.
Susanna Collings also received a grievous blovv, as if she had been struck
with fire, and the under part of her body seemed, as if it had been severed
from the upper; it scalded the wrest of her right arm, as broad as a piece of
three pence, which was not whole in a fortnight after; though she nor any of
the rest felt any of the greater hurts, after the same day; she was so
astonished with the blow, as that she fell sidewayes therewith, as she kneeled
by the form: who being seen so fallen, there came one John Burt of our parish,
who being weak in respect of age, and so not able to lift her up; forthwith
came likewise one Master Oliver Deeble, to assist him with his hands, as he
did my self, and the rest with his Christian comfortable words. As likewise
Mistress Grace Carew, the wife of the foresaid Master Richard Carew did (her
husband being then absent, by reason of his grievous sickness;) persuading
them to continue in, and not to go out of the Church: which counsel was so
hearkened unto and embraced, as that none departed from the Temple.

There came in at the North vvindow (being a little behind the aforesaid Master
Carewes seat) a great fire much redder then ordinary Lightning; which was
seen by Misteris Pearse widow, daughter unto the said Master Carew; and by
Degory Moyse the elder his Tenant; and struck Nicholas Skeleton, one of his
house, with such violence, as if he had been stricken with two flat stones, or
two trenchers, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side of his
head, and withal shook his body, as if it should have been shaken in pieces,
whereby for a time he lost his sight and his senses. This fire then passed
down by Master Carewes seat into the path before it, and so went on unto the
end thereof upon the ground, and passed up by the forepart of his seat in the
Chancell, and there instantly killed a Dog, which Mistress Pearse's Daughter
heard only once to screech.

This Lightning or fearful fire (term it as you please) entered likewise in
the same time at a window in the West end of the Church, where it brake off
pieces of the hard Moore stone, and rent one of the Arches of the window three
foot long; and likewise brake some of the glass, and left the lead of the same
pressed inwards, and made an hole in the stones and the lime of the side wall
adjoining thereunto as big as a scaffold hole, and then struck one Roger Nile
on the pinbone of his right side, and on the ankle on the inside of his left
leg, as if the blow had been given by a Bowl; so as for a while he was not
able to stand. John Cowle also (commonly called Cowling) sitting in the South
I Will of our Church, as high up as the lower end of the Chancell, was so stricken
with Lightning in the face, that he thought all the hair thereon had been
burnt; yet by the mercy of God, though he were feared, had no hurt. Nicholas
Wilcock, a servant unto the foresaid Master Carew likewise says, that he saw
fire come down from aloft, and a small piece of Lime therewith being thrown
down, struck him on the cheek, which made his cheek continue in a burning
heat all that day. In this Agony one cried as the child to his Father, Mine
head, mine head, 2 Reg. 4.19. Another, My belly, My belly, Jer. 4.19. A third,
like a lame Mephibosheth, My leg, My leg, 2 Samuel 4.4. All, like the Prince in
Daniel, chap. 5.6. (troubled, yea trembled) whose face was changed at such a
dismal sight.

After this fire (which it should seem came from diverse places; as appears by
the blows of several persons, received in several places, and all at one
instant) there was heard in the Church, as it were the hissing of a great shot;
and withal such a noise, as rather resembled diverse Canons shot off at an
instant to make one single terrible report, then usual long rattling thunder:
Which fearful sound was not heard till the Ball of Fire was seen to break
in pieces; neither did the noise descend from above, but was heard, and seemed
to begin in Church first: And as I for mine own part do verily think, close
at the North side of the Communion Table, and as near as might be, to mine
own person; with which terrible noise the Church seemed to shake, and the lyme
fell on the persons of two, who sat in one Pue, so as their Hats and clothes
were white therewith, as if they had been vvhited with Meal; so as many
feared the falling of the Roof, as it did at Withicombe, where one was
killed with the same, and diverse others hurt, and the Church so ruined, as they
were forced to have a contribution for the reparation thereof. After this fire
and sound, there followed a loathsome smell of Gunpowder and Brimstone, but the
savor of the Gunpowder by the judgment of all, was stronger then that of the
Brimstone. There was a great smoke in diverse places of the Church, which many
saw and many saw not.

The fearful hearing of this noise, and seeing of this fire, astonished and
even mortified most of those who were smitten therewith, and greatly terrified
the whole Congregation (which were about two hundred souls) as appeared in
their faces; yet notwithstanding the storm (praised be the Name of God) we all
went safely home, as the Seamen did to land, Acts 27.44. Wherein it pleased
God to show us his poor Christian servants such favor, as though it wrought
for a while on them who were most fearfully smitten, losing their speech, and
being deprived of their senses, so as they resembled dead, or dying men, more
then the living; yet God so limited the force and burning of the Lightning,
that it hurt neither their clothes nor persons; much like unto that mighty
work of God in Daniel upon the three children, Dan. 3.27:
the woman's small scald only excepted; (which also expressed how it wanted not
power in its own natural strength to have done mischief.) But then first in
a confused manner, between crying and speaking, their senses and speeches
began to revive; and within a little space they so recovered themselves, as
that none departed out of his place, till (after the taking of the bread when
they were smitten) they had every one of them their senses so well restored
unto them, that they likewise received the Cup at the same Table; and all
returned at the afternoon (as there was great cause) to give thanks unto
Almighty God for so great deliverance. Which appeared plainly to be far the
greater, in that the same Thunder and Lightning instantly killed a Dog, at
the feet of those who were kneeling in the Chancell to receive the Sacrament,
and likewise another without the Church at the Bell-free door.

Master Anthony Furlong the elder had a Mare killed in the field, and another
horse fearfully stricken the same time with his head on one side, and so
continues; and the ground of the same Field, for the space of three or four
foot, turned as with a Plough: And likewise made seven or eight holes and
rents in the walls of our Tower; some on the inside, some on the outside; and
made impressions on the stones thereof in diverse places, as if it had been done
by the force of shot discharged out of great Ordnance; so as in diverse places,
the light might be seen through the walls.

Thus have been represented to you terrible sounds; even sounds, containing
many Thunders at once; a Fiery Ball flying from Heaven to Earth; Fire walking
upon the Earth; Brimstone kindled with fire, thick darkness, Storm and
tempest; The blows and scourges of an hand from on high; Astonishment,
hurrying and tumbling of Bodies, shaking and distracting of senses, spirits,
and hearts of men. You have seen part of the Plague of Egypt, where fire
mingled with Hail, as here with most unusual and overflowing Rain, ran upon
the ground. You have seen a resemblance of Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.16.
where were Thundrings and Lightnings, and a thick cloud, and an exceeding
loud voice, so that all the people in the Camp trembled. Behold then in these
things the terror of the Lord; And what use shall we make of this Terror?
Exodus 20.20.
Let Moses tell us, God is come to prove you, that his fear may be before your
faces, that ye sin not. Let the Psalmist tell you, Stand in awe, and sin
not. Psalm. 4.4.
Let Samuel tell you as he told the Israelites after a wonderful Thunder and
rain, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25.
Fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all your heart; but if ye shall
still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed.

There has been also showed you, the levelling and shooting of the Arrows of
the Almighty, at this place, at this time, and among the people; you have seen
the fire, as it were, led by his hand, not only where it did, on whom it did,
but like a living creature turning about as in a walk: And so according to the
Vision of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1.14.
The living creatures ran and returned, as the appearance of a flash of
Lightning. Behold then here the Dominion, High and Supreme power of the
Almighty: He does what he will in the Army of Heaven, Dan. 4.35.
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth; and none can stay his hand, or say
unto him, Job 37.2, 3.
What do thou? He directs the sound that goes out of his Mouth, and his
Lightning unto the ends of the Earth His clouds are turned about by his
counsels, 11, 12.
that they may do whatsoever he commands them, upon the face of the World in
the Earth: And what use shall we make of the Knowledge of this High Dominion
and Rule of the Most High? Let Nebuchadnezzar humbled by this Dominion teach
you: Dan. 4.34.
I blessed (said he) the most High, and I praised and honored him that lives
for ever and ever, whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom
is from Generation to Generation: Yea, let the great King of the World teach us
himself: Esa. 46.
Look unto me, and be saved all the ends of the Earth, for I am God and there
is none else: But for those that turn their hearts from obeying this King; and
will break his bands, and cast away his cords; Let them know, That he will
break them with a Rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel;
Yea, Psalm. 2.
let the greatest son of this greatest King tell them; Those mine enemies,
which would not have me to reign over them, bring them forth and cut them in
pieces.

Lastly, you have seen flames scorching, but not consuming: A Ball of Fire
shot, and striking, but not killing; yea killing of Beasts, and unreasonable
creatures, but sparing the reasonable; casting down, but not destroying; Men
astonished and driven out of their senses, yet soon restored; A Communion
divided and cut in pieces, but healed again and perfected: Those that in the
House of God received the sentence of death, in the forenoone, returning to the
same House in the afternoon, 2 Cor. 1.9, 1^.
to give thanks for a kind of resurrection from death unto life. Behold here
the great, free, and unspeakable Goodness and Mercy of God: And what use shall
we make of this Goodness, and Mercy? Let the Spirit of God in the Psalmist
tell you; and not tongue only the burden and often returning sentence of his
Songs: O praise the Lord for he is good, Psalm. 136.
for his mercy endures for ever And again, Psalm. 107.
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men. And again, I will extol thee my God, Psalm. 145.
O King, and I will bless thy Name for ever and ever. Every day will I bless
thee, and I will bless thy Name for ever, and ever. Men shall speak of thy
terrible Acts, and I will declare thy Greatness; They shall abundantly utter
the Memory of thy great goodness: And yet again, we have thought of thy
Goodness, Psalm. 48.
O God, in the midst of the Temple; According to thy Name O God, so is thy
praise unto the ends of the Earth: Neither let us only praise him in thoughts
and words, Psalm. 100.2.
but in works also; Serve the Lord with gladness, as well as come before his
presence with singing. Being delivered, Let us serve him in holiness and
righteousness all our days: Luke 1.74, 75.
Say as the children of Israel, but do also what they said, and did not; Who
is there of all flesh, Deuteronomy. 5.26, 27.
that has heard the voice of the living God, speaking out of the midst of the
fire; as we have heard, and lived? Therefore all that the Lord shall speak
unto us, we will hear, and do it: But for such as turn aside unto their
crooked ways, Psalm. 125, 5.
the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity; Therefore let us
sin no more, lest worse things come unto us.

Fire and Brimstone over Constantinople, Tract. De Excidio urbis, inter
Augustini opera. Tom. 9.
NOnne ante paucos annos, Archadio Imperatore Connstantinopoli (quod dico
audierunt nonnulli, and forsitan noverunt, and sunt in hoc populo, qui and
illic praesentes fuerunt) volens Deus terrere Civitatem* and terrendo emendare,
terrendo convertere, terrendo mundare, terrendo mutare; servo cuidam suo fideli
(viro ut dicitur militari) venit in revelatione, and dixit ei, Civitatem
venturo de coelo igne perituram; Eumque admonuit ut Episcopo diceret. Dictum
est; non contempsit Episcopus, and allocutus est populum, conversa est Civitas
in luctum poenitentium, quemadmodum quondam illa antiqua Ninive. Tum ne
putarent homines illum qui dixerat vel falsitate deceptum, vel fallaciter
decepisse, venit dies quem Deus fuerat comminatus. Intentis omnibus, and exitum
cum timore magno expectantibus, noctis initio tenebrante jam mundo, visa est
ignea nubes ab orient* primo parva, deinde paulatim, ut accedebat super
Civitatem, ita crescebat, donec toti urbi ingens terribiliter immmineret.
Videbatur horrenda flamma pendere; nec odor sulphuris deerat: Omnes ad
Ecclesiam confugiebant, non capiebat multitudinem locus; Baptismum extorquebat
quisque a quo poterat. Non solum in Ecclesia, sed etiam per domos, per vicos,
and plateas salus Sacramenti exigebatur, ut fugeretur ira, non praesens utique
sed futura. Attamen post magnam illam tribulationem, ubi exhibuit Deus fidem
verbis suis, and revelationi servi sui; caepit ut creverat minui nubes,
paulatimque consumpta est. Populus securus paululum factus, iterum audivit
omnino esse migrandum, quia Civitas esset proximo Sabbato peritura; migravit
cum imperatore tota Civitas. Nemo in domo remansit, nemo domum clausit, long
recedens a moenibus, and dulcia tecta respiciens, relictis charissimis sedibus,
miserabili voce valefecit. Et aliquot millibus tanta multitudo progressa, uno
tamen loco, fundendis ad Deum orationibus congregata, magnum fumum subito
vidit, and vocem magnam emisit ad Deum; tandemque tranquillitate conspecta,
missis qui renunciarent, sollicita quae praedicta fuerat hora transacta, and
renunciantibus, quod salva universa moenia, and tecta consisterent, omnes cum
ingenti gratulatione redierunt. Nemo de domo sua quicquam perdidit patente,
omnis homo sicut dimisit invenit. Quid dicemus? utrum ista ira Dei, an potius
misericordia fuit? Quis dubitet misericordissimum patrem corrigere voluisse
terrendo, non perdendo punire, quando nihil hominum, nihil domorum, nihil
moenium, tanta impendens praesentia calamitatis laesit?

The same in English.
Was it not some few years past, Archadius being Emperor at Constantinople
(what I speak some have heard, and perchance known, for there are among this
people, those that were present there) that God intending to terrify the
City, and by terrifing to amend it, by terrifing to convert it, by terrifing
to cleanse it, by terrifing to change it, came to a certain faithful servant
of his (a military man, as is reported) in a Revelation, and told him; That the
City should perish by fire coming from Heaven, and willed him to tell it to
the Bishop. It was told, and the Bishop despised it not, but spoke to the
people; The City was turned into the wayling of penitents, like the ancient
Niniue. But then lest men should think, that he who reported it, was deceived
himself with a falsehood, or had deceived others, the day came which God
threatened. All being intent, and expecting the issue with great fear, at the
beginning of the night, the world now growing dark, a fiery cloud was seen
from the East; first small, but by little, as it drew near over the City, it
did so increase, that being very great, it did lie fearfully over the whole
City. A horrible flame seemed to hang there, neither was there wanting the
savor of Brimstone: All fled to the Church, the place could not contain the
multitude: Every one unbaptized extorted Baptism from such as they might; not
only in the Church, but in houses and streets, the safety accompanying the
Sacrament was required, that the wrath, not so much present as to come, might
be avoided. But after that great tribulation, when God had given trust to his
words, and the Revelation of his servant, the cloud began to diminish, even as
first it increased. The people now secure, yet heard again, that they must by
all means depart, because the City was to perish the next saturday; then
departed (together with the Emperor) the whole City: No man staid in his
house, no man did shut his house, but going far from the walls, and looking
back to their sweet dwellings, and leaving their beloved Mansions, with a
pitiful voice they bid them farewell. This great multitude going some miles
forth, yet gathering together in one place to pour out prayers unto God,
suddenly saw a great smoke, and sent up a great cry unto God. At length
tranquillity being seen, and some sent to bring back notice (the sad hour
which was foretold being past) they bringing back word that all the walls and
houses were safe, every one returned with great rejoicing. No man lost any
thing out of his house, though left open; every man found it as he left it.
What shall we say? was this a wrath, or rather a Mercy of God? Who can doubt
but that a most merciful Father, would amend by terrifying, not punish by
destroying, when the presence of the calamity hanging over, no man, no houses,
no walls were hurt.

The Reason of the Publication.
THe publication of those great calamities, which befell our Neighbors at
Withicombe, made many of us that had knowledge thereof, at the instant while
this great fear was on us, to cry more earnestly, God be merciful unto us
miserable sinners, Luke 18.13. And to pray more devoutly, The Lord bless us
and keep us, The Lord make his face to shine upon us, and be gracious unto us,
Numb. 6.24, 25. Now another Visitation falling on us, our desire is, that ours
may be published as theirs was, for the benefit of Gods Church and Children.
And withal more particularly, that it may be an everlasting memorial of Gods
goodness to the people of the place and Parish where it happened; because
therein God did so mingle terror with Mercy, as that we must ever acknowledge
our selves infinitely bound to our most gracious God, because he was pleased
like a most loving Father, to awaken us from our dangerous sleeping in sin,
by striking us with the flat, and not with the edge of his wounding, killing,
and flaming Sword.

Who so is wise will consider these things, and he shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord,

Psalm. 107. FINIS.

