NEWS OVT OF Cheshire of the new found Well.

Imprinted at London by F. Kingston for T. Man. 1600.

News out of Cheshire, concerning the new found Well, as it is contained in a
Letter lately sent from a Cheshire man, to a Gentleman a dear friend of his in
Northhampton-shire.
Hearty commendations prefixed. You earnestly desire me in your last letters
to impart unto you a true report of the New found Well here in Cheshire,
whereof you have so many incredible reports in that country, as it would
greatly satisfy you to hear that which were undoubtedly true. That which in
so short a time I could gather and set down for your satisfaction herein, I
have sent you enclosed. The matter it self would require to be handled by some
man of great learning and judgment, not one of my small understanding, and to
be published to the world in a grave and judicial discourse, not barely
reported in a plain unlearned letter: but sith you desire it, I will adventure
to deliver you my knowledge and opinion touching this new Well. If the length
of my letter be trouble some to you, you may thank your self for urging me to
write of a matter which my skill serves not to contain in the limittes of an
ordinary letter. Now I have undertaken it, I can be no briefer, then first to
preamble it a little: then to tell you the place, the situation, the
description of the Well, then some of the effects and cures it has wrought,
the credit and opinion it daily winnes, and to do you all the pleasure that I
can in this intelligence I have with my pen drawn a true plot and site of
the Well as it is placed: so I desire to be heartily remembered to all my good
friends at Stoke lodge.

Chester the 12. of August. 1600. Your brother in law ever assured. G. W.

News out of Cheshire concerning the New found Well.
IT is a well known truth, that the giver of all good blessings does diversely
bestow the same upon mortal creatures here on earth, and in the bestowing
thereof, has always observed a distinction or difference of persons, times,
and seasons, as revealing some at one time and some at another, and how some
which have been hidden and unknown to all ages heretofore past, have been
showed to men of latter days. Among all other benefits extraordinarily
thrown down from that bountiful hand, what has oftener been felt in Man's
comfort, than the finding of remedies against diseases, and medicines against
the frail infirmities of our corruptible bodies? The proof hereof is the well
known invention of so many new devised easements and helps for all manner of
Maladies, and we see that as new and new distempers do from age to age still
bring forth infirmities, not seen nor heard of former times; so men have been
inspired evermore with gifts and graces of that excellency, whereby they have
found out, used and applied profitable remedies, never formerly invented nor
prescribed.

And of all things in the world found to be medicinable and helpful to Man's
health, no one thing may challenge so great a preeminence (as an isntrumental
cause) as Water, wherein even from the worlds beginning has ever been found
most excellent sovereignty of preservation and recovery of men's decayed
health, and remedy against several diseases. And as the unspeakable
Providence created Water at the first to be one of the chief means to nourish
and feed the bodies of such creatures as were to live by food and sustenance:
so has he miraculouslie at diverse times endued special waters to be
effectual against men's infirmities: a thing most apparent in all, both sacred
and humane stories and testimonies.

Naamans washing him seven times in Jordan at the Prophets commandment, to be
healed of his leprosy, implies the fitnes of Water in the curing of so
grievous a disease, and albeit the Almighty power, who indeed performed that
cure miraculouslie, could as well have done it by the use of any other matter,
yet herein was showed the fit use and application of Water above all other
things, for the effecting of that glorious work: and may not the like be
affirmed touching that lame Cripple in the Gospel, which had lain so long by
the Poole, wanting means to be put into it, whereof he was still prevented by
those who thrust in before him for recovery of infinite infirmities?

Besides the peculiar graces bestowed on some special Waters upon
extraordinary occasions, what simple judgment cannot observe that the use of
pure and good waters has in all ages, at all times, in all places, and with
all persons been of such estimation, that (to speak nothing, that nothing
medicinable or needful can serve man's necessity without some necessary help
of water) bathing and washing has been as the common and readiest, so the most
effectual and sovereign preservative of health and remedy against
infirmities; and has thoroughout the whole world been practiced not alone by
vulgar people, or young unlearned feeble, sick, or poor persons, but by men
most wise, learned, mighty, rich; yea, Kings, Emperors, and greatest Monarkes
of the earth.

To what purpose (will it happily be asked) is this far fetched preamble placed
in the front of so slender a discourse? Truly, not that I would here trouble my
self to prove a matter that perhaps is not doubted of, or which no man means
to make question of, but only to this end: even that having prepared the
minds of such to whom these news shall be imparted, to yield to this reason,
and remember it as a truth, that extraordinary remedies are often even
wonderfully revealed to Mankind for help of their diseases, and that the
most excellent instrument which has most often conuaied that sovereign good to
men, has been and is, some special water; they may with better approbation
conceive the report of our News of the Newfound Well, and with gentler
credulity embrace the benefit, and believe the truth.

The famous County Palatine of Cheshire can boast of many excellencies,
wherein a country either for profit or pleasure may be termed happy. Among
other the ornaments thereof, I cannot but greatly commend a most stately,
large, and as I may so term it, a princely Forest (though there be others
also within the shire) situate even in the chiefest and best known parts of
the County, called the Forest of Delamere, belonging to her Majesty. The
same bordering toward the West and Northwest side, near to Merzey, an arm of
the Ocean, in many old records of this county, is called the Forest of Mare
mondiam, but is best known, and has been very auncientlie called by the name
formerlie mentioned.

Give me leave a little to describe unto you the same Forest, because in it is
the Well whereof I entreat. There are about the midst of the Forest
certain ruinous walls of stone, some enclosures, and the prints of an
ancient situation, which as well common report of the country, as also the
testimonies of the best writers of Englands antiquities do affirm to have
been a City (and it should seem indeed to have been a walled Town) there
founded and built by Eadelfleda a Queen of Merceland: and the place to this
day is called Eades bury, whereof the whole hundred (being a seventh part of
the shire) reteyneth still the name.

The Borrough or Town being now utterly decayed and gone; there remains
only upon the top of the utmost height within that situation, a proper built
lodge, called the Chamber, and has been for the most part maintained and
inhabited by a famous race of Gentlemen (the Dones) of whom for certain
hundreds of years, Knights and Squires of that surname (having still by
inheritance been masters of the game or chief Forresters there) have left good
remembrances of their worthes and great reputation to all posterity: and is
now possessed by a worshipful Gentleman, John Done Esquire: whom the rather I
am bold here by name to mention, because of his charitable disposition and
gentlemanlike furtherance of the benefit of this Well, to the relief of all
sorts of people that seek for help by it.

About a mile and half from the chamber toward the Southwest side of the
forest is situate the Newfound Well. All the Westerly and Southerly side of
the forest is mountanous, and full of vaste uneven hills, scattringly
beautified with many Oaks (yet most of them shrubby and of low growth) and not
few queaches and thicks of Hull and Hauthornes, the hills themselves for the
most part distinguished by galls and gutters made by waters falling from
springs and other places, which in continuance of time have worn and eaten
deep passages.

In the side of one of these hills, whose declining lies almost full upon the
North and North-east, arises the spring, head, and fountain it self now
called the New found Well: the same insensibly issuing from firm ground at the
root or foot of a shrubbie hull or hollintree, yet so as the same hull
standing at the South-west corner of the Well there is some twenty inches
distance between them.

The Well or Cesterne being bordered with three or four flagge stones (as the
compass of it without breaking any earth about it would give leave) is almost
four square, containing South and North about 30. inches, West and East about
26. inches.

Whether the Spring issue upright from the bottom, or from the one side, or
from all sides, it is not perceived. I rather judge it comes at the South side
(which is the back of it, and bears against the descent of the hill.) If it
should bubble forth at the bottom (as in many other Wells I have seen) this
water being so clear it might be easily perceived, especially the Spring being
free, and yielding continual issue in a good proportion.

I have seen indeed many orderly Springes far exceed it in strength and
bigness of gush, yet have I not known any to keep a more certain and uniform
course, nor deliver his water in so close and vnperceiueable manner, as this
Well does.

The force or stream which the Spring is well able to maintain, is about so
much water as you may imagine would continually run at full through a pipe or
tronke, whose concaue or hollow were three or four inches compass.

The descent of the hill beneath the Well Northward is steep, and the waste
water falling North from the fountain has both of it own course, and shortly
meeting with some other rilles, worn the ground to a great hollow dingle,
which carries them down to a brook at the foot of the hill, by which they
are conveyed to a great poole of Sir John Egertons near little Budworth, which
serves Olton Milles: so that, albeit the Spring sends his water at the first
Northerly, yet within less then one quarter of a miles labor it windeth about
the hill skirte, and then holds his course full Southerly.

What the veins of the Earth about it may be, or from what manner of mixture
the Spring should issue, I dare not take upon me to set down, having neither
skill to judge of such matters, nor having had means as yet to procure search
made to find the nature of the mould whence it springes, which I know would be
greatly material to such as have skill and knowledge how to judge of the power
and efficacy of the water thereby. All that I can say in this respect, is that
the upper part or face of the earth there seems to be a stiff clay, insomuch
that the resorters thither having made some one or two slender weak dammes to
stay the water, half a dozen yards or more beneath the fountain, there are by
that means two small lakes or pooles, wherein poor people, when they are
disposed, do bathe and wash themselves. Which pooles though they be very unfit
for that purpose, being very unhandsomely, thick and muddy with the clay and
soil of the earth, yet they show the fitness and commodious means how
cesternes or some handsome provisions might be made, either open or close, for
the people of all sorts to use their best benefit, and that so far from the
head of the Spring, and so much beneath the body and seat of the fountain it
self, that there were no peril by breaking or digging the ground, to work
any annoiance or hinderance to the virtue of the Spring or water thereof.

There be many that at their first taste of the water, do confidently affirm
they feel as it were some relish or smacke of an allome-like composition; and
not a few I have heard censure, that there seems to them a little resemblance
of the taste of Licoris; some compare it to some other things: for my part
(because I am purposed to auerre nothing herein, but what I am verily
persuaded to be true) as I can allow of no man's taste to be authentical in
this point, unless I could also find it in mine own, so truly I must confess
that it is a water different from many other Spring waters in taste, and the
most pleasantest in drinking of any that I have ever tasted, only the relish
is to me of no especial thing that I can name, and the operation such as in my
judgment, and by experiment upon mine own and many others bodies, it never
offends with cold or heavy weight in a man's stomach, as the most sorts of
waters usually do.

It is one thing most notorious and worthy to be so, that no persons of any
sort whatsoever, which take it in any good quantity, but can and do report
that they find difference in the operation of it from other waters, and most
commonly it is observed that to such as are unhealthful, and grieved with some
infirmity, they are sure by the water to find in themselves some alteration:
to such as are healthful and very sound of body, it either works no motion
at all, or if any, it loses the belly, and gives most gentle and hurtlesse
purgations.

That there may be some alluminous mixture within the ground, by which the
Spring has his passage, one reason may be that quick piercing nature which is
found in it, both in the inward receipt of it, and the outward application to
green wounds and cuts, upon which with wonderful speed it works
effectually. And besides, though I never made trial my self, the general
report is that by reason of a secret sharp tartness that is in it, the water
will turn or break milk, whereinto it is put immediately.

An other reason of the same efficacy may be this, which I can well testify
upon mine own knowledge, that it skowreth and cleanses any thing which is
washed in it, more then any water that I have known, insomuch that it is of
exceeding use for the keeping white and fair the face and hands, better and
more pleasing to many then the use of sopes, washing balls or such other
mixtures, neither so wholesome nor so pleasant as this natural pure spring
water.

This may be sufficient for the situation and description of the Well, will you
now hear the manner of finding it.

In the end of the last winter quarter, and beginning of this spring time now
past, here in these parts (as I think elsewhere) there reigned an extreme
contagion of sickness, not infectious, yet so general, as few escaped without
some or other touch of vnhealthfulnesse. Among other sorts of infirmities, many
were tormented with hot burning Agues and Fevers of all kinds, which Agues the
vulgar people here (especially when they light on children or young folks, or
that they hold them but intermissiuely, so that the patient lies not by it)
call it the Fittes.

One John Greeneway of Vtkinton an honest substantial countriman of good
credit and well reputed, being about fifty years of age or somewhat more, was
about the end of March last past troubled with the Fittes; he tried such
ordinary remedies as the country experience would offer, but found no
abatement of his disease, at length he calls to mind an experiment, that
sixteen or seventeen years now past in the like necessity had relieved him:
and this it was.

Being at that time vexed with the Fits, and finding no ease nor remedy for
it, he thought good to repair to a learned Physician at that time lying at the
City of Chester, which is about six or seven miles distant from Greenwaies
house.

The Physician took good regard of the man's infirmity and being a man both
learned and conscionable prescribed to him, that he should get him home, keep
him warm, use good diet, and not to omit to walk forth in the mornings, to
find out some good pure spring water, to drink of it, to bathe and wash
himself with it, and herein he doubted not he should recover his health
shortly.

I have hereat not a little been troubled in mine own opinion to resolve in
any probable appearance, what to deliver touching the Physicians direction, as
whether he might speak this of an excellency of knowledge, or having before
that time either read in some unknown memorial, or had understanding of
peculiar virtue to be in that or some other water thereabout, or that he spoke
in generality, meaning that any pure Spring water were good for that man's
infirmity; or whether the great guider of al ma^s invention for general
benefits did not herein use the Physicians prescription, as a means of that
future benefit he meant to bestow upon poor destressed creatures: which last
surmize, I verily hold most answerable to my own satisfaction, yet so, as I
leave it with the rest to each man's particular choice and approbation.

Howsoever it were, Greeneway being well acquainted with the Springs and al
other commodities of the Forest, had soon found out this pretty purling
fountain, both for purity and situation (as he thought) fittest to answer
the Physicians direction, and there by drinking, washing and accomplishing what
he was commanded, in very short time he was of his Ague thoroughly cured.

Since that time till this present year he has lived healthful and sound,
but being again surprised with the same grief, necessity then enforcing the
remembrance of his former help, he repaired to his ancient medicine again,
where a short trial had soon taught him, that this was a remedy of greater
regard then he formerly made of it: And thereupon took better notice and
aduisement of it then before he had done.

It happened within the space of one month after this, that one of his sons,
and afterward a second, and then a third were successively taken with the
Fittes, and each of them severally eased and helped by the use of this Well,
according to their fathers direction, as he himself had done before them.

The neighbors near unto him hearing and finding the truth of this success,
began to resort to the Well, as either the same sickness or any other grief
gave them cause, and when the experience of many confirmed the virtue thereof
to extend to give help and ease, not only to Agues and other inward diseases,
but also to be medecinable to al manner of outward grieuances and sores, it
drew people in very great numbers to repair thither, and the more trials were
put in execution, the more credit and account it has ever since gotten.

If I thought it not a thing both ridiculous and in some sort infamous, to
spread in peoples ears vain tales and incertainties, I would then have
stuffed this discourse with such surmises, as perhaps would go more current and
plausible to many, then a bare recital of the truth touching the finding of
the New found Well. And upon this conceit I have thought fit to omit the laying
forth of sundry opinions, as they now are delivered among common persons, and
some others of good note touching the same.

I spare to discourse unto you what couiectures are daily cast abroad, that the
same Well should have been of known, and notable virtue in the days of the
before named Queen Eadilflede, and used by her means and maintenance to the
general relief of people in those days, but afterward in the outrages and
oppressions which the conquering Danes made in the Country, it was closed and
stopped up to prevent the benefit which that common rigorous enemy might have
received by it: but because I find no such thing recorded in any remembrance
that I read or hear of, I leave the credit thereof to such proof as they can
make, who would persuade the world that it is so.

I have heard likewise some persons of no mean account report, that there are
within this County some credible records which might be produced, wherein
mention is made of an ancient Well, within the precincts of Delamere, that
many years past was esteemed of great virtue and efficacy, insomuch as the
same being dedicated by the first christians which had use thereof to holy
Saint Stephen, the same still bears name (in the said records) of Saint
Stephens Well, and by circumstances therein gathered, it is said that this late
found Well may be likely to be the same: whereof having no farther proof, then
as yet I can attain unto, I leave it as doubtful as the former.

But I will proceed with the further explication of the late effects of this
Water, which since the great repair and concourse which people of all sorts
have made unto it, is found to be profitable, not only against Agues, which
was the first virtue revealed in it, but also against all manner of coldes,
stoppings, grypings, gnawings, collicks, aches, ruptures and inward
infirmities, and no less sovereign against sores and outward anguishes,
wounds, swellings, ulcers, festers, impostumes and hurts of the several joints
and members; besides that, it has done no small number of strange cures,
against sorenes of eyes and ears, blindness, deafness, lamenesse, stiffness
of sinnewes, numbnesse, weakness and feebleness, all which I am able to
auerre and prove, by undeniable demonstration from the several effects of
infinite numbers of people, that have given witness thereof in these three or
four months now last past.

I call them infinite numbers, because indeed the resort thither immediately
after the first rumor of the Well, grew vncountable, and the people as well of
Cheshire, as all the bordering shires thereabouts, traveling thither daily in
greater and greater multitudes (even till they amounted by estimation to more
than two thousand in a day) Master Done even then at the first, although it
were great disturbance to her Highness Dear in the Forest, and occasion of
much other inconvenience to the country, yet in regard of the notable comfort
that sick and diseased, and pleasure that healthful and sound persons
received by it; has been contented to allow free access, and permitted all
manner of meet provision to be brought unto it, with most careful and
Worshipful foresight and heed, as well that no money nor see should be
exacted for the use of the water which God had freely bestowed on poor and
rich, as also that there should be order and government warily taken over all
such as resorted thither, so that no manner of misdemeanor, or disorder should
grow in that place, whereunto such great assemblies are apt and prone enough,
if good heed and prevention be not used.

To which purpose it happened well that the Well it self falls within the
limits of a walk in the Forest, which has long time been kept and watched by
one John Frodsham the keeper of that walk, who as he was a very fit and meet
person, both for his good discretion and estimation to take the government and
ordering of people of the inferior sort, and for the entertainment of the
better sort as they resorted thither, so has he taken great pains and care in
discharging the trust in him reposed, for satisfaction of all manner of
resorters thither, and daily endeavors himself by all ways and means
possible, that his Masters good and forward inclination to do all both poor
and rich equal furtherance in their desires, may honestly and respectively be
accomplished.

Now by that which has been before set down, it appears what diversity of
cure this Well water has made upon sundry persons, as shall be more largely
proved to such as make doubt of the truth of these reports. For as it
consequently follows that (these things being granted) then is this Water
found beneficial and medicinable against more several sorts of diseases and
infirmities, then any one remedy that has been commonly known heard of, or
experimented (which report is indeed wonderful, and scarcely to be believed
to such as have not been eyewitnesses thereof) so were it a great boldness
and an enterprise of a very brainsicke disposition in me, that should affirm
the same, unless I were warranted by the experience of so many, so credible,
so wise, so grave, so sufficient persons, both in Cheshire, Lancashire,
Darbishire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, Flintshire, Denbighshire and others,
from whence men, women and children having resorted hither in such abundance,
there is not any but have given ample testimony that they found some
extraordinary pleasure by drinking, or other use of the water (especially
those who upon any cause of grief have received it) as more at large I might
very well make manifest, if I thought it convenient or much necessary for me
to publish that approbation and testimony under their several names, which
many of the best rank of the inhabitants of these adjoining countries, have
and do freely and truly give of it.

And least it should be expected that I should insist upon some particular
instances, or otherwise suspected I dealt not plainly, but sought to beguile
persons remote and far dwellers, with words whereof I had no proof, I think
it not impertinent to set down the particulars of some of the cures made upon
diverse diseases, in diverse persons, of diverse habitations: which though they be
skant an hundredth part of those which might be registered to have received
benefit by the Well, yet it shall be sufficient to any reasonable mind, to
take view and note by these of what power and force the water is found to be:
wherein I cannot in any sort be convinced of lying or misreporting, because
they are testimonies taken from the confession of all the parties themselves,
and witnessed by the beholders, being many scores, yea hundreds of people of
all these Countries, who have seen the proceedings as here is delivered.

First, for the curing of Agues there is none within any reasonable distance
from the place, but know what numbers have been, and are daily cured of that
infirmity, especially of such as dwell near the Well, or have stayed a
competent space to take benefit by the water in the best kind: which is to
receive it fresh from the Fountain it self: let it suffice to name these few
for example.

The aforenamed John Greenwaie, William, Thomas and Ralphe his sons, all
honest young men and credible persons.

One William Johnson a servant to Ralphe Smethers, extremely vexed with an
Ague, was upon May day last, speedily and perfectly restored to his health by
drinking that Well water.

One Master Haworth of Congerton, an honest Gentleman, delivered from the fits
within once or twice washing and drinking.

One Joan Gorst a substantiail honest man's daughter, likewise perfectly cured
of an Ague, which had handled her in such extremity, that through weakness she
could not be brought on horseback, butas she was stayed and held upon the
horse, she recovered health by three or four times drinking and washing.

For sorenes and blindness of eyes, consider these few reports.

Hugh Row of Darnall, a man of good wealth and very honest credit, having been
quite deprived of the sight of one eye for three years space, by washing often
in this water, has welneere recovered sight in the same again, a cure that
among the rest has much confirmed both mine and many others belief of the
effectual operation of this water, being well acquainted with the loss of his
said eye, and knowing well the man's worth of credit in that behalf.

Thomas Leonard, borne at Salisburie, and lately blind for the space of two
years, has with washing in this water about twelve days received sight
again.

Ralphe Hichenson a poor labourer fallen of late years very blind, as has
been well known to many of the Worshipful Gentlemen in the country, who
thereupon have caused relief and provision for him according to the statute,
has by the use of this water recovered sight again, which serves him well to
go without leading, which before he could not do.

One Robert Bradley, who came out of Darbishire the 24. of July, being borne at
Chapel in the Frith, was led hither blind, has here recovered sight, and the
fourth of August is gone home without leading.

One of Edge in Cheshire having had a pearl fifteen or sixteen years in one
eye, by this water got remedy for it.

Cures of aches and griefs in the ioints and body have been such as follow.
One Anne the wife of William Wield of Rushton having such pain in her back
and hippes, that she was altogether unable to go, is by using this water become
perfectly sound, and goes well.

One Anthony Bigges a soldier late in the Regiment of Sir Samuel Bagnall came
forth of Ireland very lame, sick, and feeble, not able to move farther then
he was supported by crouches, on the 24. of July began to use this water, and
the 29. of the same had recovered strength, and went lustily homeward toward
Somersetshire with only a walking staff in his hand.

Roger Nickson a substantial man, now Mayor of Over confesses himself to be
cured of a sore pain he had in one of his legs.

One Ralph Lightfoot of the same corporation says he had a certain griping in
his body which would take him three or four times a day, and almost pluck him
to the ground, and in short time now has been fully cured thereof.

George Blacamore of the same society says, that by twice washing he was cured
of an issue of water which came from his knee by a cut with an axe, which
before would have drenched through nine-fold of cloth in less then a quarter
of an hour.

One James Kelsall cured of a leg which had been sore for many years
before, and would be helped by no means till now.

One Edward Billington of Middlewich parish, having a strange disease in his
body, that he was not able almost to move himself, is now able to go to the
Well with ease, being almost four miles distant.

One Mistres Drakeford of Congerford was here cured of some infirmities in her
body, as by her husband was credibly reported.

One Hugh Fairechild of Prescot Parish in Lancashire, affirms himself to be
hereby cured of a Rupture.

One Randol Phitheon of Warmincham Yeoman, was long time benumbed by a poison,
that he could almost hold nothing in his hand, avouches that he has received
great comfort by this water.

Robert Hall of the parish of Whitegate Wheelewright had of late a disease fell
into one hand, which brake and issued at fifteen or sixteen holes, and is
with this water made fish whole, witnessed by the sight and knowledge of the
Vicar of Over, a very honest gentleman.

One Master William Iohnes a gentleman of worth and good reputation, dwelling
near Wrixham in Denbighshire came very sick and lame to this Well, where
recovering health and soundnes, he left testimony there under his handwriting
of the great benefit he received to this effect. Viz. That where he was
exceeding lame of his knees and feet, and grievously pained in his head,
neck, shoulders, and sides, that from Easter week till the 26. of June, he
was not able to go without the help both of the crouch, and one to hold him by
the other arm, using this water at his house one fortnight, he found himself
able to travel to the Well, where he continued in all twelve days, and found
such good thereby, that he was able to go only with the help of a little
stick in one hand, and to get upon his horse without help, and in token of
the benefit he received there, he has left his crouch in the hollin there
behind, this second of August 1600.

The same crouch with diverse others being there indeed reserved as often as any
have cause to leave them.

One Peter Nightgale was by this water likewise cured of a Rupture in his body.

One Ioane Bromhall of the Middlewich lame of one arm and one hand, as is
known and affirmed by men of good worship, by this water has gotten help, and
has perfect use of her arm and hand again.

John Olton of Wettenhall the younger, an honest credible man, having a Rupture
many years, and not able to go without the help of a steel girdle which he
wore continually, has hereby gotten remedy, and goes now lustily without
his girdle.

I may not omit among these some that have been eased of the gout and such
like aches: As one George Johnson of Northwich, long time diseased in that
sort, so that he was not able to go, is by this water helped and well amended.

Christopher Bennet of Wiruin much eased and helped of a gout, and soreness
besides, called a Wildfire in one of his legs.

One Master James Hocknell son to John Hocknell Esquire, being not able to
go, but was brought to the Well on horseback three or four times, and became
perfectly amended.

One Elizabeth Bradshaw of Northwich had sore legs twenty two years, and has
here by this water gotten help.

The straungest cure to my judgment that proceeds from this water, among all
the rest, is the help that it gives to some of the hardness of hearing,
whereof there are no few testimonies given by many, one that is known to be
benefited therein is Randal Wield a young youth of Vtkinton.

This I know upon my own knowledge that a Gentleman here in the country, one
Master D. C. being so deaf that he cannot hear the report of a gunne
discharged very near him, having of this water infused into his ears, it
presently drew forth much corruption beyond all expectation, what further
benefit will ensue toward the amendment of this deafnes restes in Gods hands,
but there is good hope.

I have purposely spared to remember a Worshipful Knight of Lancashire, who
has often visited to his own great ease and comfort this Well, and as well
himself as other Gentlemen of good account, and some learned of his company
have given very great approbation to the truth of the Wells efficacy.

One notable virtue it has not to be forgotten, which is sovereignty in curing
and helping the Stone, which was notorious in that one cure it did upon James
Okenthorpe of Eaton, who was tormented both with the Stone and Strangulion, and
hereby received remedy.

No man can better confirm the credit of this, that the water helps the
Stone and other hurtful obstructions, then one Master John VVyttur of
Torporleigh a very substantial Freeholder, who of late was of the stone
together with a cold and certain gryping torments in his body brought even
to deaths door, and through help (as he thinks next under God, of this
water) is very well restored to his former health.

I heard an other very sensible wise Gentleman profess and openly auerre, that
he verily believed, if he had not had ease by the water of this Well, the
disease of the Stone had surely killed him, the Gentleman is toward Sir H.
Harrington, and will confidently avouch it.

It has had no few reports of doing good to some such as have been there to
seek for remedy against falling sickness, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Letargies,
Giddinesses and other strange Symptoms: but either I suppose these proofs
are sufficient, or infinite cannot serve.

I hold it therefore a needless and unprofitable labor to travel further in
these recitals of cures: Neither do I labor hereby to spread an opinion
beyond truth of the virtue of this Well, which to do were no way to me worth
my labor.

That I should endeavor to deceive and beguile men's ears with a strange
report, would more displease me to think my self so gulde in mine own folly,
then pleasure me to think there were a pleasure in illusions, to labor to
draw men the faster to frequent the place and come to see the Well, I protest
before God I know not how that may any way benefit me one farthing. Only my
desire is to satisfy my friends and others of the truth of that, whereof now
there grow many doubts and disputations among men.

They which dwell far remote rest doubtful, whether the large and ample fame
thereof spread, deserve credit or not. Some that dwell near the place argue
and debate whether or how it is possible such strange and admirable effects
should be produced from a cause so simple, poor, easy and common as the water
of a little Spring.

Of the first sort those that be generous, gentle and well disposed, I suppose
these confirmations will work very far for their satisfaction: because I
know not how any thing may be proved, if it be not a good proof which is
drawn from the approbation of worshipful, wise, learned, rich, poor and
altogether, and that not of one, but of many Shires: and I will never believe
proverb more whilst I live, if the proverb be not in this cause somewhat
available which says, It must needs be true which every man says.

For those that doubt of each thing they see, because they presently apprehend
not the reason of it, I hold them not worthy of satisfaction, because their
perverse opinions are incapable of instructions of the true acceptance of any
benefits either divine or natural. These are like to the neighbors of some
excellent and skillful Physician, who in envy and hatred do usually disable
his skill, and cannot endure to see other men flock to him for help and
remedies: yet if grief, pain, or sickness sease upon themselves, they then are
glad to sue for his help, then for necessity sake they honor the Physician:
not the wise man which gave this precept, but necessity it self teaches them
to do him his due reverence.

Endless were the labor a man might have that would go about to answer the
objections which the curiosity of some brains will still brue, and fling in
his face that shall commend any truth whatsoever, neither will I enlarge this
discourse with so tedious a purpose as to convince that by way of argument,
which no equal mind will much doubt of.

The Skeptic inquirers which profess doubtfulnes in all things though never
so manifest, and ask why fire is fire, or why heat is heat, why white is not
called black, and why black is not called blew: what answer deserve their
frivolous demands, but silence the reward of foolish questions?

They that ask why the water of that Well should be so wholesome above an other
water, either on this side or beyond the same place, either on one this side
the hill, or one the the other, are they not like to those which conte^ned the
Prophets prescription touching Naaman, and asked if Abanah and Pharpar, rivers
of Damascus, were not as fine waters as that of Jordan?

Why was not this precious water (say some) found out before this time? or how
comes it to pass, that in an element so bare, void of mixture, and so merely
nothing almost differing from other water, there should be operation so diverse,
as to be medicinable against such diversity of diseases, whereof no doubt the
causes proceed some contrary one to another? Questions sottish and
contemptible. Have not all notable benefits had their several beginnings? and
cannot men tell you of the invention and first finding of ten thousand
public admirations, whereof some have lien hid and unrevealed even till our
days? and is it any new thing that waters should effect so strange, and so
diverse operations?

What mean Scholar has not read of the Well in Gnarsborrough forest, which
co^uerteth leaves, flesh and such like into hard stone? of the Well in
Glocestershire, which turns oak roots as they grow into hard stone, of an
other near Stony Stratford, converting sticks and the like, into the like
hardness of stone?

Are not these strange operations? and can a man prefently give a reason
hereof. Knows any man the reason why that lake in Snowdon which carries the
mooueable Island, should bring forth Eeles, Perches and Trouts with only one
eye a piece in their heads, which no other water beside does? or why that Well
in Wales, six mile from the sea, or another in Darbishire 40. miles distant
from the sea, should rise and fall just with the ebbing and flowing of the sea?

We are to wonder at, not examine all the secret workings of nature, and giving
praise to the great Guider of nature, and ouer-ruler of natural causes, to
receive the good benefits we find with thankful humility.

I could heartily wish that some learned and experienced man of ability and
judgment (rather a skillful Physician then any) would take pains, iudicially
to approve and publish to the world the virtues and use of this good water, as
has heretofore been done by our best bathes in other parts of the Realm.
Perhaps some famous Doctor Turner, or learned Master Jones could well satisfy
the curiosity of the narrowest inquirers why this should be, and that should
be; they could judge of the nature of the water, of the color, of the veins
of the earth, of the situation of the climate, of all the collateral causes
which make it beneficial.

If our Well work the like or as strange effects as Bath, Buxtons, Saint
Vincents or Hally well, what advantage have they of it, saving that good
fortune has found them out such men (as those before named) to publish their
virtues.

The first of which named Wells (I mean the Bath) I must needs with great
reverence give due admiration unto, in respect of the great fame and
antiquity, it is known to be of. And because it exceeds all the rest as in
heat, so in the sensiblenes or manifest appearance of physical or medicinable
curing, I hold it great reason it should retain the pre-eminence over all the
rest.

And where our Well wanting that sensible heat may perhaps in that respect be
disallowed the name of a medicinable water: I answer nothing but that which
Master Jones writes of Buxtons Well, that being not so hot, as the water of
Bathe, it heals more temperately and effectually.

Thus far (Bro. B.) as my haste and slender ability would permit, I have
labored to impart unto you the news of the New found Well. If you please you
may commit it to further view, if it be not well reported, or the news not
well accepted, or my meaning not well construed, I can say no more but this, I
would all were well.

FINIS.

