A Catalog of the Bishops of Excester, with the description of the antiquity
and first foundation of the Cathedral Church of the same.

Collected by John Vowell alias Hoker, Gentleman.

Ezec. 3. Act. 20. I have made thee watchman over the house of Israel, to give
them warning from me. Take heed therefore to your selves, and to the flock
whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham. 1584.

POST MORTEM VITA


To the Right Honorable and Reverend Father in God, John by the sufferance of
God Bishop of Excester, and to the Right worshipful and Reverend the Deane and
Chapter of the same; John Vowell alias Hoker, wishes grace mercy and peace.
ABout a few years past, right Honorable, reverend and worshipful, I was
requested to give out the description of the city of Excester, some one (then
living) pretending and minding after the order of Ministers, to set forth a
general description of the whole realm of England, and also a Topographicall
and a particular discourse of every province, city, and town, in the same.
This request tending to so good an end, liked me so well, that albeit I were
and am very unfit, and of small knowledge, to wade into such a matter: yet
when I saw no man would take it in hand, I was contented to yield thereunto.
And finding no such thing before done, my pains were the greater, and I
driven to make the more diligent search and inquiry, for such old and ancient
presidents, records and writings, as might be found and had for my best
furtherance herein. In which my travels, it was my hap among other things, to
have the sight of a certain table within your Cathedral church, which
chiefly contained a certain Catalog of a few Bishops thereof. I did not so
much reioise at the sight thereof, at the first, but when I had thoroughly
perused and considered the same, I was sorry, that no one man, in the course of
many years, had continued it. At length, considering with my self, that
there is such a sympathy and affinity, between this city and the church,
both which are enclosed and environed within one wall, and be as it were one
body, though in certain privileges distinguished; and that in the search for
the one, I might the better do the like in the other, I did resolve my self,
to bestow my travels in both alike, and yet greatly was I herein discouraged,
for being an earnest suitor to some of your own company, for some help out of
your ancient records, I had small furtherance; some being more suspicious than
needed; some if I may speak it, under your patience, not unlike Aesops dog,
who would neither eat haie himself, nor yet suffer the ox to do it, by
means whereof, I was driven to pick out else where what I could, which I do
persuade my self to be so much the more imperfect. Well, what I have done for
the city, I have presented it to the Mayor and magistrates of the same; and
what I have done concerning your church, I do here most humbly offer unto
you, the effect whereof is; The antiquity and first foundation of your
cathedral church, when and by whom the same was done, and then the Catalog of
all the Bishops that I can find, which have been of this province, as well
before as sithence the sea was stablished in this church and city. And for as
much as the Bishops were always accounted to be the fathers of Gods people,
for the direction of them in all holiness, virtue and religion, I will by way of
a little introduction, set down the beginning of christian religion, within
this realm, and of the first placing and appointing of Bishops over this
province and country of Deuon and Cornwall. It is recorded in sundry
histories, that immediately upon the death of Christ, the Gospel was preached
in this land of England. Some write, that Simon Zelotes, one of the apostles
was here and preached; some write that S. Paul was here, and did the like;
some say that Joseph of Arimathia, did come into this land, when king
Aruiragus reigned, and did both preach and baptize the king and his people;
some say that it was some one of the apostles, but they name him not; but
whosoever was the preacher, true it is, that Christ was preached, and his
Gospel received, even with the first: notwithstanding, the seed was cast among
the thorns and high ways, and brought forth no fruit, but as a candle under
the bushel, and as fire raked up in the imbers, it seemed to be hidden and
buried, until the time of king Lucius the son of king Coyleo, who about the
year of the Lord 187. was by the goodness of God called to the knowledge of the
Gospel; and he forthwith expelled all the Archiflamines and Flamines, and
constituted in their places, Archbishops and Bishops, which were in number
three of the one, and xxviij. of the other; and at this time the provinces of
Deuon and Cornwall were under the Archbishop of London, for of any other
particular Bishop, there is no mention made. And notwithstanding, the Gospel
had his free passage for the time, yet clouds covered the sun, and through
persecutions, the godly were put to silence, and the true religion seemed to
be extinguished, for almost about four hundred years, until the time of king
Vlphus, then king of West sex, or West Saxony, who about the year of our Lord
636. was converted unto christian religion, by the good and godly man Birinus,
and the sea for West sex was appointed to be at Dorchester, and then under the
same were the provinces of Deuon and Cornwall about twenty years, until the
time of Kinwalchus, who builded the church of Winchester, about the year 654.
and he removed the sea from Dorchester unto Winchester, and thencefoorth was
all Deuon and Cornwall under the Bishop of Winchester, for and about fifty
years, until the time of king Jew. In whose time about the year of our Lord
705. there was a synod or a provincial council, holden under Brithewaldus
Archbishop of Canturburie, in which it was ordained, that the Bishoprike of
Winchester, should be divided into two Bishoprikes or diocesses: that is
Winchester, and Shereborne, and then under the Bishop of Shereborne, and in his
Diocese was Deuon and Cornwall, and so thenceforth did this constitution hold
and continue about two hundred years, until the time of king Edward the
elder, the son of king Alphred, who making a progress through out his
kingdom of Westsex, came to this city of Excester, and found both it, and the
whole country clean destituted of Bishop or preacher, and so had been for
sundry years, whereupon by the advice of Pleymundus Archbishop of
Canturburie, a synod or a provincial council was kept in Westsex: and therein
it was ordained and concluded, that in every particular province or shiere,
within Westsex, there should be a particular Bishop: and then one Bishop was
appointed for Devonshire, and an other for Cornwall. Werstanus was consecrated
Bishop of Deuon, and his sea was then at Tawton, now named Bishops Tawton, and
from thence shortly after removed to Kirton, and after many years, from
thence to Excester. Herstanus was consecrated Bishop of Cornwall, and his sea
was first at S. Petrokes in Bodmin, and after removed unto S. Germines, and at
length was united unto Crediton, and in the end both were removed unto
Excester. And for as much as I have not yet found any thing of the Bishops of
Cornwall, worthy memory, I will deal and set down only the Catalog of
the Bishops of Deuon and of Excester, and what I find done by them or in their
time worthy the observation. I know that for want of knowledge in me, there be
many imperfections herein. But among so many wise godly and learned men, as
you are, I hope that some one good man or other, and having access unto your
evidences and records, will either reform what they find amiss, or impart it
unto me, that I may so do it, when time and opportunity shall serve
thereunto. And thus much concerning the first receiving of the true and
christian religion, and appointing of Bishops in this province of Deuon. And
for as much as this pamphlet done and written a few years past, came upon
some occasion to my hands, to be revived at this present time; being the end of
the year past, and the beginning of the new now come, in which it has been
an old usage and custom among good friends, and especially of the yoonger to
their elders, and of the inferior to their superiors, to offer some small
present, each one to the other, congratulating thereby the good success of the
year past, and wishing the like to come, and considering also, that you which
do labor in the word and in doctrine, do daily beget us through the Gospel
in Christ Jesus, and are his ministers to our salvation, and therefore the more
worthy of double honor; and for as much as I my self am (his name be
praised) by these means made partaker of his heavenly blessings, and daily
confirmed, do think my self most bounden to be thankful and grateful unto
you all herein. Wherefore these my travels, so much as concern your church, I
thought it good, by way of a strene, to offer and present unto you, praieng
you, that though it be somewhat imperfect, yet such as it is you will accept
and take in good part, not respecting the slendernes of the thing offered, but
the good will and benevolence of the offerer. And herewith also I am to pray
you to call to your remembrance, that as the old year is past, and the new is
come; so that every one do cast away the old man, which is corrupt, and put
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and holiness, and
that you be renewed in knowledge after the image of God, which created us, and
to cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, walking
honestly as in the day time, not biting nor devouring one the other, least we
be consumed one with another: but walk in love, and peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, and temperance, which are the fruits of
the spirit, crucifieng the flesh and the affections and lusts thereof; and thus
having purged away the old leaven, and being freed from sin, and made the
servants of God, and prepared to good works through Christ, you may have your
fruits in holiness, and in the end to enter into the joy of our Lord, and life
everlasting. And thus commending you unto the eternal and everliving God in
Christ Jesus, I do most dutifullie take my leave. Exon the last of the old
year, and the beginning of the new. 1583.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, John Hoker.

The antiquity, foundation, and building of the Cathedral Church, of S.
Peter's, in the City of Excester.
AFter that false and superstitious religion, was crept and received into the
Church of God: and the people grown very devout therein, they began the
erecting and building of religious houses, and monasteries, in every place:
(which after the manner of the most part of Christendom) as it was done
universally within this realm, so also there wanted not the like in this
city after the rate and portion thereof. For this humor being now entered, and
the people misled therein, so prone and forward was each man to continue the
thing begun and received: that the more busy, forward, and liberal he was
therein, the better man he was reported, and taken to be. There were therefore
in this city from time to time, as opportunity served, diverse religious
houses, and monasteries, founded and erected: whereof appears that three were
within the site, circuit, and place, which is now called the close of S.
Peter's: and which, in time, ^^crewed and were united into one. The first was a
house of women, called Moniales or Nuns, which is now the calenderhaie and
the Deanes house of the Cathedral Church. The other was of monks, and supposed
to be builded about the year of the Lord 868. by King Etheldred, the third
son of King Ethelmophus: and these two were by Bishop Leophricus added and
united to the Cathedral Church. The third was a house of Moonks of the order
of S. Benet, and founded by K. Athelstane, Anno 932. And this is that part of
the Cathedral Church, now called the Lady chapel. For the said King, having
driven out of this city, the Brytaines (who then dwelled therein) and minding
to make a full conquest of them, and of such as then inhabited in Deuon or in
Cornwall followed and pursued them, whom in the end he conquered; and having
exploited his wit, and gotten the victory, returned to this city, and here
staieng and soiourning for a time, did reedifie the city, as also yielding
himself thankful to God for his good success, builded the said monastery
for Moonks, for thus is it so written of him, Hanc vrbem primus Rex Athelstanus
in potestatem Anglorum effugatis Brytonibus redactam, turribus muniuit, and
muro ex quadratis lapidibus ^inxit: ac antiquitus vocatum Munketon, nunc Exeter
vocari voluit: ac ibi sedens mansum quoddam dedit ad fundandum monasterium pro
monachis deo and sancto Petro famidantibus. And besides the great charges he
was at, in the building, he gave also sufficient lands and revenues for their
living, whereof Morkshut and Thresaurers bear, be yet remaining and are
appertaining to the treasurer of the said Church. But after the time of K.
Athelstane, the Danes with great hostility, and cruelty having ouerrunne this
land, this city and Church was much infected and troubled, for with no less
cruelty, did the Danes pursue the English men, and Saxons, than did the Saxons
before pursue the Brytaines. And then the Moonks not able to endure the same,
fled and forsook their house, seeking places of refuge, and better safety:
and so was this monastery left destitute, and forsaken for sundry years,
until the time of K. Edgar, for he making a progress into those west parts,
to visit his father in law Ordogarus (whose daughter he had married) then
Earl of Deuon, and founder of the abbeie of Tauestocke, came to this city,
Anno, 986. and he pittieng the distressed state of the said Church, caused the
Moonks to be sought out, and to be assembled together; whom he then restored to
their house and liueliehoods, and appointed Sydemannus (who afterward was
Bishop) to be their Abbat.

And thencefoorth, they continued together (although in great troubles) until
the time of K. Swanus the Dane, for he with a great troop and army of his
Danes, came to this city, anno, 1019. who besieged it, and at length, having
taken the same, he spoiled, destroyed, and burnt, both city, and monastery,
but yet shortly after it was again restored, for K. Cahutus or Canutus, being
advertised of the great cruelties done by his father Swanus, did at the
request of one of his dukes named Atheldredus, make restitution unto
Atheluoldus then Abbat, both of lands, livings, and privileges, as appears
by his chapter dated, anno, 1019.

After this, near about xxx. years, K. Edward the confessor came to the
city, and he by the advice and counsel of Leophricus, then Bishop of Crediton
and sometimes Lord Chancellor of England, and of the privy Council, with the
said King; partly for the better safety of the Bishop, and his successors,
and partly to provide a more apt place for the Moonks, did remove the Bishops
sea, from Crediton to this city, and sent the Moonks to westmonaster; and did
himself in his own person, together with Queen Edeth his wife, place and
install Bishop Leophricus in possession of his new Church and sea. The Bishop
then thus removed from the old, and placed in the new, indoweth his new sea
and Church, with the lands, and liueliehoods of his former Church, and to make
his sanctuary to his mind, pulls down the two monasteries, near adioining,
the one of Nuns, the other of Moonks, and adds them to his own Church: and
then having thus brought his devise to effect, makes ordinances, laws, and
orders, for the good government of his Church and clergy.

After Leophricus death, his successors following his example did every of
them, for the most part, procure the augmentation and increase of their church,
some in liueliehoods, some in liberties, and privileges, and some in
buildings, and some in one thing or other.

William Warewest, the third Bishop after the conquest, being sometimes
chapleine to the conqueror, and to William and Henry his sons, obtained of
the conqueror such grace and favor, that he gave to this Church* Plimton,
Brampton, and S. Steeuens in Excester, which his gift, his foresaied two s^nnes
by their charters did also confirm: and then the said Bishop, having the
ordering and distribution thereof, gives Plimton to the regular Cannons, for
whom he had erected a monastery there, and where he himself shortly after,
leaving his Bishoprike became a Cannon; Bramton was reserved to the Cathedral
Church, and afterward was annexed to the Deanerie, but S. Steeuens, with the
fee to the same, he reserved to himself, and to his successors, whereby they
are Barrons and Lords in the parliament.

Anno 1112 the said Bishop Warewest began to enlarge his Ca^hedrall Church,
which at that time was no bigger than that part which is now the Lady
chapel, and laid the foundation, of that which is now the chore or quier.

Anno 1235. or there about* William Brewer Bishop, established and made a
Deanes chapter of xxiiij. prebendaries: for the Deane (whom he then appointed,
and whose name was Serlo) and for his successors, he appropriated and gave
Brampton, and Coliton Rawleigh, for the prebendaries he purchased lands,
allotting to every of them, the like portion of four pound, by the year.

Anno 1284. Peter Quiuill Bishop, finding the chancell of his Church to be
builded and finished to his hands, begins and foundeth the lower part, or
body of his church, from the queere westwards; he also appointed a chanter,
and a subdeane in the Church, to the one he impropriated Painton, and
Chudleigh, and to the other, the personage of Egloshale in Cornwall, he also
impropriated the personage of S. Newlin in Cornwall, and of the Stokegabrill
in Deuon, to the Chancellor of the Church for reading of a Divinity lecture in
his Cathedral Church.

Anno 1340. John Grandisson Bishop, did increase the length of his Church, from
the foot, westwards; he vaulted the roof of the whole Church, and fully
ended and absolved the same; and albeit, from the time of K. Athelstan, the
first founder, anno 932. until the death of this Grandisson, which was anno
1369. there were 437. years distant, and in the mean time, this Church
builded by sundry and diverse men, yet so uniformly the same is compact, as
though it were builded at one instant.

Anno 1456. George Neuill then Bishop of this Church, but shortly after
Archbishop of York, began to build the chapter house, which was ended,
finished, and absolved, by his next successor, Bishop Edmond Lacie, but the
cloister, and library, was builded by the Deane and chapter. And thus much
concerning the first foundation and building of this Church, and the full
ending of the same, and now to the Catalog of the Bishops, and of so many as I
can find, who have been particular Bishops in this province of Deuon, since
the time of Edward the elder, the son of K. Alphred.

A Catalog of the Bishops of Excester.
WErstanus, at a provincial synod, holden in west sex, anno. 905. was
consecrated Bishop of Deuon, and had his sea at Bishops Tawton: and in the
year following 906. he died and was buried in his own church.

PVtta, after the death of Werstanus, was elected and consecrated Bishop, and
had his sea at Tawton, and taking his iorneie toward Crediton, to see and
visit the king (or as some say, Vffa the kings lieutenant) was by the said
Vffas men slain, and then upon his death the sea was removed to Crediton.

EAdulphus, brother to Alpsius duke of Deuon, and Cornwall, and founder of
Launceston, was consecrated Bishop of Deuon, but installed at Crediton, where
he had his sea, and continued Bishop xxij. years, and then dieng about the
year 932. he was buried in his own church.

EThelgarus, anno. 932. succeeded Eadulphus. and in his time king Athelstane
subdued the Cornish people, reedified this city, and compassed the same with a
stone wall: he founded the monastery of S. Peter's, for monks of S. Benets
order. This Ethelgarus after he had been Bishop ten years died, and was
buried in his own church.

ALgarus, anno. 942. after Ethelgarus was constituted and installed Bishop at
Crediton, and having been Bishop about ten years, died and was buried in his
own church.

ALfwoldus, as Matthew of Westminster writes, was next Bishop after Algarus,
and consecrated by the advice of Dunstane, anno 952. In this time Odogarus
Earl of Deuon, and father in law to king Edger, builded the Abbie of
Tauestoke, and king Edgar calls home all the Monks of S. Peter's which were
dispersed, and without any Abbat, and made Sydemanuus Abbot, who was
afterward Bishop. This Alfwoldus after sixteen years that he was
consecrated, died and was buried in his own church.

ALwolfus, as Dicetus affirms, was consecrated Bishop, anno 969. and after
nine years died, and was buried in his own church.

SYdemannus, of an Abbat was made a Bishop, anno. 978. in this man's time the
Danes ouerranne and spoiled the whole contries of Deuon and Cornwall, burned
the town of Bodmen, and the cathedral church of S. Petrokes, with the Bishops
house. Whereupon the Bishops sea was removed from thence to S. Germans, where
the same continued until the remoouing and uniting thereof unto Crediton.
Sydemannus in the twelfe year after his consecration died, and was buried at
Crediton in his own church. 990.

ALphredus, whom Dicetus calls Alfricus Abbat of Malmesburie, was consecrated
Bishop, and installed at Crediton, he was taken for a learned man, because he
wrote two books, the one entitled De rebus coenobij sui, and the other De
rerum naturis. In this Bishops time, king Etheldred endowed the Bishoprike of
S. Germans, with lands, liberties and privileges. The Danes made a fresh
invasion, in and upon all Deuon and Cornwall, burned and spoiled the Abbie of
Ordolphus at Tauestoke: they beseeged Excester, and being removed from thence,
were fought withal at Pinneho, about three miles from the city, and
overthrown. Alphredus, after he had been Bishop about nine years, died anno.
999. and was buried in his own church.

ALwolfus, as Dicetus writes, was the next Bishop. In his time Sweno king of
Denmark, by intisement of one Hew, then Earl of Deuon, came with a great
host and besieged the city of Excester, took it and burned it, and with
great cruelty used the people, until in the end Almarus then Earl of Deuon,
and the gentlemen did yield and submit themselves, and so obtained peace. This
Alwolfus about the fifteenth year of his Bishoprike, anno. 1014. died, and was
buried in his own church.

ALnoldus, by the report of the Archdeacon of London, succeeded Alwolfus, and
was installed at Crediton. In this man's time king Canutus gave to Athelwode
Abbat of S. Peter's of this city, great gifts and sundry privileges, in
recompense of his fathers great injuries. Arnoldus in the fifteen year of his
Bishoprike 1030. died, and was buried in his own church.

LEuigus or Leuingus, Abbat of Tauistoke, and nephew to Brythewaldus Bishop of
Cornwall, was chosen the next Bishop,, and according to the orders then used,
consecrated and installed. He was in great favor and credit with king Canutus,
upon whom he attended in pilgrimage unto Rome. And after his uncle the Bishop
of S. Germans being dead, obtained of the king that the Bishops sea was
removed from S. Germans unto Crediton, and both were thereby reduced and
united into one Bishoprike, and so has ever sithence continued: he was after
the death of Brythegus Bishop of Worcester, removed to that church, and there
died and was buried as some suppose: but some affirm, that in the time of
Hardicamitus the king, at the accusation of Alfredus then Archbishop of York,
for that he should be consenting to the death of Alfredus the son of
Etheldred, that he should be deposed of his Bishoprike there, and so did
return unto Tauestoke, where be died: but Dicetus affirms that he purged
himself of this crime, and by that means was restored both to the favor of
the king and to his Bishoprike again, and died Bishop of Worcester. It is
recorded that he was Bishop of Crediton fifteen years.

LEofricus, a man descended of the blood and line of Brutus, but brought up in
the land of Lothoringia or Loreine, was so well commended for his nobility,
wisdom and learning, that king Edward the confessor had him in great favor,
and made him first one of his privy Council; and then Lord Chamberlain of
all England: and lastly the Bishoprike of this province being void, he was
made, consecrated, and installed, Bishop of the same. By him and by his means,
the Bishops sea was removed from Crediton, to this city of Excester, for at
his request, king Edward together with Queen Edith his wife, came to Excester,
and remoouing the moonks from hence to Westminster, did also remove the
Bishops sea from Crediton to his city, and did put the Bishop in the
possession: for he conducting the Bishop on the right hand, and the Queen on
the left hand, brought him to the high altar of his new church, and there
placed him in a seat appointed for him. He suppressed sundry houses or cells of
religion within his sanctuary, and appropriated and united them to his own
church, as also by the good liberality of the king, obtained great revenues,
possessions, privileges, and liberties, to be given unto the church. In this
man's time, William Duke of Normandy, made a conquest of this whole realm, as
also in the year 1068. besieged this city of Excester, which after by
composition he restored to his former estate again. Also in his time Richard
de Brion, a noble man of Normandy, the son of Baldwin of Brion, and of
Albred the niece to the conqueror, was made Baron of Okehampton, warden of the
castle of Excester, and Vicount of Deuon. This Leofricus after that he had
well and worthily ruled his church and Diocese, by the space of xxiij.
years, he ended his days in peace, and died anno 1073. and was buried in the
cemitorie or churchyard of his own church, under a simple and a broken Marble
stone, which place by the since enlarging of his church, is now within the
south tower of the same, where of late, anno 1568. a new monument was erected
in the memory of so good, worthy, and noble a personage, by the industry of
the writer hereof, but at the charges of the Deane and chapter.

OSbertus or Osbernus, a Normaine borne, and brother to an Earl named William,
was preferred to this Bishoprike, and in the year 1074. was consecrated and
installed to the same. Polydorus writes, that one Galfrid who joined with Odo
Earl of Kent and Bishop of Boion, against William Rufus, should be Bishop of
Exon: but it was not nor could not so be. In this man's time William the
conqueror, and William Rufus his son died. This Osbertus or Osbernus, after
he had been Bishop thirty years, was blind, and died, and lies buried in
his own church.

WIlliam VVarewest, a Normaine borne, and chaplain both to the conqueror and
his two sons, William and Henry, was a very grave and a wiseman, and for
the same was preferred by Henry the king to this Bishoprike, anno 1107. and
was consecrated by Anselmus Archbishop of Canturburie, in the month of August,
the same year. He first began to enlarge his church, which at that time was no
bigger than that which is now called the Lady chapel. He founded and builded
the monastery of Plimpton, and placed therein regular Canons: in his latter
days he waxed and became blind; and yet notwithstanding for his wisdom the
king sent him in embassage unto Pope Paschalis the second, wherein he so
wisely dealed, and so discreetlie behaved himself in his message, that he
made a reconciliation between the Pope and the King, and returned with great
praise and commendation. Not long after his return, and having small joy of
the world, he gave over his Bishoprike, and became one of the religious canons
in his own house of Plimpton, where he died and was buried, he was Bishop
about twenty years.

RObert Chichester, Deane of Sarisburie, was consecrated Bishop under Anselmus
Archbishop of Canrtuburie, anno. 1128. and the xxviij. year of king Henry the
first, he was a Gentleman borne, and therefore esteemed for his zeal in
religion, wherein he was very devout according to those days, and thinking
his labors to be best employed that way, did eftsoons go in pilgrimage,
sometime to Rome, sometime to one place, sometime to an other; and ever he
would bring with him some one relic or other. He was a liberal contributor
to the buildings of his church. In his time was founded and builded the
Monastery of S. Stephens in Launceston, and furthered by Reynold Earl of
Cornwall, but unto it this Bishop was an adversary; not for misliking the
work, but for fear of an intrusion upon his liberties. Likewise at this time
was builded the Priorie of S. Nicholas in Excester, by the Abbat of Battle,
unto which Abbie, this Priorie was a cell. In this man's time also, king Henry
made William Rideuerse a Normaine, and his kinseman Earl of Deuon; and
therewith the Lordship of Twifordtone, and the honor of Plimpton, together with
the third penny of his revenues in Deuon, which in the whole was then xxx.
marks, whereof this Earl had ten. Also in this man's time, king Henry died,
and king Stephen entered, and took upon him the crown, whereof ensued great
wars. This Bishop after that he had occupied the place xxij. years, died and
was buried in his own church. But the moonke of Westminster writes that he
should be Bishop xxvij. years, and died in the year 1155. but he never saw
the records of this church which are to the contrary.

RObert VVarewest, Nephew to William the Bishop of this church, Deane of
Sarisburie, was consecrated Bishop by Theobaldus Archbishop of Canturburie,
anno 1150. he nothing degenerate from the steps of his predecessors, but was
altogether of the same bent and disposition. In his time king Stephen died, and
Henry the second was crowned king. This Robert after that he had occupied this
sea nine years or there about, died and was buried at Plimpton by his uncle.

BArtholomeus Iscanus, otherwise Bartholomew of Excester was consecrated Bishop
of Excester under Theoldbald Archbishop of Canturburie, anno. 1159. he was
called Iscanus of Isca, which is one of the ancientest names of this city. He
was a mean citizens son, but being very apt unto learning, his parents and
friends kept him to school, and he so well profited therein, that he came and
proved to be a very well learned man, and being Bishop he wrote sundry
books, as of Predestination, Freewill, Penence, and others: of all men he
could not brook nor favor Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canturburie, for his
contempt and disobedience against the king, for the which he sharply
improoued, rebuked, and inueighed against him openly, in the parliament house
holden at Northampton; and with such effectual reasons and pithie arguments,
he did so temper the same, that the whole parliament relied unto his judgment
and opinion herein, against Thomas Becket. And after his death, such was the
gravity, modesty, and wisdom of the man, that he was specially chosen to
be Ambassador for the king unto Pope Alexander the third, and so wisely and
with such discretion used the same, that notwithstanding his cause and message
had many adversaries, yet he reconciled the Pope, and the king, obtained the
good will and favor of the Pope, and brought his message to good effect. This
Bishop was in great familiarity and acquaintance with Baldwin of Excester his
countriman, now Archbishop of Canturburie, who was a poor man's son in this
city; but for his learning advanced to this estate. In this Bishops time,
about the year of our Lord 1168. William Fytzralph a citizen of this city,
founded a cell for moonks within this city, and dedicated the same to S.
Alexius, which not long after was united to S. John's within the East gate of
the same city. In his time also Reynold of Courtney, a nobleman of Normandy,
the son of Elorus the son of Jews, named Jews le gross, king of France,
came into this land, and married Hawise, daughter and heir to Maud the
daughter and heir to Adelis, sister and heir to Richard de Briono the first,
Vicecount of Deuon, and in her right was Vicecount of Deuon. This Bartholomew
after he had been Bishop about xiiii. years, anno. 1184. died, but where he
died and where he was buried, it does not appear. In this Bishops time about
the year 1170. one Johannes Corinienses a Cornish man borne, was a famous
learned divine, he was a Student at Rome and other places in Italy, and by
that means grue into great acquaintance with Pope Alexander the third, he
wrote diverse books, and namely one De incarnatione Christi, against Peter
Lombard, who affirmed, Quod Christus secundum quod homo est, aliquid non est;
and this he dedicated to Pope Alexander.

John, the Chaunter of the cathedral church of this city, was consecrated and
installed Bishop of this church, anno. 1184. he was well reported for his
liberality, in continuing the buildings of this church, wherein he was nothing
inferior to his predecessors. In his time king Henry Fytzemprise died, and he
himself having been Bishop about six years, died anno. 1191.

Henry Marshall, Archdeacon of Stafford, the brother to Walter the Earl
Marshall of England, was consecrated Bishop by Hubert, Archbishop of
Canturburie, anno. 1191. he finished the building of his church, according to
the plat and foundation which his predecessors had laid, and that done, he
purchased the patronage and Lordship of Woodburie of one Albemarlie, which he
gave and impropriated unto the vicars coral of his church. In this man's time
anno. 1201. one Simon Thurnaius, a Cornish man borne, brought up in learning,
did by diligence and study so prosper therein, that he became excellent in all
the liberal sciences, and in his days none thought to be like him: he left
Oxenford, where he had been a studient, and went to Paris, and there became a
priest, and studied divinity, and therein became so excellent and of so deep
a judgment, that he was made chief of the Sorbonistes; at length he became so
proud of his learning, and glorified so much therein, that he would be
singular, and thought himself to be another Aristotle, and so much he was
therein blinded, and waxed so far in love with Aristotle, that he preferred
him before Moses and Christ. And behold Gods just judgment, for suddenly his
memory failed him, and he waxed so forgetful, that he could neither call to
remembrance any thing that he had done, neither could he discern, read or
know a letter of the book. This Henry, after that he had spent and lived
twelve years in his Bishoprike, he died, and lies buried in the North side of
the Chauncell of his church, in a very fair toombe of Marble, anno. 1206.

SImon de Apulia, anno. 1206. was installed Bishop of this sea, of him there
remains no memorial at all. In his time were famous Joseph Iscanius, and
Alexander Neckam; the one was very well learned in the Latin and Greek
tongue, and in the liberal sciences; the other was Prior of S. Nicholas, and
was an universal man, being a profound philosopher, an eloquent orator, a
pleasant Poet, and a deep divine. In this Bishops time, the doctrine of
elevation, adoration, reservation, and praieng for the dead, being established
by Pope Honorius the third, the parish churches within this city were
limited, anno. 1222. In this man's time, anno. 1212. one Johannes Deuonius, so
surnamed because he was borne in Deuon, being well bent to good studies, was
much commended for his learning and modesty. He was familiar and of great
acquaintance with Baldwin Bishop of Canturburie, and being made Abbat of Forde,
was in such favor with king John, that he chose him to be his confessor and
chapline, he was a writer, and compiled diverse books which were then accounted
of. Being dead he was buried in his Abbie, the people much lamenting the want
of so good a man. This Bishop having spent xviij. years, died anno. 1224. and
was buried in his own church.

WIlliam Brewer, very shortly after the death of the foresaid Simon, was
elected Bishop, and consecrated by Stephan Langton, Archbishop of Canturburie,
anno. 1224. he was borne and descended of a noble house and parentage, being
brother to Sir William Brewer knight, the husband of the eldest daughter and
one of the heirs to William de Verona, Earl of Deuon; and who also was
founder of the Abbeis of Tor and of Hartland, and of other Monasteries. This
Bishop so wisely and so discreetlie behaved himself, that he was had in great
reputation among all men, and in special favor with the king: for king
Henry, having given his sister Lady Isabell, to wife unto Frederike the
emperor, did commend and betake her to this Bishop, to be conueighed and
conducted to the emperor. And such was the fame and good report spread of him,
that as he passed through the countries, they were from place to place received
with great honor, and being come to the city of Coleine, the Archbishop there
did not only very honorably receive and entertain them, but also
accompanied them unto the city of Worms, where the marriage was solemnized.
When this Bishop had seen the marriage, and althings performed, he took his
leave and was dismissed with great presents, and honorably accompanied
homewards by the Archbishop and others. At his return he was ioifullie
received of all the noblemen about the king, and most thankfully by the king
himself, and whom the king used as his special and most trusty councellor in
all his weighty causes. This Bishop being come home to his own house, and
minding as his predecessors had done, to leave some good memorial behind him,
he made a Deane, and constituted xxiiij. prebendaries within his church, to the
one he impropriated Brampton, and Coliton Rawley: for the others he purchased
so much land, as out whereof he assigned to every prebendarie iiij. pound by
the year, and of these he ordained his chapter. Also in this man's time, anno
1240. Gilbert Long, and Robert his brother, citizens of this city, builded and
founded the hospital of S. John's, within the East gate of this city, for the
sustenance of certain poor folks, called afterward the poor children of S.
John's, and gave all their lands, and tenements to the same, which was
sufficient. The year following the cell of S. Alexus was removed and adioined
to S. John's, and then the founders being dead, the charge and government of
that house was by those founders commended to the Mayor of this city, and they
thensefoorth were founders and patrones thereof. Anno 1244. there grew a
contention, concerning the poor. lazer, sick people of the Magdalen without
the south gate of this city, whose manner and usage was then, with a clapdish
upon every market day, to resort and come to the markets, and there to beg
every man's devotion: but by reason of their sickness, which was loathsome and
abhorred, the peoples devotion waxed short and scant against them, as also
every man murmured against their going and begging at large, whereupon the
matter being brought into question, between the Bishop and this city, it was
concluded, that a permutation should be made, and that therefore, the Bishops
should be patrones, and have the government of S. John's, and the Mayor and his
successors to be gardians and founders of the hospital of the Magdalen, with a
prouiso that the proctor of the Magdalen, should on one day in every month,
come with his box to S. Peter's Church, at the time of service; and there
receive and gather the devotion of the canons, which is used at these presents.
This poor house remains still, but the other for want of good friends, was
suppressed and dissolved. This Bishop after that he had continued in his
Church, about xix, years he died, anno 1244. and lies buried in the middle of
his own Church, under a plain Marble stone.

RIchard Blondie, 1245. was consecrated and installed: Bishop Bonifacius, then
being Archbishop of Canturburie. This Richard was a man of a mild spirit, but
very stout against such as in his time, did offer any injury to the church,
and in his old years being but a weak man, he was much carried and ruled by
such as were his officers, and about him; who taking the opportunity of the
time, used all the means they might, to enrich themselves, his cheifest
officers were one Lodesewell his chancellor, Sutton his register, Fitzherbert
his official, and Ermestow the keeper of his seal. These with other of the
chief servants of the household, compacted amongst themselves, that whilst the
Bishop was yet living, who then lay sick and very weak in his bed, to make
and conuaie unto themselves, conueiances of such liuelihoods, as then lay in
the Bishops disposition; and accordingly made out aduousons and other such
conueiances, as to them seemed best, all which were forthwith sealed and
delivered, according to the orders among them concluded, but these their
subtle dealings, were not so closely conveyed, but that the next Bishop
following, boulted and found the same out, and did not only reuerse all their
doings, but also did excommunicate them, and who were not absolved until they
had done their penance for the same. Which was done at S. Peter's Church,
openly upon Palm sundaie, being the xix, of March, 1267. This Bishop Richard
in the twelfe year of his Bishoprike died, and was buried in his own Church.

WAlter Bronescome, Archdeacon of Surreie, was consecrated Bishop of
Canturburie, upon passion sundaie, anno 1286 under Bonifacius, then Archbishop,
he was borne in this city of Exon, and was the son of poor parents, but he
being of a very towardness and good disposition, and very apt to learning,
they partly of themselves, and partly by help of their friends, did put him
to school, and kept him to his book* wherein he proved and prospered so
well, that he was very well learned. At the time of his election, he was no
priest, and therefore not capeable of any such dignity, but immediately he
took that order upon him, and forthwith was consecrated Bishop, all which
being done within fifteen days, it was counted as for a miracle, namely,
that he should be elected Bishop, then made priest, and at last to be
consecrated within that space. For so many dignities as they termed it, to be
cast upon one man in so short a time, had not been lightly seen. He founded
the college of Glascin, in Perin in Cornwall, and endowed the same with fair
possessions and revenues. He purchased the the Barton of Rokesdone, and Clist;
and gave it to the hospital of S. John's, within the Eastgate of the city of
Excester. He instituted in his own Church, the feast called Gabrils feast; and
gave a piece of land for the maintenance thereof, he also did by a policy,
purchase the Lordship and house of Clist Sachisfield, and by a devise did
enlarge the Barton thereof, by gaining of Cornish wood, from his Deane and
chapter: and builded then a very fair and a sumptuous house, and called it
Bishops Clist, which he left to his successors. Likewise he got the patronage
of Clist Fomeson, now called Sowton, and annexed the same to his new Lordship,
which as it was said was in this order. He had a friar to be his chapline and
confessor, which died in his said house of Clist, and should have been buried
at the parish church of Faringdon, because the said house was and is in that
parish: but because the parish church was somewhat far of, the ways foul,
and the weather rainie, or for some other causes; the Bishop willed and
commanded the corpse to be carried to the parish church of Sowton, then called
Clist Fomeson, which is very near, and bordereth upon the Bishops Lordship:
the two parishes there being divided by a little lake called Clist. At this
time one Fomeson a Gentleman, was Lord and patron of Clist Fomeson, and he
being advertised of such a burial toward in his parish, and a leech way to
be made over his land, without his leave or consent required therein; calls
his tenants together, and goes to the bridge over the lake, between the
Bishops land and his, and there meets the Bishops men, bringing the said
corpse, and forbids them to come over the water. But the Bishops men nothing
regarding the same, do press forthwards to come over the water: and the
others do withstand and fall at strife about the matter, so long, that in the
end my Lords Friar is fallen into the water. The Bishop takes this matter in
such grief, that a holy Friar, a religious man, and his own chaplain and
confessor, should so irreverently be cast into the water, that he falls out
with the Gentleman, and upon what occasion I know not, he sueth him in the
law, and so vexes and tormenteth him, that in the end he was feign to yield
himself to the Bishops devotion, and seeks all ways he could to currie the
Bishops good will, which he could not obtain, until for his redemption, he
had given and surrendered up his patronage of Sowton, with a piece of land, all
which the said Bishop annexeth to his new Lordship. Thus by policy he
purchased the manor of Bishops Clist, by a devise gains Cornish wood, and by
power wresteth the patronage of Sowton. This Bishop after he had occupied this
sea about xxiij. years, died and was buried in his own church, in a sumptuous
toombe of Alablaster.

PEter Quiuill, anno. 1281. was consecrated Bishop of this church, under John
Archbishop of Canturburie. He first instituted a Chaunter and a Subdeane in his
church. To the one he impropriated Painton and Chidleigh, and to the other the
rectorie of Egloschaile in Cornwall, he was a liberal and a special
benefactor to the hospital of S. John's in Excester, as well in goods as in
liuelihoods; he first began to enlarge and increase his church from the
chauncell downwards, and laid the foundation thereof. In his time anno. 1285.
Walter Lichelade the first Chaunter, was slain in a morning as he came from
the morning service, then called the Mattines, which was then wont to be said
shortly after midnight. Upon which occasion the king came unto this city, and
kept his christmas in the same, and thereupon a composition was made between
the Bishop and the city, for enclosing of the churchyard, and building of
certain gates there, as appears by the said composition, bearing date in
Festo annunciationis beatae Mariae 1286. The king at the suit of the Earl of
Hereford, who at his being here, was lodged in the house of the Graie Friars,
which then was near the house of S. Nicholas, obtained of the Bishop, that
they should be removed from thence to a more wholesome place, which was to the
place without Southgate: whereof after the kings departure grew some
controversy, because the Bishop refused to perform his promise made to the
king. This man also impropriated the parish of S. Newleine, and the parish of
Stoke Gabrell, and united the same to the office of the Chauncellor of the
Cathedral church, and under condition that the said chauncellor should
continually read a lecture within the said city, of divinity, or of the
decretalls: and if he should fail to do this, that then it might and should
be lawful to the Bishop to resign the said parsonages impropriated, and to
bestow it at his pleasure, as appears by the said grant, under the seals of
the said Bishop, Deane and Chapter, dated the twelfe of the Calends of May.
1283. This Bishop not long after, and in the eleventh year of his Bishoprike,
died being choked in drinking of a sirrop, anno. 1292. and was buried in his
own church. The Franciscans or Graie Friars of this city, imputed his death
to his hard dealing with them: for whereas he had promised the king to provide
a convenient place for them to build their house in, and had willed their
warden, named Deoditus, to seek out and make inquiry for the same: yet
notwithstanding, when he had so done, because the same was in his fee, he did
swerve from his said promise, and did utterly deny to perform the same, by
the persuasion of one Peter Kenefeld, a Dominican or a black Friar, and
confessor unto the said Bishop: for he enuieng the good success of the
Franciscanes, persuadeth with the Bishop, that in no wise he should permit them
to enioie the place which they had gotten, nor to build therein, because it was
within his fee; for says he, as under color of simplicity, they creep in to
the hearts of the people, and hinder us poor preachers from our gains and
livings: so be ye sure, that if the canons put foot within your liberties,
they will in time so incroch upon the same, as that they will be clean
exempted from out of your liberty and jurisdiction. The Bishop being soon
persuaded and contented contrary to his promise to yield thereunto, denies
the Franciscans; and utterly forbids them to build or to do any thing
within his fee or liberty. About two years after, the Bishop kept a great
feast, upon the sundaie next before Saint Francis day, and among others was
present with him one Walter Winborne, one of the kings chief justices of the
bench, and who was present when the Bishop at the request of the king, made
promise to further and to help the Franciscans, and who in their behalf, did
now put the Bishop in mind thereof, and requested him to have consideration
both of his own promise, and of their distress. The Bishop misliking these
speeches, waxed somewhat warm and offended: and in open terms, did not only
deny to yield hereunto, but wished himself to be choked, what day so ever
he did consent or yield unto it. It fortuned that the same week, and upon the
day of S. Francis Eve, the Bishop took a certain sirop to drink, and in too
hasty swallowing thereof, his breath was stopped, and he forthwith died. The
Franciscans heering thereof, made no little a do about this matter, but blased
it abroad, that S. Francis wrought this miracle upon the Bishop, because he was
so hard against them.

THomas Bitton, the year following was elected Bishop, and the sea of
Canturburie was void, he was consecrated by John Roman Archbishop of York, he
left no memorial of any great things done by him, saving that he continued
in the building of his church, as also was a favorer of such learned men as
were in his Dioces: in his time, namely, Robert Plimton a regular Canon of
Plimpton, and a professor of divinity, and who wrote two books, Walter of
Exon a Franciscane, Friar of Carocus in Cornwall, who at the request of one
Baldwin of Excester, wrote the history of Guie of Warwike, William of
Excester, Doctor of divinity, and warden of the Franciscan Friars in this
city, Godfrey, surnamed Cornwall, a subtle schooleman, and a reader of
divinity sometimes in Paris. This Bishop after xiiij. years that he had
occupied this sea died, anno. 1306. and was buried in his own church.

WAlter Stapledon, anno. 1507. being elected Bishop of this city, was
consecrated, by Robert Wincelsey, Archbishop of Canturburie, he descended of a
most noble parentage, which joined with his learning, wisdom, and politic
head, did get him great credit and favor with the King, who had him not only
one of his privy counsel, but also made him Lord Treasurer of England. At his
inthronization or installing, he kept a solemn observation. For being come
first to the city, immediately after his consecration, as soon as he came to
the Eastgate, he alighted from his horse, and went in on foot, all the streate
being covered and laid with black cloth; he was led on both sides, with two
men of worship, and Sir Hew Courtneie Knight, who claimed to be steward of his
feast, went next before him. The feast it self was very sumptuous, and
liberal, a controversy was between him and the said Sir Hew Courtneie,
concerning his challenge, to be his steward, but it was compounded and ended.
This Bishop as he grew and increased in wealth, so he was careful in the well
disposing of part thereof; for the increase of learning he builded and erected
two houses in Oxford, the one named Stabledons inn, but since Excester
college, the other Harthall, he was also a special benefactor unto the
hospital of S. John's in Excester; unto the which, for the releeuing of
certain poor children therein, he impropriated the rectorie or personage of
Ernescome. In the controversy between his master King Edward the second, and
Charles the French king, he was sent Ambassador, to the French king and joined
in commission with the Queen, for the treaty of a peace and reconciliation:
which though it were obtained, yet he ioining with the Spensers, who favored
not the Queen, he returned into England; leaving the Queen behind him. And
whereas they practiced what they could, to put enmity between the King and
her; and to set her besides the cushion, they themselves fell into the same
snares, which they had laid for others. For not long after the Queen, by the
help of the Earl of Henaulde, and of S. John his brother, came into England
with a great army, whereof the King and the Spensers, being afraid, departed
from London to Bristowe, leaving this Bishop at London, and made him custos of
the same, who requiring the keys of the gates of the city, of the Mayor, the
commoners took him and beheaded him, as also his brother Sir Richard
Stapledon, in cheapeside, and carried his body to his house without
templebarre, and there buried it in a sand-hill; namely, the xv. of October,
anno 1329. But the Queen forgetting all discourtesies, and reuerencing his
calling, commanded his corpse to some more honorable burial, whereupon the
same was taken up, and brought to this city, and with great solemnity, was
buried in his own church, upon the 28. of March; where his epitaph by the
writer thereof is set. Thus after that he had been Bishop about xx, years, he
ended his days.

James Barkeleie, upon the xxvj. of March, anno. 1327. before the burial of
his predecessor in his own Church, was consecrated Bishop of this city, he
descended of the noble house of the Lord Barkeleie, and albeit he were reputed
to be a very godly and a wise man, yet he had no time to yield the trial
thereof. For he died in the fourth month after his consecration, upon the
xxiiij. of Iulie, anno, 1327. and was buried in his own church as some say,
but some think he never came hither at all.

John Grandesson, being in Italy, with Pope John, the xxij. after the death of
James Barkeleie; the King presented him unto the Pope, who accepted the
presentation, and consecrated him Bishop of this diocese, the eight of
October, anno 1327. he was borne and descended of the ancient house of the
Grandessons, Dukes of Burgundy, his father was named Gilbert, the brother of
Otho the great Lord Grandesson, which Gilbert coming into this land, was well
interteined by the king and nobility: and had a good liking of the country,
that by means of Henry Earl of Lancaster, with whom he came into England, he
married lady Sibill, daughier and one of the heirs to John Tregos, Lord of
the castle of Ewas, near Hereford east, and by her had issue five sons, and
four daughters; of which this Bishop was one, and was borne in the parish of
Asheperton, in the diocese of Hereford. He was from his childhood very well
affected to learning, and became a good scholar and a professor of Divinity,
of which method he wrote two books, the one entitled Pontificales maiores,
and the other Pontificales minores. He was also very grave, wise, and
politic, and thereby grew into such credit with Pope John the xxij. that he
was not only of his privy counsel, but also Nuntius apostolicae sedis. And
in all matters of weight, and importance, an ambassador for him, to the
emperor, to the kings of Hispaine, of France, of England, and all other, the
mightiest princes of Christendom, and being on a time sent on in an embassage
to K. Edward the third, he did with such wisdom and gravity behave himself,
that the king was ravished in love with him; and did so tenderly love and
favor him, that he never ceased until he had procured him from the Pope, and
then he gave him the Archdeaconrie of Notingham, and bestowed great livings
upon him. He made him one of his privy counsel, and in the end preferred him
to this Bishoprike. After this, there being some disliking between Pope
Clement the sixth, and the king, he for his approved wisdom was sent in an
ambassadge to the Pope, anno. 1343. for an entreaty of a peace, and an amity
between them to be had; and with such wisdom he did his message, that he
obtained his purpose, and made a reconciliation. After his return home to his
Bishoprike, he was altogether given in doing some good things, he builded and
founded the college of S. Marie Otrey, and endowed the same with great and
goodly liueliehoods. He was a liberal benefactor to the Vicars Chorall of his
own church, as also to the college of Glasney in Perrin; he builded the two
last arches in the West end of his church, vaulted the roof of all the church,
and fully performed and ended the buildings of the same, and then enriched his
said church, with plate, ornaments, and great riches, he also builded a very
fair house in his sanctuary at Bishops Taington, which he gave and least full
furnished unto his successors, and did impropriate unto the same the personage
of Radwaie, to the end as he sets down in his testament, Vt haberent locum
vnde caput suum reclinarent, si forte in manum regis eorum temporalia
caperentur: and which his halsening in the end came partly to effect. For not
only the most part of the temporalities of this Bishoprike, but this new
builded house and impropriation are come to be the possessions and inheritances
of temporal men. This Bishop waxed old, and feeling in himself a decaie of
nature, made his last will and testament, wherein he made such large and
bounteous legacies to the Pope, Emperor, King, Queen, Archbishop, Bishops,
colleges, churches, and to sundry persons of high estates and callings, that
a man would marvel, considering his great and chargeable buildings and works
otherwise, how and by what means he could have atteined to such a mass of
wealth and riches; but his wisdom and policy considered, it was easy. For
first he sequestrateth from himself and out of his house the troop of many
men and horses, reteining and keeping no more than to serve his reasonable
estate, his diet was frugall, his receipts great, his expenses no more than
necessary. Moreover he had taken and set an order with all the ecclesiastiall
persons of his Diocese, that at the time of their deaths, they should leave and
bequeath all their goods to him or to some other in trust, In pios vsus, and
toward his chargeable buildings; and so well he was beloved, and his doings
liked, that they all accepted this his order: by means whereof he grew within
the course of xl. years to infinite wealth and riches. He was in all his life
time a plain man, and void of all vain glory and pomp, and preventing that
none should be used at his burial, commanded the same to be done plainly
and simply. And that none of his executors, Chaplains, servants, nor none of
his house should wear any moorning black cloths at the same, but only
their accustomable and common apparel, which then was commonly graie
colored clothes. This Bishop was no more grave and wise, than stout and of
courage, if occasion so did require. And among other things, this is reported
of him; that about the year of our Lord 1331. Simon Mepham, then Archbishop of
Canturburie, sent his mandatum unto this Bishop, that he would visit his church
and diocese upon mondaie next after Ascension day then following. This Bishop
(upon what occasion it is not written) did refuse this mandatum, and appealed
from the same, aduertising the Archbishop that he should not visit his church
nor diocese. Notwithstanding, the Archbishop at the time appointed, came to
this city and went to S. Peter's church, nothing thinking that any durst to
withstand him. But the Bishop knowing of his coming, goes to the church door
and meets the Archbishop, and forbids him to enter into his church; and
the Archbishop pressing forward, as with force to enter, the Bishop being then
well guarded, denies and resists him: whereupon the Archbishop departed, and
after at a provincial council holden at London, the Archbishop complained
hereof, but by means of the like discord between him and his suffraganes, he
prevailed not. In this Bishops time one William of Excester, a very well
learned man, was a Canon of this church, and he ioining himself with Nicholas
de Cesena, Okeham, Walsingham, and others, did openly preach, that Christ and
his apostles were but poor men, and had no temporal possessions: neither was
any Emperor or lay man subject to the Pope, but only in matters of
religion. But when he heard that Pope John the xxiij. had excommunicated, and
would condemn them all for heretics; this William to save his livings,
secretly shronke away from his old companions, and changed his copy, and
writes certain conclusions against them, and his own preachings. Also in
this Bishops time about the year of our Lord 1340. one John of Bampton, so
named, because he was borne at Bampton, in this diocese, and a moonke of the
order of the Carmelites, was a very good scholar, and first did openly read
Aristotle in the university of Cambridge: where he was a scholar, and
afterward he studied divinity, and was made Doctor, he wrote certain books,
which are not extant. This Bishop after that he had occupied this church, about
xlij. years, he died upon S. Swithins day 1369. and was buried in a chapel,
which he builded in the west wall of his own church.

THomas Brentingham, after the death of this John Grandisson, was at one
instant chosen Bishop of Excester and Bishop of Hereford, who refusing the one
took the other, and was consecrated Bishop of Excester, upon the tenth of
March 1370. being the feast day of Nereus and Achilles, William of Worcester
then Archbishop of Canturburie. This Thomas, was a man very well learned, and
experted both in ecclesiastical matters, and in politic government, and in
both these respects, greatly reverenced and esteemed; and for that cause, at
the parliament holden at Westminster, in the tenth year of K. Richard the
second, he was chosen to be one of the twelve peers of the realm under the
King, he was a benefactor to the Calenderhaie, of the vicars chorall, of his
own church, and performed and supplied in buildings; and otherwise what his
predecessors had left undone, and having been Bishop xxiiij. years, he died
the third of December, anno 1394. and was buried in the North side of the body
of his own church.

EDmond Stafford, upon the xx. day of June, anno 1395. was consecrated at
Lambhith by William Courtwaie, Archbishop of Canturburie, he was borne and
descended of noble parentage, being brother to Ralph Lord Stafford, created
Earl of Stafford, by K. Edward the third; he was both wise and learned, for
his wisdom, he grew into great credit with the king, and was both of his
privy counsel, as also Lord Chancellor of England. At the parliament holden
at westminster, the xxj. year of K. Richard the second, he being then speaker
of the higher house, made a very learned and pithie oration, to prove the
absolute authority of a King: his theme was, Rex vnus erit omnibus, and having
discoursed at large of the authority of a king, did conclude; Quod potestas
regis esset sibi sola vnita annexa and solida, and whosoever did by any means
impeach the same, Paena legis merito esset plectendus. And for the furtherance
of good letters, he did increase two fellowships in the college of Stapledons
inn in Oxford, reformed the statutes of the house, and altered the name of it,
and called it Excester college. After that he had continued Bishop in much
honor, about xxiij. years, he died the fourth of September, being the seventh
year of King Henry the fifth, and lies buried in his own church, in a very
air tomb of Alablaster.

James Carye, Bishop of Chester, being at Florence when news was brought to
Pope Martin the fifth, of Bishop Staffords death, was then and there made Bishop
of this church, anno 1419. and also consecrated, but long he enioied not his
office, for there he died, and was buried.

EDmond Lacie, Bishop of Hereford, was translated from thence unto this church,
in the feast of Easter, and in the eight year of king Henry the fifth, anno
1420. he was a man very devout, and religious, but subject to flatterers, who
carried him to their pleasure; he was a liberal benefactor to the vicar of
Calenderhaie, great contentions were between him and the city, for liberties,
which by arbitriment were compounded, he founded the chapter house, in his own
church. He was a professor of divinity, and very well learned; for in the
second year of his Bishoprike being the ix. year of the kings reign, there
was a parliment holden at Westminster, in which great complaints were made
against the loose and dissolute life of the religious men, and especial the
black moonks. And this matter being brought to the convocation house, this
Bishop as chief prolocutor of that assembly, did make a very learned and a
pithie oration, before the king then of purpose present, and the whole
clergy, much lamenting that the religious men were so far straied from the
rules of their professions, and the holiness of their predecessors. And when
he had at large discoursed the same, he delivered up certain articles in
writing, praieng for reformation: which his speeches were so effectually
uttered, and his articles so effectually penned, that both the king and the
clergy, did not only with great liking and allowance praise and commend the
same, but also took order that there should be a provincial Council called
out of hand for a reformation, which was then promised, but not performed, by
reason of the kings death, which not long after followed: but yet in the way
of good speed it was then concluded and agreed that every third benefice,
being of the gift of any of the prelates, or of any monastery, should from
thencefoorth, for seven years be given to some scholar of Oxenford or
Cambridge. This Bishop after he had lived xxxv. years in this Bishoprike, died
and was buried in the North wall of the quier in his own church. After whose
death many miracles were said and devised to be done at his toombe, whereupon
great pilgrimages were made by the common people to the same.

GEorge Neuell, succeeded Edmond Lacie, and was consecrated in the feast of S.
Katharine, anno, 1455. he was of a noble parentage, being the second son of
Richard Neuell Earl of Sarisburie, he finished and ended the chapter house
which his predecessor had begone. And after that he had been Bishop about ten
years, he was removed to York, and made Archbishop there, anno. 1465.

John Both, after the translation of George Neuell to York, was consecrated
Bishop under Thomas Burscher, Archbishop of Canturburie, upon the xxij. of
February anno. 1466. He was by profession a Ciuillian, and a Batcheler of the
same, he governed his church very well, and builded, as some suppose, the
Bishops sea in the quier, but being weary of the great troubles which were in
this contrie, between king Edward the fourth, and the Earl of Warwike, he
removed from hence to his house of Horsleigh in Hamshire, where in the twelfe
year of his Bishoprike he died upon the fifth day of April, anno. 1478. and
lies buried at S. Clements in London.

PEter Courtnaie, immediately after the death of Both, was presented to this
Bishopric, and consecrated by Thomas Archbishop of Canturburie, in November
anno. 1477. at S. Stephens in Westminster; he was the son of Sir Phillip
Courtnaie of Powderham, his mother was named Elizabeth, daughter to Walter Lord
Hungerford, he for his wisdom and good behavior was in great credit and
favor with king Henry the seventh, by whose means he was translated from
this church unto Winchester, in the ninth year of his being Bishop here, and
in the fifth year of his being there, he died upon the xx. of December, anno.
1491. and lies buried in his own church. He finished the North tower of S.
Peter's, and gave the clock bell which is in the same, and which bears the
name Peter.

RIchard Fox, upon the remoouing of Peter Courtnaie, was consecrated Bishop of
this church, under Thomas Archbishop of Canturburie 1466. he was a very wise
man, and in great credit and estimation with king Henry the seventh, unto
whom he was a faithful counselor, and of his privy Council; with whom he
acquainted himself at Paris, when he was there a student. For king Henry then
Earl of Richemond, being at Venice, and advertised how the nobility of
England was bent to have him to be their King, came from thence to Paris, and
sought unto Charles then king of France for aid and help: in which the Earl
his suits, this Fox was a special traveler and counselor; and in the end,
God giving the success, the Earl obtained the crown, and having had the
trial of the fidelity, wisdom, and trust of this Bishop, he made him Lord
privy seal; and kept and used him, and his advise in all his weighty
matters, as well at home as abroad. He being Ambassador sundry times, to the
K. of France and Scotland, and of a very hearty good will and love, the King
made him godfather to his second son K. Henry the eight. There was a kind of
emulation, between this Bishop and the Earl of Surreie: both of them being
very wise and of great service to the King and commonwealth. Howbeit, in some
diversity of respects, the one having no issue, to care for, did deal without
any private affection, or singular gain; and the other having issue, was
desirous to advance his house and honor. These affections did breed some
dislike between them two, yet the king finding a faith unto himself and a
commodity to the commonwealth; misliked it not, if the same exceeded his
measure: and they more warm than commendable for their calling and estates.
The king then or the council would deal between them for the appeasing and
pacifieng of them, and to them he was both friendly, loving and liberal. The
one he delivered out of the tower, pardoned him of his offenses, restored him
to his lands, received him into special favor, made him of his privy
council, as also Lord Treasurer of England, and his general into Scotland,
and augmented his liuelihoods. The other he first made Bishop to this church,
then removed him unto Bathe, and from thence unto Durham, and lastly unto
Winchester. Erasmus in his book entitled, the Preacher or Ecclesiastes,
declares how that the king upon a time, wanting some piece of money, was to
borowe the same of the commons and of the clergy. And for the dealings with
the clergy, the matter was by commission committed to this Bishop. Who when
they came before him, used all the excuses that they could, to shift themselves
from lending of any money: some came very seemly and well apparrelled, and
awaited upon by their men, according to their liuelihoods, and these alleged,
that they were greatly charged in hospitality, and house keeping, with other
charges incident to the same, so that they had no money, and therefore could
pay none. Some came poorly and barelie apparrelled, and they alleged that
their liueliehoods were but small, and yet their charges great, and by that
means the world was so hard with them, that they had it not to spare. This
bishop having heard all these excuses, used this dilemme: to the ritcher sort
he said, For as much as you are so well and seemlie apparrelled, and do keep
so great houses, and have all things necessary about you, it is a manifest
argument, that you have some store about you, or else you would not do as ye
do: and therefore ye must needs lend. To the others who pretend excuse of
their poverty, he thus replied unto them; that For as much as they were so
bare in their apparel, and so sparing of their expenses. It must needs be
that they saved their pursses and had money, and therefore they must needs
pay, and so adiudgeth them to lend unto the prince. As he rose by learning, so
he was a great fauorer and furtherer of learning, and for the good increase of
the same, he builded and founded Corporis christi college in Oxenford. In his
latter days he waxed and was blind, and dieng in Winchester, he was there
buried in his own church, after that he had been Bishop of Excester six
years, he was removed to Bathe, anno. 1492.

Oliver King, immediately upon the transferring of Bishop Fox, was consecrated
Bishop of this church, in February 1492. John Morton, then Archbishop of
Canturburie. This Oliver was chaplain to king Henry the seventh, and Deane
of Windesor, and register of the order of the Garter. In his time were the
rebellions of Joseph the Blacke-smith, in Cornwall, and of Perken Warebeke.
This Bishop after that he had occupied this sea about five years, he died,
anno. 1497. and as some suppose, he was buried at Windsor.

RIchard Redman, immediately upon the death of Bishop Oliver King, was
translated from his Bishoprike in Wales, unto this city; but after five years
he was removed unto the Bishoprike of Elie, and installed there in September,
anno. 1501. He was a Gentleman borne, and descended of a very worshipful
house, which joined with his wisdom and learning, did much increase his
credit and good report.

John Arundell, next after the translation of Bishop Redman, was removed from
Couentrie and Lichfeeld, unto this city, and was installed the xv. of March
1501. Wherein he sought not the preferment for any liuelihoods, but rather
desirous to be a dweller and resiant in his country where he was borne, for he
was descended of the Arundels of Lanherne in Cornwall, a house of great
antiquity and worship. He long enioied not his new Bishoprike, for after two
years after his installing, he had occasion to ride unto London, and there
died and was buried in Saint Clements church without Templebarre, anno. 1503.

HEw Oldham, upon the death of Arundell, by the preferment of the Countisse of
Richmond and Darbie, unto whom he was Chaplain, was preferred unto this
Bishoprike, and installed in the same. He was a man having more zeal than
knowledge, and more devotion than learning; somewhat roughe in speeches, but
friendly in doings. He was careful in the saving and defending of his
liberties, for which, continual suits was between him, and the Abbat of
Tauestoke, he was liberal to the vicars chorall of his church; and reduced
them to the keeping of commons, and toward the maintenance thereof, he gave
them certain revenues, and impropriated unto them the rectorie of Cornwood;
he albeit (of himself) he were not learned, yet a great favorer and a
furtherer of learning, and of learned men. Notwithstanding, he was sometime
crossed, in his honest attempt therein. He first was minded to have enlarged
Excester college, in Oxford; as well in buildings, as in fellowships. But
after being a requester to the fellows for one Atkins, to be a fellow; in
whose favor he had written his letters, and was denied, he changed his mind,
and his good will was alienated. About the same time, Doctor Smith Bishop of
Lincoln, was building of the college, named Brazen nose, and was very
willing and desirous to join with him: but being denied to have the nomination
of a founder, his mind was changed. Not long after being advertised, that
Bishop Fox of Winchester, was minded to erect and found a new college, joined
with him, and contributed unto him a great mass of money, and so a college
was builded for scholars, and great liueliehoods provided for them: and then
the house was named Corporis christi college. Whereof the one of them bare the
name of a founder, and the other of a benefactor. Howbeit some diversity was
between these two Bishops, at the first, to what use this college should be
employed: for the founder was of the mind that he would have made it for a
house of moonks, but the benefactor was of the contrary mind, and would have
it for scholars; alleging that moonks were but a sort of bussing flees, and
whose state could not long endure; whereas scholars brought up in learning,
would be profitable members to the common wealth, and good ornaments to the
church of God, and continue for ever. The founder being a wise man, and of a
deep judgment, when he had well pawsed and considered hereof, yields
hereunto: and so it was concluded between them, to make and build a college
for scholars. And forthwith for the good direction, guiding, and government of
the said college, and scholars; such wise, good, and politic statutes and
ordinances were by good advise and counsel devised, stablished, and ordained;
as whereby the said college has been, and yet continues one of the best
nurseries for training and instructing of good scholars in learning within that
university. This bishop and the abbat of Tauestoke did still contend and
continue in law, during their lives: and during which suit, this bishop died,
being excommunicated at Room, and who could not be suffered to be buried,
until an absolution from Rome was procured for him, after that he had been
Bishop about xvj. years he died the xxv of June, 1519. and was buried in his
own church.

John Voiseie, otherwise Harman, succeeded Oldham, by the preferment of K.
Henry the eight, whose chapleine he then was, and Deane of his chapel, as
also of this church, he was Doctor of the laws, very well learned and wise,
and in great favor with the king, who sent him sundry times in embassages to
foreign princes, he was Lord president of wales, and had the government of the
kings only daughter, Lady Marie princess of Wales. Of all the Bishops in
the land, he was accounted the courtlikest, and the best courtier, and although
he were well reported for his learning, yet better liked for his courtlike
behavior, which in the end turned not so much to his credit, as to the utter
ruin and spoil of the Church: for of xxij. Lordships and manors, which his
predecessors had, and left unto him, of a goodly yeerelie reuenewe, he left
but three, and them also leased out. And where he found xiiij. houses well
furnished, he left only one house bare, and without furniture, and yet
charged with sundry fees and annuities; and by these means this Bishopprike,
which sometimes was counted one of the best, is now become in temporal lands,
one of the meanest: and according to the fore-prophesieng of Bishop Grandisson,
a place ^arse left for the Bishop to lay and rest his head in, and yet
nevertheless, he was a great fauorer of learned men, and especially of
Divines, whom he preferred in his church above others. He was very bountious
and liberal unto all men, but especially unto courtiers, unto his own
kindred, and contriemen. Upon many he bestowed much, unto the confusion of
some of them; and upon the other he spent much, by building of a town, named
Sutton Colshull where he was borne, which he procured to be incorporated, and
made a market town: and set up therein making of kearsies, but all which in
the end came to small effect; in his time, after the death of King Henry the
eight, there was an alteration of religion, by King Edward the sixth, whereof
insued rebellion, and a commotion in this diocese: which in some part was
imputed to this Bishop, because he lay far from it, and dwelled in his own
country. Whereupon he resigned the Bishoprike, into the kings hands; after
that he had been Bishop about xxx. years, and lived by the rents of the
temporaltie of the Bishoprike, which when he alienated, and discontinued, he
did receive unto him, for term of his own life.

MIles Couerdale, after the resignation of Voisie, was by king Edward made
Bishop of this city, and consecrated at Lambeth by Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop
of Canturburie, anno. 1550. He was borne in the North country, and from his
childhood given to learning, wherein he profited very much: he was one of the
first which professed the Gospel in this land; in the time of king Henry the
eight, he translated the Bible out of the Hebrew into English, and wrote
sundry books upon the scriptures, which doctrine being very new and strange
in those days, and he very straightly pursued by the Bishops, made his
escape, and passed over into low Germany, where he printed the Bibles of his
translation, and sent them over into England, and thereof made his gain,
whereby he lived: but the Bishops, namely Doctor Stokesley, Bishop of London,
when he heard hereof, and minding to prevent that no such bibles should be
dispersed within this realm, made inquiry where they were to be sold, and
bought them all up, supposing that by this means no more Bibles would be had,
but contrary to his expectation, it fell out otherwise; for the same money
which the Bishop gave for these books, was sent over by the merchant unto this
Couerdale, and by that means he was of that wealth and ability, that he
imprinted as many more, and sent them over into England; but he was then so
narrowly sought for, that he was driven to remove himself out of Flanders
into Germany, and dwelled under the Palsgraue of Rhene, where he found much
favor; first he taught young children, and having learned the dutch ^oong, the
prince Palatine gave him a benefice, named Burgh^aber, where he continued and
lived very well, partly by that benefice, and partly by the liberality of
the Lord Cromewell, who was his good Lord and relieved him very much. At
length when the religion was altered in England, and the Gospel had a free
passage, he returned and did very much good in preaching of the same. And when
the commotion in Deuon was for religion, he was appointed to attend the Lord
Russell, when he came to suppress the same, and very shortly for his
learning and godly life was made Bishop of this sea: who most worthily did
perform the office committed unto him, he preached continually upon every
holy day, and did read most commonly twice in the week, in some one church
or other within this city. He was after the rate of his livings, a great
keeper of hospitality, very sober in diet, godly in life, friendly to the
godly, liberal to the poor, and courteous to all men; void of pride, full of
humility, abhorring covetousness, and an enemy to all wickedness, and wicked
men: whose companies he shunned, and and whom he would in no wise shroud, or
have in his house and company. His wife a most sober, chaste, and godly
matrone; his house and household, another church, in which was exercised all
godliness and virtue. No one person being in his house, which did not from
time to time, give an account of his faith and religion, and also did live
accordingly: and as he had a care for the good success in religion, so had he
also for the direction of the government in ecclesiastical causes: and because
he he was not skillful therein, neither would be hindered from his godly
studies, and be incombred with such worldly matters, which nevertheless he
would have be done in all vprightnes, justice, and equity, he sent to Oxford
for a learned man, to be his Chancellor, and by the ministry of the writer
hereof, he procured and obtained one Master Robert weston, Doctor of the
civil law, and afterward Lord Chancellor of Ireland, unto whom he committed
his consistory, and the whole charge of his ecclesiastical jurisdiction;
allowing unto him, not only all the fees thereunto apperteining, but also
lodged and found him, his wife, family, horse, and man, within his own house,
and gave him a yeerelie pension of xl. pound. And surely the Bishop was no
more godly and careful of his part, concerning preaching, but this man also
was as diligent and severe in doing of his office, without reproach of being
affectionated or corrupted. And notwithstanding this good man, now a blameless
Bishop, and lived most godly and virtuous, yet the common people, whose old
bottels would receive no new wine, could not brook nor digest him, for no
other cause, but because he was a preacher of the Gospel, an enemy to
papistrie, and a married man. Many devises were accounted against him, for his
confusion; sometimes by false suggestions, sometimes bp open railings, and
false libelles; sometimes by secret backbitings; and in the end practiced his
death by impoisoning, but by the providence of God, the snares were broken and
he delivered. After that he had been Bishop about three years K. Edward died,
and then Queen Marie having the crown, the religion was altered, and he
deprived. And notwithstanding, the malice of the Prelates and archpapists, was
most bitter against him, and who had sworn his death, yet by the goodness of
God, he was most miracouslie preserved, and delivered from out of their hands,
at the suit and by the means of the king of Denmark: who so earnestly sewed,
and so often wrote to the Queen for him, that he was delivered and sent unto
him, with whom after that he had stayed a while, he went again into Germany
unto the Palsegraue, who most lovingly received him, placed him again in his
former benefice of Burghsaber, where he continued until the death of Q. Marie.
And then the preaching of the Gospel being again received, and having a free
passage, he returned into England, but would never return to his Bishoprike;
notwithstanding it was reserved for him: and sundry times offered him, but
lived a private life, continuing in London, preaching and teaching the Gospel,
so long as the strength of his body would permit; and at length being very
old and stricken in years, he died and was honorably buried at S. Magnus
church in London.

John Voiseie, after the deprivation of Miles Couerdale, was restored to this
church, and for the better settling of the Romish religion, did here stay for a
while: but his mind was adicted to his own country, that he returned thither,
and made his only abode there, practicing there what he could, to have the
making of kersies, to come to seem effect; but the same being more chargeable
than profitable, came to small effect: this man being very old died in his
own house, with a pang, and was buried in his parish church there, anno 1555.

James Troblefield, succeeded Bishop Voiseie, and was consecrated, anno 1556.
he was a gentleman borne, and of a good house, very gentle and courteous, he
professed divinity, but most zealous in the Romish religion, and yet nothing
cruel nor bloody. And yet that he might not seem to do nothing, he was
contented to prosecute and condemn a giltles poor seely woman, named Agnes
Pirest for religion and heresy, and who was burned in Southingham for the
same; it was laid to her charge as does appear, by an indictment taken at
Launceston, Die lunae in quarta septimana quadragesimae anno Philippi and
Maria, secundo and tertio, before William Stanford, then justice of the assise,
that she should deny the real presence in the sacrament of the altar: and
that the same was but a sign and a figure of Christ's body, and that none
does eat reallie the body of Christ but spirituallie. He was very careful
to recover some part of the lands of his Bishoprike, which his predecessor
wasted, and did obtain of Q. Marie, to him and to his successors, the fee
ferme of the manor of Crediton. After that he had been Bishop about two years
Q. Marie died, and he was deprived, and lived after a private life.

WIlliam Alleie, in the second year of Q. Elizabeth, was chosen Bishop, and
installed the sixth of August, 1561. In all Q. Mary's time, which were called
the Marian days, he traveled from place to place, in the North country,
where he was not known; and sometimes by practicing of physic, and sometimes
by teaching of scholars, he picked out a poor living for himself and his
wife, and so continued, being not known to have been a priest, during all Q.
Mary's time: after whose death he went to London, and there did read divinity
lecture in Paul's very learnedlie, and to his great commendation; and from
whence he was taken and made Bishop of this city. He was very well learned
universally, but his chief study and profession was in divinity, and in the
toongs. And being Bishop, he debated no part of his former travels, (...) spent
his time very godly and virtuous. Upon every holy day for the most part he
preached, and upon the week days he would and did read a lecture of
divinity; the residue of his time, and free from his necessary business, he
spent in his private studies, and wrote sundry books, whereof his prelections
or lectures which he did read in Paul's, and his poor man's library he caused
to be imprinted: the like he would have done with his Hebrew grammar, and
other his works, if he had lived. He was well stored, and his library well
replenished, with all the best sort of writers, which most gladly he would
impart and make open to every good scholar and student, whose company and
conference he did most desire and embrace: he seemed to the first appearance, to
be a rough and an austere man, but in very truth, a very covetous, gentle,
and an affable man; at his table full of honest speeches, joined with learning,
and pleasantness, according to the time, place, and company. All his
exercises which for the most part was at bowls, very merry and pleasant,
void of all sadness, which might abate the benefit of recreation, loath to
offend, ready to forgive, void of malice, full of love, bountiful in
hospitality, liberal to the poor, and a succourer of the needy, faithful
to his friend, and courteous to all men; a hater of covetousness, and an
enemy to all evil and wicked men, and lived an honest, a godly, and virtuous
life. Finally he was endued with many notable good gifts and virtues, only
he was somewhat credulous, and of a hasty belief, and of light credit, which
he did oftentimes mislike, and blame in himself; in his latter time, he waxed
somewhat gross, and his body full of humors, which did abate much of his
woonted exercises, and having been Bishop about eight years he died the first
of April 1570. and was buried in his own church.

WIlliam Bradbridge, Deane of Sarisburie, was the next Bishop, and consecrated
at Lambhith, by Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canturburie, the 18. of March
1570. he was a professor of divinity, but not taken to be so well grounded as
he persuaded himself, he was zealous in religion, but not so forwards as he was
wished to be, in his latter days, he delighted to dwell in the contrie, which
was not so much to his liking, as troublesome to his clergy, and to such as
had any suits unto him, it was thought he died very rich, but after his death
it proved otherwise, he died suddenly, no body being about him at Newton
ferris, the ninth year of his Bishopprike, upon the xxix. of Iulie 1578. and
was buried in his own church.

John VVolton, now living, next after Bradbridge, was called to be Bishop of
the sea, and consecrated at Lambhith, by Edmond Grendall, Archbishop of
Canturburie, in August 1579. He is a professor of divinity, and a preacher of
the Gospel, and universally seen in all good letters; great good things are
looked and hoped for at his hands, and that he being now made a watchman over
the house of Israel, and a shepherd over the Lords flock, to be a minister
of the Gospel, and a disposer of Gods holy mysteries, will attend the same,
and perform the office of a true Bishop, in preaching in season and out of
season, not by constraint or slowly, but willingly and gladly; not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: by leading an unreprovable life, to be
example of good works, in all sobriety, patience, gentleness, and integrity.
And that he living thus godly in this life, may not only have a good report
to the posterity; but also look for the blessed hope and appeering of the
glory of God and of our Savior Jesus Christ, that when he shall present
himself and his talent the people of God before the high and chief shepherd,
they may all enter into the Lords joy, and receive an incorruptible crown of
glory.

FINIS.

