The admirable virtue, property and operation of the quintessence of Rosemary
flowers, and the means to use it for the sicknesses and diseases herein
mentioned.
MAny authors, as well ancient as modern, have described the great property,
both of the leaves and flowers of Rosemary, and of the quintessence that is
drawn thereof by the art of distilling, also the means to use the same. But
whosoever will know the truth, besides the experience had of it, let him peruse
what Galen has written in his 7. book of Simple faculties; Paul Aeginetia in
the 7. book; Dioscorides in the 3. book of simples; Arnauld de Villeneufue in
the treaty made by him of the sundry compositions of Wines; Theophylact in
his 9. book; Sapara and Martiol in the chapter of Rosemarie; Marcel in the
book that he has made of Medicaments; Raphael Volateran in the book of
Medicaments; Plinte book 29. Aurelian 3. Aeluius in the second tome, Relfonso
de Eriera book 3; Marciel question 10. Soceps Surgeon in his book of the
secrets of Physic, and an infinite number of other famous and learned authors,
the recital whereof should be over tedious.

(...)he said quintessence preserves the humane body from all cor(...)ction
of corrupt air: it cures all kind of venom(...)eth the heart, strengthens
the brain, scatters the melancholic humor, consumes phlegm, helps
digestion, diuerteth ^hes or Catharres, quenches the thirst, vomiting, freeth
from the hickock, which procures evil taste in the mouth, dissolueth
windiness, opens oppilation, melts the blood that is congealed in the
stomach, increases natural heat, corroborateth and fortifieth the digestive
faculty, reuiueth appetite, procures to live long in health. The manner to
use it is thus:

You must put one drop or two of the same in a little quantity of broth, or in
good wine, and drink it in the morning fasting: and they that are subject to
Melancholy, Lethargy, Megrim, Lunacie, Vertigo, Apoplexy, and any other
infirmities that come to the head by reason of humiditie and coldness, let them
drink of the same quintessence, as abouesaid, and according to their pleasure
may put some more drops, to use of it many times a day, for it stays the
fluction in what part soever it be. It is a most certain remedy to augment
memory, rubbing the temples with a little cotton dipped in it, and using it
morning and evening, as aforesaid, you shall see admirable effects thereof
after some days continuance.

Moreover, the force and virtue thereof extends it self even to the sinews
shrunk and weakened, anointing morning and evening the member offended, and in
few days it will restore strength to the sinewie parts, and heals
conuulsions.

Such as have weak sight, and the eyes offended with clouds, skins and such
like evils, it is good to let drop in them one small drop thereof, and to
continue this remedy from two days to two days, for in few days the effect
thereof shall be seen; aduertising you that in putting it within the eye it
will smart a little, but without any damage.

Furthermore, the said quintessence is excellent for all sorts of Aches,
Impostumes and deafenes of the ears, coming by accident: To that effect it is
good to infuse one drop in the ear at night when one goes to bed, but one may
not sleep on the ear wherein the medicament has been put, for then it would
issue forth; but if the disease be in both ears, in that case the one must be
cured in one day, and the next day following apply the medicine to the other
ear, and so the whole cure shall come to perfection.

Moreover, it shows forth evidently her heavenly virtue in the tongue palsy,
and stinking wounds and ulcers of the mouth, with a little cotton dipped in the
said quintessence; one must touch the sore part, and holding it a little in
ones mouth, it will sweeten the breath, cleanse the gummes, and take away the
dolor of the teeth.

Likewise it stops the fluction which falls on the stomach, increases
natural heat, helps digestion, and clears the voice, purifying all the
organs which nature has ordained to that function.

I^m, the said quintessence has very great force to comfort the substance of
the heart, reuiueth the vital spirits, and gives them an incredible liuelines,
in such sort that that great Philosopher and Physician Arnauld de Villeneufue
dothrestifie, that it makes them that use thereof to wax young again.

Irlike manes it profits to all sorts of colic passions and gripings of the
inwards, wastes winds, stops the bloody flux, and al other sorts of
fluxes, though it be inueterate, and therefore it will be very good to continue
the use thereof in wine or broth, the quantity of three or four drops.

I will relate the excellency of the same in taking away the grief of the
Hemorhoides or Piles: besides that, many are wholly cured thereof by it,
anointing them with the said medicament, and after applying thereon the flower
of beans. And the gut coming forth, it must be anointed, and afterward cast
on it the powder of gaulles; by that mea^es one shall recover his health.

The great virtue of the same serving to comfort (...) whose (...) it covers
and attenuateth the viscusse and fat(...) it comes to drive out the gravel
and stores: and if (...) solution in those (...) readily, and withal it eases
readily (...) retention of urine, so that it proceed from the stone, and not
(...) for it comfort the blader, unless the retentiue force be weakened,
opens the spermaticke conducts, and provoke urine.

Aduising you that when the dolor does oppress you, you must take half a
French crown weight of the said quintessence, and as much Turpentine in good
white wine, and when the grief is appeased continue to take the same every
fortnight, to preserve your health.

Moreover, it is marvelous profitable for all cold aches which come to the
hands, feet, knees, hanches, which parts must, to that effect, be nointed
during a fortnights space, and thereof a miracle of nature will be shown
above all medicaments as well old as new, except it be of the Pox.

It is an admirable medicament for women which are brought to bed before their
full time, by reason of over much humiditie, being over fleshie and fat by
reason it skoureth and cleanses the matrix, and helps the conception:
besides it faciliteth the menstruall purgations, it drives out the grief and
suffocation of the matrix, mildeneth the pangs of childbirth, and cutteth off
all sinister accidents which vex the woman, using thereof as abouesaid.

By the same means the said quintessence shows forth in very short time her
great force, in the healing and whole cure of wounds and effusions whatsoever:
but one must take heed if the parts have need of reioyning, for in this case it
is meet to reunite and join them, and afterward apply the said quintessence
without any tent: which being done, one shall see in a very short time what is
pretended.

The worthy man Master Hierome Martine, great Operator to the French (...) the
said quintessence work miracles of nature to them that be subject to the
falling (...) conditionally the party be not above five and twenty years of
age, using thereof at the wane or sall of the Moon by three days continuance
half a French crown weight, and as much of true Viscus Queroinus, or
Missel-toe of the Oak in powder.

Furthermore the said Operator testifies that he has seen and experienced in
many cities of Italy and France, in time of contagion, many wonderful effects
made by the said quintessence for the infection of the air, in using thereof
every morning: take four drops of it, and four times as much of Aqua-vitae,
and drink it fasting in the morning, and rub your temples therewith, the
pu^ses and about the heart, and happy is he that has of the said
quintessence in his house for the sicknesses above written, aduertising you
that the said quintessence may be kept one hundred years, so that it be well
stopped, by reason of her great subtility.

Provided that this quintessence be not applied to any sickness that proceeds
of a hot disease.


