depiction of a man

THE EPIGRAMS OF P. VIRGILIVS MARO, and others.

WITH The Praises of him and his Works.

ALSO His Epitaphs composed by diverse illustrious persons.

And lastly, the Arguments of his Works.

Englished by I. P. lover of Learning.

Candidus a salibus suffusis fell refugi:
Nulla venenato littera mista ioco est.
Ovid. 2. Trist. LONDON, Printed by G.P. 1624.

TO THE MOST Flourishing and hopeful BRANCH of a most ancient and generous
Stock, NATHANIEL GVRLIN, of the honorable Society of Lincolnes Inn Esquire.
THis Dedicatory custom (as Lactantius testifies) has been since the time of
Jupiter, and as I conceive) will continue during the time of Jupiter, that is,
the Planet so called, the rather for that a book set forth without a
Dedication, does intimate or raise a suspicion in the Reader, that the Author
studies destitute (as one vnworhy of a Mecoenas. For which cause, when I had
finished this Translation according to my slender skill and weak wit, whereof I
may say with Ovid, Ingenium fregere meum mala, cuius and ante,
Fons infecundus, paruaque vena fuit.
Musing with my self, to whose Patronage I might especially commend it, your
noble worth worthy Sir, which way so soever I turned me, did still present it
self to my unsettled mind, considering the general fame of your pious
inclination to virtue and good discipline (both which are copiously taught and
expressed in these Epigrams) with detestation of the contrary. Yet (worthy Sir)
more exactly weighing that Honorable course of life, wherein your settled
industry (by no vicious exercize interrupted) has proved so proficient, that
diverse years sithence you have meritoriously attained the Worshipful degree
of Barrister (which is rare in a person so youthful) and are grown old in
wisdom, learning, and experience, I conceived this pety Paper-present, as well
for the difference of its subject from the matter of your practice, as in
respect of my rude workmanship hereupon bestowed, to be far be-beneath and
come short of your illustrious merit. Howbeit Pliny says, it was usual with
Husbandmen to make supplication unto the Gods with Milk, and when they wanted
Frankincense, to sacrifice with a Cake made of meal, water, and salt, which
(as he thought) was no less accepted then the most costly and odoriferous
burnt-offerings.

Let therefore (worthy Sir) your nobly-disposed heart with a cheerful
benignity, entertain this grateful and zealous oblation, how mean and
unmeet soever it is, from the hands of him that will not only pray for your
health and prosperous proceedings, but endeavor to deserve your favorable
regard by all respective service in his power, and approve himself

A most dutiful declarer of your Honour-worthy Virtues, John Penkethman.

Upon my worthy Patrons Name, NATHANIEL.
THe Prophet Samuel ( Scripture testifies)
was named so, because of God ordained;
Or asked by his mother, in whose eyes
(as to her heart) most precious he remained,
And stood in general (as the sacred Pen
Records him) favored both of God and men.
So is Nathaniel, by Interpretation,
The gift of God; who gained the blessed istle,
From Jesus (as Saint John makes declaration)
of a true Israelite, and void of guile;
Whom, like a perfect Christian, he confessed
To be God's Son, and King of Israel blessed.
Now, though but one of those two happy Names
to this my worthy Patron be assigned;
Lo, in his Person (as his life proclames)
most gracious gifts of either be combined;
Fabour'd of God and men, as by him sent,
And to his Mothers heart a sweet content;
A Christian true, a Lawyer wanting fraud,
Whose Wisdom, Learning, virtues all applaud.
The Translator to the vertuous-minded English Scholar, and the indifferent
READER.
MY Muse being not inclined (according to the custom of these times) to the
invention of scandalous or reprehensiue Inuectiues, by way of Epigram or
Satyr, either for the disgorging of my stomach against any, (though occasion
does excite me to reprove many from whom I have received insufferable
injuries) or otherwise to carpe at the notorious humors and vices of
particular persons that never offended me, only for ostentation of my wit; but
rather desirous to spend my vacant hours, and employ the poor portion of my
little learning, generally for the good admonition and reformation of the
vicious, and instruction of the ignorant, I have adventured (as formerly of the
Schoole-book inscribed with the name of Cato) to make interpretation of these
Epigrams, which (notwithstanding they were for the most part, the fruits of
Virgils minority, being by him composed at his age of 15. years, as I note in
his life written by Donatus) do contain such variety of good doctrine, and
exquisite inventions, that to me they seem rather to have been brought forth
in his Maiority, when Learning, Judgment and Wit in him were most mature, or
else the greatest number of them to have issued (as Scaliger and other
Commentors conceive) from the learned heads of more ancient Poets. And for that
cause I have punctually observed the peculiar titles of these Epigrams as they
stand in the last edition of the Latin, without addition or alteration of any
Authors name, considering withal, that to know the workman is not so
material, or so much to be inquired and regarded, as the benefit and good use
of the work it self: and as in meats the wholsomnesse is more to be wished
then the toothsomnesse, so in books, the goodness of the matter is to be
preferred before the eloquence of the phrase.

But here some selfe-conceited Grammarians, being conditioned like the dog in
the manger, neither willing to bestow their own studies in translating such
work, nor permitting others, without a snarling reproof, to perform that
part, will peradventure tax and accuse me (as they have done) of doing injury
to Learning, by making it so common, that now adays they can discourse or
deliver nothing of worth out of Latin Writers, but the Hearer (though the
Latinist) is ready to take the tale by the end, as one that knows already no
less then themselves, and that Learning thereby is vilified, and daily grows
out of request with many, who when their sons have spent some time at
School, to keep them out of the dirt (as they say) and from hurt and
idleness, choose rather to bind them Apprentice to deceitful trades, and
mechanike handycrafts, then to place them in the University, where with their
years they might increase in discipline, and consequently become good members
of the Church or Commonwealth.

To these, I answer, that not only in mine own opinion, but by the
approbation of impartial (and those profound) Scholars, whose works extant
do witness it, this custom of translating does rather Right then Wrong to
Learning. For the knowledge of good discipline ought not to be kept private or
restrained, like treasure in a misers chest, in the possession of a few, but
like the element of water, should be public and useful for all men. And
Parents by this means of translating, finding what excellent matters are
comprised in Latin Authors, do admire and fall in love (as I may say) with
the worth of Learning, and thereupon do seek to furnish their children with
what they see wanting in themselves, hoping that the like fruit may be produced
by their future studies, and that at length the Fathers obscure family may (as
has been lately known, and some Latin Authors testify) be ennobled by
their sons advancement. And thus having briefly and plainly, forth better
understanding of the unlearned, yet I hope sufficiently apologized for this my
translation, I leave you to peruse it.

The Contents of this TRANSLATION.
Epigrams.
THe praise of the Garden. Epig. 1 Of Wine and Women. Epig. 2 Of Envy. Epig. 3
Of the Sirens charms. Epig. 4 Of the birth day of Asmenus. Epig. 5 Of Orpheus.
Epig. 6 Of gaming. Epig. 7 Of the letter Y. Epig. 8 Of the 12. labors of
Hercules. Epig. 9 Of the same Labors. Epig. 10 Of these words, It Is and Not.
Epig. 11 Of a good man. Epig. 12 Of the ages of diners living creatures. Epig.
13 Of the Muses inventions. Epig. 14 Of our Image in the water. Epig. 15 Of a
River frozen. Epig. 16 Of Iris, or the Rainbow. Epig. 17 Of the rising of the
Sun. Epig. 18 Of the 12. celestial Signs. Epig. 19 Of the four seasons of
the year. Epig. 20 In honor of Augustus Caesar. Epig. 21 Upon the same
Augustus. Epig. 22 Upon Balista, a Schoolmasters. Epig. 23 Upon a beauteous
Boy. Epig. 24 Upon the Crow on Tarpeius. Epig. 25 Of Letters. Epig. 26 Upon the
death of three. Epig. 27 Of Fortune. Epig. 28 Of love to Theotimus. Epig. 29 Of
Roscius his beauty. Epig. 30 To Phileros of loves power. Epig. 31 To Pamphila
of an amorous ecstasy. Epig. 32 To Shepherds of loves fire. Epig. 33 Upon a
Thracian Boy. Epig. 34 The Tomb of Lucrece. Epig. 35 Upon Narcissus. Epig. 36
Upon 3. Shepherds. Epig. 37 Upon 3. Amazons fight. Epig. 38 Of an
Hermaphrodite. Epig. 39 Of Acis a beautiful Boy. Epig. 40 The Tomb of Hector.
Epig. 41 The Tomb of Achilles. Epig. 42
The several Praises of Virgil and his works.
Virgil of himself. Epig. 1 Of Virgil. Epig. 2 Of Virgils Aeneid. Epig. 3
Caesar's edict for the preservation of the Aeneid. Epig. 4 Of Virgils Aeneid
preserved. Epig. 5 In praise of the Aeneid. Epig. 6 Of Virgils wanton writing.
Epig. 7 Of Virgil. Epig. 8 Upon Virgil, and his works. Epig. 9 Upon his
Georgicks. Epig. 10
The Epitaps upon Virgil. Owens Epitaph. The Arguments of his Works, viz.
Monosticks of all his works. Epig. 1 Tetrastichs of his Georgicks. Epig. 2
Monostichs of his Aeneids. Epig. 3 Pentestichs of the same with the Supply by
Mapheus. Epig. 4 Decastichs of the same. Epig. 5

THE EPIGRAMS of VIRGIL, and others.
The praise of the Garden.
FRom greatest Jove, ye Muses that do spring,
The Gardens praise, come help me all to sing,
With wholesome food the hungry flesh it fills,
And diverse fruits affords to him that tils:
Sweet Pot Herbs, and of many kinds more dear,
Delicious Grapes, and what the Trees do bear:
Nor does the Garden special pleasures want;
But those it has, with profits nothing scant;
The murmuring glassie Brook the same besets,
Whose Seeds the furrow-guided water wets:
With diuers-colour'd buds gay flowers abound,
With gemmy glories garnishing the ground;
The gainefull Bees with gentle noise do hum,
Flowers tops or new dews gathering where they come;
The fertile Vine, th'Elme her Yoke Fellow lades,
And with her Branches the others wouen shades,
Faire-shady-sheltring Bowers the Trees do yield us,
And their thick boughs from Phoebus parching shield us,
Sweet sounds, the prattling Birds abroad do send,
Their Songs, our Ears, alluring to attend;
The Garden does excite, deteine, feed, please,
And our sad minds of heavy sorrows ease,
Brings vigor to our bodies, cheeres our sight,
With fuller favors does our pains requite,
And gives the trimmer manifold delight.
2. Of Wine and Women.
LEt not the love of wine or women seize thee,
For wine and women both alike disease thee:
As Venus mars the strength, so Bacchus flowing,
Works weakness in our feet, and trips our Going.
Many, their secrets through blind Love detect,
And Drunkenness does work the like effect,
Fierce love is often cause of deadly war,
So copious Cups not seldom make us iar.
With fearful fight, vile Venus wasted Troy,
So Bacchus, thou the Lapithes did destroy:
In short, when either does man's mind possess,
He Is void of goodness, fear, and shamefastness.
In bonds Lyaeus, fettring Venus, bind,
Least thou, in the gifts of either damage find:
Wine slakes our thirst, Lust for creation serves,
Beyond these bounds he suffers harm that swerues.
3. Of Envy.
Envy, a poison of corrupting power,
In wicked men (whose bosoms it contain)
The bones untouched, the marrow does devour,
And drinks up all their blood through every vein;
For he that does another Fortune spite,
Becomes his own Tormenter, as by right.
His heavy griefs, with Groans he does unfold:
He sighs, he frets, his Teeth together hits;
Beholding what he hates, he sweats with cold,
And from his evil mouth, black venim spits,
His eie-lids a pale fearful color takes,
And bare his Bones unhappy leanness makes.
To him, nor light, nor diet seems sweet,
No drink delights him, nor the taste of Wine,
Though Jove himself should deigne his lips to greet,
With propination from his cup divine.
Or Hebe reach and serve the same unto him,
Or Ganimede with profer'd Nectar woo him.
He never sleep enioyes, or bosome-peace,
That bloody Torturer his bowels vexes,
And moving secret furies does increase,
Flames of Erynnis that his heart perplexeth,
And Titius-like, within him he does find,
A vulture that does rend and eat his mind.
Close in his pining breast does live a wound,
Which not the hand of Chiron can make sound:
Nor Phoebus, or his Offspring most renownd.
4 Of the Sirens charms.
Variety of Songs and Heavy notes
Were wont to issue from the Sirens throtes:
Their voices and their warbling Muse did move,
All tunes that pleasant Thymele did love:
That which the Trumpet and hoarse Horn laments,
That which the Pipe sounds with a thousand vents:
What the light Reeds, or what sweet Aedon can,
What the Harp yields, or the dying Swan:
Shipmen with measures musical prouokde,
In floods Ionian they have often chokde.
Ulysses great from Sisiphus descended
Safely, by this Art only, his defended:
Subtly with wax his fellows ears he shut,
And his own hands in manicles he put;
The Rocks and dangerous shores his navy past,
And in the Sea themselves the Sirens cast.
Thus flattring Notes and Songs he over went,
And rauishing Monsters into ruin sent.
5 Of the birth day of Asmenus.
TItan come forth with vnoffended light,
And cheerful Morn greet all with heaven bright.
You young men also, kind in heart and voice,
With happy vows this Holy day rejoice.
That it returning prosperous every year,
His children, gifts to him with joy may bear.
6 Of Orpheus.
THe Thracian Poet with sweet Harp is thought
In savage Beasts, mild motions to have wrought,
And stayed the waters, as they past along,
The senseless Rocks alluring with a song,
And Trees attending such sweet-sounding Lays,
Him, as they say, one shadowed in his ways:
Yea more, he made, by pleasing speeches, mild,
And civil, by lips learned, people wild:
To one Society this Orpheus brought them,
Polisht their Manners rude, and Justice taught them.
7 Of Gaming.
HAte Lucre, mad Desire does deeply grieve:
Old men fly Fraud; vnskill'd, the skilled believe.
Gamesters, their minds must with their money lay:
Shun spightfull Strife, when thou art queld in play:
Play ye secure that still have coin in store:
Who comes in monyed, so departs no more.
Covetous Gamesters go by weeping Cross:
Good men love peace; leave Anger, having loss,
No man in Game can ever luckie be;
Wrath make the Furies, Four, at first but Three.
Chastise thy raging spirits, true to play:
Timely fly fighting, and put Ire away.
8 Of the Letter y.
THis Two-horn'd letter of Pythagoras
Seems to do denote, how Men their lives do pass:
Steep on the Right hand, Virtues way is bent,
Which at first sight hard entrance does present,
Yet gives the wearied Rest, when they attain
The highest Top: the left way broad and plain
Shows a soft journey, but the bounds at last
Captived, by steep Rocks, headlong all do cast:
For whosoere for Virtues loves endures,
Both praise and honor to himself procures:
But he that artlesse Luxury pursues,
Or Sloth, and labor offered does refuse
With inconsiderate mind, his time shall spend
In shame and want, and reap a wretched end.
9 Of the 12. Labors of Hercules.
CLeone saw him first the Lion fell,
Next Lerna's serpent, Shaft and fire did quell.
After with life the Erymanthian Bore did part,
Which done, of golden horns he reft the Heart.
Those won, the Birds of Stymphalus he foild,
Then th'Amazonian of her Belt he spoild.
By seventh toil he purged a Stable full,
By eighth, he triumphed in th'expulsed Bull.
By ninth, both Horse and Master he confounded,
For Geryons end, Spain his tenth glory sounded.
Apples of Gold were his eleventh gains,
And Pluto's Porter period of his pains.
12 A good Man.
A Wise good man, (where wisdoms God in many,
Yea many thousands has found hardly any)
Himself does censure and search every where,
And what Repute with all sorts he does bear:
Round, like the World, abiding, and secure,
Lest his plague Outside blemish do endure:
He weighes in Cancer, when the daylight ends
How far the night in Capricorn extends.
And with just Balance himself poyseth well,
Lest either Cleft appear or Angle swell;
That all his parts may equally befit,
And that the Plumbe line may not swerue a whit,
He must be sollid all; no emptiness,
Let erring fingers force in him express.
Let not his Eye lids be to sleep inclinde,
Ere he his days whole actions call to mind;
What he has slipped, what done, in, out of season;
Why this fact wanted comeliness, that reason:
What I have past: why this opinion stood,
Which for me to have changed, it had been good:
Why pitying him that feels wants bittersmart,
I suffered Grief with an effeminate heart.
Why would what I should not, and why gain,
Rather then goodness did I entertain.
Whether in Speech or Looks harsh any knew me;
Why Nature more then Learnings virtue drew me:
Thus passing through, what he has said and done;
And, not long after Setting of the Sun,
All things reuoluing, with the Bad offended,
He gives the Palm to th'Good by him commended.
13 Of the ages of diverse living
creatures.
THe life of Man most commonly outweares,
Being complete, fourscore and sixteen years:
And these, nine times exceeds the prattling Crow;
Yet does the Heart that age four times over go:
And thrice his years expirde, the Raven dies:
But those, the Phoenix nine times multiplies:
Yet th'Hamadriades Nymphs, past compare,
Breathe nine times longer then that Bird so rare.
Those creatures vital fates these bounds restraining,
The rest God knows, the secret Age ordaining.
Some men set before them these two others.
AHedge three years, a Dog, three hedges courses:
A Horse, three Dogs; a Man out-liues three Horses.
14 Of the Muses inventions.
CLio things done does afterward rehearse,
Melpomene shows all in Tragic verse.
To wanton words her mind Thalia bends,
Sweet sounds from hollow reeds Euterpe sends.
Terpsichore, love with Harp moves, rules, augments.
With songs, looks, dances, Erato contents.
Calliope indites heroicke lines.
Urania notes heavens motions, stars and signs.
Speaking with gesture Polymneia stands,
And figures all things with her learned hands.
These on all parts Apollo's virtue guides,
And he ith'midst, embracing all, abides.
Of the same in prose.
Clio invented Histories. Melpomene invented Tragedies Thalia invented
Comedies. Euterpe invented Flutes and such like. Terpsichore invented The
Harp. Erato invented Geometry. Calliope invented Letters. Urania invented
Astrology. Polymneia. invented Rhetoric.
15 Of our Image in the water.
Distichs varied 12. several ways.
1
THe looker sees his looks in water clear,
As in an obiect-myrror they appear.
2
Pure forms from water to the sight do pass,
As from the splendor of a looking glass.
3
The fountain represents our likeness right,
Such as the steele-glasse, which is plain and bright.
4
Still Waters, figures opposite, no less
Then myrrours through their brightness, do express.
5
Springs void of mud dissemble our Aspects,
As each bright myrrors orb the same reflects.
6
Clear Water is the crystal mirrors ape,
For either to Spectators tells their shape.
7
Fountains most clear show faces seeming true,
Like Glass, that women, for their dressing, view.
8
As the Beholders form, Steele-glasses take,
So Forms their Image in the water make.
9
Feigned Shapes in Conduit-heads, the Right engender,
As to each face, the Glass a face does render.
10
The Spring untroubled Shape for Shape does yield,
As Substance, Shadows in a Glassie field.
11
Bodies in quiet Springs are seen again:
As Images appear in Mirrors plain.
12
The Viewer viewes himself in glassie Brooks,
As in that brittle stuff, whereon he looks.
16 Of a River Frozen.
Distichs varied 12. several ways.
1
WHere Ships did use to plow, yoked Oxen drew,
When once hard Winter did the Waters glue.
2
The Flood bears Wheels, where Shipmen sails did strike
So soon as Frost congeales it Marble-like.
3
Hardened with Winters cold, the Waters bore
Waines drawn with Oxen, that Ships cut before.
4
To solid Ice the River being changed,
Indures the Wheel, where fleeting vessels ranged.
5
The Carres, where Ships were wont, have past the flood,
Since, turned to Ice, like Marble it has stood.
6
A road for Carres, where Ships did run, is made,
With Frost the Waters being firmly laid.
7
In place of Ships the Trackt of Wheels is found,
Since Icy Winter the loose Waters bound.
8
Yoked Oxen draw the Waine where Ships did reele,
Winds having hardened Waves to bear the Wheel.
9
The Beast now drags where Mariners did sound,
The River being turned to massy ground.
10
The Stream with cold extreme now firm abiding,
Bears up the the Waine where Ships were lately riding.
11
No sooner be the Waves by Boreas quaild,
But we drive Oxen, where before we saild.
By the Translatour to make up a dozen.
Now Carters play their parts where Sailors acted,
To a firm Stage, Frost having Waves contracted.
17 Of Iris or the Rainbow.
Distichs varied 12. several ways.
1
IRis in diverse hues her self arrayes,
And flies with painted Bow through cloudy ways,
When Sol thereon has cast his burning rays.
2
When Phoebus fills the olouds with radiant light,
With diverse colors Iris comes in sight,
Adorning heaven with her compass bright.
3
In clouds Thaumantias brightly shining reigns,
From whence a picturde veil Heavens visage gains,
When once the Sun a rainy shower attaines.
4
The hot Suns light wet clouds no sooner wear,
But many-figur'd Iris does appear,
And therewith beautifies the welkin clear.
5
While Sun and showrie clouds naught keeps asunder,
The Rain does sundry figures form thereunder,
Which we the Rainbow call, and view with wonder.
6
If to dark clouds the Sun his Beams object,
And to the shower opposd their light reflect,
Those clouds with colors are by Iris decked.
7
The Rainbow girts the clouds with wondrous Art,
Which Phoebus reaching on the adverse part,
Rare colors through the same does subtly dart.
8
Where Phoebus with his Beams moist clouds out-faceth,
Iris, whom many a glorious color graceth,
With comely Orb the cloudy sky embraces.
9
On watery clouds if Sol his luster throw,
Then does the liquid humor shine below,
And we behold a varie-figur'd Bow.
10
The gathering shower dissolved by Phoebus beams,
Iris, so called in Greek, thereunder streams,
Decking heavens Cope with many-colour'd leames.
11
Colored is Jris through light under laid,
Which of a showry cloud the Sun has made,
When with his Heat the Wet is ouer-swayd.
12
With light when Sol has filled a rainy Cloud,
Straight Iris like a semicircle, bowed,
Shines forth with many-figur'd parts endowed.
18 Of the rising of the Sun.
Tetrastichs varied 12. several ways.
1
Morn came from Sea, as vaild with Saffron bright,
And on her two-wheeld Chariot blushing sat;
The candent Orb the pole bespred with light,
And shining with clear beams up Phoebus gat.
2
Forth walks Aurora in a Rosy robe,
Dying with orient light the Starry round:
And Sol from Tethis lap, this Earthly globe,
Comes to illumine with beams glory crowned.
3
The golden Sun from The Ocean raisd his head,
And then through heaven the stars appeard no more:
With reverence to his brightness, darkness fled,
And light to all things did their hue restore.
4
The Earth by Tithon's ruddy-colourd spouse,
With rosy light is did, and starry sky,
When Phoebus, from the deep his horse does rowze,
With fiery wheels, and makes the stars to fly.
5
Night, whom a veil of stars does fair adorn,
Returns amain perceiving day to rise,
And Phoebus in his golden chariot borne,
Makes all things here seem glorious in our eyes.
6
With rosy hair the golden Morn appeard,
And Earth was moistened with an early dew,
When Sol himself from Tethis bosom reard,
With flaming visage, and eye-dazling hew.
7
Titan dispersing ore Seas, Earth, and Air,
His glistring light, now forth again is ridden:
The Stars forbear to shine with golden hair,
And sable Nox her twinkling fires has hidden.
8
Sol with his luster from the Ocean-streames,
Rearing his chariot, has restored the day,
And, by reducing his flammigerous beams,
To heaven and earth, has driven the star resaway.
9
The Sky fair Memnons mother having did,
And with her rosy hands the Stars exilde,
Now from the Sea Latona's son is hy'd,
Whose Orb the day and air has reconcilde.
10
Blushing Aurora vsher'd Phoebus Carre,
And he his Coursers from the Ocean brought,
Whose rays de pelling each night-wandring Star,
Days restitution to all mankind wrought.
11
Days chariot scarce had made the Welkin red,
And new dewes topt the flowers, herbs, and weeds,
When Phoebus left his lovers watery bed,
And Stars gave place to his flame-bearing steeds.
12
Titans fair daughter with Ambrosian weed,
Her white feet shadows, from the Sea ascended;
Then with bright beams her Father does proceed,
Thence driving darkness, and Nights rule is ended.
19 Of the twelve celestial Signs.
Hexastichs varied 12. several ways.
1
THe Ram, the Bull with golden-horned head,
The Brethren, and the Crabfish backwards tending.
The Lion fierce, the Maid that did not wed,
The Scales, the Scorpion with her tail offending,
The Shooter, and the Goat with horny suit,
The Water-powrer, and the Fishes mute.
2
Who Hell, who Europa carried soly,
The Twins, the Shelfish, that Alcides quasht,
The horrid king of Beasts, the Virgin holy,
The Balance just, with Tail what deadly lasht,
Old Chiron, Capricorn, the Lad, like rain,
Ministering Water, and the Fishes twain.
3
The first is Aries; next is Taurus placed;
Then Gemini; Cancer follows retrograde;
The fifth is Leo; the sixth Virgo chaste;
And after Libra, Scorpius does invade;
Yet Sagittarius, and Caper past,
Aquarius comes, and Pisces at the last.
4
The chief all Ram-kinde, the Cowes mate succeeds,
Two of one birth be third, the fourth Crabs feature:
Lord of the Desert, she that never breeds,
The poizer of all weights, the stinging creature,
The Bow-arm'd Centaure, the Venerious beast.
Jove's water-bearer, and the Friday-feast.
5
The crooked Ram-hornes, the Bulls threatening hooks,
Leda's male issue, the Fish hotnesse bringing,
Great Hercules first prize, the beauteous looks,
The Weighing measure, and the Serpent stinging,
The skillful Archer, and the Winter sign,
The Trojan boy, the Fishes lastly shine.
6
Phryxus transporter, Jove with horns disguisde,
His Twin-borne sons, the Crawler tropica! I,
The Nemean terror, Maid immortalizde:
Sol's Weigh-house, and whose Prick inuenoms all,
The Man halfe-Horse, the Star with tail of fish,
The Water-titled, and the Anglers dish.
7
The lecherous Weather, and the vngelded Ox,
Castor and Pollux, and the Star adust,
Nemea's plague, Maids face, of Lux with Nox,
The Autumnian equallizer, poysning Thrust,
Phillyra's monstrous birth, cause of Sea-stormes,
The Riuer-giuer, and the Fishy forms.
8
The flocks wooll-bearing Head, the Heifer stout,
Tyndaridae, Alcides crawling foe,
Chief of wild Creatures, Virgin most devout,
The pendent pair, the Venomous piercing blow,
Saturnes base issue, the Goat Neptune-growne,
Fair Ganymed, two fishy Signs in one.
9
The Rams proportion, and the Bull vnbaited,
The double Offspring, the Sea-fostred Crab,
The Lions looks, Erygone translated,
The poyzing Yoke, the Tail with poysning stab,
Biformed Chiron, the Seas Horned creature,
The chief Gods minion, and the Fishes feature.
10
The flocks horned Guide, another armed with horn,
The Swan got sons, the Crabs hot-burning arms,
The club-feld Horror, the Maid bringing corn,
Means of true Measure, cause of Poysnous harms,
The wood-bred Archer, Jupiters milker-giuer,
Deucalions waters, and two bred in the River.
11
Sire of the Sheep, Europa's worst well-willer,
Zetus and sweet Amphion, Summer-bringer,
That seasons second sign, the Maid selfe-killer,
The Haruest-entring star, the Mortal stinger,
The Shaft sore-wounded Huntsman, the Sea-goate,
Jove's favorite, and such as live in the Mote.
By the Translatour, to make them even.
The Sign in the head, what alteration puts
In The neck, Armes-guider, keeper of the Breast,
Our hearts Freeholder, Lady of the Guts,
Reines-ruler, where the Secrets are possessed,
The Governor of Thighs, Knees' Constellation.
Lord of the Legs, cause of the feets mutation.
20 The 4. seasons of the year.
Tetrastichs varied 13. several ways.
1
EArth opes her womb in the Spring, and gives us Flowers
The fat field bears rich Ears in Sunny hours.
The Grapes abounding Autumn brings to tunning,
And Winter binds in Ice the Waters running.
2
The Spring, the clear sky tempring, Frost confounds,
But with Sols fires hot Summer chaps the grounds:
Weak Heat with Harvest neighboring Winter mixeth,
And she the whitened Rivers hardly fixes.
3
Ver paints the Meads with sundry colors gay,
Aestas the soil with Corne-eares does array:
Autumnus from the Vines their burden takes,
And Hyems great with Snow the Welkin makes.
4
Venus in Springtime flowery garlands wears,
Ceres in Summer chiefly domineeres:
Bacchus in Harvest bears a special sway,
Boreas in Winter does the Ruffin play.
5
Spring lasting, Herbs and Flowers Tellus yields,
Summer brings fruitful Crops to harrowed fields:
Hatuest from tender Vines affords us fruit,
Winter in White the Earth does coldly suit.
6
New Spring the field with sweet flowers does adorn,
And plough-lands are made rough with Summer Corn,
Must foaming Vessels does in Autumn heat,
And Winter-blasts from Trees the Leaves do beat.
7
Wreathes knit of many a flower the Spring allows,
With sheaues of Corn the Summer decks her brows:
Bacchus in Autumn from the Vine is crowned,
Sad Winter suits with Snow the mountaine-ground.
8
The Spring with splendent flowers the fields makes fair,
Substance for Bread the Summer does prepare:
Sweet smells the Vineyard with Autumn all birth,
But Winter freezes Floods, robs Woods and Earth.
9
From Earth spring purple flowers in the leauy Spring,
The fields in Summer gifts of Ceres bring,
In Harvest hours our Cups with Bacchus flow,
Cold Winter Clothes our Mother Earth in snow.
10
The air waxes warm in the Spring when Southwinds blow
Through heat Estiuall, Rivers lesser grow,
Autumn, thy temper flows with Nectar sweet,
And showers of Snow in Winter Earth do greet.
11
Flowers grace the Spring, naught drooping while it lasts,
The fields with Corn abound through Summer blasts,
The Vine to Elmes in Autumn loading cleaues,
Hyemall rage Woods of their glory reaues.
12
Sweet Spring with flowers paints the grassie way,
The sith-arm'd Goddess corn in Summer stays:
Autumn for Must plumpe-swelling Grapes does bear,
Sythonian Snow makes Winter old appear.
^3
The Spring stood fresh, girt with a flowery wreathe,
And Summer naked, a corne-crowne beneathe,
But Autumn stood with Grapes in baskets pressed,
And Icy Winter rough with hoary crest.
21 In honor of Augustus.
By Virgil.
ALL night it raines, ith'morne the Shows appear;
Caesar with Jove divided rule does bear.
J these Verses did compose,
But the praise another chose.
So you, not for you, Birds knit slender pieces,
So you, not for you, Cattle wear your fleeces,
So you, not for you, Bees your Sweet prepare,
So you, not for you, Oxen draw the Share.
22 Upon the same Augustus.
Jove in Heaven gouernes all:
Caesar on this Earthly Ball.
23 Upon Balista.
THis Hill of Stones does dead Balista hold:
Both day and night now, Traveler, go bold.
24 Upon a beauteous Boy.
NAture, what sex to give thee, being in doubt,
Of both well near has framed thee (fair) throughout
25 Upon the Crow on Tarpeius.
By an uncertain Author.
LOng since upon Mount Tarpey sat the Crow,
She could not say, it is well, but shall be so.
26 Of Letters.
By an uncertain Author.
LEtters the matter done explain;
That, the words marrow does contain,
The sight whereof quick minds do gain.
27 Upon the death of three.
Varied three ways: by an uncertain Author.
1
A Bore, Snake, young man, did one chance abide,
By stroke, foot, sting, the Bore, Snake, young man did.
2
A Youth, Hog, Serpent, does lament, fret, hiss,
Stung, stricken, bruizd, and life at once do miss.
3
Death at one time, a Snake, Youth, Bore do meet,
The Bore, by wound; Youth, sting; and Snake, by feet.
By the Transtatour to make it more plaeine.
A Huntsman trod an Adder that him wounded,
As he the Bore, so were all Three confounded.
28 Of Fortune.
By Caelius Firminianus Simphosius.
O Powerful Chance, how changeable thou art,
That stearnly claimst of Rule so great a part!
Bad men thou raisest, and the Good o'rethrowest,
Keeping no credit in what thou bestowest.
Men undeserving Fortune makes renownd,
And guiltesse persons Fortune does confound;
The righteous Man with Poverty she grieves,
And who unworthy be, with wealth relieues;
Old she does hug, and young men from her thrust,
The times dividing with a will unjust.
To the Bad she gives, what from the Good she takes,
And never judges true, nor difference makes,
Frail, faithless, and unconstant as the wind,
Slippery, light, foolish, and like Cupid, blind,
Not ever favoring where she gives a Blessing,
Nor whom she does forsake, for aye oppressing.
29 Of love to Theotimus.
By Qu. Catullus.
MY heart is fled to Theotime, I fear,
As it was wont; it is so, 't has refuge there:
What if, to show the fugitive respect,
I had not him forbid, but to reject?
I Will go in quest: yet he may me deteine:
What should I do? thy counsel, Venus, deigne.
30 Of Roscius his beauty.
By the same Author.
TO greet Aurora rising while I chanced,
Straight Roscius at my left hand was advanced:
May I, ye Gods, by speech, not lose your love,
The sight beneath was fairer then above.
31 To Phileros of loves power.
By Valerius Edituus.
WHy bear thou Phileros a needless light?
Lets go; my breast with fire is fully bright;
And that may vanish through winds raging power,
Or from the Clouds a down right shining shower
But for this fire of Venus, there is no force,
Except her self can quench or stop its course.
32 To Pamphila of an amorous ecstasy.
By the same Author.
WHen Pamphila, my grief I seek to break,
What I would crave of thee, I cannot speak:
Straight sweats my wretched heart, then double I
My prayre and power; if mute, loue-rackd I die.
33 To Shepherds of Loves fire.
By Porcius Licinius.
Keepers of Sheep and of their tender Fry,
Fire seek ye? hither come, a Fire am I:
The whole wood, if I touch it, fired will be,
And fired your Cattle all, all that I see.
34 Upon a Thracian Boy.
By C. Julius Caesar or Germanicus Augustus.
A Thratian Boy on Hebrus frozen playing,
Broke with his weight the flood, like marble, staying;
And as in sinking down full ill he sped,
The slippery Test (alas) took off his head:
Which when his mother found and vrn'd, quoth she,
For sire, this bare I; the rest, drowned to be.
35 The Tomb of Lucrece.
By Ovid.
IN her chaste breast when Lucrece sheathd her blade,
A bloody Torrent issuing, thus she said;
My Spirit, before the Gods, my Blood, my Lord,
Witness I did not to my Shame accord:
In death, for me produced, they will plead right well,
The One soard to Heaven, the other sunk to hell.
36 Upon Narcissus.
By an uncertain Author.
THis is Narcissus whom the Well did move,
To overmuch belief, yet worthy Love:
The Bank thou see with moist grass him does nourish,
That by the Spring (his Ruin) he may flourish.
37 Upon three Shepherds.
By Cytherius Sydonius.
A Sabine, Spartan, Laurentine, each of a diffrent root,
Did Thirsis, Theon, Almo get at high Pelorus foot,
The Sabine, Spartan, Laurentine, Vines, Plows, Swine did enjoy
And Thirsis, Theon, Almo, was a stripling, yongster, boy,
Which Thirsis, Theon, Almo then
Sheep, Kids, Goats up did breed:
And Thirsis, Theon, Almo vsd for music, voice, straw, reed:
To Thirsis, Theon, Almo love these Nai^s, Nisa, Glauce showed,
And Nai^s, Nisa, Glauce there Lillies, Rose, Violets bestowd.
38 Of three Amazons fight.
By the same Author.
Alce, Hyppolite, Lyce (signal sounded)
Oehalus, Teuthras, Donis sole confounded,
The Arcadian, Greciau, Marsian, boy, youth, peer,
To Ida, Epus, Doricles full dear,
With sword, shaft, datt, ith'side, in the guts, ith'face.
On horse, foot, chariot, and thus ends the case.
39 Of an Hermaphrodite.
By Pulex an ancient Poet.
WHile I my mothers pregnant womb possessed,
To know my sex the Gods she did request:
A boy, quoth Sol; a girl, Mars; Juno, neither:
And being borne I was by nature either:
Then my death questioned; Juno said, By sword:
Mars, hanged; Sol, drowned: all, Fortune did afford.
A tree the flood o're-shadowing I ascend;
My sword and I thereon, did downwards tend:
My foot stuck fast, my head being ouer-waterd:
Male, female, neither, I was drowned, hanged, slaughtered.
40 Of Acis.
THe bones of Acis in this Hill repose,
Where a smooth Fountain from the bottom flows;
Signs of the Cyclops fury these endure,
Where stays thy love, (bright Nymph) and sorrow sure,
But since he perished, he is well covered here,
While dancing streams his endless name do bear:
Thus he abides whom Fame dead shall not ring,
Whose cerule life glides through the liquid spring.
41 The Tomb of Hector.
HEctor his countries shield, stout'st youth of all,
That was to Troy distressed another wall,
Dyed by Achilles violent hand subdude,
Which Phrygian hope and safety did conclude;
Him 'bout those walls his cruel Victor halde,
Those which in his youth himself kept vnassailde.
O what a sea of grief did that day bring,
To his wife, mother, and the good old king?
But his unhappy Father bought for gold,
And wailing laid him in this earthly mold.
42 The Tomb of Achilles.
A Chilles, Thetis son am I well known,
Through valiant Acts and prowess famous grown,
I that so often ore threw my foes in fight,
And singly many thousands put to flight:
Great Hectors fall my glory highest raisd,
That many a time the Grecian powers crazed;
For which, by slaying him, revenge I reaped,
And then my sword on Troy confusion heaped:
At length by treachery queld on hostile ground,
Above the stars a conqueror I was cround.
The praises of Virgil, and his works.
1 Virgil of himself.
SVch Romans as sweet Homer have not read,
By reading me, may be of either sped:
His fields Greece does admire, so large and filled,
But less our ground appears, yet fitly tild.
The shepherd, plowman, soldier here is for thee;
The Greeks have each but one, I have all three.
2 Of Virgil.
By Alcinous.
IF Homer for no Poet you allow,
Then Maro shall be First, the Second now.
But from the Poets if you Maro sever,
Far from the First the Seond shall be ever.
3 Of Virgils Aeneids.
By Cornelius Gallus.
LEt us (great Caesar) in mirths time be sad,
For only Virgils loss, whom I lament.
But he his Aeneid to be read forbad,
Which must be so, if thou but give consent.
Rome, yea the world to thee their prayers turn,
From fire to save so many Captains stories.
Shall Troy again with flames, (yet greater) burn?
O make thy deeds read with Italians glories,
And see him by a greater Nuncius decked,
For Caesar's mouth can more then Fates effect.
4 The Edict of Octauius Caesar for the preservation of the Aeneid.
COuld then a voice perverse that straight expirde,
Will a misdeed so dire? shall then be firde?
Shall learned Maro's noble Muse depart,
(Ah worthless ill) and lost be wealthy Art?
And can these eyes behold it? nor the flame
His Honor spare, or save lines worthy fame?
Phoebus forbid it, and the Sisters nine:
Ceres prevent it, and the God of Wine.
In arms he was your Soldier, whose Pen sought;
Your husbandman in the country, for he taught,
What virtues be in Summer and the Spring,
What good does Autumn and the Winter bring,
New formed the Fields, the Vine and Elm combined.
Kept Sheep, and unto Bees their Hiue assigned.
Now these (if it be lawful so to say)
Did he deliver to be cast away?
But Laws faith should be kept, the deads man's will,
What ere it bids be done, we must fulfill.
Yet rather let us burst laws reverend power,
Then see one day so many lines devour,
So many lines congested day and night,
Or dying words destroy his watching quite.
If at his end proud grief this Error wrought,
If (witless what) he spoke with wavering thought,
Not willing, but compeld by pangs o'respent;
Or his mind blind through loathsome languishment:
Shall therefore Troy be forced to view again
Her flaming Ruin, and a new complain?
Shall wretched Dido's wounds with fire be wounded?
And shall a work so sacred be confounded?
And one mischievous hour, with treacherous Error,
To ashes turn so many fields of Terror?
Come, ye sweet Muses, from your Syluan caves,
And quench these burning fires with flowing waves;
And lest a Poets Muse being so renowned,
Should come to ruin, let the flame be drowned.
Famous in the world, yet to himself ingrate,
May Maro live, his charge so obstinate
Let us controwle: In death he is satisfide,
So shall his Verse eternally abide,
The Muses all resounding, and his name,
Crowned with a deity all Rome proclaim.
May he be praisd and honored, may he please,
Flourish, be often read, love joined with these.
Other Copies are thus.
COme, Muses, and use all your waters here,
To quench the fire, live Maro euery-where.
What he to the whole world envious (as ingrate)
Both of himself and works and after-Fate.
Grown hurtful, had commanded, be it our part
To countermand; being dead, he is pleased in heart.
Yea rather let the Muses all resound
His verse eternal, and his name renowned,
The people deifie, fade let him never,
Still be perusde, delight, affected ever.
5 Of Virgils Aeneid preserved.
By Sulpitius of Carthage.
THat greedy fire this volume should consume,
Which sets Aeneas forth, it was Virgils doom:
Tucca and Varius nill, nor thou permit,
(Great Caesar) and so sau'dst the Latian writ.
Unhappy Troy was like again to fall,
And with a second fire to perish all.
6 In praise of the Aeneid.
By Ovid.
Wandering Aeneas lofty Romes beginning,
No work has Italy more glory winning.
7 Of Virgils want on writing.
By Ovid to Augustus.
YEt happy he, whose Muse thy Aeneid bred,
Arms and a man brought to a Tyrian bed,
Yea in verse Bucolicke, before but young,
Phyllis and Amarillys loves he sung.
8 Of Virgil.
By Christodorus.
ANd, whom for Eloquence Ausonia chose
Her favorite, sweet Swan-like Maro flourisht,
Whom with renown at Rome where Tyber flows,
His country, as another Homer, nourisht.
9 Upon Virgil and his works.
By Sextus Propertius in his 2. Book, Elegy 24.
PHoebus-fenc'd Actium, Virgd it delights,
That he could sing, with Caesar's nauall fights.
Who, with Aeneas conflicts, now restores
The city ruined on Lauinian shores.
Ye Greek and Latin writers backwards stand,
Some greater work then th'lliad is in hand.
Thou by Galesus, where Pines shading breed,
Thyrsis and Daphnis singst with slender Reed:
And how Ten apples could a Maid infect,
And from the printed Teat a Kid select.
He Is blessed that buys love at so dear a Rate,
Though Tityrus do sing to her ingrate:
Blessed Corydon that tempts Alexis chaste,
The Husbandman his Lords delights to taste:
Though wearied with his pipe to rest he lays him,
The gentle Hamadryades do praise him.
The precepts of old Hesiod thou do sing,
What field yields corn, what vallyes grapes do bring.
As Phoebus if the learned Lute he take
And play thereon, such Music thou do make.
Here may I conclude his praises with two lines

upon his Georgickes, written by our most witty
and famous Epigrammatist, Mr. John Owen, late
Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford deceased:
Thus Englished.
TRim verses of Grounds Tillage, Maro writ,
Who thereby tills the Readers fields and wit.
Epitaphs upon Virgil.
By diverse illustrious persons.
1 Palladius.
HEre am I covered, whose late rusticke pen,
Through woods and fields came to the arms of men.
2 Asclepiades.
I Maro sung of Mars, a man, sheep, corn:
Buried in Naples, but in Mantua borne.
3 Eusebius.
Here Virgil lies, that pastures did rehearse,
Good husbandry and Trojan wars in verse.
4 Pompelianus.
The Poet that sung battles, fields and sheep,
Died in Calabria, and here lies asleep.
5 Maximianus.
Virgil by Verse, of cattle, grounds, and wars,
Has merited fame lasting like the stars.
6 Vitalis.
My verses, woods, grounds, wars; my place of birth,
Mantua; name, Virgil; my grave, Naples earth.
7 Basilius.
Under this heap the Poet Maro lies,
That woods, fields, wars, in verses beautifies.
8 Asmodianus.
The Shepherds Poet here untimely pressed,
Country and combats I in verse expressed.
9 Vouianus.
Here lies wit-honour'd Maro, whose Muse came
From woods to fields, from fields to Mars his game.
10 Eugenius.
Precepts I writ of Pasturage and tyllage,
Then Armies, until Death of me made pillage.
11 Iulianus.
Here sleeps Virgil, that in sweetest measures
Vtter'd Pan, Ceres, and Bellona's pleasures.
12 Hilasius.
Shepherds and Plowmens cunning I that taught,
And set forth fights, this Tomb am under brought.
The same Author upon Virgils picture.
Maro, thy Picture foyles the fatal dart,
Whom Nature took, we see restored by Art.
Another by the same Author.
So great a Poet feels no hurt by death,
Whose Verses honor keeps him still in breath.
Virgil, or another in his name.
Me Mantua, Brunduse, Naples, bore, took, holds,
Whose volume, pastures, plow-lands, arms, infolds.
Upon his Daphnis.
By an uncertain Author.
In Daphnis wailing for thy Flaccus fate,
With Gods, learned Maro, thou make him a mate.
By an uncertain Author.
I Shepherd, Plowman, Horseman stout, did
Pasture, my Goats, with leaves,
till, my grounds, with spade,
out-stand, my enemies, with hand.
Now seeing I have before inserted an Epigram made by M. John Owen, give me
leave in this place to annex his own Epitaph, which is engraven in a plate of
Brass, and fixed under his monumentall Image, formed and erected by the most
exquisite Artist, M. Epiphanius Euesham, withinthe Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul, thus Englished.

SMall was thy state and stature, which do claim
Small statue, through great lands thy small Book flies,
But small thine honor is not, nor thy fame,
For greater wit then thine the world denies:
Whom a small house, a great Church shelter gives,
A Poet when he dies then truly lives.
The Arguments of Virgils works. viz.
1. Monostichs of all his works.
He sings in sundry strifes the Shepherds Muse,
Grounds tillage learnedly he shows in measures,
Teaches to graft and plant without abuse.
Beasts nurture next, and Pales with her treasures.
Bees ordring then with honies gifts and pleasures.
To Carthage comes Aeneas wandering far,
Reports the manner of the Trojan war.
The same Reporter shows his proper courses:
Death on her self loue-burnt Eliza forces.
His fathers grave with sports Aeneas graces:
Then Ghosts he visits and infernal places.
He enters Latium and the Italian bounds.
Here Turnus from his roof warre-thundring sounds.
A mother and young men her son lament,
To death is Lausus and his father sent,
Reneng'd Camilla by a spear extinct,
With spirts infernal Daunus son is linkt.
2 Tetrastichs of his 4. Books of Georgickes.
WHat man in Bucolicks, and read how well
In tillage and in vines, trees, plants, herds, bees,
Troyes Poet was, Tetrastichs here shall tell:
Each books contents, who viewes my writing, sees.
1
What makes Corn thrive he shows, what wether's meet
For Husbandmen the fields with ploughes to greet.
How, casting seeds, he should manure the soil,
To reap much profit for his cost and toil.
2
Earths tillage hitherto and season-skill,
Now fings he vine-leaues and the virent hill:
What places Bacchus and the vineyard suit,
And the Olive branch that bears the chiefest fruit.
3
Pales and Shepherds through the world renowu'd,
Ordring of cattle and grass clothed ground,
What soil to beasts or lambs we should assign,
All these our Poet shows in verse divine.
4
Then Realms of dew-bred honey sweetly smelling,
Bees bred in Hybla and their waxen dwelling,
What flowers they suck, with swarm collecting drifts,
He shows, and their moist comb, celestial gifts.
3. Monostichs of his 12. Books of Aeneids.
I The first, Aeneas comes to the Lybian Queen:
In The second, be Troyes wars and ruin seen.
The third, his wandering shows, and buried sire:
The fourth, Eliza vexed with Cupids fire.
Games in the fifth, and burning Ships appear:
Hell, in the sixth, is searched, and Spirits there.
To the destined land the seventh Aeneas brings.
Wars preparation the eighth against foemen fings.
They fight in the ninth, whose Captain is remote.
Mezentius flies in the tenth to Charons boat
In The last but one, hard Mars a virgin spild,
In The last, by arms divine is Turnus killed.
4. Pentestichs of the same.
1
AT Juno's suite winds Aeole setting free,
To Affricke drives the Trojans wandering fleet;
Jove's words to Venus grieved a comfort be,
Dido in Carthoge does Aeneas meet,
Cupid, Iulus like her heart does greet.
2
Aeneas moved wars, fortune does relate,
The horse, how guilefull Greeks with Sinon were.
The city ruined Priams wretched fate,
How on his shoulders he through fire did bear
His father, and did lose Creusa dear.
3
Troy fallen, with ships Aeneas runs his race,
And a new city does in Thrace bestow,
Whence urged, in Creet another he does place,
Then dangers from Helenus he does know,
Flies the blind Cyclops, lays his father low.
4
Dido, whom Anne persuades, Cupid fireth,
She in a cave storme-forc'd her lusts fulfills,
Iarbas Jupiter with prayers tireth,
Aeneas puts to Sea, as Joue him wills,
She racked with grief and love her life-bloud spills.
5
Fortune to Sicily him brings again,
Who to his fathers tomb great honor pays;
Iris by fire begins his Nauies bane,
There Mates he leaves, sad Venus prayer allayes
Neptune, where sleep ends Palinurus days.
6
The Phrygian treads in sacred Cumae-towne,
Desires an answer from the Prophetess,
Inhumes Misenus, to Dis then goes down,
His offpring there Anchises does express,
And how thenceforth to conquer all distress.
7
In The end the Trojans do Laurentum see,
Glad of peace granted, build in city wise,
Forth Juno calls a night-borne Fury, she
Makes war betwixt them, and the Latins rise,
Turnus with aid straight Italy supplies.
8
Violent wars Aeneas notes in hand,
Euander wins to help him in the field,
And to his troops gains all Hetruria land,
Venus craves arms which Mulciber does yield,
With stout acts of his issue in a shield.
9
Iris from Juno unto Turnus hastes,
Rouzeth his heart, his Troops he does not stay:
The Trojans be besieged, their Ships fire wastes.
Two friends for night-warre their lives dearly pay;
Turnus the Tents does win, is driven away.
10
Jove calmes his wives and daughters brawling spite,
The Trojan Worthy, fraught with aid, arriues;
Rutilians meet them, at tho shore they fight:
Turnus kills Pallas, out Aeneas drives
(Losing the victor proud) for one, two lives.
11
Due honor to the dead both parts commend,
Diomed help to the Latins does deny,
Turnus in words with Drance does contend:
Aeneas horse fore-sends, by the way they try
Camilla's might; she flaine, her soldiers fly.
12
Turnus to contract with Aeneas grew,
That, the Rutilians break; fair Venus cures
Her son, those queld their perjured action rue.
Turnus perforce Aeneas force endures;
And his own death by Pallas belt procures.
Of the Supply or addition to the twelve Books of the Aeneids.
Written by Maphaeus Vegius.
TVrnus through fight no sooner leaves to live,
But his to the Victor stoop e Troy-troops attending:
Then worthy honor to the Gods they give,
To joy, Sire, Son, and Fellow Soldiers bending,
Mindful of perils past; for Turnus, moan
Latinus makes; his dear Sons funeral,
And wretched Country by fire overthrown,
Daunus laments: In marriage after all,
And mirthfull Hymen's bonds the king combines
His daughter with Aeneae; either nation
Triumphs in the league of peace; then he assigns
Unto a city his wifes appellation.
And lastly, while he reigns in pleasing rest,
With heavens joys is by his mother blessed.
5 Decastichs of the 12. Books of the Aeneids, by Ovid.
AS much as Virgil to rich Homer gave,
So much from Ovid shall his Virgil have.
My self to set before thee never bent,
In wit to follow thee I rest content.
Thy Books chief Arguments I here unfold,
Lest any Ignorant should error hold.
Ten verses of each one I have composde,
Where the whole Aeneid they may view enclosde:
Affirming on my credit, that I make
These Titles not a line for Enuies sake.
1
Warre-fam'd Aeneas, with the best a Mate
In Goodness, pressed by partial Juno's hate,
For Italy on Sicile-billowes bound,
Storme-driuen came at length to Lybian ground.
And, with his friend unwitting where they were,
From Vonus learned that Dido reigned there;
Who, in a cloud her city entering, found
His waue-depriu'd Associates safe and sound.
And to the Queen most welcome, does prepare
Troys downfall at her bidding to declare.
2
All being silent, this heroicke wight
Of Troy and his the fortunes does recite,
The treacherous Greeks, Minerua's feigned gifts,
Laocons pain and Sinons cunning shifts:
How he himself was warned by Hector sleeping,
Troy next in flames, his country ruined, weeping.
Then Priams euer-lamentable wrecke;
By hand Ascanius taken, on his neck
Anchises, but by fate Creusa reau'd
In following, on the mount his mates received.
3
How after Troy destroyed he left the place,
And with a navy first arrived at Thrace;
Founded a city, how the king did take
Polydores life, and what Apollo spoke,
His voyage into Crete, thence called to Seas,
By new fates driven to the Strophades.
The charge of foul Celeno, Harpies flight,
How he Helenus left that warned him right:
Freed Achemenides from Cyclops awe,
At Drepanum interred his father saw.
4
But now Loves grieuo us fire the Queen has seized,
Who, by her sister led, to yield is pleased,
The Gods with gifts they load and sacrifice.
Venus a secret league in hunting ties.
It spreds abroad; for flight Aeneas then
From Jove enioyn'd, prepares both ships and men;
Which amorous Dido finding, wooes their stay,
Yet not prevailing where fates call away,
A wood-fire built ascends, and speaks her last,
Then wounded sote, her life awaydoth cast.
5
Aeneas borne to Sicily, the Ghost
Of dead Anchises celebrates, his Oast
Acetes with him orders Games for prize,
A Shaft, to all prodigious, burning flies;
Iris in old wives habit Beroe seems,
His navy fires, that sudden rain redeemes.
In sleep his father shows wars to betide him,
And to the court of Pluto who shall guide him:
Fight-flying men and matrons left intown'd,
Aeneas mournes for Palinurus drowned.
6
With Sybils answer he from Cumae came,
Buried Misenus, gave a hill the name.
The Branch he plucks the gods appeasd, he venters,
And with the old Prophetess hells Entry enters,
Knows Palinurus, comforts Dido there,
Much wounded then Deiphobus does appear;
Learnes the Ghosts penance from Sybilla's tale,
And meets Anchises in a virent vale,
Who shows to him his Progenies estates,
Which done, from thence returns he to his mates.
7
His Nurse he buries, and to Sea he goes,
Comes to Laurentum, this the Land he knows,
By his sons speeches, destined: Look, says he,
We feed from Tables; By lot chosen be
A hundred Orators, who sent to crave
The kings good will, that, with his daughter have.
Through Juno's wrath Alecto breaks the twist,
In words they jar, though pious Fates resist.
A heart Ascanius wounds, which war begets,
Nations prepare to join, youth fighting frets.
8
From Laurent castle Turnus war dorh spread,
And greets by Venulus great Diomed:
Who aid requires, and she was a reason why,
To king Euander fled from Arcady,
That new realm seeks, God warned Aeneas goes,
Whose son and troops he gains to his dispose.
Pallas ill-fated him consorts to fighting,
Who strengthened now in's mothers gifts delighting
In The shield, where Captains fates and fortunes shine,
And of his offpring, notes the work divine.
9
And while these things wete done on either side,
Turnus from Inno warned to battle, hy'd.
The Trojans ships, which his dart fire to burn,
To form of Sea-Nymphs does Jove's power turn.
Ill speeds the attempt of Nisus and his friend:
They fight, the Trojans, Tents and Vale defend.
Bold Remulus by fair Iulus fell.
Way's forced, two brothers Turnus turns to hell.
Yea many a Trojan by his hand expires,
Then to his own pauillions tired retires.
10
Jove touching these affairs a Council calls,
Turnus his part mean time begirt the walls.
Noble Aeneas many a thousand brings.
Mars calls, and the air with all their forces rings,
Pallas drops down at mighty Turnus feet,
Captains and people namelesse death do meet.
Juno draws Turnus from these martial bands,
Mezentius rescude, stiff Aeneas stands,
Whose conquering hand ends Lausus: and that deed,
Mezentius, to revenge, as ill does speed.
11
To Mars, Aeneas yields a Trophy won,
And to Euander sends his slaughtered son:
Then gives the Latins funeral right and space,
A fathers love Euander shows in place;
The dead divided they prepare for vrnes;
With armes-denyall Venulus returns.
Drances and Turnus (peace Latinus crying)
Each other taunt; in wait Aeneas lying.
More wars; the Trojans win, Camilla slain,
All threaten till each part their Tents attain.
12
Now Turnus, with cross wars the Latins tired,
Will single fight, peace by the king defir'd,
His part must yield that's conquered, they conclude,
Iuturna, Turnus sister does delude,
Camertes turned, and moves the troops to fight,
One stays Aeneas with an arrows flight:
Whose care his son preserues, the Town he takes:
Hanging her self loathed life the Queen forsakes:
With Troops the Champions fenced, in Martial strife,
Aeneas takes from Turnus arms and life.
FINIS.

