Certain godly instructions, very necessary to be learned of the younger
sort, before they be admitted to be partakers of the holy Communion.

Very easy to be understood of the simple and unlearned sort, dooen by
D.W. Arch.

Also certain Articles, very necessary to be known of all young Scholars
of Christ's School dooen by D,W. Arch.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London for Henry Kirkham, dwelling at the little North door of
Saint Paul's Church, and are there to be sold, at the sign of the black
Boy. 1580.

Instructions of the Godly instructions for every Minister to examine the
younger sort, before they be admitted to receive the holy Communion.
Question. What do you come to receive.


Answer. The holy Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.


Question. Why do thou come to receive it?


Answer. Because Christ has so commanded me.


Question. Of how many parts does it consist?


Answer. Of two parts: namely, the outward sign, and the inward thing
signified.


Question. Which be the outward sign^s in this Sacrament?


Answer. Bread and Wine.


Question. Which be the inward things signified?


Answer. Christ's body broken for me, and his blood shed for me, together
withal the benefits of his Passion.


Question. How do thou receive the outward signs?


Answer. I receive them with my hand, eat them with my mouth, and digeste
them with my stomach.


Question. How dooest thou receive the inward things signified?


Answer. Only by faith, and feed of it as of a food, given to me to life
everlasting.


Question. (...) did GOD choose these Crea^^res of Bread and Wine, too
represent unto us the body and blood of Christ, rather then any other earthly
creature?


Answer. Because there are none earthly creatures, that can so aptly
represente unto our outward senses, those things that God would have us to
learn by this Sacrament.


Question. What be those things which GOD would have us too learn by this
Sacrament?


Answer. By the breakyng of the Bread, we have to learn the breakyng of the
body of Christ upon the Cross: and by the powryng forth of the Wine, the
sheadyng of his blood, and by the distributyng too all that are present*
Christ's communicatyng himself unto all those tha^ will faithfully receive
him: by the eating and drinkyng we le^^^ that as Brea^ and Wine do nourishe
our bodies in this life, so Christ's body and blood do nourishe our souls to
life everlasting. And as the substance of Bread and Wine by digestion, passes
into the substance of our bodies, even so by faith, Christ and we are
united with an unspeakable union, and we made flesh of his flesh, and bones
of his bones.


Question. What more is to be learned hereby?


Answer. That we being many, are made one in Christ, as of many grains is
made one Lose, and of many Grapes, one Wine,


Question. Forasmuch as the unworthy receiver is dampened (for so Saint
Paul testifies) how will thou know whether thou art a worthy receiver or no?


Answer. If I examine me self, and find, that I humbly acknowledge mine
own unworthiness, that is to say, my sins, and to be heartily sorry for
them, and fully too purpose amendment of life, and faithfully to embrace
Gods promise of remisson and Pardon offered in Christ, then am I worthy,
because my unworthiness is forgiven me, and put out of rememberance.


FINIS.
Certain Articles, very nenecessary to be known of all young Scholars of
Christ's schole.
Dooen by D.W. Arch.
First, that the end of our creation is to glorify God.

That the praise of Gods glory begins at the knowledge of our selves.

That the knowledge of our selves issues out of the sound understanding of
the law, contained in the ten commandments.

That the law is the perfect rule of justice, teaching us what we should do,
and forbidden the contrary.

The law was divided into two tables, whereof the first contains four
commandments, touching our duty toward God, the second ^ontayneth our
duty toward our neighbor.

The end of the law is, to let us see ^^r sins: that by the sight thereof we
might be constrained to fly unto Christ.

Sin is the trasgression of the law.

Sin entered into the world by Adams transgression, and together with sin
came death, and the curse of God upon all mankind.

The reward of every sin, in Gods justice, is eternal death and damnation.

There is no means whereby we can either escape this eternal death, or
deserve any remission of sins, but only Christ crucified by whom, we are
free from the curse of the law, and by whose blood we have redemtion, that is,
the forgiveness of our sins.

None shall be saved, but those that take hold upon Christ and his merits,
by a true and lively faith.

This true and lively faith is a full assenting of our hearts unto the
promyses of GOD in Christ, ioy^^d always with endeavor of righteosnesse.

The sum of a Christian man's faith is contained in the twelve articles of
our belief, commonly called the Apostles Creed.

The preaching of the word is the ordinary mean, whereby faith is both bred
and nourished in us.

The inward workyng of the holly Ghost, makes the word preached sauory and
comfortable unto us.

That good works although they neither justify us before God, nor deserve any
remission of sin, yet have their proper place, and standing and serve for
diverse uses.

First to glorify God.

Secondly, to publishe our faith unto the world.

Thirdly, to bear witness unto our conscience of our election.

Fourthly, to win Infidels, an^ them that are without God.

Prayer is a very earnest liftyng up of the heart unto God in all kind of
necessities, whether inwardly of soul or outwardly of body.

The Lords Prayer is a perfect pattern of all prayers, and contains within
his reach, whatsoever can be demanded of God, needful for our bodies or
souls.

The Lords prayer contains six peticions: three concerning the glory of
God: and three touching our profit and welfare.

There are four principal things to be observed in prayer.

First, that we make our prayers to God only and not to Saints.

Secondly, that we feel within our selves the marvelous great want of the
thing prayed for, having our minds wholly bent therevppon, and not carried
away with bithoughts.

Thirdly, that our prayers be grounded upon faith in Gods promises, with full
assurance that they shall be granted, so far as the Lord ^o^th know them
to be meet and expedient for us.

Fourthly, that we continue in prayer, although we speed not at the ^^st.

The Sacraments are means, whereby the weakness of our faith is
underpropped.

A Sacrament is an outward sign of inward grace, instituted of God.

There be two Sacraments, baptism, and the supper of the Lord.

Baptism is an outward sign of the washyng away of sin, which we have by
Christ's blood.

In Baptism, we have our names entered into the Family and Hosholde of God.

The Lords supper represents our continual feedyng in the same Family and
Household of God.

The Lords Supper consists of outward signs and inward things signified

The outward signs are Bread and Wine.

The inward things signified are Christ's body broken, and his blood shed
together, with all the benefits of his passion.

Repentance is a bitter sorrowing and sobbing for sin, coupled always with a
set purpose of amenment.

It consists especially in two things: the killyng of the old man, with all
his corrupt lusts and affections, and the quicknyng of the new man, which
after the image of God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

The old man is then killed, and the new man quickened, when we die unto
sin, and live unto righteousness: that is to say, when we are fallen intoo
deadly hatred and malice, with our own sinful affections and ^aine
conversation before paste, strivyng now at length to subdue our unruly lusts,
and to bring into captivity, every thought to the obedience of Christ, that so
his spirit may both rule and reign in us, and bring forth her goodly
blossoms, faith, love, mercy, patience, humilytie, chastity, desire of Gods
word, hearty good will to his true ministers, diligence in prayer together
with all increase of righteousness.

FINIS.

