A Fruitful and Godly Sermon, preached at Paul's cross before the Honorable
audience and assembly there, this present year 1592. Upon the 5. chapter of
the prophecy of Zachary, 1, 2, 3, 4 verses. By A. W.

Esaie 58, 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show
my people their transgressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins. Printed
at London by R. B. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster-row, at the sign of
the Talbot.

Zachar. chapter 5. verse 1. unto the 5.
IT is thus written (right Honorable, right Worshipful, and well-beloved in
our Savior Christ) by the Prophet Zachary, in the fifth chapter of his
prophecy:

1. Then I turned me and lifted up mine eyes and looked, and behold a flieng
book.

2. And he said unto me, what see thou? and I answered, I see a flieng book,
the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof is ten cubits.

3 Then he said unto me, this is the curse that goes forth over the whole
earth, for every one that steals shall be cut off on this side and on that
side, and every one that swears shall be cut off on this side and on that
side.

4 I will bring it forth says the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into the
house of the thief, and into the house of him that falslye swears by my
name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with
the timber thereof and stones thereof.

When I first understood that I was called unto this place, being not ignorant
that this great congregation consists of diverse degrees, conditions, and
estates of men, I then began to think with my self what matter I might best
entreat of in your hearing at this time, and accordinglye my desire was so to
frame and direct my speech, that I might bring somewhat fit and profitable for all here present this day. This I take it, is that (...) that right dividing of
the word, which S. Paul commends to Timothy 1, 2, 15, for as the Priest in
the Law was able to discern what part of the sacrafise belonged unto every
one, what part the Lord was to have, what the people, and what to be reserved
for the Priest: so the Minister of the gospel as a faithful dispenser and
steward in the Lords house, ought to know, how to give unto every one his
portion and meat in due season. The wise man says that the precious stone
turned every way shines, Prou. 17, 8. Much more the word of God, upon what
side soever it is turned, that is applied unto all sorts and callings of men,
from thense does issue and shine forth a direction and light for every man's
duty. In this sense by S. James 1, 23. it is compared to a looking glass,
wherein al men both high and low, noble and unnoble, are to behold their faces.
I have therefore for the same purpose, made choice as you see, of this present
Text. Wherein the Prophet cries out against two especial sins of Israel,
Theft and false Swearing: under these two comprehending many besides. By
stealing, all wrongs and injuries committed against our brethren, and so the
offenses and breaches of the second Table: by false swearing, al false worship
of God and abusing of his holy name, here meeting also with many sins against
the first table. And thus I doubt not, but in the opening of these words it
shall appear that there are few here present this day, that shall not find
the holy speech and admonition of the Prophet in some part to appertain and
belong unto them.

But before we do enter into the matter, we must note somewhat concerning the
words and phrase of speech here used by the Prophet: the whole is very well
translated, as we read in our English translation, saving that in the third
verse, I do find that there are diverse readings of those words, They shall be
cut off on this side and on that: Hierome reads, iudicabitur, he shall be
judged or condemned, the Septuagint translate thus, (...) He shall be
punished: Arias Montanus, Succisuserit, as we translate, Shall be cut off:
Tremelius somewhat diverse from the rest, does interpret thus, Quia se innocentem
agit, They shall be cut off, because they do justify or make themselves
innocent. And this diversity rises of the diverse acceptions and takings of
the Hebrew word Nachah which is here used, which signifies to absolve, to
euacuat, or bring to nothing: likewise the other words (on this side and on
that) are diuerflye taken: Hierome says, secundum scriptum voluminis, On this
side and that side of the book, and so reads Arias Montanus the septuagint,
understand it of the time, (...), Ex hoc, from this time: Tremellius sicut
illa, that is, says he, even as the whole earth shall be destroyed, so shall
they. The best and safest reading of all these, in my judgment is, as in our
own translation, they shall be cut off on this side and on that side, that is
on every hand, according to the writing of the book.

Let not now any captious papist or any other cauilling spirited man, take
heerevpon occasion, to make exception against our translations, as disagreeyng,
and being contrary one to the other: for howesoeuer in words and in terms
they seem to be diverse, yet in matter and in sense, the difference and ods is
not great.

We see that the Evangelists, in writing the story of the Gospel, do use the
same liberty, in other circumstance of words to exercise the same things: As
Mat. 3, 11. reports John the Baptists words to be these, I am not worthy
(...) to bear his shoes after him, speaking of Christ: Mar. says, 1, 7 I am
not worthy (...), stooping down to unloose the latchet of his shoo: here we
see there are diverse words, but one chief sense. Augustine says upon this
place, Non est mendacium, cum dicens quisque aliquid aliud, quod etia^ ille
nondixit, de quo aliquid narrat, si voluntatem tamen eius hanc explicat, quam
etiam ille, qui eius verba commemorat. It is no untruth* says he, if a man use
other words than he did of whom he writes, if he keep the same purpose which
he does that reports the very words. As, be it that Matthew spoke the very
words of John, Mark uses other, yet both he that says I am not worthy to
bear his shoes, and the other which has, I am not worthy to loose his
shoes, both do express the self same meaning, showing hereby the great
humility of John, how much he abaseth himself in comparison of Christ. Thus
much concerning the translation of the words. Now to the matter.

The parts of this scripture are these two: the Vision it self contained in
the two first verses: the interpretation of the vision in the two latter.

In the vision we must speak of the book, which is described by twoe
adjuncts, one of the qualitye, it is a swifte or flieng book, the other of the
quantity, it is 20. cubits long, and 10. cubits broad. This book is the
decree of the judgments of God, which are both speedy and swift, and general
likewise and large, comprehending all the wicked of what state soever they be.
In the interpretation, first the sins or matter of Gods judgment is set
down: namelye those twoe, stealing, and false swearing, containing many other
sins, as diverse waters issuing from one stream, and many branches springing
from one root. Secondly the judgment of god against their persons, they shall
be cut off, in the 3. verse, and against their substance, it shall be consumed
stick and stone: with the manner also of the Lords judgment, it shall enter in,
no secret corner into the which it shall not pierce: it shall also tarry there,
they shall not be rid of the plague, when it has once taken hold of them.
This order I will observe (God willing) in the handling of these words.

But first of all, somewhat would be touched concerning visions, and
apparition of angels, for all this was showed to the Prophet by an Angel in a
vision. First therefore, that angels were seen in times past of the Patriarchs
and Prophets, even with the eyes of their flesh, no man can doubt, that is yea
but a little exercised in the reading of the holy scriptures. But whither they
appeared with very material and fleshelye bodies at some time (for always it
is certain they did not) it is a greater question: and yet we may soon be
resolved of this point: remembering how that the angels did eat and drink with
Abraham. Genesis 18. their feet were washed in Lots house. Gen, 19. Jacob
wrastled with an angel. Genesis 32.

All this could in no wise be, if they had not had material, sensible, and
palpable bodies. And of this judgment is that great and learned father
Augustine. Quanquam non nati ex faeminis. says he: though they were not borne
of women: Deus tamen illis corpoream creaturam subdidit, yet God gave them
power to assume the corporal creature of bodies for a time.

For this we shall read to have been the difference between the appearing of
good and badde angels: that they were endued with power from God to appear
sometimes in human bodies: but the other that we read of, never were seen
of men but in show only, and outward appearance; as Augustine thinks that
it was Phantasma Samuelis a show only or fantasy of Samuel, which was
seen of Saul, and not Samuel himself. 1. Kings. 28. For the Apostles were
afraid when they saw Christ walking upon the waters, thinking that they had
seen a spirit, the word is (...), Mark. 6, 49. And Luke. 24, 37. they were
likewise afraid, as if they had seen a spirit: the word there used is (...),
all one with the other: and our Savior in that place does comfort them, using
this as an argument, a spirit says he, has not flesh and bone, as you see me
to have: that is an evil spirit, such as you imagine me to be, and of the
which you are afraid (for the Apostles would not have feared the presence of
good angels, though they might be our savior) uses not to appear with flesh
and bone, as I have: for if Christ had meant al angels in so speaking, then
would it follow that they never appeared in humane bodies, which the scripture
sets down to have been otherwise. And concerning the very moment and
instant of their appearing, it is no matter, whether the flesh be appropriate
to their nature, as it was only in christ, or assumed only for the present,
as in the Angels.

Now for visions, we read in the scripture that they were of three sorts,
according to the three faculties of the soul: for there is the outward and
external sense, the inward and internal, called the fantasy, and the
intellectual and understanding part, which properly we call the mind: so
according to this distinction, some visions were showed to the outward sense,
as when the young man with the prophet, having his eyes opened saw all about
upon the mountains fiery chariots and horse. 2 kin. 6. some are seen with the
inward and interial sense, as the visions of the seven fat and lean kine and
the ears of corn, which appeared to Pharao in his dream: some are altogether
spiritual in the mind, and they are of two sorts, either by the abstracting
and rauishing of the mind, as in an exstacie or trance: such was that of
Peter. Act. 10 and Paul's. 2. Cor. 12. or by the secret instinct and
inspiration of the spirit, as 2. kin. 20, 1. The word of God came to Isai the
prophet, being gone out from Hezekia, before he was come to the middle court
There was no sound or voice herd from heaven, but the word of God was secretly
infused into him. This vision, which the prophet saw in this place, seems to
have been altogether spiritual, as Stephe^s was. Act. 7, 55. Who being in the
counsel house. Act. 6, 15. saw the heavens open, and Jesus sitting at the
right hand of God, which sight he beheld not with his bodily eyes, being in
the house, and therefore it must be understood of his spiritual sight. Before
we leave this place, let us make some use of this which has bin said. We
learn, that howsoever the prophets in times past were instructed by visions,
yet now we are not to look for such extraordinary reuellations, having a
most perfect rule of the word, unto the which we ought to fly and appeal in
all doubts and controversies whatsoever. Wherefore away with all other
Anabaptisticall dreams and revelations, and all popish traditions, which both
do derogate and detract much from the integrity and perfection of the
scriptures. It is the Privilege that Jesus Christ our heavenly Doctor has,
beyond al other prophets and teachers, that unto them God spoke diversely, and
at sundry times, not one of them being able to deliver a perfect and absolute
form of doctrine, but now in these last times he has spoken unto us by his
son, not many times, but once for all, not diversely, but after one and the
self same manner, by him delivering an absolute and intier pattern and form
of doctrine, which should remain without any addition, alteration or change
to the end of the world. Indeed the word spoken by Moses was so perfect, that
if a man regarded it not, neither would he hear a man speaking ab inferis,
from the dead, Luke, 16. 31. But the Gospel is left unto us in such
perfection, that an angel from heaven, a superis, speaking against it, is not
to be heard. Now we see as in a glass with open face, 2. Corint. 3. 18. He
therefore that would leave the word and cleave to uncertain revelations, is
as one that not contented to see his face in a steel glass, would behold it
in the inconstant waters, whereof the wise man speaks, Prou. 27, 19. Or as
one that forsakes the fountain of living waters, and diggeth the broken pits
of humane invention, which can hold no water, Ierem. 2, 13. Moses received of
God this especial grace and favor, that whereas the Lord spoke to other
prophets by vision and dream, he would be known to Moses face to face, mouth
to mouth, Numb, 12 7, 8. He then that refuses the word and runs to unknown
traditions, and uncertain and deceivable doctrines, might as well say, I will
not have God to speak to me mouth to mouth, for so does he in his word, but I
desire to be taught by visions and dreams. Let us hear, what our savior
says, scrutamini scripturas, search the scriptures Ioh. 5, 39 And S. Paul
says, they are able to make the man of God perfect to every good work. 2.
Timo. 3, 17. If then the word of God do bring perfection with it, what need
we any other helps or furtherances, perfection being by the word already
attained.

It follows now, that we speak of the book, and the description thereof,
which comes to be considered in the first part. We do read of three sundry
books besides the written word, which the Lord in the scriptures, is said for
to have. The first is, the book of his secrets as that which was showed to
Ezechiel. 2, 10. and that which John saw, Revel. 5, 1 None was found worthy to
open it, but the lamb.

The second is the Lords register book, or his book of record and
remembrances, wherein al things done in the world either good or evil, are as
it were registered, Malachy. 3, 16. A copy or counterpane of this book, every
man has in his conscience, which is called the book of our conscience,
Revelations. 20, 12. The third is called the book of life, which is nothing
else, but the lords steadfast decree concerning those that shall be saved,
Revel. 20, 12. and another book was opened, etc. This book which the prophet
here saw, is as the first, the decree of Gods judgments, which he had
determined to bring upon the wicked.

This book first is a swifte book, which betokens the swiftness and spee
dinesse of the judgments of God. For howsoever unto the wicked, if the Lord
spare them but a little to provoke them to repentance, his judgments seame to
be slow, yet shall they come in the end, and suddenly, when they are unlooked
for. The Lord is not slack, as some men count slacknes, says S. Peter, for a
thousand years with the Lord are but as one day, and one day as a thousand
years. 2. Pet. 3, 8. What and if the wicked escape unpunished, even until his
old age, yet when Gods judgments overtake him at the length, then hec is
constrained to cry out and confess, that the judgments of God are swift indeed
and too soon brought upon him. The Lord spared the old world a thousand six
hundred years and more, yet when the flood came, no doubt the wicked, which
perished in the waters, thought their destruction to be too sudden. So was the
final overthrow of Amaleck deferred 400. years from Moses time, until Saul,
yet who will not say, that they soon were brought to utter ruin.

Therefore is the destruction of the wicked likened to the putting out of a
candle, which with one little blaste or puff of wind is soon extinguished and
put out. Job. 18, 5. like the house of a spider, which is soon dissolved. Job.
8, 14. They are set as in slippery places, soon ouerturned and cast down.
Psalm. 73, 18. Yea they are as a dream, then the which nothing is more vain.
Psalm. 73, 20. But some man will say, as Augustine speaks in their person. Ego
iam senui, multos castos inuenes ante me sepeliui, multorum castorum funera ad
sepulchrum deduxi. I am now aged, may the old adulterer say, I have buried
many chaste young men, and followed them to the grave: O says he, writing upon
those words of the Psalm, Perdet Deus eorum memoriam de terra, god shall cast
out their memory from the earth. Est alia terra says he in qua non erit
inpudicus, est alia terra in regno caelorum. There is another country, into the
which no unclean person shall enter, another land in the kingdom of heaven.
Wherefore boast not, O thou secure sinner, whosoever thou art, that thou have
continued many years, and never tasted of the cup of Gods wrath. What if
thou passest all thy time in pleasure? yet know that Gods judgments may meet
with thee in another world. Remember the example of the rich glutton in the
Gospel, who lived on earth in all outward happiness, when his life was ended,
with all his vain joy, and his sorrows began, think you not, that even then,
the time past seemed as nothing, no notas one day or one hour to him, or that
he thought not in himself that the judgments of God were swift, yea swifter
then any Eagle. Therefore let no sinner flatter him self in his ungodliness,
or think because the judgments of God are deferred, that either he regards
not as the wicked and sinful do imagine, or else that the ungodly shall
escape unpunished.

It is also a large book, 10. cubits in breadth, and in length 20. cubits:
whereby is signified, that none, of what place and calling soever, that are or
can be exempted from Gods judgments. Neither the rich shall escape because of
his riches, nor the wise man by his wisdom: yea rather than any of the ungodly
shall be left out of this book, it is written both within and without, Isach.
2, 10. Tropheh says the prophet is prepared even for the king. Isai. 30, 33.
say unto the king and the queen, humble your selves in sackcloth. Ier. 13,
18. Wherefore fitlye are the judgments of God compared to a rasour, that shall
shave not only the hear of the feet, but of the head and the beard also. Isai.
7, 20. they are as a raging flood, that comes up not to the loins only and
the middle, but even to the chin and the neck Isai. 8, 8. And although other
fishers do spread their net for the smaller fish, they cannot take the
Leuiathan of the sea, the Whale or the whirlepoole with an hook, or pierce his
jaws with an angle, as the Lord says to Job. 40, 21. Yet the Lord will come
against the great Dragon and Crocodile of the rivers, he will take him with an
hook, and cause the fish to cleave to his scales. Isai. 29, 4. By this then we
do learn, that there are no such mighty potentates or powers upon the earth,
whom the Lord is not able to overthrow and to tread as mire of the streat
under his feet, if they rebel against him. And therefore the church and people
of God, need neither to fear Pope nor Spaniard, no if all the kings of the
earth, were leagued together against them, though they stand up as a huge
mountain against our Zorobabell, yet shall they be made a plain as the
prophet says. Zach. 4, 7.

Again, seeing the judgments of God are revealed against all
unrighteousness, in whomsoever it is found: Let not rich men, honorable
and noble personages think much to have their faults touched by the word of
God, nor storm in their hearts, or whet their toongs against the ministers of
Gods word, which are but the lords mouth to his people: Why? We do but unfold
the book, the writing is the Lords, Nunquid ego scripsi (says Augustine)
Nunquid primum ex ore meum exiit: that is, did we write it, or came it first
out of our mouths. We do but hold out the looking glass, it is the glass
that descrieth the blemishes of your face.

We are the Lords trumpetters: if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who
would prepare himself to the battle* 1. Cor. 14, 8. if the trumpet should
give a false alarm, and sound the retraite when the enimyes are at hand,
should he not betray the camp: so if the ministers of God should flatter the
people in their sins, and cry peace, peace unto them, when the sword of God
is drawn out against them, were it not the ready way to destroy them.

We are your physicians, Eligo aspera sed salubria medicamenta, says
Augustine, I sometime make choice of sharp, yet holdsome medicines. And
again, ye right Honorable and worshipful may find flatterers enough
abroad. Where should you look for sound and faithful counsel, if not in
this place and at our hands. Wherefore, let not men be offended at us when we
rebuke them for their sins, we are in stead of Physicians and faithful
Counselors unto them. We have also a charge from GOD to speak. O, says one,
Consideret periculum meum, he that is displeased with me, let him consider my
danger: For, says not God to Ieremye, that he would destroy him before their
face, if he held his peace, Iere. 1, 17. Augustine says very well: Quid tu
succenses mortalis? sub iussione Christi mare audit, and tu surdens es? O worm
of earth, why do thou storm? The sea obeyed the voice of Christ, and do
thou stop thine ears. Mare audit, ventus cessat, and tu sufflas? The sea waxed
calm, the wind was still, and thou beginnest to bluster and swell.

Chrysostom prettily quippeth and checketh such proud men, that could not
abide to be reproved, Quid tibi tantum arrogas homo? quia sublimi curra
veheris? O foolish man, why dooest thou think so well of thy self, because
thou ridest and art carried in a Coach. Quale est istud? nam ligna and lapides
sic gestantur. A goodly matter, we see stones and logges even so to be drawn
along, and carted in the streates.

But if so be that men are so dainty eared, that they will not hear a sharp
word, let them follow Augustines counsel: Emendate vitam, ego emendabo uerba.
Mend you your ways* I will mende my words, Cessate perverse ag^re ego quiescam
mala improporare: leave ye off to do evil, I will cease to threaten and speak
evil against you: And to be short, Qui male audire nolit, ne male faciat, he
that will not hear evil, let him not do evil.

Thus much concerning the vision it self, now we come to the meaning and
interpretation thereof. And first of the sins, which the prophet here
denounces against, then of the judgment. The sins are two, theft, and
false swearing.

By theft is not only understood that kind, which the law calls and adiudgeth
to be theft, when by violence or privy pilfering, one spoileth another of
that he has, but likewise when any wrong is offered and done to our neybour,
by craft or subtlety, by oppression or usury, by wrong judgment or extortion,
or howsoever else, the spirit of god does not spare even to call it theft, and
to account of such as of those that do rob and steal from their brethren.

First, concerning open and plain theft, much I will not say, not because I
think there are few that offend this way (for I am afraid this sin does too
too much abound both in city and country) but thus I take it, that seeing
there is straight provision made by the Laws of this land for the sin of
theft, which accordingly are executed, if these poor miserable wretches will
not be warned to take heed by those daily examples of thieves and robbers
which are brought forth before their eyes to execution, I must not look that
they should be much moved by my speech, yet I will not altogether hold my
peace, if perhaps it may please God even now to touch their hearts.

That theft and privy pilfering is too commonly practiced, who sees it not?
No rare thing now a-daies for servants to purloine from their masters,
children from their parents, one neighbor from another. I find that there are
2 especial causes of this mischief: two things that make so many thieves:
Idleness, and necessity and want. The idle person that has not been brought
up unto labor, he says, as it is Proverb. 9, ver. 17. Hidden waters are
pleasant, and stolen bread is sweet. It is a goodlye matter he thinks to
live of other men's sweat, when without any great labor or travail, he can
tell how to satisfy himself and mayntaine his family.

But whosoever thus boasts in himself, let him consider the end, and hear
the counsel of the wise man in the same place, in the next verse, he
remembers not that he is in the way to Hell and Destruction: for first the
shame of the world follows, They are ashamed (says the Prophet) as when a
Thief is taken, Ierem. 2, 26. But if they care not for the shame of men, let
that fearful saying of saint Paul move them; That thieves and covetous
persons shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, 1, Cor. 6, 9.

See then, they do not only hazard their bodilye life - but they do also
incur the eternal danger of their soul. What foolish, nay what mad men
then are these, that for a morssell of bread, for a matter of small value, will
thus desperatelye cast away their bodies and lives, yea their souls too,
without the great mercy of God. But (sir) will some say, What should I do?
shall I suffer my self and my family to starve, and so perish? Here now is
the other cause, that drives men to steal, their extreme want and penurye.
So says the Wise man, A man despises not a Thief that steals to satisfy
his soul, for he is hungry, Prou. 6. 30. In which words he excuses not
the lewdness of those that satisfy their hunger by stealth: but secretlye he
reprooueth the hardness and unmercifulness of rich covetous men, by whose
means the number of thieves is increased, for if they would stretche forth
their hand to help and relieve those that are in need, I am verelie
persuaded we should have fewer Beggars, and not so many Thieves. And truly
it were greatly to be wished, that as the law is sharp against thieves, so it
might take hold of theefemakers: that is, that some order were divised, to
restrain the greedines and covetousness of some, whereby many are constrained
to use unlawful means. But now to thy demand who say, It is better to
steal than to starve: What, is there no mean between? must thou needs do the
one or the other? S. Paul shows a safer and better way to provide for thy
self: Let him that stole, steal no more, but let him rather labor and work
with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that
needs. Ephesians. 4, 28. Lo here is a way showed thee whereby thou may not
only in some competent manner maintain thine own estate, but even be
helpful unto others. Labor diligently in thy vocation, follow thy calling
painfully, be the world never so hard, rich men never so covetous, yet God
shall so bless thy travel, that thou both shall have sufficient and not be
without a penny in thy purse, to give to the needy.

To close up this point. We read that in king Alureds days, a Saxon king
sometime in this land, that this nation was so cleared and void of theft, that
of purpose there were golden bruches nailed up in the cross ways upon
posts, and there was none to take them away. At that time a man might have
gone laden with treasure from one side of the land to the other, and no man
would have asked him any question. If then in former ages there were such
simplicity, and true dealing in all sorts of men, when as yet religion was as
it were but in the infancy, a shame it shall be for us in these days of
knowledge, to come so far behind them in the practice of an honest life.

In the next place now, we have to deal with craftye and deceitful men, who
by their subtle and scandulent sleights in bargaining, do much abuse their
simple brethren that come unto them. This is a trade well known to many
merchantes in this City, who what with bad and naughty wares what with
excessive and unreasonable prises, do even no better, then steal from their
brethren.

Such men the prophet compares to Fowlers, Hosh. 5, 1. for he that flattereth
with his lips, spreads a net for his neighbor, Prou. 29, 5. When a simple
man walks in the streets and hears how merchants call in their chapmen, and
offer them good peniworths, now may he think with himself is a net laid for
me, let me take heed as well as I can. Even as a Cage is full of Birds, so
their house is full of deceit. Jeremy 5, 27. So is a plain man in the hands
of deceitful and craftye cosoners, as a Bird which is a prisoner in a cage.
Let there not be a root of bitterness or Wormewoode amongst you, says
Moses, Deutr. 29. 18. These flattering deceitful men are very well compared
unto Wormewoode: for as Wormwood a far off has color and savor good enough,
but come once to rub it in your hand and taste of it, and then the bitterness
bewraieth it self: even so these men at the first does show a friendly
countenance, and make fair promises, and give goodly words, but begin to
graple and chafe with them you shall find their doings as bitter as gall* But
will some say as Austin puts the question, si innocentiam retinuero, pauper
ero, If I use plain dealing I shall be but a beggar: O says he, Paruaene
diuinae innocentia? What, is it so small a thing to be innocent? to be
without guile is great riches. Further he says: Vt augeres aurum, fides
diminuta est, atte^dis luchra, damna non cogitas, to increase thy coin, thy
faith and honesty is decreased, thou think on thy gain, but remembrest not
thy life: Abundat nescio quid amplius in arca tua, sed non vides, quid
imminutum sit in cord: Thou have a little more I know not what in thy chest,
but thou see not how much thou have less in thy heart, for thou had some
Faith and show of honesty before, but now it is gone. And true it is, that
for a little money they have let go that which for no monye can be had
again. They have filled their chest with gain, but their heart is empty, and
even as their coin rusteth, so is there a worm and canker in their
conscience, which when it shall begin to gnaw and prick them, then will they
wish that never had they used deceit, and that with the loss of thousands
they might redeem the peace of conscience, which before they let go for less.

Next unto these men which do use fraudulent and deceitful crafts, they are
to be reckoned and adioined, which by any kind of oppression and hard dea ling,
do wring and grieve the people. Such as are all usurers, which by hard loanes
of money and cruel conditions do bring their poor neighbors to a morsel of
bread: As also those, which by extreme covenants and bargains, do seize upon
house and land, yea and bo dies to, of those which fall into their hands, and
are in danger unto them. Think ye not that they would have their lives to
if they might be suffered: for so the prophet says, They do gape over the head
or the life of the poor, Amos. 2, 7.

And such are the ways (says the wise man) of every one that is greedye of
gain, he would take away the life of the owners thereof. Prou. 1, 19. This I
say not, to excuse the bad and lewd dealings of such, as having vnthriftilye
wasted other men's goods, or craftily gathered them into their hands, do seek
how by all means, they may defeat their creditors of their own: but to this
end I speak it, that there may be some difference made of men, all being not
of the like lewd disposition, and that there might be some moderation and
lenity used, that in our common affairs Christians may be known and
discerned from Papists, Turks, or Infidels.

You know that the sin of oppression, is one of those three great sins, that
do cry unto God for vengeance. The first is murder, and shedding of innocent
blood: so it is written, that Abels blood cried out of the earth. Genesis 4, 10.
The second is the sin of adultery and uncleanness, as the cry of Sodom went
up to heaven. Genesis 18, 20. The third, is this grievous sin of oppression, so
the Israelites cry being oppressed under Pharao, came up into the presence of
God, Exodus 2, 23.

The Prophet Esaye does no better liken such, then to the milstones, which do
grind and wear the corn: so cruel oppressors do grind the face of the
poor. Isai. 3, 15. Nay they are like to cruel wolves, that do eat the
flesh, flea of the skin, break the bones, and chop them as small as flesh to
the caldron. Micah. 3, 3. Chrysostom thus speaks of such, wondering and
crieng out against them. Quid (says he) irrationabil. us inuenire potest, qua^
vt sine agro, pluuia aratro seminare contendas. What an unreasonable thing is
it says he, speaking against usurers, that they should sow their seed, having
neither field to sow in, nor rain, nor plough.

And indeed so it is: for the usurer sitting at home in his surd gown, having
neither plough nor horse at work, yet sees his harvest more plentifully come
in, and brought home unto him, then the poor husbandman that toileth in the
earth, is worn with labor, and wet with the dew of heaven. Augustine thus
says of the covetous men: Ipsaebelluae modum habent, rapiunt quando esuriunt,
cum satiantur praeda pariunt: The very brute beasts keep a mean, for they
raven only, when they are hungry, they give over the chase when they are full:
only covetousness is never satisfied.

But go to now thou covetous man, Hearken you Usurers, I see your malady I
feel your humor. It is a hard matter altogether to reclaim you from oulde
practices, and to win you wholelie to lay down your trade.

Well, you shall play the usurers still, and put forth your money to
advantage, but I pray you listen how: Si vis faenaerare faenera deo, says
Chrysostom, vsuram tuam non aurum, sed caelum esse volo. If thou will needs
put forth thy money to usury, let God take it to lone, I would have thee
play the usurer for somewhat, not to purchase gold, but Heaven by thy usury.

I am sure, if I should come unto a great monied man and say unto him: Sir you
are my friend, I know you have money, and you make not the best of it, you let
it out for ten (or say twenty) in the hundred, but I can tell you who will give
you an hundred, nay a thousand increase: would he not think you, give ear
unto me. Why then do you not regard that which is said unto you now, Lend
unto God you shall not receive gold for silver, and interest of hundreds, for
your principal, but heaven for earth, everlasting life for your temporal
goods, for so the scripture says: Pro. 19, 17. He that has mercy on the
poor, lends unto God, and the Lord will recompense him that which he has
given, not rendering a reward as a debt or due by desert, but crowning his
faithful deeds in mercy and according to his bountiful promise

Now therefore you rich men, seeing you know how to make the best return of
your money, slack not the time, distribute to the poor, sow your seed
against the time of harvest. It was wont in times past, to be the honor and
renown of the Cittye of London, to be given to have compassion upon the
poor: and specially have care of 2. sorts of poor: the stranger that
soiourneth amongst us, and the poor scholar that spends himself in study.

How your compassion is to strangers, I cannot say, my self a stranger in
this place I hope the best: but unto the schol lers of the Universities (to
whom you have opened your hands wide in former times) your benevolence and
liberality is much decreased, and your good will and charity toward them
greatly abated. Remember I pray you your ancient love unto learning, that the
honor and worship of this city may in you be revived: And consider I
beseech you, that though your gifts in all other should perish, yet in such it
is not lost: for have not you the fruits of their labors? Are they not all at
your commandment, to come up from both the Universities, and wheresoever
else in the whole land, to furnish this place (which is, I dare say) as
sufficientlye in this respect provided for, as any assembly or congregation in
Christendom: And yet verelye to speak truth (bear with my boldness I pray
you) they that come from far to this place, with great labor and to their
cost, yet are little regarded or thought upon. You give them the hearing, but
how: Even as Ezechiell complains, That the people would come to hear, but as
they were wont to hear a Minstrell, or Musician, or one that could sing well;
so long as the song was in singing, they would listen with the ear; but when
the song is done, the Minstrell may go shake his ears, they care not from
whence he comes, nor whether he goes. Eze. 33, 23. I pray you in how much
better account are the Ministers of God in these days: the comparison in deed
is homely, but judge you if I speak not the truth your wine vessels, and fig
frailes are in good reckoning and kept safely under lock and key, so long as
there is Wine or figs or any other precious thing in them. But when the
treasure is drawn out, the empty caske is turned forth, and put to viler uses.

So with many the Lords messengers are little regarded, while they are in
delivering their message, but when the message is out of their mouth, they are
but meanly accounted of. But I follow this point to far, I vpbraide not good
Christians, to whom both the message of peace and the bringers of it are
welcome: But I exhort all, that as they love the word of God, so they would
have in estimation those unto whom the word of reconciliation is committed.

And to the rich I do now turn my speech, that they would especially
consider of such, as are the seed and hope of learning and religion, I mean
poor and paineful students in the Universities. For if the swine be not denied
the husks, nor the dog the crumbs that fall from the table, how much less
ought the mouth of the Ox to be musled that treads out the corn. Luke. 15,
16. Mark, 7, 28.

If all poor ought to be relieved, the maimed, the lame and impotent, and
other needy folks, to whom what is given is to relieve them, and help their
present need. Much more ought you to stretch forth your hands unto those, that
do labor in the study of religion and learning, hereafter to profit the Church
of God. Shall it not in time to come be a joy and rejoicing of the heart, and as
marrowe of the bones to you (that fear God) when you shall see the Lords work
to prosper and thrive through their hands?

The fourth general sin which we note out of the prophets words, is wrong
judgment and extortion: which sins do reign in public persons, and such as
bear office. Here we are to deal with 3. sorts of men. First the judge, then
the lawyer, thirdly with officers, scribes, clerks, notaries, etc. For by all
these in their several places and callings the people of god may be much
grieved, wronged, and injured.

The Judge and Magistrate is a chief Minister of God, appointed for the praise
of weldoers, and punishment of the wicked, as S. Paul says, Romans 13. They are
in the Lords place in earth, to minister justice and equity unto all: wherefore
the scripture calls them Gods, Psalm. 82, 1. They are the pillars that hold
up the earth, and keep it as it were from staggering, which otherwise is in
danger to be dissolved, Psalm. 75, 3. That is, the burden of the common wealth
rests and staieth upon their shoulders. They are therefore as nails
fastened in a sure place, upon the which the whole weight of the land hangs
and depends, Isai 22, 23. They are as the strong men of the house, as the
wise man says the legs are to the body. Eccl. 12, 3. Wherefore if the pillars
be weakened, if the nail be broken, or the strong men bow themselves, the
earth, burden, house and all falls that leans upon them. So if judges be
deceitful and corrupt, the whole common wealth is in ieopardy.

The judge therefore ought not to be a lover of gifts, for a gift blinds the
eyes of the wise: and of all other, judges ought to hate covetousness, as Hobab,
Moses Father in law, gave him counsel to make choice of such to judge the
people, Deuteronomy. 18, 21. For the wise man says of a prince that harkeneth to
lies, all his servants are wicked, Pro. 29, 12.

That is, if the master be corrupt and will favor the unrighteous cause, all
his servants will be corrupt to, and look for bribes. Augustine says, Attendis
viscu^tuum, propter quod liberas non habes pennas; Thou art caught with
birdelime, thy wings are pinioned, thou can not fly. He likeneth the
receiving of a gift unto birdlime. Another way also the judge may offer
wrong: namelye in deferring and delaieng to give judgment in the righteous
cause. Wherefore the wise man says: if thou can do thy neighbor good to
day, say not to him come to morrow. Prou. 3, 28.

Job also protests of himself, that he caused not the eyes of the widows
to fail, 31, 16. He was a right pattern of a good judge. And in another place
he says, my talk dropped upon them, and they waited for me, as for the
rain. 29, 23, the sentence of the judge to the oppressed is as the comfortable
rain to the thirsty ground. The earth waits for the rain, but if it come
out of time, and not in due season, it helps not, so is the sentence of the
judge, deferred and put off days and years, even like rain that comes out
of season. Hobab Moses*father in law, thought it too much that the people
should wait for judgment from morning to even, Exodus 18, 14. What would he
say if he were now alive, to see the people wait from month to month, from
Term to Term, from year to year, and yet many times find no end of
their suits.

The Judge again ought not to have respect of persons in judgment, he ought
to hear the small as well as the great, and not to fear the face of man, Deuteronomy.
1, 17. for such a man will transgres for a piece of bread, Prou. 28, 21. That
is a fearful judge that stands in fear of the mighty, and will be swayed
by authority, is made such a slave to his affections, that the least thing in
the world will corrupt him. But as the Judge ought to behave himself
uprightly in all causes, and to deal equally and indifferently with small and
great, so most of all, Justice ought to be executed in causes of blood, they
ought neither for favor nor fear, nor for any reward to suffer a murderer to
escape unpunished. When such an one is accused before them and is convinced by
plain evidence, they ought to say as the Elders of Israel were wont, when a
man was found slain in the way: Our hands have not shed his blood, neither
have our eyes seen it, Deutrinom. 21, 7. For if the Judge shall suffer the
murderer to escape, though he has not put his hands to the murder, yet his
eyes have seen it, and winked at it, for the matter is made so plain by
evidence before him, as if he had seen it, and yet he holds his peace.

There is a notable place for this purpose, 1. King. 20, 37. The prophet there
being sent to reprove the king for letting go the Lords enemy, the king of
the Aramites, says unto one, Smite me, and because he would not smite him, he
was slain by a Lion, for here the prophet takes upon himself the person of
a malefactor or murderer. He that will not smite such an one, shall be
smitten and slain himself. Again, the Prophet disguiseth himself and stood
in the kings way, and made as though he had been a souldior, that had lost a
man, taken in battle and given him to keep, and so the man did escape, the
kings sentence was, That his life should go for his: So, says the Prophet to
the King, that because he had let go a man whom the Lord appointed to die,
his life should go for his. Thus then the case stands, so long as we are in
this life we are in a continual warfare, there is a continual fight between
the children of righteousness and the wicked. The Judges are the captains and
chief leaders: when a murderer is brought before you, he is as taken in the
midst of bat tail, a man whom the Lord has appointed to die, take heed,
let him not go, the sentence is given, Your life shall go for his, whosoever
lets him escape, that is, God will require it at your hands.

When Elisia was sick, the king of Israel came to visit him, to whom the
Prophet said, smite the ground, and he smot it thrice, then the prophet was
angry and said, thou should have smitten five or six times, so should
thou have smitten Aram til thou had wholly consumed it, 2. King. 13. 19. Thus
must the enemies of God be smitten. It is not enough for to smite a murderer
once twice or thrice, in imprisoning him or otherwise layeng any corporal
punishment upon him. But he must be smitten till he be consumed, that is, he
ought to die the death, blood cannot be purged but by blood.

Concerning Lawyers and men of counsel, to them I say that they take heed
they become not patrons and maintainers of the unjust and unrighteous cause The
wise man speaks to wise men, and gives counsel to counselors, Buy the
truth but sell it not, Prou. 23, 23. that is, spare no cost to purchase the
truth, for it is more worth than pearl or precious stone: but sell it not,
be not hired for any money to forgo the truth, and to sell thy counsel and
help, to countenance out a false matter against the truth, for now thou
sellest, thou betraiest the truth. Does not the prophets woe reach unto such.
Woe unto you that speak good of evil, and evil of good, that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter, does not the hireling at the law even so for with
his sugared eloquence and fined tongue, he gives a sweet taste to the bitter and
sower, that is, vntighteous cause, yea to them the prophet speaks, saying woe
unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, Esa. 5, 18. for their fair
pretenses, their cunning gloses, their goodly circumstance of speech, and all
to uphold and bolster out the unjust cause, what are they else but cords and
ropes whereby they violently pull iniquity upon themselves. I wish such men
that set their wisdom, eloquence, conscience and all to sale, betimes to look
unto themselves, and not by unlawful means, as by defending of badde causes
to hunt after gain, for in the end if ever they have grace to repent, it will
be a worm in their conscience, Then shall they say unto their Clients, Recipe
quod tibi cum male adessem, mihi dedisti, and read ^duersatio quod me agente
male abstulisti, (August.) Hold here, take that again which thou gave me,
when I pleaded for thee in a false matter, and go thy way, seek out thy
aduersarye, restore unto him that which by my means and false pleading thou
wrongfully tookest away from him.

To officer^ now, whether in temporal or spiritual courts. I say not, but that
holy man John Baptist says unto such, Be coment with your stipende or wages,
Luke 3, 13. Use not extortion, oppress not the poor people of God, enforce
the^ not to pay more than of right belongs unto you. And you Masters that
keep Scribes and clerks under you give them for their labor, suffer them not
to live by the spoil of others, to scrape and get together what they can, do
you not hear the clamor and noise of the people, how they co^plain of great
extortio^ among officers: judge you your selves how true and just it is, Si
quis (says Augustine) qui stipendia public decreta consequitur, adhuc amplius
quaerit, tanqua^ calu^niator and concussor Ihoannis sententia co^demnatur, He
that is not content with the stipend by public order allotted to him but
seeks for more, is condemned by the sentence of John, as an oppressor and
extortioner. Such men are fitly compared to the fish of the sea, their
property is this, that if one be but a little bigger than his fellow, he will
knabble upon him and consume him by peecemeale: then comes a greater fish
than he and deuoureth him to, so it comes to pass, Dumpraedo vis esse
minoris, praedaes maioris. It is the just judgment of God upon extortioners,
that while they prey upon their inferiors as the smaller fish, they themselves
are but made a fatter prey to others, that are greater and mightier than they.

Now having touched those sins which are worthy of reproof in the Civil
state, I come to the ecclcsiasticall, least I should be thought either to deem
Ecclesiastical persons to be faultlesse, or else partial, in passing over
their faults with silence. There is therefore a kind of spiritual stealing and
theft, which is even next unto the Church, for if there were not, the Prophet
would not have said of some, That they did steal away the word from the
people, Ierem. 23, 30. First therefore we are to warn and admonish all
negligent and careless pastors to attend upon their charge, and to feed the
flock of Christ committed to them, for why should they reap temporal things,
unless they sow spiritual, why do they eat the fat, and cloth themselves with
the wool. and yet feed not the flock, Ezec. 34, 3. I speak unto al, whether
the unskillful Pastor that can not, the idle that does not, the careless that
will not feed and instruct the people. One says very well of such, Qui non
frangit pane^, non dispensator est, sed dissipator, non speculator, sed
spiculator, He that breaks not the bread of life to the people, is not a
disperser, but a destroier, not a watchman, but a waster of his flock. Does
not the Prophet worthily call such idol-sheepheards, that as the idol has
eyes, mouth ears, feet, yet neither sees, speaks, hea reth or walks, so
they do occupy the room of shepherds yet feed not, of teachers, and yet teach
not, and they are all physicians of no value, as Job says 14, 4 who are not
able or willing to heal the diseases of the people, and to comfort them in
the day of their needs. It was decreed in a counsel of Lateran, an. 1179 even
under the popes nose, in the assembly of 300 Bishops, that it should not be
lawful for any Priest, as they then called them, to have more than one
benefice. Pope Innocent the 6 chased away from his court and from the City of
Rome all Prelates and other Ecclesiastical persons that had charges abroad,
and sent them home to their bishoprikes and benefices. I say therefore no more
but this, let our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
pharisees, as our savior says, If in time of ignorance and superstition such
good care was taken, and provision made for the church of God, let these
lightsome days of knowledge bring forth greater, or at the least the like
fruits. And the rather pastors and shepherds are now to be moved and stirred
up to look carefully to their flocks, and to speed them home to their charges
because there are many woolues gone abroad, many Jesuits and seminary Priests,
as locusts from the bottomless pit, are spued forth from Rhemes in heaps into
this land: now it is high time we should give ear to the wise man Nunc
cognosce faciem pecoris* Prou. 27, 2^ Now be diligent to know the countenance
and state of the flock, and be ready at hand to drive away the wolf. The
danger is great that is threatened against idle shepherds r^poscam sanguin^m
eorum a manib. tuis, I will require their blood at thy hand, Ezechiel 33. And
on the contrary side, unspeakable is the joy, that shall redound in the end to
faithful shepherds, when they shall stand forth with boldness in the day of
the Lord, and say, Ecce ego dominum, and na^i, quos mihi dedisti, Isaie, 8,
18. Behold O Lord, here am I, and the children whom thou have given me.

But are Ministers, think you, all in fault for Church matters that are
amiss? Noe I trow not, there are others which are no great friends to the
church I pray you what right have lay men to the Leuits maintaynaunce, to live
of the Tithes which are allotted for Ministers. I speak not of humane law, by
the which they hold the^m, which is constrained to suffer many things for the
great hardness of men's hearts, and so was the law of Moses, as we may read
Math. 19, 8. But where find they in the law of god that they ought to deal
with spiritual livings, nay we find the contrary, for between the ministers
and people there is a mutual exchange, a matter of giving and receiving, Phi.
4. 15. They give spiritual things and receive temporal: none therefore has
right to challenge their te^porall things, but they which distribute amongst
them spiritual, Augustine says that tithes and other spiritual maintainaunce
is due unto the church, Quasi debitum fisco reddendum, As subsidies and taxes
of the subjects are due to the exchequer, Si non haberet rempublicam Christus
non haberet fiscu^ suum, Christ has his commonwealth, and Christ has his
exchequer, which are the revenues of the church, it is no more lawful for any
man to withhold the due from the Church treasury, than for the subject to keep
back any thing from the princes exchequer. In king Henry the third his days
there was suit made by the Bishops of this land to have impropriate benefices
that were annexed to Abbeys and priories, and other houses of popish ^^^igion
to be restored to the Church, they made a great piece of money and sent up to
Rome about it, but as never any good thing lightly proceeded from that
Antichristian sea, so they were frustrate of their purpose and prevailed not.
Which godly motion of theirs if it had then gone forward and taken place, it
had been happy with the Church of England at this day.

But shall I tell you of a worse sort of Church thieves and churchrobbers tha^
any I have yet spoken of, they are these greedy and devouring cormorants,
corrupt and covetous patrons, who make sale of Church liuinges, and by cunning
sleights and devises spoil and rob, and make havoc of the Church, these
fretting Cankers and Caterpillars of spiritual liuinges (if they might have
their will) would bring it about, as they have already in some places, that
Ministers should serve as the poor Leuite did in Micah his house, for meat
and drink and a suit of apparel, and a few sickles of Silver beside, Judges,
17, 10. And they would gladlye see us in that case that Elie his house was, to
bow our selves for a piece of Silver, and for a morsel of bread, 1. Samuel. 2,
36. Who if they will needs live of the altar, they might be content to be at
our allowance, as David received sheaw bread at Achimeleks hand. But it is
too too much that they should be their own car uers, and be first served: Like
as in Ely his time the Priests boy would come and thrust in his three tined
fleshhooke into the cauldron, and whatsoever came up was their own, 2. Sam. 2,
13. So now do these fellows deal with the ministers of the gospel, with
their threetined flesh hook they will take three parts of the living to
themselves, and what remains the poor ministers shall have. And thus by their
corrupt dealinges they cause others to make shipwreck of their conscience, and
they themselves are in the high way to destruction, who are the cause that many
people for want of sufficient teachers, perish in their ignorance.

Thus have we delivered unto you the Prophets meaning, concerning such sins
and transgressions as are committed against our brethren, which are
comprehended under the general sin of stealing. Now it follows, that
likewise we should declare what the Prophet understands by false swearing,
whereby such sins are deciphered as offend against the Majesty of God, and
whereby his name is dishonored. First of all, false swearing is condemned, which
is of two sorts, either that which is committed in common or ordinary talk, or
that which falls out in public judgment, which we call perjury: the former
of these two is a sin used now adays very commonly, yea men are grown unto
such a custom in swearing, that many times oaths break from them, and they
know not whether they have sworn or not: and they have such a delight in it,
that they take it to be an ornamente and beautylieng of their speech to
powder it with oaths, yea daily new oaths are invented, and so foolish and
ridiculous, that for shame I cannot name them. And thus the name of God is
profaned, and he is robbed of his honor, for whereas it is a peculiar part
of Gods worship to swear by his holy name, they, in swearing by creatures, by
Saints, nay by Idols, as by the Mass, by the Roode, and such like, they do
give the honor due unto God unto others, and so commit idolatry, they also
wilfully transgress the commandment of our Savior Christ, who says, Swear
not at all, but let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, Math. 5, 37, not
hereby abridging Christians of the lawful use of an oath before the magistrate,
and in other weighty causes, but giving the rules for the brideling of our
tongue in common talk.

The Wise man says, that in the multitude of words there can not want
iniquity, Proverb. 10, 19. How great then is the sin which is committed in
the multitude of oaths. It is a sport to a fool to do evil, verse 23. This
is even the highest step of iniquity, for a man to rejoice in evil doing.
And I am afraid these blasphemers are come to it, that think them the iolyest
fellows in their company, that can swear out most lustily. The Leopards skin
is not fuller of spots, Jeremy 13, 23, than their tongue is full of lies,
their mouth full of oaths, The thorns do not crack faster under the pot,
than they break forth into oaths and blasphemies, Eccle. 7, 8. They are always
foming out their own shame. Jude. 13. For from the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks: their unseemly and unchristian talk it is but Tanquam spuma
cordis, the froath and foam of a profane heart. And verily this ungodly custom
of swe ring, is so much the more intolerable, as it is far easier then many
other sins to be left. Non opus est pecunia vel sudore, says Chrysostom,
it asks no great cost, labor, or sweat, to be weaned from this sin. Watch
over thy self says he, and desire thy friends to observe them: Hac
meditatione te exerceas vel quadraginta dies, Be thou but thus occupied forty
days, thy sin will leave thee.

Augustine says, Nunquid non ego fratres consueueram quotidie iurare: ye al
know brethren, that it was my daily practice to swear: But after I understood
how grievous a sin it was, I called upon God, and labored against it, Nunc
nihil mihi facilius, quam non iurare, now nothing is more easy unto me then
not to swear. Wherefore seeing with so small labor, and in so short time,
with faithful prayer and godly endeavor, this sin may be overcome, they are
sure most careless and re^chlesse men, that choose rather still to continue in
their wickedness.

The other kind of false swering is by perjury, when men are not afraid to
take a false oath, and to call God to be a witness to an untruth. A horible
sin, nay many sins in one sin. For a perjured person is an infidel in his
heart, and says to himself that there is no God: for certainly if he were so
persuaded of the divine power, who knows the heart, and is able to be avenged
of sinners, he would never be so hardye and desperate, as in an untruth to
appeal to God. He is also a murderer, for by his oath his brother receives
hurt, as if he had wounded him bodilye. And therefore by Moses law, the false
witness did endure the same punishment, which by his false oath was cast upon
his brother. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, life for life, Deu. 19,
21. If his neighbor were adjudged to lose an eye, a tooth, or life, by his
lieng evidence, he was to sustain the same loss and damage himself, as if
with his own hand he had pulled out his neighbors eye or tooth, or taken away
his life. There is a generation whose toonges are as swords, their jaws as
knives. Pro. 30, 14. This is the generation of wicked perjured persons, the
poison of Aspes is under their lips. Romans 3, 13 Their blasphemous toonge
stingeth to death, as the venomous sting of serpe^ts. Miserable men, which do
willinglye fall into the snares of the Devil, out of the which few of them
can unfold them. Nay their conscience is defiled and polluted. Men more
senseles and profane then the devil himself, for they tremble and stand in
awe. Iam. 2, 19. But these men have no fear of God, but are clean void of
understanding Their word shall fret as a canker. 2. Tim. 3, 17, their false oath
shall be a bane to their soul, and like the bitter water which the adulterous
woman used to drink that caused her belly to swel, and her thigh to rot. Number.
6. Even so this iniquity which he has drunk as water, shall be as a gnawing
worm upon his conscience, and as a fire in his bones. Wherefore repent this evil
ye abominable periurers, and beware of this sin, least you fall into it, all
you that love your own souls.

Besides these false swearers, which pro perly offend in swearing vainly and
falsely, There are other also which in a more large and general sense do
fail in the worship of God, and so may be reckned in the same number of false
swearers: and they are likewise of twoe sorts: either such as are corrupt in
the judgment of religion, or else they which profes the Gospel, but deny the
power thereof, who honor God with their lips and outward profession, and
dishonor him in their life.

In the first place we must deal against heretics and schismatikes, that do
troble our Church. In the next against hypocrites, which cause the Gospel to
be evil spoken of by their evil life, and all these are truly said to
swear falselye by the name of God.

First they which fail in judgment of religion, and so we the seed of corrupt
doctrine, are the chief troublers and disquieters of our Church, the Papists
and Romish Catholics. There is also another sect, that have made a great rent
in our Church, and they are commonly called Brownists. Both of these do agree
in disturbing our peace, and in many opinions they come very near together,
and are almost coosine germans. They both are recusants, and refuse to come to
our Churches and congregations, and to hear divine service. They both affirm,
that we have no sacraments, no true Ministers, and consequently no Church,
though upon diverse grounds: They do not stand upon the same premises, yet they
bring forth the same conclusion. What shall we think of these men? Truly
their case is more dangerous then they are aware of. For one says truly, Non
potest deum habere patrem, qui ecclesiam non habet matrem, He cannot have God
his father who denies the Church to be his mother.

But I do make a difference between these two sorts. For the one, that is the
Papist, swarueth on the left hand, the other on the right: their transgression
is in foul idolatry and superstition, these offend through a preposterous and
rash disordered zeal. They are divided from us in the very substance of
religion, and material points of faith. These men do vary from us, chiefly
in matters of circumstance, and the external rites and orders of the Church.
They, some of them have brought forth sower and ungodly fruit of a bitter
root: they have fallen into open rebellion, committed treason in the highest
degree, and conspired the death of our Soueraign (whose life God of his mercy
long preserve) the other as yet have not proceeded so far, and I trust they
will not and I pray god, they do not. To conclude, they are manifest and
convict Heretics, these as yet we will vouchsafe the name of schismatikes. But
let them take heed betime, for if they continue obstinate, their schism will
be changed into heresy, as Augustine said of the Donatists, Schismaticus es
sacrilega discessione, heraeticus sacrilego dogmate. Thou art a schismatike,
because of thy sacrilegious departure from the Church, thou art an heretic,
for thy sacrilegious opinions, which thou hold. First as touching our
heretics and Popish Catholics, they are the briers and thorns, which the
prophet Micah speaks of. 7, 4. The best of them is a brier, and as a thorn in
a hedge. For they are as pricks in our eyes, and goades in our sides. We
nourish them amongst us, even as fire in our bosom, as the wise man says.
Pro. 6, 27. And fitly may they be resembled to cockatrice eggs, if a man eat
of their eggs (says the prophet) he dies, and that which is trod upon
breaks out into a serpent. Isai. 59, 5. So if a man be infected with their
heresy and taste of their delicates. and drink of the whore of Babilons
poisoned cup, it is death unto him, he destroieth his own soul. Again if
their doings be sifted, their practices sounded, in many of them you shall
find, conspiracies, disloyalty, and rebellion: as do but tread on the
cockatrise eg, out flies a serpent.

These are the gretest enemies that the Church of God either now has or ever
had. Sometime the church was persecuted by cruel tyrants, sometime vexed and
molested of Heretics: Tunc leo fuit, as Austin says, cum aperte saeuiebat,
modo draco est, cum occul e insideatur. Then the Dyuel raged as a Lion, when
he raised persecution against the church, another time he plaieth the wilye
serpent, and privily lies in wait. But these enemies of the church, have
both ways vexed the people of God, both by laieng wast the sanctuarye of GOD,
by their barbarous and cruel persecutions, as also in defiling it with filthy
idolatry and heresy.

So that both ways now they prove the Church as cruel persecutors. Exercent
patientiam ecclesiae, They do exercise where they may, the patience of the
Church, and as egregious Heretics, Exercent sapientiam ecclesiae, They do
try the wisdom of the Church.

Now to leave these men, whose conversion most of all we desire, if that can
not be had, our next wish is, that they were from amongst us: that as their
heart is at Rome, so they also were with their Pope holy father there. But if
this neither cannot be obtained: our last suit and request is this, That
seeing we cannot be rid of them, they might be served as the Gebeonites were in
Israel. Joshua. 9, 27. They were made hewers of wood, and drawers of water. So
it were not safe that these our home bred enemies should bear any office in
Israel, to be governors of the Lords people, but let them live as private
men, and serve in baser places as the Gibeonites. which thing (I trust) our
wise and godly magistrates will have an especial care and regard unto.

Now to come unto the schismatics of our church. We may say to them, nay the
Church of England thus speaks unto them, as the wise woman to her son,
Prou. 31, 1, What my son, what the son of my womb, and what O son of my
desires. O let them not rise up against their mother that bare them and gave
them suck. Has not the Church of England bread them and brought them up?
that knowledge understanding and faith that they have, had they it not by our
ministry, have not the spiritual fathers and pastors of our Church begotten
them unto God, if they be the Lords? What an unnatural part then is it in them
to curse their own mother, and to speak evil of her that bare the^. What
though the church of England be black, she has her infirmities, will they
therefore make her a keeper of vines, Cantic. 1, 5, that is, clean thrust her
out of doors, and say she is no Church, nor give her any place in the house
of God. But this is most unkind dealing, that the sons of her mother,
children of the same faith, should offer this hard mesure unto her: we would
not have them to justify things that are amiss in the Church, as Adam with
leaves hid his nakedness, neither ought they with curssed Cham to lay open the
infirmities of of their parents. They would be builders of Gods house, and so
are we, let us build together, not with strife and confusion of toungs, as the
tower of Baebel was built, but in peace and love, as Salomons temple was raised
up, the noise of a hammer was not heard in the house, their stones and timber
were squared in the mountains, as the wise man gives advise, Prepare thy
works abroad in the fields, and then build thy house, Pro. 24 27. So our
hammering and hewing work ought to be without: our hammers and axes should be
turned to beat down popery, and hew off al gross superstition: we ought not
one to hew at another: seeing we profess the same faith, and pretend the
building of the Lords house, we should build together in unity, concord and
peace: otherwise under color and pretense of building, we pull down and
destroy the house of God: hear what an ancient Father says, Venit
persecutor, and non fregit crura Christi, venit Donatus, and dirupit ecclesiam
Christi, integrum corpus Christi manet inter manus persecutoru^, etc. The
tormentor came and brake not the legs of Jesus, Donatus the scismaticke came
and brake the peace of the Church, the body of Christ remained sound and whole
in the hands of persecutors, and the body of the church is rent asunder among
christians. Let our English Donatists take heed therefore betime, they have a
great account to make unto god, in making such breaches in the church. Thus
having spent some time in dealing against our heretics and scismatikes, we must
also in few words admonish the hipocrits and dissembling professors of the
gospel, who outwardly bear the name of Christians, but their lives are
nothing reformed, garnished with a goodly show of christianity without, as
sepulkers are outwardly bsautiful, but inwardly their life is full of
corruption and filthiness, of oppression, covetousness, adulteries,
profaning of the Sabbath, contempt of gods word, intolerable pride, with such
like abominations. What is now become of the life and true profession of
Christians, Christ says, Let your light shine before men, and a ca^dle must
be put on a candlestick, not whelmed under a bushel, Matt, 5. A good
profession is as the candle, but an evil life is as a bushel that ouerwhelmeth
it that it cannot shine forth. The Israelits were commanded to make their
garmets with fringes on the skirts in remembrance of the commandments, Nu. 15*
39. I see every man has shaped him an Israelitish garment, they would be
called Christians, but where are your fringes, where is your obedience to the
commandments of God. Christians in these days may be compared to vessels full
of wine, but they want a vent Job. 32, 19. So men are now full of knowledge and
learning, but the vent of a good life is wanting, the vessels are in danger of
bursting, if they have no ve^t: so knowledge puffs up, if it be not ve^ted by
low. There is now a famine of good works, like as in Jeremy his time, when
the Nobles sent their servants with their pitchers to the fountains and
wells for water, they returned without and were ashamed, Iere. 14, 3. So now
adays many that should be fountains and welspringes of good life and examples
to others are dried up: if a man seek for the water of life at their hands, he
shall return with an empty pitcher, he shall find no such thing there.
Christ now thirsts again, as once he did upon the Cross, for the good
fruits and holy life of Christians. But we are all become as the summer
gatherings, My soul desired the first ripe fruits, says the Prophet in the
name of God, and there was not a cluster to eat, Micah, 7, 1. He says the Lord
hungreth and thirsts, and lo^geth after the obedience and holy life of his
servants, but what is it, even as summer fruit, soon ripe, soon rotten. But
yet I pray you let us remember the end of fruitles trees, They that bring not
forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire, Mat. 3. Wherefore
as S. Paul says, let us al covet the best gifts, knowledge is good, but love
is better: to believe aright does help, but to live well is more acceptable:
to offer the calves of our lips is a free gift, but a contrite heart is the
best sacrifise, Psalm. 51, 17. and to give our bodies a living and acceptable
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, is the reasonable serving and true
worship of God, Romans 12, 1.

There remains now, having spoken of the sins which the Prophet cries out
against, that we should also declare the judgment denounced against them: which
is double, both upon the sinners and transgressors themselves, and upon their
substance: first, for their persons, it is said, They shall be cut off (all
that steal, and swear falsely) on this side and on that, upon every hand. All
Thieves shall be cut off as Achan was, Joshua 7, 1. All covetous persons, as
the rich man, Luke 12, 20. This night shall thy soul be taken from thee. All
corrupt Judges shall be cut off as Shebuah, Isai, 22, 18. Idle sheapheards shall
be cut off, three taken away in one month, Zachar. 11, 8. All blasphemers
shall be punished as the Egiptian was stoned to death, Leui. 24, 10 All false
witnesses shall be recompensed according to their deserts, as they that accused
Daniel, 6, 24. Heretics and Idolaters shall be slain, their own parents shall
thrust them through, Zachar. 13, 3. Schismatiks shall not escape unpunished, as
Coran, Dathan, and Abiram, as they made a schism and rent in Israel, so the
earth was rent and divided to swallowe them up, Number. 16* All hypocrites and
false hearted and dissembling Christians may be warned also by the fearful
examples of Ananias and Saphyra, Act. 5. who for their hypocrisy were slain
by the mouth of Peter.

But what if the judgment of God does not presently fall upon sinners, being
for a while differred, yet have they no cause to reioise and triumph, as though
the storm were ouerpast, and that their sins are forgotten, for the longer
the Lord stays before he punishes, the more grievous is the punishment when
it comes, for the Lord is said to make some stay but until he have whet
his sword, Psalm, 7, 12. and put on his armor, his helmet and habergion, and
cloak of revenge, Isai. 59, 17. That like as a man prepared to battle, does
assail his enemies more stronglye: even so the wrath of God the longer it is
in kindling, the more fiercely it burns when it breaks forth.

The judgment of God (as the text says) shall enter into the house, it shall
search every corner, the wicked cannot be hid from his sight: It shall creep
in at the windows, Joel. 2, 9. Like as the frogs could not be kept, no not
out of Pharao his bed chamber, nor from the couch where he lay. Exodus 8, 3. So
there is no place so secret, but the judgment of God shall enter into it. The
Lord shall search out the wicked with a candle, Zephan. 1, 12. That is shall
most narrowlye seek them out, so that they cannot possibly escape his hands.

And when the judgment of God is entered, it shall remain in their house, like
as the leprosy, if it had once taken hold of an house, it would never go
away: Neither scraping of the walls, nor pulling out of the stones would
serve, till house and all were beaten down and destroyed. Leuit. 14, 45. So
look where the judgment of God lights upon any house or stock, the Lord
will continually afflict that house, the father, the children, the childrens
children, till he have consumed them, if they continue in the disobedience and
ungodliness of their forefathers. The curse of God shall enter into their
bowels like water and oil into their bones: It shall be as a garment unto them,
and as a girdle to their loins. Psalm. 109, 19. That is, it shall never depart
from their house. Their punishment shall be as blew wounds, and stripes that
go down into the bowels. The Lord shall strike home, the marks and spots of
his stripes, shall for ever be seen in their stock, as blewe wounds are in
the flesh. And this shall be the judgment of their persons.

They also shall be punished and afflicted in their substance, whatsoever they
have scraped together, by frawde, violence, oppression, and extortion, shall not
prosper in their hands: the judgment of God as a consuming fire, shall consume
all the house, the timber, and stones thereof, as the Prophet says: That like
as in a raging fire, there is neither stick nor stone left, so shall the
substance of ungodly men come to nothing: So the wise man says, that the
deceitful man shall not roast that which he got in hunting. Pro. 12, 27. He
shall not enjoy that long, which is craftily purchased. Their money shall be
put as into a bottomless bag. Hagge. 1, 6. Though they should build them a
neast as in a rock. Isai. 22, 16. yet shall they be as a tottering wall.
Psalm-62, 2. Though they build them houses, and call them by their names, Psa.
49 11. yet shall they come to ruin and desolation: Nettles and thistles shall
grow in their palaces: Owls, serpents, and dragons shall dwell in their
pleasant places. Isai. 13, 20. Lo this shall be the portion of the wicked. But
as for the righteous, he shall grow as the Lille, and fasten his roots as
the trees of Libanon Hosy. 14, 6. and he shall be as the sun when he arises
in his strength and beauty, Judges. 5, 31.

But now if men would be wary and wise, they may learn how to prevent and
avoid the wrath and displeasure of God, and sheilde both themselves and their
substance from the day of vengeance. First let them make them friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, let them distribute unto the necessitye of their brethren.
If they will have their houses to continue, they must lay the foundation in
the service and fear of God: as it is said that the midwiues in Israel feared
God, and therefore the Lord built them houses, gave them a name in Israel.
Exodus 1, 21. The fear of God, and true religion, is that rock that we must
build upon. Matthew. 7, 24. Terrena aedificatia a terra incipit, caelestis
instructio a superno crescit exordio: A spiritual building (says Augustine)
must be built clean contrary to an earthly. For in earthly buildings, the
foundation is laid below, but the foundation of our heavenly house must be
laid in heaven. Let rich men follow Solomon's order: First build God an
house, and then build for themselves.

Let them not build as covetous and over greedy minded men, in desolate and
solitary places, and out of the way. Job. 3, 14. But as Jobs house stood in the
way, and was as an Inn for the poor traveling and waifaring manne. Job. 3,
14. Thus an house erected and builded in righteousness, and founded in the
fear of God, shall stand and endure many ages.

Let us hear also a remedy for our selves, how the Lords wrath may be
appeased toward us. Truly repentance is the only remedy for sinners, we
must meet the Lord our GOD in the way, Amos. 4, 12. As Abigail did. 1. Sam.
25. she met David in the way, if she had waited David at home, they had been
all put to the sword. So the Prophet moves us to go forth and meet the Lord
by repentance, before the sword be upon us.

Let us do as Jacob did, who sent a present and gift before to his brother:
for as the wise man says, a man's gift inlargeth his steps, and leads him
before great men. Pro. 18, 16. So let us present the Lord, with contrite
hearts, humble and sorrowful spirits, bring forth worthy fruits of repentance,
which are the most acceptable gifts unto God. As Aron took a censor and censed
before the Lord, and so stayed the plague. Number. 16, 48. So let us sense up
unto God the sighs and groninges of our hearts.

The Gibeonites punishment was to draw water for the temple, God requires no
other punishment of us, but to draw water before him, that is to weep
abundantly for our sins, as the Israelites in Samuels time are said to draw
water before God. 1. Sam. 7, 6.

Lastly, either we must judge our selves or else the Lord will judge us. 1.
Cor. 11, 31. Augustine says, Peccatum puniendum est aut a te, aut a deo, si
punitur a te, tunc punietur sine te, sivero a te non punitur, tecum punietur:
Sin must needs be punished either of thy self, or of God: If by thy self,
then shall it be punished without thee: if of God, then thou and thy sin shall
be punished together. Wherefore let us return unto God by true repentance let
us judge and condemn our selves that we be not judged of God.

Let every man leave his wicked ways, and depart from iniquitye: the thief
from stealing, the crafty man from deceiving, the covetous man from oppression,
the judge from corruption in judge meant, the Lawyer from dealing unfaithfully,
the officer from extortion: the idle pastor, from his careless and sinful
life: corrupt patrones from Churchrob bing: blasphemers from swearing: perjured
persons from forswearing: papists from Idolatry and superstition: Schismatikes
from contention: Hyppocrites fro dissimulation. Thus if every man shall turn
from his wicked ways, and do the thing that is lawful and right: the Lord
will return unto us, he will fauourablye look upon us and bless us, he will
be our God, and we shall be his people: his blessing shall be upon us and
our children for ever: we shall have our desire over our enemies, and shall see
Jerusalem in prosperity all our life long: and at the length, when we have
walked thorough the desert, the barren and unfruitful wilderness of this world,
the lord shall bring us under the leading of our Captain Jesus Christ into the
promised land, the Celestial Canaan, and heavenly Jerusalem: unto the which
blessed estate the Lord grant we may at length attain tho rough Jesus Christ,
who has bought it for us, not with gold or silver, but with his own precious
blood: to whom with God the Father, and God the holy ghost, three persons and
one everliving, immortal, and only wise God, be all praise, honor, and glory,
thorough the Church for ever.

FINIS.

