THE DESCRIPTION OF the City of Excester, collected and gathered by John
Vowel alias Hooker, gentleman, and Chamberlain of the same City.
EXcester or Exeter is a famous and ancient City, being the Metropole and
Emporium of the west parts of England, situated in the Province called
Deuonia, which is Deuonsheer. Of the first foundation thereof (by reason of the
sundry inuations of foreign and strange nations, and of their hostilities and
mortal wars, in burning and destroying this City) there remains no
certain memorial, neither among the records of the said City, nor yet in any
other writer. But most certain it is that it was first builded by the Brutes
or Britons, for the names which they gave unto it: are yet at these presents
had in remembrance, as Brutus.
well among the Cronographers of this Realm: as also among the Cornish people,
who sometimes were one with this Province, but are now in a Province of
themselves and borderers to this, being the remanent of the blood of Brutus.

For when Cadwalader King of this land by reason of a great Cadwalader.
famine and Pestilence, was enforced to forsake the same and flee into little
Britain (which now is under the dicion of the French King) diverse and most
part of his people fled also, some into Wales and some into Cornwall, where
ever sithe^ce they and after them their posterity have remained and continued.

The old Cronographers serchers, and writers of antiquities, Corinnia.
do find that this City was called Corinia, and thereof the Monaltary of
this City was called Ecclesia Coriniensis: which name if it were first given
as it should seem by Corineus, who after the ariuall of Brutus into this land,
was made the first Duke of these two Provinces of Deuon, and Cornwall, and who
the^ after his own name called it Corinia, but now Corinibia, whereof this
City ever has been and is the Metropolie and Emporium and always parcel,
sometimes of ye kingdom, then of the Duchy, and afterward of the Earldom,
and now again the Duchy of Cornwall, out of all dout it is of no less
antiquity then the said names do importe.

The Britons in their fung call it by sundry and diverse names. The first and
eldest in remembrance in their speech Cairpenhulgoit.
is Cairpenhulgoyte, that is to say, the prosperous cheef Town in the wood, as
it does appeer by Geftery of Monmoth and Ponticus Virimus. It was also called
Penhaltcayr, that is to say, the cheef City or Town upon the hill, as
appears in the Penhaltcair.
trauerse between the Bishop, Dean, and Chapter of this City, and the Mayor
and comminaltie of the same: in a long suit concerning their liberties.

But the names which the Cornish people do at these presents remember and
retain are Pencayr, Cayrruthe, Cayrriske. Pencayr. Cayrruth. Cayrriske.
Pencayr is to say the cheef City. Cayrruthe signifies the red City,
taking that name of the soil of the ground whereupon it is situated, which is
red. Cayrryske is ye City of Iske being so called, and taking his
denominatation of the River which fleeteth by the said City called in
British Iske. And of this name Houedon in his Cronicle makes mention saying
thus, Anno domini. 877. Excercitus danorum, ab warham nocte quadam federe
dirupto ad Exancester diuerterunt quod brittannice dicitur Caerwiske. Ptolomeus
the famous Astronomer, who was about the year of our Lord. 162. ( Coel being
King of this land) names the City Isca and the River king Coil
Isaca. And Bale the sercher of antiquities, following the same opinion does
also name the City Isca and the in habitant or dweller therein Iscanus. But
under corection and Bale.
with reverence be it said, a man may think that Ptolomeus being in
Alexandria, and so far distant from this Realm was happily misinformed: or
else the Printer mistaken because it is most likely that the River should be
called Isca according to the British speech in those days when it was called
Isca, which name by tra^sposing of two middle letters does yet remain, being
now named Icsa. or Ecsa. But whatsoever Ptolomeus or Baleus censures and
judgments be heerin: it is most certain, that the names which the Britons
gave were of longest continuance, and this City called by their dominations
by the space of xv. hundred years until the coming of the Saxons, the Pictes,
and Scots into this Realm, which was about the year of our Lord 450, for they
as they prevailed and conquered: did always alter and change the names of all
places and Towns, accounting it a great part of their glory and renown to
give new names of their own device, or of their own native Contries, for so
write ye Cronographers.

Picti, Scoti, Angli, Daci et Normandi, in hac insula rerum potiti, cuncta
immutarunt, pro trophaeis habentes, Locis a se deuictis noua imponere nomina.
Wherefore as of all other Cities and Towns (few excepted) so of this also they
changed Muncketon.
and altered the old names and called it Muncketon, by which name it was so
called by the space of three hundredth and od years, until the time and coming
of King Adlestane. For he about the year of our Lord. 932. being much grieved
with Adlestane
the Rebellion of the Cornish people, because they refused and denied to
acknowledge him for their lawful King: did bend his power, and conducted his
army against them, and (with force when he had subdewed them) returned to this
City, and for a perpetual memory to this commonwealth, whiles he soiorned
him self therein: repaired and new builded the City and the walls thereof,
which before with force and fire were utterly destroyed. And then altered and
changed the name thereof calling it after the name of the River Esseterra or
Exeterra, that Exeterra.
that is to say Exeter. For so writes Polidorus. Est Exonia vrbs Deuonie
comitatus loco precelso ad occidentem versus posita abluiturque flumine Exi, a
quo nomen habet.

Others therbe which name it Excestrum, and thinks it to Excestre.
be so called of the River which is named Exestrum, for this write they
Clarissima vrbum est Excestria, que ab amni Excestro, qui eandem preterfluit,
est sic nuncupata.

I find it also in an old written Cronicle that it is named Exancestre.
Exancestria or Exancestre, which name should seem to be so given, by the
Saxons at their abode and being in this land, for commonly the names which
they gave to such Towns, Cities and Fortes as they either builded or
reedified, did end in Cestre as Chestre, as Glocestre, Lecestre, Ma^chester,
winchestre, worcestre, Oscestre, Colchestre, Cicestre, Ilcestre, Bicestre and
this City of Exancestre with others, for Cair in British, and Cestre in
Saxony, is in English a Fort, Town or Castle.

This City is walled round about, and so is thought was from the begininig.
It is all together four square, but declineth toward a roundnes, and
contains in circuit or compass xvj. hundred whole paces, after five foot to
the pace, which accounting one thousand paces to a Mile: is a mile and half
and some what more.

The situation of it is very plesaunt and amenous, being set upon a little
hill among many hills, the Contrie round about being Mountanose and full of
hills. It is pende^t toward the Sowth and West parts after and in such sort,
that be the Streets never so foul or filthy: yet with a shower of rain they
are cleansed aad made sweet. And albeit commonly hills are dry: yet nature is
so beneficial to this hill that it is full of springes, and by that menes every
part of the City is furnished with wells and Tyepittes, the commodity
whereof has well appeered in sundry times of necessity, but especially in the
late Commotion which was in the year of our Lord. 1549. for though then the
enemy by spoiling of the Pipes, whereby water was conuayed to the fountains of
the City from certain Springs distant not a Mile from the same, did abridge
them of that water: yet most comfortably did they enjoy the wells and
Tyepittes within the walls, which abundantly fleeted with waters to the
satisfying of all the people therein.

There are also within this City certain Fountains called Conduits, unto
which through certain canalis or Pipes of Lead, waters are conveyed from
Springs rising out of certain places and feelds without this City, and these
waters are of most price, the same by reason of the carriage being purified
and made lighter then the waters springing within the City, and by that menes
more fit for the dressing of meats. Of these Fountains one being of great
antiquity, and of later reedifyed, stands in the middle of the City at the
meeting of four principal Streets thereof, and whereof it takes his name,
being called the Conduit at Quarterfoies or Carsoxe, and this serves each
part of the City a like.

At the higher part of this City, is a very old and ancient Castle called
by the name of Rugemont, that is to say the red hill, taking that name of the
red Earth whereupon it stands. The Cite of it is eminent, and above both the
City and country adjoining, for they do all lie as under the lee thereof. It
has a goodly prospect toward the Seas, for between that and it is no hill at
all, it is strongly diched round about, and was so builded (as is thought) by
Julius Caesar or rather by the Romans after him, for they had their recourse
to it for their defense and refuge many years.

The same also was sometimes the Palaice of such Kings, as to whom the
Kingdom of west Sex or west Saxons was alloted unto. After that: it was the
habitation of the Earls of Cornwall, and last of all to the Dukes of Exon, and
of Cornwall, for to those estates: the signiory of this City did appertain,
the same being parcel sometimes of the Earldom, but now of the Duchy of
Cornwall It. is now in marvelous ruin and decay, not easily by force to be
gotten, were it reedified and environed.

At the lower end and part of this City, without the walls: fleeteth a
goodly River called in British Iske. Ptholomeus by misinformation calls it
Isaca, but the old writers name it Esle, Exe, Ex^ or Excestrum, which names be
yet retained.

It has his spring or head in a certain Moer or desert, distant from this
City near about xxiiij. miles called Exemore: it flows into the main Seas,
but by the way is increced with sundry Rivers, Brooks and Lakes, namely:
Creedy, Collome, and others, in it is great plenty of Salmon, Trout, Peal,
dace, Pike, and other fresh water Fish, which are had in the less price for
that the Seas being so near: do furnish the City and the country abundantly
with sundry kinds of Sea Fish most delicate. The main Sea it self is not
distant from the City abooue eight miles out whereof comes an Arm serving
for the Port of ye same, which sometimes as appears by old and ancient
records: did flow up to ye walls of the City, where both Ships were wunt
to be laden and unladen, of all kind of Merchandise at a proper place
appointed for the same, which at this presents keeps his old and ancient
name, being callen the Water gate.

The decay thereof happened in the year of our Lord. 1312. Courtney
by one Hugh Courtney the third of that name, and Earl of Deuon who being
offended and incenced against this City, his wrathful humor could not be
satisfied unless he might impair the state of that commonwealth, and therefore
seeing and understanding among other commodities, the use of the Haven to be
one of the cheifest: did never quiet him self until he had destroyed the same.
Wherefore in the year of our Lord. 1313. being the fifth year of the reign of
King Edward the second, he enterprised his pretenced devise and mischeef.

For where as the Lady Awmerle Countess of Deuon his Ancestrix, had builded
certain Wears upon the River of Exe, the one within the manor of Exminster,
being in ye west side of the River and the other within her manor of Topsham,
beging in the East side of the River: leuing between the said two weres, a
certain aparture or open room of thirtye foot, through which all Botes,
Ships and Uessails without let might have their usual passage and repassage,
toward and from this City. The said Earl to abridge and destroy this
commodity: did leuye and build a new Wear in the said open place, stopping,
filing and quirting the same with trees, timber and Stones, in such sort that
no vessail could pass or repasse.

After him Edward Courtney Earl of Deuon and Nephew to the said Hugh did not
only maintain and continue the fact of his ancester and grandfather, by daily
repairing and defending the same: but also woorking an vttter destruction for
any passage for Ships thencefoorth to ye City, under pretense to buyld
certain Milles, did erect and make two other wears, the one Saint James
overthwart the River, and the other at Lamperford, by means whereof, not only
the City sustained the whole loss of their haue^: but the whole Country
adjoining, for which iniuryes upon complaints made, writs and commissions of
inquiry were sent out, and the said Earls for the same by verdict and
presentment, at several times found guilty, but such was his authority and
power: that it auailed nothing.

Nevertheless the said Earl Hugh (the water course unto the City thus
destroyed) builded a place called a Key, for the charge and discharge of all
Wares and Merchandise within that port, at a Town of his own called Topsham,
distant from the City about three miles, from whence ever sithence all wares
and Merchandises have been carried and recaryed to and from the City by Horse,
Cart or Wain, though to the gain of the Earl and his Tenaunts: yet to the
great trouble and hindraunce of this City and Merchaunts thereof.
Nevertheless the port has evermore, and yet does retain his old and ancient
name, being called ye Port of this City of Exon, and always has been and
presently is a tribute paid unto the City for all kinds of wares and
Merchandise discharged within that Port, and called by the name of the petty
and town costome.

And albeit the water course thus destroyed, can hardely be restored to his
old pristinate and natural estate, for that through long continuance the
old course cannot be discerned: yet now at length after many attempts and
great expenses, a water course and passage begun in the year. 1564. is
recovered, and by sluices, Botes and vessailes of xx. tons tight are brought
to the City, and there discharged at the old and ancient place called the
Water gate* Where is builded a fair and a large Key or Wharf, as also an
engine called a Crane fit for the purpose.

Within this City were sometime but few parish Churches, but when that
Innocencius tertius, in the year of our Lord. 1198. had established the
Article of Transubstanciation adding the same to the Simbole, as appears in
the Decretal, titulo de summa trinitate, cano^, firmiter, the^ his next
successor Honorius, Anno. 1218. did not only confirm the same: but also
decreed Reservation, Candlelight and praying for the dead as appears Decret.
titulo de celebratione missarum, canon, sane cum et sane cum creatura, by which
means ye number of Preests did not only increace: but Churches also in all
places began daily to be builded. And therefore in this City in ye year of our
Lord, 1222. being the.vj. year of Henry the third, the parish Churches therein
were limited out and augmented to the number of xix. Churches within the
City and suburbs of the same. And most certain it is, that in times past
they were livings competent and sufficient to maintain an Incumbent, but that
kind of Religion now avoided and the Gospel preched: the liuelihods are so
small as not sufficient to maintain a poor Clark or Scoller, which is the
cause that so many of them do ly vacant without Incumbents.

Besides these parish Churches, there was also a Monastery Church of Exon.
sometime of Monks of Saint Benets order, but sithence a Cathedral Church
being very fair and sumptuously builded, with free Stones, and the Pillars of
gray Marble, standing and Ethelvvol phus.
situated in the East part of the City, which as some do report that
Etheldred the third Son of Ethelwolphus should first found and buyld. Some
think that King Edgar did it, truth it is that both the said Kings builded
every of them a house of Religious persons within this City, but the first
was Etheldred
utterly burnt and destroyed by the Danes: and the other in process of time
united to the Monastery, which now is a Cathedral Edgar.
Church, which is most certain and true that King Athelstane the Son of King
Edward the elder did both found and buyld it, as it does plainly appeer in
the history of the said Church where it is written. Athelstanus subiugatis
cornuquallensibus reuersus est ad ciuitatem que antiquitu* Muncketon vocabatur,
nunc autem Exeter, ac ibi sedens Anno. 932* non tam lacerata eiusdem Ciuitatis
maenia reparabat, quin et mansum quoddam dedit ad fundandum Monasterium pro
monachis Deo et Sancto Petro famulantibus. This King besides his expenses and
charges in building of this Church (which at the first was but small) placed
therein Munkes of S. Benettes order, provided liuelehodes for them, and made
unto them a governor and Ruler called by the name of an Abbote, toward whose
liuelihodes he gave Morckshull and Treasurers Bear, which at these presents
do yet remain being annexed to the dignity of the Tresurership. The Church
thus begun: Kings, Princes, and noble men (from time to time) were gladly
contributors to the absoluing and finishing of the same. For about lxxx. and od
years after Adlestene. King Knoght called Cahutus or Canutus at the sugestion
of one of his Dukes named Canutus
Athelred, did confirm and grant to Athelwolde (then Abbot of the said
Church) and to his successors, many and sundry privileges and liberties, under
his Letters Patentes, dated the second year of his reign. Anno domini* 1019.

After him near about xxx. years King Edward the confessor S. Edward,
removed the Munkes unto Westminster, and made this a Cathedral Church,
remoouing the Sea the^ at Crediton to this City, making Leofricus Bishop
thereof, as appears by his letters Patents dated the viy year of his reign,
An. 1050. Howbe Leofricus
it the Munck of Bury and Polidorus and others, do affirm and write that ye
settling of this Bishops seat in this City, was in the xij. year of William
the Conqueror, for thus they write. Habitum est Londini sub Lanfra^co
Antistitum et sacerdotu^ comitium, quo decretum est, quod aliquot seeds
Episcopales, que in opidulis et pagis ante fuerant, in vrbibus et locis
celeberrimis, collocarentur, quo factum est, vt Bathonia Lincolnia, Sarisburia,
Exonia, Cestria et Cicestria vrbes, huiusmodi, nouis Episcoporu^ domiciliis
sunt nobilitate. But the reverence of these writers reserved, this cannot be so
of this Church, the Charter thereof witnesing the contrary, and declaring how y^
King Edward and Edith his wife did put Bishop Leofricus in possession of this
Sea them selves.

Likewise William ye Conqueror in the third year of his reign. Anno. 1069.
did not only confirm the former Charter, but also at the instance and suit of
William vvareweste then his Chaplain and after Bishop of the same Sea, did
give unto it the segniory of Plimpton, Brampton and S. Stephens, in Exeter,
which the said William being Bishop did distribute, giving Plympton to the
Channo^s there, Brampton was afterward annexed to the Deanery, but Saint
Stephens with a Court Baron to the same, was always reserved to the Bishop and
his successors, whereby they are Barons and so Lords of the Parliament. It was
also enlarged from time to time, with possessions, revenues, buildings, riches
and privileges, by Kings, Princes, Prelates, Bishops, and sundry others* as
hereafter I shall particulerly touch and declare by Gods grace at large in a
particular Book thereof. And this one thing is to be noted, y^ albeit there were
near iiij. hundred years distant from the foundation to the absoluing thereof:
yet is so uniformly and decently compact, as though it had been builded at one
instant.

The Bishop is distinct from the Channons, both in house and reuenew, his
liuelihods being no parcel of that which does appertain to the Church and
Channons. It was sometimes of great large revenues, but the more part thereof
prodigally has been exhaunsed by a wastful Bishop.

The Bishop and Cha^nons have very fair houses which are situated about the
Church and Cemitory, and are enclosed every night, by shutting fast of certain
gates, whereby they claim them selves to be exempted from the jurisdiction of
the City. In the middle thereof: is a very fair Conduict or fountain, where
into waters by certain pipes are conveyed from certain places out of the City,
and the same from thence conveyed to the Bishops, and some of the Channons
houses.

The City it self is very populus, and was sometimes chiefly inhabited with
Clothyers or Clothworkers of broad clothes, serving much for the Spanish and
South Countries, which were of such goodness and substance: as that the names
of them do yet continue in these parties, but now it is chiefly inhabited with
Merchaunts, Kersey Clothyers and of all sorts of Artificers, among whom ye
Merchants are ye cheifest and the welthiest.

The government of this City was sometimes by four Bayliffes called
Prouostres, but shortly after the Conquest: there was ordered a Senate of xxxvj,
and in these latter days of xxiiij* persons of the most sober, grave and
wisest Co^moners and franchised men of the same, of which number one was and is
yearly chose^ to be the cheifest governor for the year following and is called
by the name of a Mayor.

This Mayor associated with the foresaid four Bayliffes, has the discerning
of and in all manner of actions betwixt party and party, and for which he
keeps on every Monday a Court in the Guilde hall of the said City, but the
Bayliffes having the like jurisdiction: do according to their old and ancient
customs keep the like Courts, being distinct from the Mayor at all days and
times when them best likes, which their Court: is called by the name of the
Prouostres Court, for Prouostres was their first names. Thus the Mayor and
Bayliffes both jointly and severally have jurisdiction to discern in causes
between party and party, but if the matter do touch the Prince, the Crown,
the common peace, or the state of the City and the commonwealth of the same:
then the same are decided and determined either by the Mayor and Justices, or
by the Mayor and common Counsel, or by the Mayor him self, or by some other
Officer or officers according to the nature or quality of ye cause or matter.
But because it requires a large discourse to discribe the government of the
commonwealth of this City, the charge of every several Officer, the
diversity of officers, their several jurisdictions, with a number of other
things incident to their charges: I do mind hereafter by Gods grace, at large
to set the same forth in such sort that all estates and degrees, and every
particular Officer and other person within that City shall know his charge,
Office and duty, and what to every of them appertains.

In the mean time: let it suffice that partly through good government and
partly of a civil inclination, the people of this City as very obsequions
and obedient to the Queen and her laws, and have in great reverence and awe,
their governors and Magistrates for the time being. And this one thing is not
so strange as notable, that even from the beginning, they have from time to
time been careful for their commonwealth, and most vigilant for the
preservation thereof, which as in time of peace they did well rule and govern:
so also in ye troublesome times and unquiet estates they have most valiantly
defended against the incurtions and assaults of their enemies, as by the
sundry Historyes it may appeer.

For Aruiragus, King of this land minding to stay the Realm in his ancient
libertyes: denied to pay to the Romans the tribute which they demanded,
wherefore Claudius the Emperor sent Vespasian the Duke of the Romain Army into
this Realm, either to recover the tribute or to subdue the land. This
Vespasian is he who in the xxiiij. year after this did besiege and destroy
Iherusalem, wherefore ye Duke landing in Torbay which was then called Totonesium
littus, came to this City, laid siege to the same, with continual assaults
and batteryes for eight days. Aruiragus the King being then in the East
parts and hearing of this: gathers his Army and power, marches toward
this City and incountreth with the enemy. The Romain after long fight (not
able to preuail) ends the matter by composicion, and because this shall not
seem to be a devised and fained matter: I will write the words of four sundry
Historyes. The Cronicle of the Cathedral Church of the said City has these
words Anno dom. 49.

Vespasianus, cum Romano exercitu ciuitatem nunc voca tam Exeter octo diebus
obsedit: sed minime preualuit, Aruirago Rege Ciuibus auxilium prestante.

Gaulfride of Monmothe writes thus. Vespasianus a Claudio missus est, vt
Aruiragu^ vel pacificaret, vel Romanae subiectioni restitueret: cum igitur in
portu in rutupi applicare Vespasianus cepisset: obuiauit ei Aruiragus, atque
prohibuit ne portu^ ingrederetur retraxit itaque se vespasianus a portu illo,
retortisque velis in littore Totnesio applicuit: nactus de inde tellurem
Kayerpenhulgoite que nunc Exoma vocatur obsessurus eandem adiuit cumque diebus
octo eam obsedisset, superuenit Aruiragus cum exercitu suo, preliumque
commisit: die illa valde laceratus sunt vtrorumque exercitus: sed neuter est
potitus victoria: mane autem facto, mediante Gen wissa Regina concordes effecti
sunt. Matthew of Westminster writes. Aruiragus Britannoru^ Rex in tantam
prolapsus est superbiam quod Romanae potestati noluit diutius subiectione
parere: Vespasianus igitura Claudio missus, cum in rutupi portu applicare
incepisset, Aruiragus illi obuians prohibuit ne ingrederetur: ac Vespasianus
retortis velis in Totonesio littore applicuit: et ciuitate^ que Britannice
Kayer penhuelgoite nunc autem Exonia appellatur obsedit: elapsis inde septem
diebus Aruiragus superuenit, preliumque cum Romany commisit et vtrorumque
exercitu valde lacerato, mediante Genvvissa Claudii filia, duces amici facti
sunt.

In the History entitled, Noua Cronica de gestis Anglorum a Britonibus vsque
ad Henricum sextum: in effect is written the like. Vespasianus a Claudio missus
est vt Aruiragu^ pacisicare vel Romani ditioni restitueret, cui obuia^s
Aruiragus prohibuit ne terram suam ingrederetur: timens Vespasianus armatorum
cohortem retraxit sese retortisque velis in Totonesio littore est appulsus,
atque vrbem Exone obsedit: post septem dies superuenit Aruiragus: preliu^
committitur, laceraturque vtrorumque exercitus, sed neuter potitur victoria:
demum mediante Genuissa Regina reconciliati snnt.

It was also in many troubles and great perplexities in the uncertain and
troublesome estates of this Realm, when some times the Romans, sometimes ye
Picts, sometimes the Scotts and sometimes the Saxons made their incursions and
wars upon and in this land, by reason whereof the Records and memorialles of
the states in those days were for the most part lost and consumed. And yet
nevertheless Matthew of Westminster writes y^ it was beseeged by Penda King
of Mercia. An. Edvvin.
632. in the time of Cadvvallin one of the last Kings of the Britons. The
history is Edvvin the Saxon King of the Northumbers, having wars against
Cadvvalline or Cadvvallo, did so Cadvvalline.
preuail and had such conquests over him, that he was fain and driven to
forsake his Realm of Wales and flee into Ireland: where Cadvvallo being
careful to recover his land and cuntreye: repaired his Army and gathered a new
force, and often times did attempt to land there within his own Contreye, but
all was in vain, for Edvvin was ever in redines and always resisting him would
not suffer him to land in any place.

For this Edwin had about him a certain man named Pellitus who was a Magitian
and skilful in Nicromancie, and by his science and Art: did for show and
declare unto Edwin what things were a doing and attempted against him.

Cadwallo having such evil success: was in utter despair to recover or auail
against Edwin, wherefore he sailed into Armorica now called Britain unto ye king
thereof named Solomon to whom he disclosed his miserable estate and fortune, as
also complained much of Pellitus and of his Sorceryes. When these two Kings had
consulted of the matter: it was at length concluded and thought best, that some
witty and bold man should be sent over and give the attempt to kill Pellitus,
whereupon Brienus Nephew to king Cadwallo takes upon him to attempt this
matter, and appareling him self in poor man's weed: saileth over into England
and traueleth unto York where King Edwin lay and kept his Court. And there he
joined and accompanied him self among the poor people, whose custom and manner
was to lie about the Kings gates, at dinner and Supper times, awayting for the
Alms after Dinner and Supper. Pellitus being the Kings Alomener and having
the charge to distribute the alms: comes forth and sets the poor people
in order. Brienus by his being there: watches his time to woork his feat, and
sudainly in the prese of the people, with his weapon which he had prepared for
the purpose: thrusts Pellitus into the body and kills him, and forth with
(the thing in such a throng not perceived) shifteth him self away privily, and
through woods, thickets, hills and Dales, comes to Exeter, where he
discloseth and declares unto the Britons what he had done, they glad and
rejoicing heerof, and hoping that now their King Cadwallo would return: do
prepare and make ready both them selves and the City as well for the resisting
of their enemies: as also for the receiving and ayding of their King.

Penda hearing of this injury done to King Edvvin his contreye man, and minding
to revenge the same: gathered a great army of Saxons, marches unto Exeter and
beseegeth ye same round about, minding the utter subuertion of the City, and
nation, but the Citizens and Britons manfully withstanding his force: defended
both them selves and their City, until that king Cadwallo (being heerof
advertised) did with his force come over, who not only reskewed and delivered
both his City and country: but also joining battle with his enemies gave
them the overthrow.

3 It was also in great trouble in the time of King Allured Alphred
or Alphred the fourth Son of Ethelvvolphus, for Polidorus and others do
write that in the fifth year of ye said Kings reign: the Danes concluded a
peace with the King, and gave hostages for the keeping thereof, notwithstanding
contrary to the same, most perfideously they assembled the^ selves and with
all haste marched toward this City and perforce entered and took ye same.

Daci etenim qui Religionem et fidem pre suo commodo postponendam ducebant
Londino se mouentes maximus iti neribus Exoniam proficiscuntur: vrbemque per
vim capiu^t. but long they inioyed no rest there: for the winter passed, the
King to be revenged of their periurye: marched toward the said City with his
power, which the Danes understanding, and not able to abide the vexation and
trouble of the Citizens: would not abide the end, but fled some to Dartmouth,
and there took shipping, who were in a tempest at the Seas for the most part
drowned, some fled to Chipenham or as so^e write to Bristovv, whom the king so
hardly pursewed that he never gave over until he had overcome them, and slain
their Captains, Hubbert and Hungar.

4 Likewise in the xix. year of ye reign of the said king, ye Danes contrary to
their faith, pledges and promises did again come to this City and laid siege
to the same. Danorum Excercitus Anno. 877. ab warham nocte quadam federe
dirupto ad Excancestre diuerterunt quod Britannici dicitur Cayerewise at audito
Regis aduentu: ad puppes fugerunt, et in mare predantes manebant.

5 It was also besieged by the said Danes in the xix year. of king Elgered.
Anno. 1001. For the Danes which were the^ in Normandye hearing of the good
luck, success and great spoils their company in England had in every place,
and their teeth set on edge therewith: sudainly prepared their Ships to sail
and come over, and as it chanced they landed upon the costs of Deuon and
forthwith took their journey and marched toward this city of Exon, thinking
to have found them napping, and to have taken them unawares and upon a sudain.
Sed Ciuibus viriliter resistentibus recesserunt, the inahbitants and people of
Deuon, Somerset and Dorset hearing thereof: in all haste assembled the^ selves
minding both to reskew the City, as also to encounter and adventure the
feeld with the Danes. And meeting with them as they were coming from the siege
of the City: joined battle with them at a place called Pinho distant about
iij, miles from the City, where was a cruel fight and a great slaughter had
between them. And thus does Houedon also testify for says he, Memoratus
paganorum exercitus de Normannia in Angliam reuectus ostium fluuii Eaxe
ingreditur et mox ad extinguendam vrbem Exancestre egreditur sed dum murum
illius destruere moliretur ac ciuibus vrbem viriliter defendentibus repellitur:
vnde nimis exasperatus more solito villas succendendo agros depopulando
hominesque cedendo, per domnoniam vagatur: quare domnanienses in vnum
congregati, in loco qui dicitur Pinho certamen cum eis ineunt.

King Sweno being in Denmark and advertised heerof, as also Svveno.
how King Eldred alias Etheldred or Egelred, had caused all the Danes in the
Realm sudainly in one night to be slain, being much grieved therwt: did
provide and prepare an army for the revenge thereof, and in the year. 1002.
landing into diverse parts of this Realm did most cruelly spoil the land*
sley the people and bring the whole estate to an unspeakable miserye. But at
length (receiving a tribute for peace) returned home again into his own
country, howbeit the Citizens of Exon hearing of this cruelty used in the East
parts: made them selves strong and prepared the City in redynes to withstand
ye force of such an enemy, if happily he should attempt hostilite and force
against them. But the Dane being returned heme and knowing nothing of this
preparation: one Hugh then Earl of Deuon, (as Princes lack no fawners) sent
his letters into Denmark to King Sweno, certifying him both of the slate and
wealth of this City, and of the great preparation made therein to with stand
him, persuading him not to sustain such a matter, and as Coals will be soon
enkendled: so forthwith the Dane was in his heat, and prepared all things in
a redynes to woork his will against this City.

Wherefore the year following being ye year of our Lord. 1003. he landed upon
the costs of Deuon and Cornwall, with a huge host and marching toward this
City gave and laid siege to the same in the beginning of August and continued
until the xiiij. of ye Kalendes of September, during which time, though the
assaults were often ferce and cruel: yet there wanted no stomach in the
Citizens to withstand the same. But in continuance of time when they saw them
selves weke, Uictualles to fail, the fire round about them, their walls beaten
down, them selves daily slaughtered and murdered, and with this their decay,
the enemy to be the stronger, and yet in all their distress their king Eldred
fled into Normandye having no care for their miseryes, nor preparing reskewes,
for their aid and succor: it was no maruail though in so heavy a case they
were amassed and astonished, and yet consulting and considering with the^ selves
that Sweno was a Dane, a cruel enemy, a bloody murderer and a very usurper,
having no other title to ye Realm of England but tyranny: did with one consent
agree and conclude never to yield or give over as long as any were left alive,
which might with stand such an enemy, wishing rather to dye in truth, and for
their commonwealth: then to live with reproach and infamy, and to depart
rather with mortal Fame: then to be miserable slaves to an usurping tirant.
When therefore after many long assaults they were spent and few or none left
alive to withstand so mighty and so many enemies: the Dane on the. xxvij. of
August entered the City, and when he had served his bloody appetite, in
murdering the poor widows and Children: he spoiled the City, burned the
houses, rased the walls, beat down the Temples, and left nothing which either
by sword, fire or spoiling might be consumed.

And so Renolph writteth. Dici cum suo Rege Swano Excestriam venerunt et vrbem
funditus destruxerunt, nulla re incolumir* licta, que aut ferro aut igne
poterat vastari. et omnia spolia cineribus tantum relictis, secum deportauerunt.

The like words Henry of Huntington in the sixth Book of his historyes,
writes in this sort. Anno dom. 1003, Daci ira exarserunt, sicut ignis quem
sanguine velit aliquis extinguere: aduolantes igitur quasi multitudo locustarum
quidam Exestriam veneru^t, et vrbem totam funditus destruxerunt, et omnia
spolia secum, cineribus tantum relictis deportauerunt. Houedon also writteth.
Rex danorum Swein per iniuriam et proditionem Normanici comitis hugonis quem
Emma Domnaniae prefecerat, ciuitate^ Exon infregit spoliauit murum ab orientali
vsque ad occidentale^ portam destrux it et cum ingenti praeda naues repetiit.
William Co^querer.


6 It was also besieged by William the Conqueror in the first year of his
reign Anno. 1068.: for when he first entered the land using by dent of Sword
all hostility: this City entering in leage with the nobility and Towns of
this Country, did conclude and promise, each to the other to withstand the
enemy to the vttermoste, and accordingly did prepare for the same, but when
the Conqueror had prevailed and subdued almost the whole Realm, and
understanding that this City would not yield: sent his Army from London and
besieged the same, and perceiving the siege to continue: marched him self as
far as Salisbury toward the same. In the mean time. ye Citizens advertised
that the whole Realm had yielded, and seeing their confederats to shrink daily
from them: and by that menes they to wax daily weaker and weaker, being not
able to withstand so great a power and Army as was round about them: did by
way of entreaty offer conditions of peace, and submitted them selves to the
King, who according to their composition received their submission, and after a
greeuouse fine taken: did restore the City unto them again. But in token of
his conquest: he altered the Gates of the Castle, and swore all the people to be
his liege Subjects.

Houedon in his History makes mention that King Harolds wife should be within
the City during this assault and besiege, for these be his words, Hyeme
imminente Rex Willielmus de Normannia in Angliam rediitet Angliae importabile
tributum imposuit: deinde in domnoniam hostiliter profectus est ad ciuitatem
Excestriam quam ciues et nonnulli Anglici ministri contra illum retinebant et
obsedit et in fregit: Githa vero commitissa matter scilicet Haroldi Regis
Anglorum, ac soror Swani Regis danorum cum multis de ciuitate fugiens, euasit,
e^ Flandriam petiit: ciues autem dex tris acceptis regi se dederunt.

7 Also in the second year of King Stephen. Anno. 1137. the King Stephen,
Lords and Peers of the Realm remembering the oath they had made to King Henry
the first, to whom they swore to be true to Maude the Kings daughter and to
her heirs (and yet contrary to the same had sworn them selves to King
Stephen:) began to repent them selves, and consulted how to restore Maude the
Empress, wherefore assembling together in armor did divide themselves and took
sundry Cities and Castles.

Baldwin Ridiuers.
And Baldvvin Ridiuers Earl of Deuon with force of Arms took this City,
whom King Stephen pursuing: did drive him out of the same to ye Islle of VVight
then his Lordship. But the King when he had received the City into his faith:
did march toward the Isle of VVight, and taking the same, did banish the said
Earl. But Maude ye Empress remembering this City for this faith did enlarge
the liberties, for whom ever after an aniuersary was kept at the charges of the
City. Howebeit some say that this Baldvvin took Oxforde or Westchester, and
not Excester and from thence fled to VVight.

8 It was also in some trouble in the xj. year of King Richard King Richard.
the second. Anno. 1387. For a controversy being befall between the King and
his Uncles, the Dukes of York and Glocestre, Duke of York.
none were then so much in the Kings favor as Robart Vere Marquis of Doublin,
Michael Dalapool Earl of Suffolk, and others of their faction: whom the King
commanded Duke of Glocestre
to collect and assemble an Army, in and for his defense against his uncles,
but they, whether they mistrusted their own part, or whether they were minded
to make them selves stronger, leuing their journey toward London came to this
City, Vere.
the Dukes understanding the same: pursued the^ with all speed, and at this
City joined battle and fought with them, but the Marquis and the Earl
trusting better to their feet then to Delapole.
their hands: did preuily flee away into Scotland, and from thence into
Flanders where they dyed.

9 It was also in great troubles in the time of King Edward Lord Din ham.
the fourth, for in the x. year of his reign. Anno. 1469. when the states of
King Henry the vj. and King Edward the fourth were doutful. The Duchess of
Clarente, the Lord Dinham, the Lord Fitzvvarren and the Baron of Carewe with
others, Lord Fitzvvarren.
who took part with Henry the vj. came to this City accompanied with a
thousand fighting men, the Duches being great with child, and lodged in the
Bishops place. But Sir Baron of Carevve.
Hugh Courtney Knight, who favored and was of the part of King Edward, hearing
of this: raised an army of his friends and Allies, besieged the City, brake
down the Bridges, and stopped all the ways coming toward the same, by means
whereof no Uictualles could come to the market. And being encamped about the
City, sent unto the Mayor requiring him either to open the Gates: or to
deliver the gentlemen which were within.

The gentlemen which were within, they of their parties either mistrusting the
Mayor or Commons, or not willing to be ruled under his government: requied the
keys of the gates to be delivered into their custody, and all things to be
done as at their appointment.

In which perplexity and doutful estate: the Mayor and his brethern
consulting, did resolve and determine neither to yield to the request of them
which were without: nor yet to satisfy their requests which were within, but
pacifying both parties with such honest and quiet means as they might, did
conclude to keep the City and them selves, as to their allegiance appertained
to the use of the Crown, wherefore forthwith they rampred the Gates, fortified
the Walls, and armed their Soldiers and set all things in good order, leaving
nothing undone, which might be for the preservation of the state and commonwealth of the City. But in small process of time, the provision waxed short,
and victualles began to be scant, whereof it was feared a famine would ensue,
the same being so hard a thing, as so great a number of people would not
endure and abide. Yet notwithstanding partly by ye good peswasions of the
Magistrates, and having a regard of their own duties and estates, and hoping
this troublesome time would not long endure: did continewe firm and trusty in
their cause, until at length by way of entreaty and mediation of certain
Chanons Duke of Clarence.
of the Close, the siege was after xij. days removed and raised, whereupon
very shortly did ensue the feeld at Edgecourt, where the Duke of Clarence, and
the Earl of Warwick being put to the worst) did flee to this City, entering
in the third of April, Neuel earl of VVarvvick.
lying in the Bishops Pallaice for a few days, until they provided Ships at
Dartmouth fit for their passage to Calleys.

The King having understanding which ways his enemies were gone: followed and
pursewed them with an army of xl. thousand men, and came to this City the
xiiij. of April, Anno. 1470. but he came to late the Duke and the Earl being
gone to the Seaes before his coming, wherefore the King after he had reposed
him selfheer three days: returned.

10 It was likewise in great trouble, being besieged the.x. j. king Henry.
year of the reign of King Henry the vij. Anno 1498. by one Parkin VVarbeck
who in the beginning of September came to this City and encamped it, with
Ordinance battred the walls, fired the gates, undermined the walls and
scaled the same, but by the noble courage of the Citizens: he had small
success, being manfully resisted until such time as the King advertised
thereof: did send the Lord Edward Courtney Earl of Deuon, and the Lord
William his Son, with other Noble men, who reskewed the City and delivered
it from the enemy.

11 Finally and last of all it was besieged in* the third year of King Edward.
King Edward the sixth. Anno. 1549. by the Commons of Deuon and Cornwall, who
not contenting them selves with the state of Religion then established:
clustered them selves in companyes, appointed to them selves Captains, and
minded by their force to undo that which the Prince by Law and Act of
Parliament had established, wherefore to redeem all such places of force, wealth,
and defense, into their own hands, which might in any respect, serve for
their aid and defense: came to this City the second of July. 1549. and
encamped them selves about the same in great numbers, during the time of their
abode and besieging: great troubles arose, so^etimes assaults made, sometimes
ye gates fired, so^etimes ye walls undermined, some times skirmishes made and
some great laromes to defend ye walls against scaling, finally nothing was
left undone, which the enemies might devise for ye obteining of their purpose.
And albeit there wa^ted not lusty stomakes of the Citizens to withstand this
outward force, yet in process of time such scarcity of Uitualles did
increase, and Bread waxed so scant: that the people began to wax weary and
loathe to abide the extremity thereof, which was so extreme, that it was feared
either that the people must yield to the enemy: or perish with famine. How beit
the Magistrates (though sorry in such destesse) yet having a special regard of
their duty toward the Prince, and their charge to the commonwealth, left no
means unsought to quiet the people and stay them in their deutye and
obidience. Wherefore comforting the people with fair promises, and liberal
releeuing their necessities: did in such sort and order handle the matter, that
every body with one assent was resolved in hope of some speedy releef to abide
the end, and in no wise to give place to the enemy: but to continue faithful
to the Prince, and trusty to their commonwealth. And yet in the mean while the
governors left no devises and provisions which might be for the relief and
comfort of the poor hungrye bellyes, wherefore the corn and Meal consumed:
they caused of course and old refused Bran, bread to be molded up in clothes,
for otherwise it would not stick together. Also they caused some excurtions to
be made out of the City, for the praying and taking of such Cattle as were
near about the walls, which being taken: was distributed among the poor.
Likewise the Prisoners in captivity were contented to be fatisfied with such
victualles, as could be provided, and albeit man's nature can scarcely abide
to feed upon the flesh of a Horse: yet these poor men were fed therewith and well
contented.

The noble King and Council advertised of this distress: did at length after.
xxxv. days, send the honorable S. John Russel Knight, Lord Russel, Lord privy
Seal, and afterward Earl of Bedford, with a company and band of Soldiers,
who after sundry conflicts had with the enemies: came to this City the vj. of
August, reskewing and delivering the same from the enemy, and set them at
liberty. For the which as God was most worthy of all praise and glory: so is
the same his deliverance at this present had in perpetual memory the vj. of
August being a holy day in the remembrance thereof.

Thus this little City which in antiquity is not inferior to other: has
from time to time felt the smartes and chau^ges of all times, and endured great
troubles, dangers, extremities and perilles, and yet God regarding their faith
and obedience to their Prince and commonwealth before all other sacrifices:
has defended and preserved them always rewarding them with immortal Fame,
for which his great benefits, his name be praised for ever and ever.

The sundry and several names of the City of Excester, and the
interpretation of the same.
COrinea or Corinia, is the first and eldest name of this City, and so named
by Corineus who ariuing with Brutus into this la^d, and seasing or taking la^d
upon these west partees: was (by Brutus) Lord of the same. And he then building
this City (as is thought) called it by his own name Corinia which being
so: then is this City one of the first Towns or Cittyes builded by the
Brittons in this land.

Cayrpenhuelgoite, is compounded of four words. Cayr is a Fortress or a
walled Town, pen is a head or the cheef of any thing, hovvel is good luck,
prosperity or knowledge, goyed is wood, a forest or timber woork, now these
put together after the English phrase: is the prosperouse cheef Town in the
wood.

Penhaltcayr is compounded of three words, Pen is the head or cheef, halt is
high, a top of a hill, or the brim or edge of a thing. cayr is a Town walled or
a Fortress, these put together, do signyfy the head Town or City upon the
Hill.

Pencayr is compounded of two words, of Pen and Cayr, which signify the cheef
City.

Cayrruthe, Cayrrith, is compounded of Cair and Rith, Rith is tawnish or a dark
red, and so it signifies the red town, City or Fort.

Cayrriske is likewise a compound of two words, Iske signifies afresh water,
also a quil or a wing, but in this place: it is the name of the River which
fleeteth by the City, and so it signifies the City of Iske.

Isca was also the name of the Town, and Isaca the name of the River which
fleeteth by it, as Ptolomeus and certain latter writers following him: do
suppose and write, though it should seem rather the City to be called Isaca
and the River Isca.

Muncketon was so called by the Saxons, but upon what reason: it does not
appeer, others the^ that they did at their coming change and alter the names
of all or most part of places in this land, giving new names either of Towns
or places of the Country from whence they came, or of their own devise: or else
King Etheldred or King Edgar when they had builded each of them a Monastery for
Muncks: did give that name.

Exeter was the name which King Adelstane gave unto it when he soiourned in
this Town calling it so of the river Exe, and then it is to say Exeterra the
town or soil of Exe*

Exancestre is thought to be so called by the Saxons, who commonly and for the
most part named such Fortes and holds as they builded by this word Cestria,
as Cicestria, Dorcestria. Osestria and many other like, for Cestir in the Saxon
tung is a Forte, a Town or a City.

Excestrum or Excestre is the name most now in use, and so ^amed (as some
write) of the River, which they write (...) named Excestrum.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Folio. side. line. fault. correction. 4. 1. 9. Republica. e Republica. 6. 2.
12. advisedly. unadvisedly. 21 1. 18. thrir commission. their commission. 33.
1. 7. Also no person. Also as no person. eodem. 2. 12. and there to do. and
there to do. 41. 1. 19. iu a province. in a province. eodem. 2. 1. Corinibia.
Cornubia. eodem. 2. 11. Po^ticus Virimus. Ponticus Virumus. 42. 1. 5.
dominations. denominations. eodem. 1. 11. glory and renown. glory and renown.
eodem. 2. 11. It is all together. It is not all together. eodem. 2. 21. aad
made sweet. and made sweet. eodem. 2. 34. canalis. canelles. 43. 1. 12. The
Cite. the site. eodem. 1. 23. the signiory. the segniory. eodem. 2. 1. and
otber. and other. eodem. 2. 10. being callen. being called. 44. 1. 4. one
Saint James. one at Saint James 45. 2. 21. exhaunsed. exhausted. 46. 1. 35.
as very obsequions. are very obsequious 47. 1. 2. laceratus sunt. laceratus
fuit. eodem. 1. 18. pacisicare. pacificaret. eodem. 1. 24. reconciliati sunt.
reconciliati sunt. 48. 1. 20. maximus. maximis. 49. 1. 35. with mortal Fame.
with immortal fame 50. 2. 34. requied. required. 51. 1. 9. leaving nothing.
leaving nothing. eodem. 2. 29. in such destesse. in such distress.


