A NOTE OF THE SHIPPING, MEN, AND PROVISIONS, SENT and Provided for VIRGINIA,
by the Right Honorable, the Earl of SOUTHAMPTON, and the Company; this year,
1620.
Ships and People, etc.
THe Bona Noua of 200. Tons, sent in August 1620. with 120. persons. The
Elizabeth of 40. Tons, sent in August 1620. with 20. persons. The May-Flower
of 140. Tun, sent in August 1620. with 100. persons. The Supply of Bristow,
of 80. Tons, sent in September 1620. with 45. persons. The Margaret and John,
of 150. Tons, sent in December 1620. with 85. persons. The Abigall, of 350.
Tons, sent in February 1620. with 230. persons. 600. Persons. In two Ships
out of Ireland, there are going one hundred Kine of English breed. 100. Kine.
There are now providing several Ships to transport the Governor, Treasuror,
and Marshall of Virginia, with their Companies, together with other private
Plantations, to the number of 400. persons. 400. Persons. Sum of Persons
1000.

Officers.
There are sent, and in sending, for public uses, five hundred persons, for
the increase of the number of the Companies Tenants, and for maintenance of
Officers, 500. Persons.

Whereof besides the new Governor, there are six principal sent and chosen.

To Master George Thorpe Esquire, as Deputy for the College land, belong
Tenants, 10. To Captain Thomas Nuce, as Deputy for the Companies Land, belong
Tenants, 50. To the place of Secretary of State, Tenants, 20. To Doctor Bohun,
as Physician to the Colony, with whom are also sent diverse Appothecaries and
Surgains, belong Tenants, 20. To Master George Sandys Esquire, as Treasuror of
Virginia, Tenants, 50. To Captain William Nuce, as Marshall of Virginia,
Tenants, 50.

Men skillful for setting up Staple Commodities.
There are three principal men sent again for Masters of the Iron works which
are in some good forwardness, and a proof is sent of Iron there made.

Three sufficient men for perfecting the Salt-works: One a French man from
Rochell, which works are likewise there begun.

Four Dutchmen from Hambrough, to erect Sawing-Mills, and all provisions
necessary thereunto.

Eight French Vignerons, procured from Languedock, who are very skillful also
in breeding of Silke-wormes, and making Silk. Of this Seed there is good
store gone, both French, Italian and Spanish: together with Instructions for
providing Commodious housing, and orderly planting of the Mulbery-Trees. There
are also some Englishmen sent that have been trained up therein.

A Gift
Given to the use of the College, certain good Books of Divinity, by an
unknown person.

Patents granted this year.
To the EARL of Pembrooke. To Sir Richard Worsley. To Sir Richard Bulkeley. To
Sir William Mounson. To Captain William Nuce, Marshall of Virginia. To
Captain Raphe Hamor.
Who together with their Associates have undertaken to transport great
multitudes of People and Cattle.

Supplies to Virginia, in Anno 1620.


