ERRATA.
Page 1. read Rhapsody for Ropsody. p 1. r. Schismatical for Shismaticall. p. 1.
r. which for with are etc. p. 4. r. dilemma for delemma. p. 4. r. peculiar for
perculiar. p. 17. r. reference for reverence. p. 19. r. evil for ewill. p. 20.
r. genu for genus. p. 20. r. flectitur for flectiter. p. 21. r. concilii for
conilii p. 21. r. Emmanuel for Emmavel. p. 21, r. and for annd. p. 26. r.
literally for literally. p. 28. r. vt ei coelestia for coelestia etc. p. 39.
r. reference for reverence. p. 53. r. interpreters for interpreter. p. 54. r.
come for ome. p. 59. humility for humity. p. 62. r. poplite for polite p. 65.
r. Orosius for Orotius p. 73. r. must not for must not. p. 80. termino for
termino.

Certain others (...) has admonished me, which I correct thus (...) Docter
Willets Cent(...)6. Read Calvin at the (...) but not at the 10.p.16.

Seeing that he is (...) in mine eye. When he has (...) of his own eye,
(...)6. texts of scri(...) appears by my

A MEDITATION UPON THE XXIIth Chapter of GENESIS.
By H. W.
IN this wonderful Piece of Sacred Story, Behold the Father of the Believers,
at extreme Age surprised (as it should seem by the Circumstances of the Text)
in his Bed by a Commandment from God, to sacrifice his only Son; In which
case All the Powers of his Mind being suddenly shaken with an infinite combat
between Faith and Nature; we may upon the whole matter conceive Him to have
broken forth into some such Discourse with Himself, as follows.

WHat? Could this possibly be the voice of God which I heard? Or have not
rather some strange Impressions of the Night deluded my Fancy? Yea, Thy voice
It was (My God) It was Thy voice. How can Thy humble Servant deny it? with
whom seven times before descending from the Throne of Thy Glory, Thou have
vouchsafed even to commune in this Vale of Tears.

When Thou did first call me out of the darkness of my Fathers House into
Thy saving Light; When Thou did often cherish and encourage me in the Stepps
of my Pilgrimage; When Thou did furnish me with Plenty, and Crown me with
Uictorie in a strange Land; When lastly Thou did even overlade my feeble Age
with Joy in a rightful Heir of mine own Body; was I forward at all these
times to acknowledge Thee the God of my Support and Comfort? And shall I now
question Thy Uoice, when Thou demandest but a part of thine own Benefits? No,
(My dear Isaac) although the Heavens know how much I love Thee: yet, if Thou
were, or could be Millions of times more precious in the eyes of Thy
trembling Father: I would summon together all the Strength of mine aged Lymnes
to render Thee unto that gracious God from whom I had Thee. Alas (poor Boy)
how sweetly Thou slumbrest, And in Thy harmeles Bed do little think what
change is toward Thee. But I must disturb Thy Rest. Isaac arise, and call up
my Servants; Bidd the^ prepare for a Journey which we are to make unto the
Mount Moriah, And let some Wood be carried for the burning of a Sacrifice.
Mean while I will walk out a little by my self to contemplat the declining
Stars, and approach of the Morning.

O ye Ornaments of the Sky, who when all the World is silent obey your Maker
in the determinat Order of your Motions. Can Man behold his own duty in a
fairer Volumne? Why then stand I gazing here, and do not rather go my Self
to hasten my Servants, that I may execute his will? But stay: His Will? Why?
Is His Will contrary to the Example of his own Justice? Did He not heavily
punish Caine even at the beginning of the first World for killing but a
Brother? And can I slay my Child and imbrue my hands in mine own Bowels
without offense of His Immortal Majesty? Yes? Why not. The Act of Caine was
the Act of his own sinful malice: But I have received an immediate Command
from God himself. A Command? Why? Is his Command against his Law? Shall the
Fountain of all Truth be served with Contradictions? Did not the same God
straight after the universal Deluge (as our Fathers have told us) denounce
this Judgment; That Who so sheddeth Man's Blood, His Blood shall be shed?
How then can I herein obey my God, But I must withal disobey Him?

O my week Soul; what poor Arguments do thou search to cover thine own
rebellious Affections. Is there any VVarrant higher then His Will? Or any
better Interpreter of His Will then Himself? If the Princes of the Earth (who
are but mortal Types of His invisible Glory) can alter their Edicts at
pleasure; Shall not the Lord of the whole (whom Angels and Men adore) have
leave to dispense with His own Prohibitions? Yes surely: But then how shall
the Blessing that my Good God has determined upon my Seed, and even upon this
very Child be accomplished, if I destroy the Root? O Lord, was not Thy Divine
Goodness pleased in the depth of Thy Mercy to accept my Belief for
Righteousness? And shall I now frustrate Thy Promises with my Obedience? But
what? Am I fallen again into a new Reluctation? Have I before contested with
Thy Justice? And shall I now dispute Thy Power? Did Thou not create the Light
before the Sun? And the Effect before the Cause? And shall I bind Thee to
the Passions of a natural Agent? Did Thou not make this All of Nothing even
by Thy word (which was Thy Wisdom) And foment All that Thou have made, by Thy
Spirit (which is Thy Love?) And shall I doubt but Thou can raise innumerable
Nations out of the very Ashes of my poor Isaac? Nay, Did I not even at first
receive Him in a manner from a dead Womb? And art not Thou still the same
Almighty and everliving God? Merciful Father, full of all tenderness and
compassion, That see from Heaven whereof we are made; Pardon my Discourses,
and forget my Delays. I am now going to perform Thy good Pleasure. And yet
there is remaining one humble Suite: which refuse not (O my God) though it
proceed from the weakness of Thine unworthy Creature. Take my Child, and All
that is Mine. I have resigned Him with my whole Heart unto Thy Will. He is
already Thine, and Mine no longer; And I glory that He shall Die upon Thy Holy
Altar. But yet I fear withal, That these my shaking Hands and fainting Limbs
will be seized with Horror. Be not therefore (Dear Lord) displeased, if I use
my Servants in the Execution. How now (My Soul) Do Thou shrink in the last
Act of Thy Loyalty? Can I yet walk up and down about vile and ordinary
Functions? And when my God is to be served, do my Ioints and Members fail me?
Have I humbled my desires to his Will? And shall I deny Him the choice of His
own Instrument? Or if His indulgent Mercy would permit it, shall I suffer
another to anticipate the cheerfulnes of my Obedience? O Thou great God of Life
and Death! Who might have made Me an insensible Plant, A Dead Stone, Or a
Poisonous Serpent And yet even in That likewise I should have conduced to the
variety of Thy glorious VVisdome: But have vouchsafed to endue us with the
form of Man, and to breath into our first Parent that spark of Thy Divine
Light which we call Reason, to comprehend and acknowledge therewith Thy High
and indisputable Sovereignty over all Nature, Thou then (Eternal Maker and
Mover, whose Will is the First of Causes, and whose Glory is the Last of
Ends) direct my Feet to the Place which Thou have appointed, Strengthen there
these poor Hands to accomplish Thy Pleasure, And let Heaven and Earth obey
Thee.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for George Baker, 1631.


