THE SVMME OF A DISPVTATION, BETWEEN Mr. WALKER Pastor of St. John Euanglists
in Watling-street London; and a popish Priest, calling himself Mr. Smith, but
indeed Norrice, assisted by other Priests and Papists.

HELD IN THE PRESENCE OF some worthy Knights; with other Gentlemen of both
Religions.

Printed. 1624.

The sum of a Disputation bebetweene Mr. Walker, Pastor of St John
Evangelists in Watling street in London: And a popish Priest, calling himself
Mr. Smith, but indeed Norrice, assisted by other Priests and Papists; May last
1623. held in the presence of some worthy Knights, with other Gentlemen of both
Religions.
The occasion of the Disputation.
SIr William Harington Knight, having a Kinsman of the Romish Catholic
Religion, by much reasoning with him, and many persuasions had brought him to
wavering, so that he stood in doubt which was the true religion, and desired to
be satisfied. The forenamed Priest Mr. Smith alias Dr. Norrice for the settling
and hardening of him in the popish religion, told him that the Protestant
Church of England unto which he seemed to incline, had no faith, neither indeed
was it any Church of Christ at all: and also challenged his kinsman Sir William
Harrington to bring any Minister of the English Church whatsoever into any
convenient place of meeting, and he would by disputation, and by invincible
arguments prove against him before their faces, and in their hearing, that
English Protestants had neither Church nor faith. Sir William Harrington did
take his offer, upon condition that he would answer to such questions as the
Divine which he would bring should propound against the Romish religion; it was
agreed; the day and place appointed. Whereupon Sir William requesting a
reverend Doctor of his acquaintance to take the charge upon him; he being to
preach in his charge upon a necessary occasion the very day which was
appointed: sent him to Mr. Walker, whom he assured him to be a man ready for
such a purpose, And who at the first motion upon a days warning embraced the
offer, promised to come the next day to Sir William, and to attend him to the
place of meeting, And Sir William requesting him to name before hand some
questions opposite to the Romish religion which he would dispute upon against
the Priests; he gave him these three following. 1. That the present Church of
Rome is the Whore of Babylon. 2. That the Pope is Antichrist. 3. That the
Popish doctrine of Peter's being Bishop of Rome is a forged fable contrary to
the Scriptures.

These positions Sir William Harrington sent to the Priest, that he might arm
himself for the defense: The next day Mr. Walker came to Sir Williams lodgings
to dinner, and accompanied him and Sir Edward Harwood, with some other
Gentlemen to a private house by the Thames side, where they found some Romish
Catholic Gentlemen, and they said Smith with other Priests. Before they entered
into disputation, Mr. Smith alias Norrice, called Master Walker a side, and
desired that the disputation might be performed lovingly and sweetly with all
mildness, and without bitter words or biting speeches. Mr. Walker answered,
that he desired to byte and gall no adversary but with sound reasons, which do
most commonly cut to the quick, such as defend errors: as for other speeches,
he promised for his part to be mild or sharp, according to the behavior of
his Adversaries. And thus they proceed to a formal manner of disputation, the
one sitting down at the one end of a Table, the other at the other end, and
the auditors sitting along on both sides, and some standing about in a large
upper Parlor, But first Mr. Walker desired a Bible* unto which they might
appeal, and by which testimonies of Scriptures; which both parties alleged
might be tried; whereupon there were two Bibles brought, and agreed upon; the
one a vulgar Latin, which the Counsel of Trent, and the whole Romish Church
holds to be most authentical; the other an English Bible, for the standers by
to look upon. Then Mr. Smith alias Norrice, begins first with an apology for
himself, telling the gentlemen that he had of late by reason of some bodily
infirmity, been forced to take Physic, and to use a diet drink, and
therefore if his memory should fail, or if pain in his head should force him
to break off abruptly, desired them to bear with him, and to have him
excused; By which he seemed wisely to provide before hand for a less shameful
flight, if he found the fight too hot and sharp for him to be endured. Mr.
Walker on the other side desired, that they might go to it hand to hand, and
but one speak at once for avoiding of confusion; that the disputation might be
in short syllogismes: and desired also that the Arguments and the answers might
be writ down, for preventing all false relation and misreports afterward, and
withal, did put it to the Adversaries choice, whether he would oppose or
answer first? Mr. Smith desired, that he might first dispute upon his own
questions, and promised that afterward he would answer Mr. Walker, disputing
upon his questions: It was agreed upon; And thereupon he putting off his hat,
and crossing his face and breast, began to speak to Mr. Walker as follows.

Mr. Smith, alias Norrice. Sir, I have here received three questions from you,
which you have taken upon you to prove by Argument, I have here written down,
and will relate them unto you: First you say you will prove the Pope to be
Antichrist: 2. The Church of Rome to be the whore of Babylon: 3. That St. Peter
was not Bishop of Rome as we hold; These questions are such as are not fit to
be named, much less to be disputed or answered; they are delivered in terms
very unseemly and unmannerly: for what can be more unfit or unseemly then
this, that you should call the holy Father the Pope Antichrist, and the Church
of Rome the whore of Babylon now in these days, when it pleases the Kings
Majesty to give the Pope that honor, as to send and sue to his holiness for
a dispensation for the marriage of thr Prince his son: I pray you therefore
let us have no more of these questions, but let us have some other, or else
propound them in other terms, as that the Church of Rome is not the true
Church or the like: As you see I have done, in that I have used milder words in
my questions: holding that you protestants in England, have no Church nor faith.


Mr. Walker. Seeing it is your pleasure thus to speak at large in loose
speech, and not in strict Syllogism, I will answer you in your kind. First, I
marvel that you are not ashamed to slander the Kings Majesty with honoring
of the Pope, by suing to him for dispensation, which we all know he will never
do; because he has not only said, that he is Antichrist, but also publicly
in his learned writings proved him so to be, and the Romish Church to be the
whore of Babylon. I warrant you our King will marry his Son and ask the Pope
no leave, if the other party will adventure it as well as he. It is most
intolerable, that you should so boldly slander his Majesty.

Secondly, for the terms of my questions, which you call unmannerly, they are
the same which it pleases Gods spirit to use in the holy Scriptures; and his
holiness has in his wisdom been pleased to style the Pope and Church of
Rome by the same titles, as I shall quickly prove, if you will undertake to
answer me. And therefore you are too bold to tax Gods spirit of
unmannerliness: But perhaps this is a shift of yours, to put off our
disputation upon these points which pay you home, with a cleanely excuse of
unmannerly terms: yet it shall not serve your turn; for the more unseemly
that the questions are, the more disgrace it will be to me, and the more hard
task to prove them: and to you it will be more credit and ease to defend the
contrary, so that this is no excuse for you at all. Thirdly, in that you do
charge us here at home so manifestly contrary to common sense, that we have
neither Church nor Faith, when as we believe and profess all holy truths
taught in the holy Scriptures, which by your selves cannot be denied to be Gods
infallible word. But I pray you let us leave all loose and idle discourses, and
come to a strict form of Disputation, writing down the Arguments and answers
which do pass between us. Your task which you have undertaken is to prove,
that we have no Church nor Faith: let us hear your arguments briefly.


Mr. Smith. Well, that we may come quickly and closely come home to the matter,
let me ask you a question, and do you answer me, that I may ground my
Arguments upon your own words, and I shall quickly prove against you my
assertion, and make the truth of it plainly appear. First I ask whether the
true Catholic Church be visible?


M. Walker. The true Catholic Church is not visible, neither can it be seen
with eyes of any mortal man on earth.


M. Smith. Mark Gentlemen, he will deny this Canon: he says the Catholic
Church is not visible, which I will prove to be against all reason.


Mr. Walker. Indeed if I should say that it were visible, considering it as it
now is, I should speak against all reason; For the greatest part of it being
Saints in heaven are without the reach of man's eyes, and cannot be seen.


Mr. Smith. You do but equivocate of purpose to decline all Disputation; you
know that I mean, not the Church triumphant in heaven, but the Catholic
Church militant on earth.


Mr. Walker. Nay, rather do you equivocate or worse; for to say that the
Catholic Church is militant on earth is as absurd, as to say that all
mankind, even the whole universal race of Adam are now living on earth, when
reason and experience teach us, that the greatest part are dead, and many also
yet unborn: I hope you know that the word Catholic, signifies universal: and
therefore the Catholic Church is universal company of the Elect and
faithful, and includes in it every one whosoever has been, or is, or shall
be hereafter a true believing member of Christ, and a^l they cannot be seen
at once on earth, because they never were altogether on earth. The militant
number of them on earth, are the least part of them.


Mr. Smith. You do wrangle to avoid D^sputation; I therefore tell you; that
by the Catholi^e militant Church, I understand the true Church of Jesus Christ,
which all true Christians here on earth ought to hear and obey, as it is the
pillar and ground of truth: now answer whether you hold that to be visible or
invisible?


M. Walker. I judge of your meaning by your words, and therefore I cannot
conceive this Church which you do speak of, to be the Catholic, that is the
universal Church: for every true particular Church, in which every true
Christian does love, and whereof he is a member, is that which he ought to
hear and to obey, because by reason of the faithful and elect which are in
it, it is the house of God, and the pillar and firmament of truth. Now every
such Church is partly visible, and partly invisible.


M. Smith. How is it visible, and how is it invisible?


Mr. Walker. Every such true Church has in it elect and faithful men,
professing outwardly in word, and practice true Christian religion, who do
belong to the Catholic Church, and are true lively members of Christ: It has
also some hypocrites and carnal professors, which do also make an outward
show and profession of christianity, but are not truly ingraffed into Christ,
by union and communion of the Spirit, neither have the true holy saving Faith,
and by consequent are not members of the true Catholic Church. Now the men who
profess religion in the Church, and are the members of it, if we consider them
as they are men, and as they practice and perform outward duties of
christians, as preaching and hearing of the word, administering and receiving
the Sacraments public outward worship and such like, they are visible: But as
for the election faith, spiritual, and in word graces and devotion in the one
sort, by which they are indeed true christians, and belong to the Catholic
Church: and the hypocrisy and carnal corruption lurking inwardly in the other
sort, by means whereof, they are separated from communion with Christ in
spirit, they are things invisible, and to be discerned spiritually, not with
bodily eyes. Thus every true Church is partly invisible, to wit, in respect of
the spiritual graces, which make men true Christians indeed; and partly
visible, to wit, in respect of the outward profession, common both to elect and
reprobates, to faithful men and hypocrites.


Mr. Smith. No sooner was the answer given but Mr. Smith as one full of anger,
protested with vehemence of words, that now he saw indeed, there was neither
Church nor Faith among Protestants; they were all so contrary among themselves,
never agreeing together in any opinion: He affirmed to the standers by, that
Doctor Whitakers, Doctor Reignolds, Mr. Perkins, and many other chief
Protestants did ever grant, that the true Catholic Church was visible. Another
Priest sitting by, scornefully repeated the name of Perkins, and spoke of him
as of a poor silly man, not worthy to be counted among the learned.


Mr. Walker. Mr Walker moved with the falsehood of the one, and the scorn of
the other, first answered the scorner, that none could count Mr. Perkins silly
and unlearned, but either out of ignorance or wilful malice: and that he knew
it to be the fashion of popish Priests, outwardly to slight and vilify before
the people, such as do most cut and gall them. To Mr. Smith he answered, that
if he would grant that Protestants have a true Church, and the true faith, as
truly as that which he affirmed of Doctor Whitakers and the rest was false, he
would desire no more for the victory: Yea (says he) if you have read Doctor
Whitakers, you know that he holds as I do; and that you wilfully and falsely
father on him things untrue.


Mr. Smith. Mr. Smith enraged with this answer, protested what he had said was
true, and the more to persuade the standers by, he added more specially, that
Doctor Whitakers does in his writings maintain, that the whole essence of the
true Church, consists only in the true preaching of the word, and the right
administration of the Sacraments which are things visible.


Mr. Walker. Sir I do not love to contend by oaths and protestations, but by
proofs. I will here write down your words (which he did, and read them in
the hearing of all, and asked if he had not truly written? and all assented he
had: Then he proceeded thus.) I doubt not sir, but you have learned Logic,
and do know that the definition of a thing does express the whole essence,
and that what a man defines a thing to be, that he holds to be the essence of
it: Tell me here do you not grant this?


Mr. Smith. I do.


Mr. Walker. Well then, it must be granted, that Doctor Whitaker does hold that
to be the essence of the Church which he does comprehend in the definition of
the Church. Now his definition of the Church is Coelus electorum and fid^lum, A
company of elect and faithful men, and he proves against Bellarmine, that none
can be seen with the eye to be members of the Catholic Church, because the
elect only faithful and godly, belong to it, whose graces are invisible, and
not hypocrites and reprobates, as Bellarmine does hold. Dare you deny this?


Mr. Smith. I am sure he holds as I said before, that the whole essence of the
Church consists in true preaching of Gods word, and in administration of the
Sacraments.


Mr. Walker. Because I will not spend time in contesting with you; let this be
the issue before these Gentlemen: let us send for Doctor Whitakers works, and
if I do not show that he does prove against Bellarmine, that the Catholic
Church is invisible, and that this is a maine point largely disputed by him,
and a maine controversy between him and Bellarmine, let me be branded with
the mark of a wilful liar, impostore and false prophet. But if I show it
presently before them all out of his own writings, then shall you confess
your self a forger and falsifier, an impostor, and a priest of Baal; The
Gentlemen all confessed that this was fair play, and desired it might be so.
Whereupon Mr. Smith began to draw back, and showed himself unwilling, and
much afraid to hazard his credit so quickly, and would gladly have left this
point, and fallen into another, But Mr. Walker proceeded on this wise and said:
Gentlemen it is true, that Doctor Whitakers maintains, that the Word truly
preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered, are the certain and
infallible notes and marks, by which every true particular Church may be
discerned to be Christ's true church: and you know that the marks of a thing
differ from the essence and substance of it: as the sign hanging at the door
of a Tavern, and showing that house to be a Tavern, differs from the Tavern
it self: and the habit and Cowle of a Monk or Friar, which is the mark of
his order, differs from the Monk himself, and is not any part of his essence.
I beseech you therefore take notice of the boldness and impudency of popish
Priests, how they can snatch here and there a speech out of our learned men's
writings, without any understanding of it, and thereby make show, as if they
had thoroughly read those Authors; yea, and can in common talk, and in titles
of their printed pamphlets profess, that they have confuted Whitakers,
Reignolds, Field, Perkins, and many others, whose books they never durst read
thoroughly, neither have the hardiness to sift any of their maine arguments. I
assure you, that as you see this which I say here verefied, so I find it a
common thing among them all.


Mr. Smith. Mr. Smith and all his company on his side were very unwilling to
insist any longer upon this point, and therefore answered nothing; but presently
proceeded to another question, and asked Mr. Walker Whether the whole militant
Church on earth may err?


Mr. Walker. I answer, that this question is captious and ambiguous, and cannot
directly in one word negative or affirmative be answered: my reasons are
these; First, because the whole militant Church, if such a Church may be
acknowledged, is nothing but the whole number of particular Churches militant
on earth; and in diverse points they do differ among themselves: and it is
impossible for any man to find out the judgment of them all in every point,
as it is impossible to gather them all at once into one place. Secondly, it may
be said both that it may err, and also that it cannot err in diverse respects
and considerations, if we consider it by it self alone, as it is militant,
and according to the militancy and weakness of it (as I may so speak) we
grant that it may err, and in every particular part of it, there may be found
some errors: but if we consider it according unto the relation and dependence
which it has upon the Triumphant Church, and the assistance which it has from
Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, upon whose doctrine and Scriptures it does
wholly cast it self, and builds all the doctrines of faith,, so it cannot
err, for in so doing it does follow infallible guides: even as the Apostle
says of a man regenerate and borne of God, that he cannot sin, 1 Ioh. 3. to
wit, in the maine, against the maine precepts of the Gospel, Believe and
Repent, for he cannot fall into impenitency and infidelity, because the seed
of God, even his holy Spirit abides in him: But that he has sin, and does
lie if he says he has none, to wit, through infirmity and weakness of the
flesh: So likewise it is truly said of the true Church, and every part
thereof, that as it builds only on the Scriptures, and does urge no doctrine
of faith of necessity to be believed, but such as the Scriptures teach: So it
cannot err no more then the Scripture, for this is a work of infallible faith.
But because all men living in the Church; have as infirmities of life, so
imperfections in judgment, and some perverseness in affections, and therefore
may fail in conceiving some doubtful and obscure places of Scripture amiss,
or in cleaving not so close to the word as they ought, or following their own
affections to much, as we see in all the writings of the Fathers, and in the
most part of the general Counsels, in this respect we truly say, that the
Church militant may err.


Mr. Smith. You do what you can to keep off, and not to come to the point;
but I will bring you to it do what you can if you will answer me this
question. Whether the who^e militant Church of England may err?


Mr. Walker. I answer to this as before, that it is a captious and ambiguous
confused question, and that this militant Church as the rest may err and not
err, according to the former diverse respects and considerations.


Mr. Smith. Whether is the Church of England so tied to the word of God, and
such helps, that it cannot err nor misinterpret the Scriptures in fundamental
points of Faith?


Mr. Walker. I answer, that as in all other particular Churches so in the
particular Churches of England, there is a double voice, one of the Church, as
she is the true Church of Christ, and that is both her voice commending the
Scriptures, only to be believed as necessary for saving knowledge and true
faith, and also the voice of GOD plainly speaking in the Scriptures, in this
respect she is so tied that she cannot err. There is another voice which the
Church utters not immediately from her self, by the Commission which Christ
gave unto her; but by her frail members, suppose a Synod and assembly of
Pastors taking upon them to determine things doubtful out of obscure places of
Scripture, and to make them more plain then the Scriptures do upon which they
build; This voice may err, and by it the Church may be said after a sort to
err in some part, though not wholly, nor finally, nor obstinately: because if
it be a true Church, it will not absolutely and peremptorily determine that
which the Scriptures leave doubtful: neither will it persist always in the
errors if they be deadly, but either the whole number, or at least some in the
number of the Church will renounce it; and so the whole shall not err finally.
This is my answer; But because I would give you some ground whereon to fasten,
that we may not spend time in questions, but may come to disputation, which is
the intent of our meeting; I will grant you thus much, that the Church of
England may err for a time, and after some manner in a point fundamental or
necessary to salvation. Ground what you can upon this, and let us have some
disputation by way of strict Arguments and Syllogismes.


Mr. Smith I have enough out of your own confession to prove that you have
neither Church nor Faith. And I pray you Gentlemen to mark and take notice, he
grants that the Protestant Church of England may err in a fundamental point,
if in one, then as well in another, and so from one to another till it err in
all, and so have no faith at all, and having no faith it is no Church. Thus you
see I have proved that Protestants have neither church nor Faith: and therefore
I beseech you all take heed of them, who by their own confession have
forsaken the Catholic Church and faith, and do wilful run into all
damnable errors and heresies, and lead men into destrustion. You see how
plainly they are convinced; and I appeal to you all, Judge whether I have not
plainly proved that which I did under take, to wit, that they have neither
Church nor Faith, and so are in a most damnable estate.


Mr. Walker. To these words uttered, with great vehemence and action of the
hands and whole body, Mr. Walker standing up, and putting of his Hat made this
reply: First (says he) though it was your motion, and my desire that I might
talk mildly without bitter words: yet seeing he first breaks out so
unreasonably, and go about by bitter and reproachful words and gestures to
bear down the truth: I must crave leave of these Gentlemen to answer you in
your kind, though it be very unseemly that in my manner of answer, you may
behold the vnseemlynesse of your disputing: and then with like words, voice,
and gestures, he answered to this effect: First, where as you say that you have
proved, that which you did undertake* you show your self without wit or
reason: for you are not able to bring one word of reason by way of argument,
till I do lay you a ground, as all here do see; and therefore if you seem to
prove any thing, you must thank me for it, who do yield more then you can
prove: Secondly, your argument is without all form, order, or reason; for it
does not follow, that every Church which may err in one point, may err in all
points at once, and fall wholly away, because God has promised, that the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against his Church so far as to put it quite from
the foundation, though it may Build stubble and straw upon the foundation, by
erring in some points for a time. Thirdly, though it be not impossible for the
true Church to err yea though it were granted that it might wholly fall away
from all faith: yet it does not there upon follow that it does so, and that now
presently it has no faith, neither is a Church at all: Thus Gentlemen you see
how I have proved this man by his own speech to be without wit, reason
modesty or honesty, roauing without wit or reason, railing without modesty, and
falsely charging us against all show of honesty: But I fear me that this kind
of Frier-like preaching, is odious and distasteful to all judicious beholders:
I pray you let us dispute orderly, and according to art: And if you be able to
dispute Scholler-like, let us have one argument framed into a short Syllogism.


Mr. Smith. I warrant you I can make Syllogismes to your small comfort.


Mr. Walker And I doubt not but I shall as easily answer them to your small
ease.


Mr. Smith. Then he with much ado uttered this Syllogism, and caused it to be
written down. That Church which has not the word of God truly preached, and
infallibly delivered unto it, is not the true Church of Christ: But the
Protestant Church is such, Ergo.


Mr. Walker. I distinguish upon the Mayor proposition: For if you mean the
word truly preached, and infallibly delivered in every particular point, so
that it can never err any manner of way in any such point. I deny the Mayor
upon example and warrant from the Apostles: and do hold that a true Church may
for a time have the word not truly delivered, and infallibly in some point, and
yet be a true Church: But if you understand a total erring in all points, and
a preaching of the whole word untruly: then is your Minor most false, for
Protestant Churches do not preach the whole word untruly at any time. Now
prove you which of your propositions you please: For in these senses which I
have named both are false.


Mr. Smith. The Mayor is so manifest that it needs no proof, neither can be
denied, for how is it possible for any Church to be a true Church which has
not the word truly preached in all points.


Mr. Walker. It is to me a manifest untruth, and therefore prove it true if
you can; if you cannot, then yield the cause, that is false.


Mr. Smith. I prove it thus. That Church which has not the word of God truly
preached, but falsely translated, is no true Church. Such is the Church of
England. Ergo.


Mr. Walker. This is no proof of that proposition which I denied, and which
you did undertake to prove, and therefore you show your self ignorant in
disputing and do commit that fallacy against the rules of Logic which we
call Ignorationem elenchi.


Mr. Smith It is a true Syllogism, and proves the maine matter in
controversy, to wit, that you have no true Church.


Mr. Walker But the thing which you were to prove, was that the Church which
has not Gods word truly preached, and infallibly delivered in every point at
all times, is not a true Church. This because you cannot tell how to prove as
you did undertake, therefore you flee to another new Argument, to which also I
do answer, as I did to the former: First, that the Mayor proposition is false:
For a Church which has the word of God falsely or erroneously translated in
some parts, and so not truly preached in every part, may be a true Church.
Secondly, if you mean falsely translated, and not truly preached of purpose
and wilfully, then the Minor is false, for though the translation of the Church
of England may fail and miss of the true meaning of diverse places, (as all
the best translations, especially the vulgar Latin approved by the Romish
Church does,) yet it is not so erroneously translated of purpose, neither do
all the Preachers thereof build, certainly on such erroneous and false
translations, but many do discern them, and preach and teach the true
oppositions; and the Church allows them so to do, when they show good
reasons for their doings, from the circumstances of the Text.


Mr. Smith. But I will show plainly by diverse Examples, that you have diverse
places of Scripture falsely translated in your translation of set purpose, and
wilfully contrary to the words of the Hebrew Text, contrary also to the Greek
and Latin, received in all ages and Churches heertofore.


Mr. Walker. You threaten largely in words which are but wind; but indeed
you can never perform that which you say. Let us see if you be able to show
any part of our translation, wherein one word is falsely translated of purpose:
I desire no more but to join a Combat with you hand to hand about the Hebrew
text, and about the truth of our translation, and the agreement of it with the
Original.


Mr. Smith. I shall quickly prove what I say, and what you require. First, I
have a plain example, Malachi 2. 7. where your translators read the words
thus, The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law
at his mouth. First this translation is false, because it is contrary to the
Hebrew text, wherein the words are Iishmeru they shall keep, and Iebakshu they
shall seek: and not, they should keep, nor, they should seek. Also it is
contrary to the Greek, wherein the words are, (...) and (...), and to the
Latin translation of St. Hierome, which is Custodient, and requirent.
Secondly, it teaches heresy and false doctrine, namely; that Gods Priests,
and they who sit in Moses Chair, may err, contrary to the words of Christ who
commands his Disciples to hear all such as sit in Moses Chair, because they
shall not err, but their lips shall preserve knowledge. Thirdly, it is thus
corrupted of purpose, to gainsay the infallibility of the Pastors of the
Church, who do succeed in the Chair of the Apostles, and to blind the
peoples eyes, that they may not see the certainty and infallibility of
judgment in the Priests and Pastors who sit in Moses Chair, and how they are
bound to seek the Law at their mouth: but may follow any vpstart teachers which
separate from the Catholic Church. Thus you see Gentlemen all, how plainly I
have proved that the Church of England has of purpose corrupted the
Scriptures, and therefore is no true Church.


Mr. Walker. Indeed if that which you say were true, you did speak something
to the purpose; but great words and protestations cannot make truth to be
falsehood, nor falsehood truth, as for the Example which you cite out of our
English translation. Mal. 2. 7. I deny it to be contrary to the Hebrew text:
yea I will easily prove both from the Hebrew words, which you have here showed
in the Hebrew Interlinear Bible, and also from the whole scope, and all
circumstances of the place, that the English is the best translation, and more
perfect then either the Greek or Latin. First, though the Hebrew words
Iishmeru and Iebakshu be of the Futuretense, yet this does not prove: that they
should be translated so in our tongue, because you cannot but know, if you have
any skill in the Hebrew tongue, that the future tense in Hebrewe, sometime
simply, and sometime by means of Vau conuersiue signifies time, either
perfectly or imperfectly past; sometimes it stands for the Optatiue, Potentiall,
and Subiunctiue mood; therefore our translation is not different, nor
irregular from the Hebrewe, which is the original. Secondly, it was never the
purpose of Gods spirit in that place, or by these words to teach, that the Law
should always be taught truly and infallibly by the Priests and Pastors who
succeed Moses, or the Apostles locally in the Church by a continued
succession: for that is a falsehood contrary to the experience of all ages: this
very place confutes it most evidently; For the Priests unto whom the Prophet
here speaks in these places were Levites, and succeeded Aaron in the
Priesthood: and yet they were departed out of the way they caused many to fall
in the law by their corrupt gloss, and their abuse of the Covenant of Leui. As
it appears in the next words immediately following: yea some of them had
sacrificed to Idols, as Josephus shows in his History of those times, and
therefore the Lord threatens to corrupt their seed by cutting off the male
progeny, and to cast the dung of their Sacrifice in their faces: so that the
Priesthood of Phineas should by a sister married into the Tribe of Iudath to
one of David's line fall to Christ, who desended of her, and he should take it
away to himself for ever as is intimated in the 3. verse of the same Chapter.
So then it is no heresy but Gods holy truth, that Priests succeeding in the
place and office of Aaron and Moses may err and have erred: Moset his Chair
in which the Scribes and Pharisees did sit, was the seat wherein they were wont
to read the Law of Moses, and the expositions of the Prophets to the people,
and therefore what they there did teach was true, and Christ commanded his
Disciples to obey it: But in their own glosses and traditions they erred
damnably, and made void Gods Law, Math. 13. 4. 16. 12.
and their Doctrine our Savior called sour leaven, and warned his Disciples
to beware of it. Thirdly, they who translate the words thus: The Priests lips
shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his mouch: Did never
intend to show thereby, that God did make here a promise, that so it shall be
for ever, but only to show that this is the Law and Commandment of God,
teaching what the Priests and People should do and ought to do, even as in
the Commaudement, Thou shall have no other Gods but me. The words do not
promise, that the Israelites should always acknowledge and worship Jehovah the
true God alone, (for the event showed the contrary within 40. pays) but show
what they ought to do; but the words are a coms mandement recited, not a
promise made, the wordof the 4. verse show. Therefore our English translation
is most perfect of all, showing not only the sense and meaning of the Law, but
also how it did bind the Priest and People, and how they ought to obey it.
Thus you see how your example does make for us against your self.


Mr. Smith. Mr. Smith finding worse success then he expected in this example,
and perceiving the standers by to be well satisfied with this answer, flees
presently to another, to wit, Dan. 4. 27. where in our English Translation the
words run thus. Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor: Here says he, the word in the Chaldee, which is
the Original, Perok, signifies to Redeem, and so the Greek and Latin
Translations render it; but your Translations of purpose, contrary to all the
ancient received Translators, and to the nature of the word in the original,
do translate it, Break off, and that of purpose to oppose the true doctrine of
satisfaction and merit by good works. Therefore your Church is a false Church.


Mr. Walker. Howsoever other translations run, I am sure our English is in
sense most sound and Orthodoxe. That translation which counsels Nabuchadnezar
to redeem his sins by righteousness, is (as the words doerun) senseless and
against all reason; For God never appointed that men's sins should be
redeemed; but his will is, that they should be mortified and destroyed, and he
so hates them, that he cannot leave them unpunished, but will have just
vengeance to be executed for them, eithervpon the sinner himself, or on his
surety. If you understand the words (as you seem to urge them) that
Nabuchadnezar a wicked Heathen King, should by his own righteousness redeem
himself from his sins; you do make Daniel a teacher of heresy and
blasphemy: for it is no less then blasphemy, to hold that an Idolatrous Pagan
may by his own righteousness redeem himself: it makes void the promise of
Christ the Redeemer. But our English translation does teach excellent truth; to
wit, that a true convert ought not only to believe in Christ, and by faith to
put on the Robe of Righteousness, that therein he may appear righteous before
God, and comely in his sight; but also to break off his sinful course of
life, and never to go on any longer in any known sin, as Papists do, in
hope of absolution by confession and penance. And therefore I doubt not, but
the word in the original will be more agreeable to our translation, when we
come to see and examine it, if you be pleased to let me see your Hebrew Bible.


Mr. Smith. Lo here in the original the word is in the Caldee Perok, which
signifies only to redeem, (...) as the Greek translation renders it: and the
Latin Redeem.


Mr. Walker. I thought that we should find it thus, when we came to the
trial; dare you here before these Gentlemen put on such an impudent face, as
to affirm without fear or shame that this Parak signifies only to redeem and
nothing else?


Mr. Smith. I confesseit signifies also to break in sunder, but never to
break off.


Mr. Walker. Yea, it signifies all kind of breaking, even breaking asunder,
breaking a pieces, and breaking off; for indeed it is an Hebrew word, and the
Caldee borrowes it form the Hebrew, the first and most proper signification of
it, is to break asunder, or to break off: and it does signify to Redeem
only in a trope by a Metominie of the cause for the effect, for men are
redeemed out of bondage, by having their yoke of bondage broken off from their
neck, and their chains and fetters broken in sunder, and that that breaking
is the means of their Redemption: That it signifies properly to break off,
appears by the common use of it in the Scriptures, as Genesis 27. 40. where Isaac
says to Esau. Thou shall break off his yoke from thy neck: Exodus 32. 2.
where Aaron said to the people, Break off the golden earerings which are in
the ears of your wives, etc. Thus Gentlemen you see what a bold face this man
can set upon a falsehood, and how he goes about to bear down the truth with
great words.


Sir Edward Harwood. Upon this Sir Edward Harwood stood up and said, that Mr.
Smith has failed much in this proof, seeing the word in the original did
bear another sense more proper, then that which he urged for the only true
sense. And that the proper sense which the English translation did follow,
being so agreeable to the rule of faith was rather to be embraced.


M. Smith. M. Smith thus confounded had no shift but this: That the Hebrew text
was by the malice of the Jews corrupted in many things, and that it was
written of old without pricks, until the Jewish Massorites did invent pricks
and vowels, by which we do read it, diverse hundreds of years after Christ:
And therefore he would not build natural point on the original Hebrew words.


Mr. Walker. Now (says Mr. Walker) you show you selse what you are in your
own colors, even one who esteems no authority or testimony either of God or
man, further then they serve your own turn: while you immagined that the
Hebrew Text was against our translation, you did urge it with great vehemency,
as the authority and testimony of God. Now when it fails you and contrary to
your expectation does make for us: you vilify it and reject it, as a thing
corrupted by the Jews, and formed according to the mind and pleasure of the
Jewish Massorites: wherein you show not only vanity of mind and inconstancy:
but also malice and wickedness joined with wilful ignorance. For how soever
Elias Leuita a turnecoate Jew of later times, may seem to affirm such a thing
(perhaps to please his Patron Aegidius) that the Vowels were invented by the
Massorites of Tiberias: yet it is the judgment of all the best learned, both
Jewish Rabbis and Christians, that the pricks, vowels and accents, were from
the beginning. And the Massorites were Jews gathered both out of the East and
West of purpose, to compare their most ancient and authentic Manuscrips
together, and when they found them all to agree in Letters and points, they
made their Massorah, and noted how many times such a word was written with such
pricks in the Scripture; how many verses, words, yet letters were in the Law,
and which was the middle verse, word and letter, so that by their Massorah, if
it hab been kept perfect, a man might find out, if there were but one word,
letter, or prick altered or taken away out of all the old Testament. All the
differences which were found between the Bibles of the Eastern and Western
Jews, are recorded and kept to this day, the one set down under the names of
the Sons of Ashur, the other under the names of the Sons of Nephtali, and
they are such as do not alter the sense at all, as may be seen in all our
great Rabbinicall Bibles; The end therefore of the Massarites meeting, and of
their work, was not to invent vowels and pricks, but only to note how they
did find the Scriptures pricked and vowelled from the days of old, and to set
down rules from the knowledge thereof, and for the preserving them without
alteration or corruption to all posterities: Thus much I have learned out of
the Rabbis, though my skill be but small in their Language, and though I have
had no time to spend in the study of them, but such as I have stolen from my
other necessary studies of Divinity, which properly concern my Calling. And if
you know not this to be true, I am sure you are but a weak Hebrutian, and
slenderly read in Hebrew Rabbis.


Mr. Smith. All the Rabbis are of opinion, that the pricks of the Bible were
invented by the Massarites, and undoubtedly that opinion is the truth.


Mr. Walker. I pray you name one Rabbin of note, who is of that opinion, and I
will name you ten of the contrary; I have ten or twelve of the best Rabbin
Comentaries upon the Law of Moses, which I will show to you, and if you can
find any of them to be of that opinion, I will yield unto you in this point.
Nay, more then that, I will show out of the Scriptures written by Moses, that
the original Scriptures of Moses his Law, which were kept in the Tabernacle by
the Priests, were written, not single without pricks as common coppies were,
but double, both with letters and pricks, so that none could doubt of the right
reading of them.


Mr. Smith. It is easily said; but impossible to be proved, if you can show me
any such thing out of the Scriptures, you shall do more then any ever yet could
do.


Mr. Walker. Look Deuteronomy. 17. 18. and there it is plainly testified, that there
was a book of the Law appointed to be kept before the Priests and Levites in
the Sanctuary; out of which, the King was commanded to write him a double
written Copy of the Law, that is a copy written both with letters and pricks,
and so most easy to be read and understood; for the Hebrew word there used is
Mishneth, which signifies Double, and so you see here in your interliniall
Bible Pagani does translate it (Duplum legis) that is, the Law written in the
double form, both with letters and pricks.


Another Priest. Mr. Smith being confounded with this proof could answer
nothing, and therefore another Priest who did sit by to assist him, answered for
him, that the Hebrew word Mishneth does not signify the original Scriptures,
but the exposition of the Rabbis upon the text of Scripture.


Mr. Walker. It is true that the Rabbis call their Expositions sometimes by
this name, as for example Rabbi Moses, Maymonides call his Sum of the Talmid,
Mishueth Torah: But you must know that in Moses his days, when he wrote this
Book of Deuteronomy, there were no Rabbinical Commentaries, nor for a thousand
years after; only the Law it self was kept before the Priests, and the King
was commanded to write it only into a Book; There Mishueth cannot here
signify any thing but the Text of the Law written in double form, which
double form of writing was easy to be read and understood, and was an
exposition in respect of the single writing without pricks. Whereupon this
word Mishueth came to signify an Exposition or Commentary which does largely
express the meaning of the Law, which is more short and obscure: and the Jews
do call by this name the Book of Deuteronomy, because it is an Exposition of
the Laws written more obscurely in the other books: And their Expositions of
the Law set down in their Talmud: they also call Mishueth and Mishuai^th.


Priest. The word Mishueth does not signify properly the Scripture, but the
doubled Law: for the Scripture is called Mickra in the Hebrew tongue.


Mr. Walker. The Law is the first Scripture which was written, and therefore
the word Mishuith by your own confession, signisying the Law doubled, is
written in double form, signifies the Scripture written both with letters and
pricks, and so you contradict your self in your speech: Whereas you allege
another name, by which the Hebrews call the Scripture, to wit, Mickra, and
from them would infer, that the Scripture is never called Mishueth by them: I
answer, that your reason is ridiculous, for one name of the Scripture does not
take away the rest, but it has diverse names in all languages: we in English
call it the Scripture, and the Bible, and the Book of God, and Gods word: So
in Hebrew the Scripture is called by diverse names; sometimes Torah, that is,
the Law, because it is the rule of Life; sometimes Chethab, The Scripture or
writing, because it is written. Sometimes Mickra, because it is read of all
Gods people. And as it is written full and plain in letters and pricks, it is
called Mishueh. The Priest having nothing to reply to this answer, but holding
his peace. Some of the Gentlemen desired, that these disputations about the
Hebrew text, which they could not understand might cease, and that Mr. Smith
would dispute in plain English by way of Syllogismes; To which motion both
parties agreed. And so Mr. Smith proceeded to another Argument, which was
written down first, and then answered.


Mr. Smith. That Church which may err for a time in a fundamental point
necessary to salvation, is no true Church. Yours is such.


Mr. Walker. I deny your proposition; for a true Church may so err for a time.


Mr. Smith. That Church which may err for a time in a fundamental point
necessary to salvation, has no certainty for that time, yours is such, Ergo,
it is no true Church.


Mr. Walker. Your Argument is Sophistical and faulty diverse ways: First, it
does not prove the proposition which I denied, and so it is a fallacy, which we
call (...), Ignorationem Elanchi. Secondly, it is no true Syllogism, because
it has four terms. For the premises tend to prove that our Church has no
certainty, and you conclude otherwise: to wit, that it is no true Church.
Thirdly, the proposition is false, for actual erring in one point, does not
take away certainty in all the rest, much less possibility of erring for a
time.


Mr. Smith. I prove it thus. That Church which may err for a time in a
fundamental point necessary to salvation, has not sufficient means of
salvation for that time: yours is such, Ergo, it is no true Church.


Mr. Walker. Here are the same three faults, which were in your former
Argument. First, no proof of the proposition denied. Secondly, four terms.
Thirdly, the manner is still false: for possibility of erring does not take
away sufficiency of means for the time.


Mr. Smith. I prove it thus. That Church which may err for a time in a
fundamental point necessary to salvation, for that time has not the whole
infallible truth requisite to salvation. But your Church may so err: Ergo. It
has not the whole infallible faith requisite for salvation.


Mr. Walker. I see you cannot bring one argument to prove that which I denied;
but still you do begin a new Argument to prove new things. Notwithstanding I
will follow you wheresoever you go; and therefore I deny the mayor, and do
require you to prove that possibility of erring, takes away the whole
infallible faith from such as are subject to it.


Mr. Smith. I prove it thus. The belief of the whole infallible faith, is a
means necessary to salvation. The English Church has not the whole infallible
faith: Ergo. That Church which may err for a time in a fundamental point, for
that time has not means sufficient.


Mr. Walker. Now sir I see you have lost the question, and your reason, and
your self, and all your speech is a Chaos without form or figure, and proves
nothing at all: If you be not able to make a Syllogism; I pray you confess
your weakness: and let me dispute one of my questions against you, and let
us try what faculty you have in defending your cause; I am sure you have none
to any purpose in opposing it.


Mr. Smith. Stay a little, and I will bring it into a Syllogism presently. The
whole entire, infallible faith in all fundamental points, is only a means
sufficient to salvation: That Church which may err for a time in a
fundamental point, has not the whole infallible faith: Ergo: it has not
sufficient means, etc.


Mr. Walker. You cloy me with crasie Syllogismes which have neither mood nor
figure, and which tend to prove nothing but only to repeat what has been
before denied; to wit, That possibility of erring for a time in a fundamental
point, does deprive a Church of the whole infallible faith. Thus you bring in
again as your minor, though it has before been denied: and therefore I will
still put you to prove it. But I pray you let your assistant write down your
Syllogismes, for I am weary of writing, and of wasting paper, with false
fallacies and confused speeches, which has neither mood nor figure.


Mr. Smith. I am sure I shall quickly bring my Argument into form, if you
stand so strictly on artificial Syllogismes: Having thus said, he arose from
the table, as if he would breath himself; and after much scratching of his
head, and other gestures, he turns to the Priest his assistant and bids him
write: and did dictate unto him another false Syllogism of some terms: which
Mr. Walker rejected and derided; And after that another, which was so rejected:
And after that a third, and so on till he had spent a side of a leaf in folio
in writing down fallacies, and a large half hour and more of time.

So that Mr. Walker began to entreat him that he would give him leave to make
his Syllogism for him, for he perceived what he intended

Whereat Mr. Smith chafed, and said to the Gentlemen, he confounds me, or else
I could have long ago brought it into a Syllogism.

Mr. Walker answered: you do me wrong to attribute to me the honor which
belongs to God and his truth, for they confound you and not I.

Then one of the Roman Catholics began to swear by God, that Mr. Smith did
make a true Syllogism, which Mr. Walker had without cause rejected.

Mr. Walker desired him to repeat it, and to show it to be regular, according
to mood and figure.

The Roman Catholic swore again diverse great oaths, and said that he would
take the Sacrament upon it, and renounce his salvation if he did not hear Mr.
Smith make a true Syllogism, and that one of them which Mr. Walker rejected
was it.

Mr. Walker answered, that oaths could not prove false Syllogismes to be
true, neither could the Sacrament turn a fallacy into a sound Argument. And
told him that if he were so prodigal of his salvation, he might sooner lose
his soul, then make a Syllogism out of Mr. Smiths confused speeches and
fallacies. At length after much ado Mr. Smith hammered out this Syllogism.


Mr. Smith. That Church which has not the whole entire infallible faith, has
not means sufficient to salvation, That Church which may err for a time, has
not the whole entire infallible faith, Ergo, it has not means sufficient.


Mr. Walker. I deny your minor, and do put you to prove, that the Church which
may err, has not the whole infallible faith.


Mr. Smith. I prove it thus: That Church which is subject to error, has not
the whole infallible faith. That Church which may err is subject to error.
Ergo.


Mr. Walker. Now sir I thank you, that you have bestowed a Syllogism upon me,
to prove the proposition denied. But I must tell you, that your mayor
proposition is false. For a Church may be so far subject to error, that it may
have a possibility to err, and yet not be void of the whole infallible faith:
It is one thing to be subject to error, and another thing to err actually: we
hold that our Church or any other particular Protestant Church may err; but
do not think that our Church does err in any fundamental point.


Mr. Smith. You do but cavil; for if it may err, it is as bad as if it did
err, and therefore I have sufficiently convinced you by my argument.


Mr. Walker. I hope you do not speak as you think, nor think as you speak:
For you know that by our Law every Seminary Priest is subject to hanging and
quartering, and there is no impossibility of executing the Law upon them; And
yet you hope that all or the most part of them in England shall not be actually
executed; and you know that they are not all in the same case, as if they were
hanging actually: For an Argument does not follow a posse ad esse, as we
Scholars speak. But now seeing your argument is hanged up, and we have spent
four hours and more in hearing you dispute to no purpose, I pray you let me
prosecute one of my questions against you for the time which remains, and I
hope to make more Syllogismes in an hour, then you have done in four, if you
will answer me directly.

Here some of the Roman Catholics said that it was full six a clock, and now
there was little time left. But some of the Protestants desired to hear Mr.
Walker dispute upon his questions. Which when Mr. Smith seemed loath to yield
unto, as being weary already. Mr. Walker desired, that he might but turn one
Argument against Mr. Smiths question, and prove the contrary to be true. To
this all assented, and the Gentleman who began to distrust his former professed
Popery coming to Mr. Walker, and standing at his back desired him to press
one Argument against Mr. Smiths question. Whereupon Mr. Walker thus began to
prove, That a true Christian Church might err for a time in some fundamental
point, and yet be a true Church.


Mr. Walker. That which the ancient Apostolical Church might do, other
succeeding Churches may do with the same success. The Apostolical Church
might err and did err in a maine point, and yet have a true faith, and was a
true Church, Ergo, other Churches also.


Mr. Smith. I deny the minor, the Apostolical Church did not err in any maine
point.


Mr. Walker. The resurrection of Christ from the dead taught in the Scriptures,
is a fundamental point of Faith. The Apostolic Church did err in it, Ergo:


Mr. Smith denied the minor. Mr. Walker proved it thus. That which the Gospel
teaches in express words is true. This the Gospel teaches, that the
Apostles erred in Christ's resurrection, Ergo.


Mr. Smith. If you say that they erred in the resurrection de facto, that is
concerning the act of it, I grant the minor: But if you speak of the
resurrection as it is a point of Faith, I deny your minor.


Mr. Walker. You distinguish strangely between a thing and it self; for the
very act of Christ's resurrection is a point of Faith, without which our faith
is vain as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 17.


Mr. Smith. It is now a point of faith, but it was not then, because the
Scriptures had not expressly revealed, that Christ should rise from death.


Mr. Walker. That which Christ had expressly taught by word of mouth, was
thereby made a point of Faith, and they were bound to believe. But he had told
them, that he must suffer and rise again the third day: and that in plain
words, as the Gospel testifies, Ergo.

Here some of the Gentlemen said, that the point was sufficiently proved.


Mr. Smith. But I deny that the Apostles erred in the Resurrection: show me
that out of the Gospel.


Mr. Walker. It is testified Ioh. 20. 9. That they knew not the Scripture that
he must rise from the dead. Lo thus it is testified in your own vulgar Latin
Bible.


Mr. Smith. I say still, that the Scriptures had not revealed it sufficiently,
and therefore it was no point of faith.


Mr. Walker. The text shows that the Scripture had revealed, for else how
could it truly say, that they knew not the Scripture; if the Scripture had not
taught it? It is no ignorance of Scripture, not to know what the Scripture
never taught.


Sir William Harrington. O well said, I protest I never heard any point so
plainly proved; and then turning himself to the wavering Gentleman said: Now
cosen, if ever thou will be converted, be converted with these proofs.


Mr. Walker. But yet I will prove it more fully, Luke 24. 44. 45. Our Savior
there says, that he had told them before, that he must die and rise again,
and that it was written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the
Psalms, and it is said there, that he opened their understanding, that they
might understand the Scriptures.


Mr. Smith. This was an error of ignorance or forgetfulness, for want of
instruction and exercise in the Word, which succeeding Churches have more
abundantly.


Mr. Walker. You cavil against common sense, for I dispute not whence this
error proceeded, but whether they erred in that maine point of the resurrection
or not; and that you cannot deny, so that the point is fully proved which I
undertook. Again, I can show you yet further, that Christ having instructed
them in the Scriptures, and from his own mouth, it could not be for want of
instruction that they erred, but this error proceeded from incredulity and
hardness of heart in them, so it appears, Mark. 16. 14. where it is said that
our Savior appeared to the eleven Apostles, and vpbraided them with their
incredulity and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had
seen him after he was risen.


Another Priest. Mr. Smith being put to silence with those proofs, the other
Priest to make up this breach, fled to another shift, and denied the Apostles
to have been a Church at that time, because the holy Ghost was not yet come
down, nor the Evangelical Law revealed.


Mr. Walker. Upon this, Mr. Walker first spoke to the wavering Gentleman, and
asked him, whether he thought it not well for him to be of such a Church as St.
Peter was, when Christ said. Math. 16. Happy art thou Simon, etc. And, upon
this rock I will build my Church. Who answered, that he desired to be of no
better Church. Secondly, he proceeded thus; The Kingdom of God which comes by
the Preaching of the Gospel is the true Church. But that was come already, as
our Savior himself testified, Matthew. 11. 28. and Luke 11. 20. It is a base
shift, to say that the coming down of the holy Ghost made them a Church: For
his extraordinary gifts came not to make them Christians, and members of the
Church of Christ, but to make them fit messengers to Preach to all Nations, and
to every people, in their proper tongue. But if all this will not convince you,
let us know who were the Church in those days, if the Apostles were not. Peter
had received that commission and promise long before, upon which you build the
Church of Rome, if it was not then able to make him of the Church, how can it
now uphold your Church against all the gates of hell? Now then to conclude, I
beseech you as you love your souls, take heed of sinning against your own
Conscience, and of rebelling against the light: you know that the Apostles were
elected from all eternity; they were effectually called by Christ himself,
not only to believe, and to be Christians and open professors, but also to be
Apostles and Preachers, and by the Gospel Preached and Miracles wrought, they
had converted many to the faith, as the Gospel testifies; And therefore
nothing being wanting in them, which is required to the essence of a Christian
Church: undoubtedly they were a true Church, and to deny this, is to resist the
manifest truth of the Gospel. Thus the disputation ended; for the Priests did
not give any answer, but were very willing to make an end. The Protestant
Gentlemen seemed well satisfied, and made them ready to depart. And one of the
Roman Catholics calling Mr. Walker aside, began to collogue and flatter with
him; telling him, that he was a good Logician, a good Linguist, and well read,
and that God had given him a sharp wit and ready tongue: And therefore no
marvel though he prevailed and made a good cause seem bad, when he opposed
it, and a bad seem good when he defended it: But says he, take heed that you
do not trust to your wit and learning too much, least they deceive you, and
make you triumph over the truth.

To him Mr. Walker answered, that he knew himself inferior to many hundreds
in the Church of England; that it was not any power in himself, but the power
of the true cause which made him to prevail. For, Magnus est veritas and
praeualebit, Great is truth and will prevail. A Gentleman ouer-hearing,
laughed and said, I am glad that you find some of our Ministers more learned
then your Priests; contrary to your common bragging and boasting, that all
learning is among your Priests and Jesuits. And so they parted. Mr. Smith
alias Norrice embracing Mr. Walker, and saying; I pray God we may meet in
heaven; and Mr. Walker replying and saying, I desire so also, and hope we shall
so do, if you will forsake your errors and embrace the truth, which is
professed in the reformed Churches of CHRIST.


Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

