A CATALOGVE OF THE NOBILITY of England, Scotland, and Ireland. With an
addition of the Baronets of England, the dates of their Patents, the several
creations of the Knights of the Bath, from the Coronation of King James, to
this present. Collected by T. W.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Eagle and Child at Britains Bursse. 1630.

A Catalogue of the Nobiliti^ of England.
Duk^s.
GEorge Villers Duke, Marque^se, and Earl of Buckingham, and Couentry,
Viscount Villers, Baron of Whadden, I^fra atatem.
Marquesses.
John Pawlet Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord St. John of
Basing.
Earls.
Thomas Howard Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl Marshall of England, and
Knight of the Garter. Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, Viscount Bulbec, Lord
Samford, and Vadilsmere. Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, Lord Poy^ings,
Fitz-payne, and Brian, Knight of the Garter. George Talbot Earl of
Shrewesbury, Lord Talbot^ Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakemere. Henry
Gray Earl of Kent, Lord Ruthin. William Stanley Earl of Derby, Lord Stanley,
Strange of Knoking, and of the I Will of Man, Knight of the Garter. Henry Somerset
Earl of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Chepstow, Ragland, and Gower. Francis
Manors Earl of Rutland, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir, and Trusbut, Knight of
the Garter. Francis Clifford Earl of Cumberland, Lord Clifford^ Westmerland,
and Vesey. Edward Radcliffe Earl of Sussex, Viscount Fitz-wal^er, Lord
Egremont, and Burnell. Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington, Lord Hastings
Hungerford, Botreaux, Moeles, and Molyns, Edward Bourchier Earl of Bath, and
Lord Fitz-warin. Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, and Baron
Wrioth^sley of Titchfield. Francis Russell Earl of Bedford, and Lord Russell.
Philip Herbert Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery^ Baron ^erbert of Cardiffe and
Shirland, Lord Parre and Roos, of Kenda^, Marmion, and St. Quintin, Lord
Cham^erlaine of his Majesty's Household, and Knight of the Gar^er. William
Seymour Earl of Hartford, and Baron Beauchamp. Rob^rt Deuereux Earl of Essex,
Viscount Hereford, and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartly, Bourchier, and
Louayne. Theophilus Fynes Earl of Lincoln, and Lord Clinton. Charles Howard
Earl of Nottingham, and Lord Howard of E^^ingham.
Earls made by King JAMES.
Theophilus Howard Earl of Suffolk, Lord Howard of Walden, and Knight of the
Garter. Edward Sackuile Earl of Dorset, and Baron Buckhurst, Knight of the
Garter, and Lord Chamberlain to the Queens Majesty. William Cecill Earl of
Salisbury, Viscount Cramborne, and Baron Cecill of Essinden, Knight of the
Garter. William Cecill Earl of Exceter, Baron Burghley, Knight of the Garter.
Robert Carr Earl of Somerset, Viscount Rochester, and Baron of Branspath,
Knight of the Garter. John Egerton Earl Bridgewater, Viscount Brackley, and
Baron Ellesmere. Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester, Viscount Lifle, and Baron
Sidney of Penshurst. Spencer Compton Earl of Northampton, Baron Compton of
Compton. Robert Rich Earl of Warwick, and Lord Rich of Leeze. William
Cauendish Earl of Devonshire, and Baron Cauendish of Hardwicke, Infra aetatem.
James Hamilton Earl of Cambridge, Marquess of Hamilton, Earl of Arran, Baron
of Even, and Aberbroth, Master of the Horse to his Majesty. James Stuart Earl
of March, Duke of Lenox, Lord Aubigny, Baron of Leighton, Bromeswold, Lord
Darnley, Mertiuen, and St. Andrews. James Hay Earl of Carlisle, Viscount
Doncaster, Lord Hay of Sauley, and Knight of the Garter. William Fielding Earl
of Denbigh, Viscount Fielding, and Baron of Newenham-padox. John Digby Earl of
Bristoll, and Baron Digby of Shirborne. Leonell Cranfield Earl of Middlesex,
and Baron Cranfield of Cranfield. Charles Villers Earl of Anglesey, Lord
Dauentrey. Henry Rich Earl of Holland, Baron Kensington, of Kensington, Capt.
of the Guard, and Knight of the Garter. John Hollis Earl of Clare, Lord
Houghton of Houghton. Oliver St. John Earl of Bullingbroke, Lord St. John of
Bletso. Mildmay Fane Earl of Westmerland, Lord le De-Spencer, and Burghwash.
Earls made by King CHARIES.
William Knowles Earl of Banbery, Viscount Wallingford, and Lord Knowles of
Grayes, Knight of the Garter. Henry Montague Earl of Manchester, Viscount
Mandeuile, and Lord Kymbolton, Lord Privy Seal. Thomas Howard Earl of
Barkeshire, Viscount Ando^ner, and Lord Charlton, Knight of the Garter. Thomas
Wentworth Earl of Cleueland, Lord Wentworth of Nettelsted. Edmond She^^ield,
Earl of Mulgraue, Lord She^field of Butterwick, and Knight of the Garter.
Henry Danuers Earl of Danby, Lord Danuers of Dantzy. Robert Carry Earl of
Monmouth, Lord Carry of Lepington. Henry Ley Earl of Marleburgh, and Lord Ley
of Ley. Edward Denny Earl of Norwich, and Lord Den^y of Waltham. Thomas Darcie
Earl Rivers, Viscount Colchester, and Lord Darcie of Chich. Robert Bartu Earl
of Lindsey, and Lord Willoughby of Eresby, Lord great Chamberlain, Knight of
the Garter. William Cauendish Earl of New-ca^tell, Viscount Mansfield, Lord
Boulfouer, and Ogle. Henry Carry Earl of Dover, Viscount Rochford, and Lord
Hunsdon. John Mordant Earl of Peterborough, Lord Mordant of Turuey. Henry Gray
Earl of Standford, Lord Gray of Groby, Bonuille, and Harington. Elizabeth
Finch Countess of Winchelsey, and Viscountesse Maidstone. Robert Perpoint
Earl of Kingston upon Hull, Viscount Newarke upon Trent, and Lord Perpoint of
Hobnes Perpoint. Robert Dormere Earl of Carna^uan, Viscount Asco^, and Lord
Dormere of Wing. Mount-Ioy Blount Earl of Newport, Lord Mount-Ioy of
Thurueston. Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield, and Lord Stanhop of Shelford.
Nicholas Tufton Earl of the I Will of Thanet, and Lord Tufton of Tufton. Richard
de Burgh Earl of St. Albons^ and Clanrickard, Viscount Tunbridge, and
Galloway, Baron of Somerhill, and Imanuey.
Viscounts.
Anthony Brown Viscount Montague of Cowdrey.
Viscounts made by King JAMES.
John Villers Viscount Purbecke, Lord of Stoke. William ^ines Viscount Say and
Seal, Lord Say, and Seal.
Viscounts made by King CHARLES.
Edward Cecill Viscount Wimbleton, and Baron Cecill of Putney. Thomas Savage
Viscount Rock Savage. Edward Conway Viscount Conway, and Killultagh, and Baron
Conway of Ragley, Lord President of his Majesty's Privy Council. Paul
Baynening Viscount Baynening of Sudbury, and Lord Baynening of Hookesley.
Edward Noell Viscount Camden, Baron Noell of Ridlington. Dudley Carleton
Viscount Dorchester, and Lord Carleton of Imbercourt, Principal Secretary.
Thomas Wentworth Viscount Wentworth, Baron Wentworth of Wentworth, Wood-house,
New-march, and Ouer^ley.
Bishops.
George Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury. Samuel Harsnet, Archbishop of York.
William Laud, Bishop of London. John Howson Bishop of Durham. Richard Neile,
Bishop of Winchester. Thomas Dove, Bishop of Peterborough. Francis Godwine,
Bishop of Hereford. John Thorneburgh, Bishop of Worcester. John Buckridge,
Bishop of Ely. Thomas Morton, Bishop of Couentry and Lichfi^ld. Jews Baily,
Bishop of Bangor. John Bridgeman, Bishop of Chester. Theophilus Field, Bishop
of St. David's. John Williams, Bishop of Lincoln. John Dauenant, Bishop of
Salisbury. Robert Wright, Bishop of Bristoll. Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of
Gloucester. F^ancis White, Bishop of Norwich. Io^uah Hall, Bishop of Exeter.
William Murray, Bishop of Landaffe. Richard Mountagu, Bishop of Chichester.
Walter Curle, Bishop of Bath and Wells. Richard Corbet, Bishop of Oxford.
Barnabas Potter, Bishop of Carlisle. John Owen, Bishop of St. Ashaph. John
Bowl, Bishop of Rochester.
Barons.
Henry Clifford, Lord Clifford elde^t son of Francis Earl of Cumberland.
Henry Neuill Lord Abergauenny. Maruin Touchet Lord Awdeley of Highleigh.
Algernon Percie, Lord Percie, eldest son of Henry Earl of Northumberland.
James Stanley, Lord Strange, eldest son of William Earl of Derby. Charles
West Lord Delaware, Infra aetatem. G^orge Barkeley, Lord Barkeley of Barkeley
Castle. Henry Parker, Lord Morley and Montegle. Richard Lennard, Lord Dacres of
Hurst-monseux. Henry Stafford, Lord Stafford of Stafford, Infra ^tat^^. Edward
Sutton, Lord Dudley of Dudley Castle. Edward Stourton, Lord Stourton of
Stourton. John Darcie, Lord Darcie, and Mennell. Edward Vaux, Lord Vaux of of
Harrowden. Thomas Windsor, Lord Windsor of Bradenham. Thomas Cromwell, Lord
Cromwell of Ockha^. William Eure, Lord Eure of Whitton. Philip Wharton, Lord
Wharton of Wharton. William Willoughby, Lord Willoughby of Parham^ William
Paget, Lord Paget of Beaudesert. Dudley North, Lord North of Carthlage. George
Bridges, Lord Shandos of Sudley, Infra ^ta^^^.
Barons made by King IAM^S.
William Peter, Lord Peter of Writtell. Dutton Gerard, Lord Gerard of Gerards
Bro^ley. William Spencer, Lord Spencer of Wormleighto^. Charles Stanhop, Lord
Stanhop of Harrington. Thomas Arundell, Lord Arundell of Wardour. Christopher
Roper, Lord Tenham of Tenham, Infra aetatem. Edward Montagu, Lord Montagu of
Kimbolton, eldest son of Henry Earl of Manchester. Basell Fielding, Lord
Newnham Paddocks, eldest so^ of William Earl of Denbigh. Robert Greuill, Lord
Brook of Bea^champ Court. Edward Montagu Lord Montagu of Boughto^. William
Gray, Lord Gray of Warke. Francis Leake, Lord Denicourt of S^tton. Richard
Roberts, Lord Roberts of Truro. Edward Conway, Lord Conway of Rag^ey, eldest
son of Edward Visco^nt Conway.
Barons made by King CHARLES.
Horace V^re, Lord Vere of Ti^bury, Master of the Ordnance. Oliver St. John,
Lord Tregoze of Highworth. William Crauen, Lord Crauen of Hamsteed Marsh^ll.
Thomas Bellassise, Lord Falconbridge of Yarom. Richard Louelace, Lord Louelace
of Hurley. John Pawlet, Lord Pawlet of Hinton St. George. William H^rny, Lord
Herny of Kidbrooke. Thomas Brudenell, Lord Brudenell of Stouton. William
Maynard, Lord Maynard of Estaines. Thomas Couentry, Lord Couentry of
Alesborough, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. Edward Howard, Lord
Howard of Est^ricke. Richard Weston, Lord Weston of ^eyla^d, Lord High
Treasur^r of England, Knight of the Garter. ^eorge Gor^ing, Lord Goreing of
Hurstperpoint. John Mohun^ Lord Mohun of O^^hampton. John Sa^ill^ Lord Sauill
of Pomfret. John Bu^ler, Lord Butler of Bram^ield. F^ancis L^igh, Lord
Dunsemore. William H^rbert, Lord Powys of Powys. Edward Herbert, Lord Herbert
of Chierbury.
A Catalogue of the Dukes, Marquesses, E^rles, Viscounts, and Barons of
Scotland.
Dukes.
James Stuart Duke of Lennox, Earl of March, Lord Da^ley^ Methuen, St.
Andrews, and Aubigny, and Ad^irall and Chamberla^ne of Scotland by inheritance.
Marqu^sses.
James Hamiltone Marquess Hamilton, Earl of Arran, and Cambridge, Lord Auen,
Inordaill, and Aberbroth, Master of the Horse to his Majesty. George Gordoun
Marquess Huntley, Earl of Enzy, and Lord Strathbolgie.
Earls.
William Douglas Earl of Angus, Lord Douglas, and T^ntallon. Archbald Campbell
Earl of Argyle, Lord Lorne, and Kintine. George Lindesey Earl of Crauford,
Lord Glenesh, and Fineuin. Francis Hay Earl of Erroll, Lord Hay of Slains,
Con^table of Scotland by Inheritance. William Keith Earl Mar^hall, Lord
Dunoter, and Marshall of Scotland by Inh^ritance. John Gordon Earl of
Sutherland, Lord Strathn^uer, and Dunrobin. John Erskeine Earl of Ma^r, and
Carioch, Lord Erskeine^ and Breichin, Trea^u^er of Scotland. John Grahame Earl
of Menteeth, Lord, etc. John Lesley Earl of Rothes, Lord Lesley, and
Ba^breigh. William Douglas Earl of Morton, Lord Dalkeith, and Aberdour. James
Grahame Earl of Montros, Lord Kincairne, and Mugdock. Alexander Seton Earl of
Eglenton, Lord Mountgomery. John Keneday Earl of Cassils, Lord Keneday. George
St. Claire Earl Ca^teynes, Lord B^rredaill. Alexander Cunnighame Earl of
Glencarne, Lord Kilmauris. James Erskeine Earl of Buchan, Lord Aughter^ous.
James Stuart Earl of Murray, Lord Done, and St. Columb^inch. John Mu^ray
Earl of Athole, Lord, etc.
Earls made by King JAMES.
Robert Maxwell Earl of Ni^hisdale, Lord Maxwell, and Cartauerock. George
Setone Earl of Wintoun, and Lord Setone. Alexander Leuinstone Earl of
Linlithgou, Lord Calendar. James Hume Earl of Hume, Lord Dungals. John Drumond
Earl of Perth, Lord Drumond, and Hobhall. Charles Setone Earl of
Dunfermeline, Lord Fyuie, and Vrquarte. Fl^iming Earl of Vigtoune, Lord
Cumber^^rd. John Layon Earl of Kingorne. James Hamilton Earl of Abercorne,
Lord Dasley, James Kere Earl of Louthian, Lord Heubotill. Patrick Murray Earl
of Tullibardine, Lord Murray. Robert Kere Earl of Roxbrugh, Lord C^ssfing.
Thomas Erskeine Earl of Kelly, Viscount Fentone, Lord Diriltone. Walter Scot
Earl of Buckcleuch, Lord, etc. Thomas Hamilton Earl of Hadingtoune, Lord
Byning, and Byris, Lord Privy Seal. Alexander Stuart Earl of Galloway, Lord
Garleis. Collen Mac-Enzie Earl of Seafort, Lord Kintaill. John Murray Earl of
Anandill, Viscount Anan, Lord Lochmabine. John Maitland Earl of Lauderdale,
Viscount Maitland, and Lord Thirilstone, and Lethingtone. James Stuart Earl of
Carrick, Lord Kincleuine.
Viscounts.
Henry Carey, Viscount Falkland. Henry Cunstable, Viscount Dunbar. David
Murray, Viscount Stormouth, Lord Scone. William Crightone, Viscount Air, Lord
Sanquhair. George Hay, Viscount Dupleine, Lord Hay of Kinfauns, Lord high
Chamberlain of Scotland. John Gordon, Viscount Melgum, Lord Aboyne. William
Douglas, Viscount Drumlanrick, etc.
Barons.
Lindesay, Lord Lindesay. John Forbes, Lord Forbes. Ab^rnete, Lord Saltoun.
Andrew Gray, Lord Gray of Fouils. James Stuart, Lord Vchiltrie. Ca^hcarte, Lord
Cathc^rte. Lord Caruill^ John Hay Lord Yester. James Semple, Lord S^mple. Henry
St. Clair, Lord St. Clair of Rauensheogh. Maxewell, Lord Heries. Alexander
Elphingstone, Lord Elphingstone. Lawrence Oliphant, Lord Oliphant. Simon
Foaser, Lord Lo^at. James Ogiluey, Lord Ogiluey. Borthwick, Lord Borthwick^
Robert Rosse, Lord Rosse. Thomas Boyde, Lord Boyde. Sandelius, Lord Torphichen.
Alexander Lindesay, Lord Spynnie. Patrick Lesley, Lord Londoers. Cambell, Lord
Loudon. Thomas Bruce, Baron Kinlosse. John Elphingstone, Lord Balmerinoch.
James Colueill, Lord Colueill. James Stuart, Lord Blantyre. Robert Balfour,
Lord Burleigh. Adam Bothuell, Lord Holyrudehouse. John Drumund, Lord Madertie.
James Elphingstone, Lord Cooper. John Cranstone, Lord Cranstone. Ogiluey, Lord
Deskford. Robert Melueill, Lord Melueill. David Carnagay, Lord Carnagay. John
Ramsay, Lord Ramsay. Carr, Lord Iedbrough. Campbell, Lord Kintyir. Naiper, Lord
Naiper of Marcheston. Thomas Fairfax, Lord Cameron. Edward Barret, Lord
Newbrough. Walter Aston, Lord Forfare. John Weymes, Lord Weymes. Elizabeth
Richardson, Baroness of Craumond, wife to Sir Thomas Richardson, Chief
Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pl^^s. John Stuart, Lord Traquair.
Donald Macky, Lord Rae. Robert Dalzell, Lord Dalzell.
A Catalogue of the Earls, Viscounts, and Barons of Ireland^
George Fitzgerald Earl of Kildare. Walt^r Butler Earl of Ormond. Henry
Obri^n Earl of Thomond. Richard Burgh Earl of Clanricard. Mernen To^chet
Earl of Castell-hauen. Richard Boil Earl of Cork. Randall Mac-Donell Earl
of Antrim. Richard Nugent Earl of Westmeath. James Dillon Earl of Roscomman.
Thomas Ridgway Earl of London Derry. William Brabazen Earl of Eastmeath.
David Barry Earl of Barrymore, and Viscount ^o^teuant. Gorge Fielding Earl of
Desmond and Viscount Callon. John Vaughan Earl of Carbury, and Lord Vaughan of
Mol^ingar. William Pope Earl of Down, and Baron Bealterbert. Luc^s Plunket
Earl of ^inga^le, and Lord of Killene.
Viscounts.
I^^ico P^eston Viscount of Gormanston. D^^id ^^che Viscount of Fermoy. Richard
^^tler^ Viscount Mo^ntgarret. Richa^d Wing^ield Viscount Powerscourt. O^^^er
St. John Viscount Grandison. Charles Wilmot Viscount Wilmot of Athlone. Henry
Poor Viscount of Valentia. Garret Moore Viscount of Drogh^da. Chris^opher
Dillon Viscount Dillon of Costellagh-galni^ Nicholas Netteruill Viscount
Netteruill of Dowthe. Hugh Montgomery Viscount Montgomery of the Ardes. James
Hamilton Viscount Clanhughboy. Adam Loftus Viscount Loftus of Ely. Thomas
Beaumont Viscount Beaumont of Swords. Anth. Mac-Enos alias Magennis, Visc.
Magennis of Euagh. Thomas Cromwell Viscount L^cale. Edward Chichester Viscount
Chichester of Carigfergus. Dominick Sarsfield Viscount Sarsfield of Roscarbery.
Robert Neede^am Viscount Kilmurry. Thomas Somerset Viscount Somerset of
Cassell. Edward Conway Viscount of Killultagh. Nicholas Sanderson Vis^ount of
Castl^towne. Thomas Roper Viscount of Baltinglas. Theobald Burgh Viscoun^ of
Maio. Jews Boil Viscount Boil of Kynalmeaky. Roger Jones Viscount of
Rannelagh. George Chaworth Viscount Chaworth of Ardmagh. Barnham Swift Visco^^t
Carlingford. Thomas Sauile Viscount Sauile of Castle-Bar. John Scudamore, Baron
Scudamore of Dromore, and Viscount Scudamore of Sligo. Robert Cholmundeley
Visco. Cholmundeley of Kellis. Thomas Smith Viscount Strangford. Richard Lumley
Viscount Lumley of Waterford. Richard Wenman Viscount Wenman of Tuan, and Baron
Wenman of Kilmanham. John Taffe Viscount Corine, and Baron of Ballimote.
William Mounson Viscount Mounson of Castle-mayne, and Baron Mounson of
Bellinguard. Charles Mac-Carty Viscount of Muskry. Richard Mulenux Viscount
Mulenux of Mariburgh. Thomas Fairfax Viscount Fairfax of Emmely. Thomas
Fitz-William Viscount Fitz-William of Meryung, and Baron Fitz-William of
Thorne-Castle. Perce Butler Viscount Kerine.
Barons.
Richard Bermingham, Lord Bermingham of Athenry. John Courcy, Lord Courcy of
Kinsale. Thomas Fitz-morrice, Lord of Kerry, and Lixnawr. Thomas Fleming, Lord
of Slane. Nicholas St. Lawrence, Lord of Hothe. Patrick Plunket, Lord of
Dunsany. Robert Barnwell, Lord of Trimleston. Edmund Butler, Lord of Dunboyne.
Teige Mac-Gilpatrik, Lord of upper O^sery. Oliver Plunket, Lord of Lough. John
Power, Lord Corraghmore. Morrogh Obrien, Lord of Inchequin. Edmund Burgh, Lord
Burgh of Castle-connell. Thomas Butler, Lord of Cahir. Mont-Ioy Blunt, Lord
Mont-Ioy of Mont-Ioy Fort. Oliver Lambert, Lord Lambert of Cauan. Theobald
Burgh, Lord Burgh of Britas. Andrew Steward, Lord of Castle-Steward. James
Balfoure, Lord Balfoure of Clan-Awley. Henry Folliet, Lord Folliet of
Ballishenam. William Maynard, Lord Maynard of Wicklogh. Edward Gorges, Lord
Gorges of Dundalke. Robert Digby, Lord Digby of Geshell. William Heruy, Lord
Heruy of Rosse. William Fitz-William, Lord Fitz-William of Liffer. William
Caufield, Lord Caufield of Charlemont. Henry Docwray, Lord Docwray of Culmore.
Edward Blany, Lord Blany of Monagham. Francis Aungier, Lord Aungier, of
Long-ford. Lawrence Esmond, Lord Esmond of Lymerick. Dermond Omallum, Lord
Omallum of Glan Omallum. William Br^rton, Lord Brerton of Laghlin. Edward
Herbert Lord Herbert of Castle-Iland. George Caluert, Lord Baltimore. Hugh
Hare, Lord Colerane of Colerane. William Sherard, Lord Sherard of Letrim. Roger
Boil, Lord Boil, Baron of Broghill. Brian Mac-Guier, Baron of Iniskillin.
Francis Ansley, Lord Mount-Norris.
The names of Baronets made by King James and King Charles, at several times;
as follows.
Anno 9. and 44. Iacobi Regis, 1611.
SIr Nicholas Bacon of Redgraue, in the County of ^^^^folke Knight, created
Baronet the 22. day of May, Anno praedicto. Sir Richard Molineux of Se^ton in
the County of Lancaster Knight, created Baronet the 22. day of May, Anno
praedicto. Sir Thomas Maunsell of Morgan, in the County of Clamorgan Knight,
created Baronet the 22. day of May Anno praedicto. George Shyrley of Staunton,
in the County of Leicester Esquire, created Baronet the 22. day of May, vt
supra. Sir John Stradling of St. Donates, in the County of Glamorgan Knight,
test vt supra. Thomas Pe^ham of Lawghton, in the County of Sussex Esquire,
created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Francis Leake of Sutton, in the County of
Derby Knight, test vt supra. Sir Richard Houghton of Houghton-tower, in the
County of Lancaster Knight, test vt supra. Sir Henry Hobart of Intwood, in the
County of Norfolk Knight, test vt supra. Sir George Booth of Dunham Massy in
the County of Chester Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir John Peyton
of Hisman, in the County of Cambridge Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra.
Lionell Talmache of H^mingham, in the County of Suffolk Esquire, created
Baronet, test vt supra. Sir I^ruis Clifton of Clif^on, in the County of Derby
Knight, created Baronet, test v^ supra. Sir Thomas Gerrard of Brim in the
County of Lancaster Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Walter Aston
of Titfall, in the County of Stafford Kn^ght, created Baronet, test vt supra.
Philip Kneuet of Bucknam Esquire, in the County of Norfolk, test vt supra.
Sir John S^. John of Lediard Tregos, in the Couty of Wilts Knight, created
Baronet, test vt supra. John Shelly of Michelgroue, in the County of Sussex
Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir John Savage of Rock-sauage, in
the County of Chester Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of June, Anno 9. and
44. Iacobi Regis, anno praedicte. Sir Francis Barington of Barington-hall, in
the County of Essex Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of June, v^ supra anno
praedicto. Henry Berkley of Wymondham, in the County of L^icester Esquire,
created Baronet the 29. day of June, anno praedicte. William Wentworth of
Wentworth Woodhouse, in the county of York Esquire, created Baronet the 29.
day of June, vt ante an. praed. Sir Richard Musgraue of Hartley-Castle, in the
county of Westmerland Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Edward Seimoure
of Bury-Castle, in the county of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet, test vt
supra. Sir Miles Finch of Eastwell, in the county of Kent Knig. created
Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Anthony Cope of Harwell, in the county of Oxford
Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Thomas Mounson of Carleton, in the
county of Lincoln Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. George Griesley of
Drakelow, in the county of Derby Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Paul
Tracy of Stanway, in the county of Gloucester Esquire, created Baronet, test vt
supra. Sir John Wentworth of G^ffield, in the county of Essex Knight, created
Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Henry Bellassis of Newbrough, in the county of
York Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. William Constable of Flambrough,
in the county of York Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Thomas
Legh of Stoneley, in the county of Warwick Knight, created Baronet, test vt
supra. Sir Edward Noell of Brook, in the county of Rutland Knight, created
Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Robert Cotton of Connington, in the county of
Lincoln Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Robert Cholmondeleigh of
Cholmondeleigh, in the county of Chester Esquire, created Baronet, test vt
supra. John Molineux of Teuershalt, in the county of Notting^am Esquire,
created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Francis Wortley of VVortley, in the county
of York Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir George Sauile the elder
of Thornehill, in the county of York Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra.
William Kniueton of Mircaston, in the county of Derby Esquire, created Baronet,
^este vt supra. Sir Philip Woodhouse of ^imberley-hall, in the county of
Norfolk Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir William Pope of VVilcot,
in the county of of Oxford Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir James
Harrington of Ridlington, in the county of Rutland Knight, created Baronet the
29. day of June, anno praed. Sir Henry Sauile of Metheley, in the county of
York Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Henry Willoughby of Risley, in
the county of Derby Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Lewis Tresham of
Rushton, in the county of Northhampton Esquire, created Baronet, test vt
supra. Thomas Brudenell of De^ne, in the county of Northampton Esquire, created
Baronet, test vt supra. Sir George St. Paul of Snarford, in the county of
Lincoln Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Philip Tirwhit of
S^amefield, in the county of Lincoln Kight, created Baro^et, t^ste vt supra.
Sir Rog^r Da^lison o^ Laughton, in the county of Lincoln Knight, created
Baronet the 29. day of June, anno pred. Sir Edward Carre of Sleford, in the
county of Lincoln Knight, creat^d Baro^et, test vt supra. Sir Edward H^ssey
of Henington, in the county of Lincoln Knight, created Baronet, test vt
supra. Le Strange Mord^nt of Massi^gham parua, in the county of Nor^^lke
Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of Iun^. anno pred. Thomas Bendish of
Steeple Bumsteed, in the county of Essex Esquire, creat^d Baronet the 29. day
of June, anno predicto vt supra. Sir John Win of Gwidder, in the county of
Carnaruon Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir William Throckmorton of
T^rtworth, in the county of Gloucester Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra.
Sir Richard Worsley of Appledorecombe, in the county of Southampton Knight
created Baronet, test vt supra. Richard Fleet-wood of Cakewish, in the County
of Stafford E^quire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Thomas Spencer of
Yardington, in the County of Oxford Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra.
Sir John Tufton of Hothfield, in the County of K^nt Knight, created Baronet the
29. day of June, Anno praedictae. Sir Samuel Peyton of Knowlton, in the County
of Kent Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Charles Morrison of
Cashiobury, in the County of Hertford, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir
Henry Baker of Sissinghurst, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet,
test v^ supra^ Roger Appleton of Southbemsteet, in the County of Essex
Esquire, created Baronet, test vt sup. Sir William Sedley of Ailesford, in the
County of Kent Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir William Twisden of
East-peckham, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra.
Sir Edward Hales of Woodchurch, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet
the 29. day of June, vt William Monyus of Walwa^sher, in the County of Kent
Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Thomas Milemay of Mulsham, in the
County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir William Maynard
of Easton parua, in the County of Essex Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of
June, anno praedicto. Henry Lee of Quarrendon, in the County of Buckingham
Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. These last Baronets which be in
number 52. bear date all 29. day of June, Anno supradicto. And the other 18.
which be first, do all bear date 22. day of May, An. supradicto.
Anno 10. and 45. Iacobi Regis, 1612.
SIr John Portman of Orchard, in the County of Somerset Knight, created Baronet
the 25. day of November, Anno pred. Sir Nicholas Saunderson of Saxby, in the
County of Lincoln, created Baroned the 25. day of November the An. praed. Sir
Miles Sands of Wilberton within the I Will of Ely Knight, created Baronet, test
vt surra. William Gostwicke of Willington, in the County of Bedford Esquire,
created Baronet the 25. day of November Anno praedicto. Thomas Puckering of
Weston, in the County of Hertford Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir
William Wray of Glentworth, in the county of Lincoln Knight, created Baronet,
test vt supra. Sir William Ailoffe of Braxted magna, in the county of Essex
Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Marmaduke Wiuell of
Custable-burton, in the county of York Knight, created Baronet, the 25. day of
November, Anno pred. John Peshall of Horsley, in the county of Stafford
Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Francis Englefield of Wotton Basset,
in the county of Wilts Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Thomas
Ridgway of Torre, in the county of Deuon Knight, created Baronet, test vt
supra William Essex of Bewcot, in the County of Berkeshire Esquire, created
Baronet the 25. day of November, anno praed. Sir Edward Gorges of Langford, in
the county of Wilts Knight, created Baronet the 25. day of November, Anno
praed. Edward Deuereux of Castle Bramwitch, in the county of Warwick, Esquire,
created Baronet, test vt supra. Reginald Mohun of Buckonnock, in the county of
Cornwall Esquire, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir Harbottle Grimstone of
Bradfield, in the county of Essex Knight, created Baronet, test vt supra. Sir
Thomas Holt of Aston iuxta Byrmingham, in the county of Warwick Knight,
created Baronet the 25. day of November, Anno praed. Sir Robert Napar alias
Sandy of Lewton-How, in the county of Bedford Knight, created Baronet, test
24^ day of September, Anno pred. Paul Bayning of in the county of Essex
Esquire, created Baronet the Sir Thomas Temple of in the county of Buckingham
Knight, created Baronet the day of Thomas Peneystone of in the county of Sussex
Esquire, created Baronet the
Anno 13. and 48. Iacobi Regis 1615.
Thomas Blackston of Blackston, in the county and Bishopiicke of Durham,
created Baronet the 8. day of June, Anno praed. Sir Robert Dormer of Wing, in
the county of Buckingham Knight, created Baronet the 10. day of June, Anno
praed. and created Baron Dormer of Wing, the thirty of June, Anno praed.
Anno 15. and 50. Iacobi Regis, 1616.
Sir Rowland Egerton of Egerton, in the county of Chester Knight, created
Baronet the 5. day of April An pred. Roger Towneshend of Rainham, in the
County of Norffo^ke Esquire, created Baronet the 16. day of April, Anno praed.
Simon Clerk of Sulford, in the County of Warwick Esquire, created Baronet the
first day of May, anno pred.
Anno 15. and 51. Iacobi Regis, 1617.
Sir Richard Lucy of Broxborne, in the County of Hertford Knight, created
Baronet the 11. day of March, anno praed.
Anno 16. and 51. Iacobi Regis, 1618.
Sir Matthew Boynton Bramston in the County of York Knight, created Baronet the
25. day of May. an. praed. Thomas Littleton of Fr^nkley, in the County of
Worcester Esquire, created Baronet the 25. day of July, anno praed.
Anno 16. and 52. Iacobi Regis, 1618.
Sir Francis Leigh of Newneham, in the County of Warwick Knight, created
Baronet, the 24. day of December, anno praed. George Morton of St. Andrews
Milborne, in the County of Dorset Esquire, created Baronet the first day of
March, an. praed.
Anno 17. and 52. Iacobi Regis, 1619.
Sir William Heruy Knight, created Baronet the 31. day of May, an. praed.
Thomas Mackworth of Normanton, in the County of Rutland Esquire, created
Baronet the 4. day of June, an. prad. William Gray Esquire, son and heir of
Sir Ralph Gray of Chillingham in the County of Northumberland Knight, created
Baronet the 15. day of June, an. praed. William Villiers of Brookesby, in the
County of Leicester Esquire, created Baronet the 19. day of July, an. praed.
Sir James Ley of Westbury, in the County of Wilts Knight, created Baronet the
20. day of July, an. pred. William Hicks of Beuerston, in the County of
Leicester Esquire, created Baronet the 21. day of July, an. pred.
Anno 17. and 53. Iacobi Regis.
Sir Thomas Beamont of Coleauerton, in the County of Leicester Knight, created
Baronet the 17. day of September, an. pred. Henry Salisbury of Leweny, in the
County of Denbigh Esquire, created Baronet the 10. day of November, an. pred.
Erasmus Driden of Canons Ashby, in the County of Northampton Esquire, created
Baronet the 16. day of November, an. pred. William Armine Esquire, son of Sir
William Armine of Osgodby, in the County of Lincoln Knight, created Baronet
the 28. of November, an. pred. Sir William Bamburgh of Howson, in the County of
York Knight, created Baronet the first day of December, an. pred. Edward
Hartoppe of Freathby, in the County of Leicester Esquire, created Baronet the
2. day of December, an. pred. John Mill of Camons-Court, in the County of
Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the 31. day of December, anno pred. Francis
Radcliffe of Darentwater, in the County of Cumberland Esquire, created Baronet
the 31. day of January, an. pred. Sir David Foulis of Ingleby, in the County of
of York Knight, created Baronet the 6. day of February, an. pred. Thomas
Philips of Barrington, in the County of Somerset Esquire, created Baronet the
16. day of February, an. pred. Sir Claudius Forster of Bambrough-Castle, in the
County of Northumberland Knight, created Baronet the 7. day of March, an.
praed. Anthony Chester of Chicheley, in the County of Buckingham Esquire,
created Baronet the 23. day of March, an. praed. Sir Samuel Tryon or
Layre-Marney, in the County of Essex Knight, created Baronet the 28. day of
Ma^ch, an. praed.
Anno 18. and 53. Iacobi Regis, 1620.
Adam Newton of Charleton, in the County of Kent, Esquire, created Baronet the
2. day of April, an. pr. Sir John Boteler of Hatfield-woodhall, in the County
of Hertford Knight, created Baronet the 12. day of April, an. pred. Gilbert
Gerrard of Harrow super montem, in the County of Middlesex Esquire, created
Baronet the 13. day of April, an. praed. Humfrey Lee of Langley, in the County
of Salop Esquire, created Baronet the 3. day of May, an. praed. Richard Berney
of Park-hall in Redham, in the County of Norffolke Esquire, created Baronet the
5. day of May, an. praed. Humfrey Forster of Aldermaston, in the County of
Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 20. day of May, anno praed. Thomas Biggs of
Lenchwicke, in the County of Worcester Esquire, created Baron^t the 29. day of
May, anno praed. Henry Bellingham of Helsington, in the County of Westmerland
E^quire, created Baronet the 30. day of May, an. praed. William Yeluerton of
Rougham, in the County of Norfolk Esquire, cr^ated Baronet the 31. day of May,
anno praed. John Scudamore of Home Lacy^ in the County of Hereford Esquire,
created Baronet the first day of June, anno praed. Sir Thomas Gore of Stitman,
in the County of York Knight, created Baronet the 2. day of June, an. praed.
John Packington of Alesbury, in the County of Buckingham Esquire, created
Baronet the 22. day of June, an. praed. Raphe Ashton of Lever, in the County of
Lancaster Esquire, created Baronet the 28. of June, an. praed. Sir Baptist
Hicks of Campden, in the County of Gloucester Knight, created Baronet the first
day of July, anno praed. Sir Thomas Roberts of Glassenbury, in the County of
Kent Knight, created Baronet the 3. day of July, anno praed. John Hamner of
Hamner, in the county of Flint Esquire, creat^d Baronet the 8. day of July,
anno praedicto. Edward Osborne of Keeton, in the county of York, Esquire,
created Baronet the 13. day of July, anno praedicto. Henry Felton of Playford,
in the county of Suffolk Esquire, created Baronet, the 20. day of July, an.
praed. William Chaloner of Ginsborough, in the county of York^ Esquire, created
Baronet, the 21. day of July, an. praedicto. Edward Friar of Water-Eaton, in
the county of Oxford Esquire, created Baronet the 22. day of Iuly^ an. praed.
Sir Thomas Bishop of Parham, in the County of Sussex Knight, created Baronet
the 24. day of July, an. praed. Sir Francis Vincent of Stockdawe-Barton, in the
County of Surrey Knight, created Baronet the 26. day of July, anno praed.
Anno 18. and 54. Iacobi Regis, 1620.
Henry Clear of Ormesby, in the county of Norfolk Esquire, created Baronet the
27. day of February, an. praed. Sir Baniamin Titchbourne of Titchbourne, in the
County of Southampton Knight, created Baronet, the 8. day of March, an. praed.
Anno 19. and 54. Iacobi Regis, 1621.
Sir Richard Wilbraham of Woodhey, in the County of Chester Knight, created
Baronet the 5. day of May, anno praed. Sir Thomas Delues of Duddington in the
County of Chester Knight, created Baronet, the 8. day of May, An. praed. Sir
Lewis Watson of Rockingham Castle, in the County of Northampton Knight, created
Baronet, the 23. day of June, An. praed. Sir Thomas Palmer of Wingham, in the
County of Kent Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of June, Anno praed. Sir
Richard Roberts of Trewro, in the County of Cornwall Knight, created Baronet
the 3. of July, an. praed. John Rivers of Chafford, in the county of Kent
Esquire, created Baronet the 19. day of July, an. praed.
Anno 19. and 55. Iacobi Regis, 1621.
Henry Iernegan of Cossey, alias Cossese in the county of Norfolk Esquire,
created Baronet the 16. day of August, anno praed. Thomas Darnell of Heyling,
in the County of Lincoln Esquire, created Baronet the 6. day of September, an.
praed. Sir Isaac Sidley of great Charte, in the County of Kent Knight, created
Baronet the 14. day of September, anno praed. Robert Brown of Walcot, in the
County of Northampton Esquire, created Baronet the 21. day of September, an.
praed. John Hewet of Headley-hall, in the County of York Esquire, created
Baronet, the 11. day of October, an. praed. Sir Nicholas Hide of Albury, in the
County of Hertford Knight, created Baronet the 8. day of November, an. praed.
John Philips of Picton, in the County of Pembroke Esquire, created Baronet the
9. day of November, an. praed. Sir John Stepney of Pr^ndergast, in the county
of Pembroke Knight, created Baronet the 24. day of November, an. prad. Baldwin
Wake of Cleuedon, in the county of Somerset Esquire, created Baronet the 5. day
of December, anno praed. William Masham of High-lauer, in the County of Essex,
created Baronet the 19. day of December, Anno praed. John Colbrond of Borham,
in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the 21. day of December, an.
praed. Sir John Hotham of Scorborough, in the County of York Knight, created
Baronet the 4. day of January, an. praed. Francis Mansell of Mudlescombe, in
the County of Carmarthen Esquire, created Baronet the 14. day of January, anno
pred. Edward Powell of Penkelley, in the County of Hereford Esquire, created
Baronet the 18. day of January, an. praed. Sir John Garrard of Lamer, in the
County of Hertford Knight, created Baronet the 16. day of February, an. praed.
Sir Richard Groseuenor of Eaton, in the County of Chester Knight, created
Baronet the 23. day of February, an. praed. Sir Henry Mody of Garesdon, in ^he
County of Welts Knight, created Baronet the 11. day of March, anno praed. John
Barker of Grimston-hall in Trimley, in the County of Suffolk Esquire, created
Baronet the 17. day of March, an. praed. Sir William Button of Alton, in the
county of Wilts Knight, created Baronet, the 18. day of of March, Anno praed.
Anno 20. and 52. Iacobi Regis 1622.
John Gage of Ferle, in the county of Sussex Esquire, ^reated Baronet the 26.
day of March, Anno praedicto. William Goring Esquire, son and heir of Sir
Henry Goring of Burton, in the county of Sussex Knight, created Baronet the 14.
day of May, Anno pred. Peter Courten of Aldington alias Aun^on, in the county
of Worcester Esquire, created Baronet the 18. day of May, an. praed. Sir
Richard Norton of Rotherfield, in the county of Southampton Knight, created
Baronet the 23. day of May, anno praed. Sir John Leuenthorpe of Shinglehall, in
the county of Hertford Knight, created Baronet the 30. day of May, Anno praed.
Capell Bedell of Hamerton, in the county of Huntington Esquire, created Baronet
the 3. day of June, anno praed. John Darell of Westwoodhey, in the county of
Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 13. day of June, an. praed. William Williams
of Veynoll, in the county of Carnaruon Esquire. created Baronet, the 15. day of
June, an. praed. Sir Francis Ashley of Hartfield, in the County of Midlesex,
Knight created Baronet the 18. day of June, an. praed. Sir Anthony Ashley of
St. Giles Wimborne, in the county of Dorset Knight, created Baronet, the 3. day
of July, anno pred. John Couper of Rocbourne, in the county of Southampton,
created Baronet the 4. day of July, an. praed. Edmund Prideaux of Netherton, in
the County of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the 17. of July, an. praed. Sir
Thomas Heselrigge of Noseley, in the county of Leicester Knight, created
Baronet the 21. day of July, an. praed. Sir Thomas Burton of Stockerston, in
the county of Leicester Kni. created Baronet the 22. day of July, anno praed.
Francis Foliambe of Walton, in the County of Derby Esquire, created Baronet the
24. day of July, an. praed. Edward Yate of Buckland in the county of Berke
Esquire, created Baronet the 30. day of July, an. praed.
Anno vicesimo and 56. Jacob Regis.
George Chudleigh of Ashton, in the county of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet
the first day of August, anno praed. Francis Drake of Buckland, in the county
of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the 20. day of August, anno praed. William
Meredith of Stanstie, in the county of Denbigh Esquire, created Baronet the 13.
day of August, anno praed. Hugh Middleton of Ruthyn, in the county of Denbigh
Esquire, created Baronet the 22. day of October, anno praed. Gifford
Thornehurst of Ague-Court, in the county of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the
12. day of November, anno praed. Percy Herbert son and heir of Sir William
Herbert of Red-castle, in the county of Montgomery Knight, created Baronet the
16. day November, an. praed. Sir Robert Fisher of Packington, in the county of
Warwick Knight, created Baronet the 7. day of December, anno praed. Hardolph
Wastneys of Headon, in the county of Nottingham, created Baronet the 18. day of
December. anno praed. Sir Henry Skippwith of Prestwould, in the county of
Leicester Knight, created Baronet the 20. day of December, anno praed. Thomas
Harris of Boreatton, in the County of Salop Esquir^, created Baronet the 22.
day of December, anno pred. Nicholas Tempest of Stella, in the Bishopric of
Durham Esquire, created Baronet the 23. day of December, anno pred. Francis
Cottington Esquire, Secretary to the Prince Charles, created Baronet, the 16.
day of February, Anno praed.
Anno vicesimo primo and 56. Iacobi Regis.
Thomas Harris of Tongue castle, in the County of Salop, Serieant at Law, created
Baronet the 12. day of April, Anno praedicto. Edward Barkham of Southacre, in
the County of Norfolk Esquire, created Baronet the 28. day of June, Anno
praedicto. John Corbet of Sprowston, in the County of Norfolk Esquire, created
Baronet the 4. day of July, anno praed. Sir Thomas Playters of Sotterley, in
the county of Suffolk Knight, created Baronet, the 13. day of August, Anno
praedicto.
Anno secundo Caroli Regis.
Sir John Ashfield of Nether-hall, in the county of Suffolk Knight, created
Baronet the 27. day of July, an. praed. Henry Harper of Calke, in the county of
Derby Esquire, created Baronet the 8. day of September, anno praed. Edward
Seabright of Besford, in the County of Worcester Esquire, created Baronet the
20. day of December, an. praed. John Beaumount of Gracedieu, in the County of
Chester Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of January, anno praed. Sir Edward
Dering of Surrenden, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet the first
day of February, anno praed. George Kempe of Pentlone, in the County of Essex,
Esquire, created Baronet the 5. day of February, an. praed. William Brereton of
Hanford, in the county of Chester Esquire, created Baronet the 10. day of
March, anno praed. Patrick Curwen of Workington, in the county of Cumberland
Esquire, created Baronet the 12. day of March, an. praed. William Russell of
Witley, in the Country of Worcester Esquire, created Baronet the 12. day of
March, an. praed. John Spencer of Offley, in the County of Hertford Esquire,
created Baronet the 14. day of March, an. pred. Sir Giles Escourt of Newton, in
the County of VVil^s Knight, created Baronet the 17. day of March, an. pred.
Anno t^rtio Caroli Regis.
Thomas Aylesbury Esquire, one of the Masters of the Court of Request, created
Baroned the 19. day of April, an. pred. Thomas Style Esquire, of Wateringbury,
in the County of Kent, created Baronet the 21. day of April, an. pred.
Frederick Cornwallis^ in the County of Suffolk Esquire, created Baronet the
day of an. pred. William Skeuington, in the County of Stafford created Baronet
the anno pred. Drue Drury, in the County of Norfolk Esquire, created Baronet
the an. praed. Sir Robert Crane of Chilton, in the County of Suffolk Knight,
created Baronet the day of May, an. pred. Anthony Wingfield of Goodwins, in the
County of Suffolk Esquire, created Baronet the 17. day of May, an. praed.
William Culpepper of Preston-hall, in the County of Kent Esquire, created
Baronet the 17. day of May, vt supra. John Kirle of Much Marcle, in the County
of Hereford Esquire, created Baronet the 17. day of May, vt supra. Giles
Bridges of Wilton, in the County of Hereford Esquire, created Baronet the 17.
day of May, vt supra. Sir Humphrey Styles of Becknam, in the County of Kent
Knight, created Baronet the 20. day of May, an. pred. Henry Moore of Falley, in
the county of Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 21. day of May, Anno praed.
Thomas Heal of Fleet, in the county of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the 28.
day of May, Anno pred. John Carleton of Holcum, in the county of Oxford
Esquire, created Baronet the 28. day of May, Anno praed^ Thomas Maples of
Stowe, in the County of Huntingdon Esquire, created Baronet the 30. day of May,
anno praedicto. Sir John Isham of Lamport, in the County of Northhampton
Knight, created Baronet the 30. day of May, an. praed. Her^y Bagot of
Blithfield, in the County of Stafford Esquire, created Baronet the 30. day of
May, Anno praed. Lewis Pellard of Kings Nimpton, in the County of Deuon
Esquire, created Baronet the 31. day of May, anno praed. Francis Mannock of
Giffordes-hall, in Stoke near Neyland in the County of Suffolk Esquire,
created Baronet the first day of June, An. praed. Henry Griffith of Agnes
Burton, in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet the 7. day June, an.
praed. Lodowick Deyer of Staughton, in the County of Huntingdon Esquire,
created Baronet the 8. day of June, anno praed. Sir Hugh Stewkley of Hinton, in
the County of Northhampton Knight, created Baronet the 9. day of June, an.
praed. Edward Stanley of Biggarstaffe, in the County of Lancaster Esquire,
created Baronet the 26. of June, an. praed. Edward Littleton of Pileton-hall,
in the County of Stafford Esquire, created Baronet the 28. day of June, an.
praed. Ambrose Brown of Bestworth-castle, in the county of Surrey Esquire,
created Baronet the 7. day of July, an. praed. Sackuile Crow of Lanherme, in
the county of Carmarthen Esquire, created Baronet the 8. day of July, anno
praed. Michael Liuesey of Eastchurch, in the I Will of Sheppey, in the county of
Kent Esquire, created Baronet the 11. day of July, an. praed. Simon Bennet of
Beuhampton, in the county of Buckingham Esquire, created Baronet the 17. day of
July, anno praed. Sir Thomas Fisher of the parish of St. Giles, in the County
of Middlesex Knight, created Baronet the 19. day of July, an. praed. Thomas
Bowyer of Leghtborne, in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the 23.
day of July, anno praed. Buts Bacon of Milden-hall, in the County of Suffolk
Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of July, an. praed. John Corbet of Stoke,
in the County of Salop Esquire, created Baronet the 19. day of September, an.
praed. Sir Edward Tirrell of Thorneton, in the County of Buckingham Knight,
created Baronet the 31. day of October, an. praed. Basil Dixwell of
Terlingham, alias Gerelingham, in the County of Kent Esquire, created Baronet
the 28. day of February, anno praed. Sir Richard Young Knight, one of the
Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy Chamber, created Baronet the 10. day of March,
an. prae.
Anno quarto Caroli Regis.
William Pennyman the younger of Mask, alias Marske, in the County of York
Esquire, created Baronet the 6. day of May, an. praed. William Stonehouse of
Radley, in the County of Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 7. day of May, an.
praed. Sir Thomas Fowler of Islington, in the County of Middlesex Knight,
created Baronet the 21. day of May, anno praed. Sir John Fenwick of Fenwick, in
the County of Northumberland Knight, created Baronet the 9. day of June, an.
praed. Sir William Wray of Trebitch, in the County of Cornwall Knight, created
Baronet the 30. day of June, an. pr. John Trelawney of Trelawney, in the County
of Cornwall Esquire, created Baronet the 1. day of July, an. pr. John Conyers
of Norden, in the Bishopric of Durham Gentleman, created Baronet the 14. day
of July, an. praed. John Bolles of Scampton, in the County of Lincoln Esquire,
created Baronet the 24. day of July, an. pr. Thomas Aston of Aston, in the
county of Chester Esquire, created Baronet the 25. day of July, an. pr. Kenelme
Ienoure of Much Dunmore, in the county of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the
30. day of July, anno praed. John Price of Newtowne, in the county of
Montgomery Knight, created Baronet, the 15. day of August, an. praed. Sir
Richard Beaumont of Whitley, in the County of York Knight, created Baronet the
15. day of August, an. pr^d. William Wiseman of Canfield-hall, in the County of
Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of August, an. praedicto. Thomas
Nightingale of Newport Pond, in the county of Essex Esquire, created Baronet
the first day of September, an. praed. John Jacques of in the county of
Middlesex, one of his Majesty's Gentlemen Pentioners Esquire, created Baronet
the 2. day of September, an. praed.
Anno quarto Caroli Regis.
Robert Dillington of the I Will of Wight, in the county of Sout^ampton Esquire,
created Baronet the 6. day of Sept^mber, anno praed. Francis Pile of Compton,
in the County of Berk^ Esquire, created Baronet the 12. day of September, anno
praed. John Pole of Shut, in the County of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the
12. day of September, vt supra. William Lewis of Lang^rs, in the County of
Brecknock Esquire, created Baronet the 14. day of September, anno praed.
William Culpepper of Wakehurst, in the County of Sussex Esquire, created
Baronet the 20. day of September, anno praed. Peter Van Loor of Tylehurst, in
the county of Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 3. day of October, anno
praedicto. Sir John Lawrence of Iuer, in the county of Buckingham Knight,
created Baronet the 9. day of October, an. praed. Anthony Slinges by of
Screuin, in the County of York Esquire, created Baronet the 23. day of
October, anno praed. Thomas Vauasor of Hesskewood, in the County of York
Esquire, created Baronet the 24. day of October, anno praed. Robert Wolseley of
Morton, in the county of Stafford Esquire, created Baronet the 24. day of
November, an. praed. Rice Rudd of Abersline, in the county of Carmarthen
Esquire, created Baronet the 8. day of December, an. praed. Richard Wiseman of
Thundersley, in the county of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 18. day of
December, anno praed. Henry Ferrers of Skellingthorpe, in the county of
Lincoln Esquire, created Baronet the 19. day of December, an. praed. John
Anderson of St. Iues, in the County of Huntingdon Esquire, created Baronet the
3. day of January, anno praed. Sir William Russell of Chippenham, in the County
of Cambridge Knight, created Baronet the 19. day of January, Anno praedicto.
Richard Euerard of Much Waltham, in the County of Essex Esquire, created
Baronet the 29. day of January, an. praed. Thomas Powell of Berkenhead, in the
County of Chester Esquire, created Baronet the day of January, an. praed.
William Luckin of Waltham, in the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the
2. day of March, an. praed.
Anno quinto Caroli Regis.
Richard Graham of Eske, in the County of Cumberland Esquire, created Baronet
the 29. day of March, an. praed. George Twisleton of Barlie, in the County of
York Esquire, created Baronet the 2. day of April, an. praed. William Acton
of the City of London Esquire, created Baronet the 30. day of May, anno praed.
Nicholas Le Strange of Hunstanton, in the County of Norfolk Esquire, created
Baronet the 1. day of June, anno praed. Edward Aleyn of Hatfield, in the County
of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 28. day of Inn, An. praed. Richard Earl
of Craglethorpe, in the county of Lincoln Esquire, created Baronet the 2. day
of July, Anno praed. John Holland of Quidenham, in the County of Norfolk
Esquire, created Baronet the 15. day of July, An. praed. Robert Ducy Alderman
of London, created Baronet the 28. day of November, an. praed.
Anno sexto Caroli Regis.
Sir Richard Grenuile Knight and Colonel, created Baronet, Test apud
Westmonasterium, decimo nono die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri sexto.
Knights of the Bath, made at the Coronation of King JAMES.
SIr Philip Herbert now Earl of Montgomery. Thomas Barkley, Lord Barkley. Sir
William Euers, now Lord Euers. Sir George Wharton, after Lord Wharton. Sir
Robert Rich, now Earl of Warwick. Sir Robert Carre, of the Bedchamber of his
Majesty. Sir John Egerton, now Earl of Bridgewater. Sir Henry Compton, third
brother to William Earl of Northampton. Sir James Erskine, son to the Earl
of Mar. Sir William Austuddur. Sir Patricke Murray. Sir James Hay Lord Yster.
Sir John Lynsey. Sir Richard Preston, after Earl of Desmond. Sir Oliver
Cromwell of Huntingtonshire. Sir Edward Stanley of Lancashire. Sir William
Herbert of Montgomery, now Lord Powys. Sir Foulke Griuell, after Lord Brook.
Sir Francis Fan, after Earl of Westmerland. Sir Robert Chichester, of
Devonshire. Sir Robert Knowles of Bershire. Sir William Clifton of
Nottinghamshire. Sir Francis Fortescue of Devonshire. Sir Richard Corbet of
Shropshire. Sir Edward Herbert, now Lord of Castle-Iland in Ireland, and Baron
Chirbury. Sir Thomas Langton of Lancashire. Sir William Pope of Oxfordshire.
Sir Arthur Hopton of Somersetshire. Sir Charles Morison Knight and Baronet of
Hartfordshire. Sir Francis Leigh of Warwickeshire. Sir Edward Mountagu, now
Lord Mountagu of Boughton in Northamptonshire. Sir Edward Stanhop of
Yorkshire. Sir Peter Manwood of Kent. Sir Robert Harley of Herefordshire. Sir
Thomas Strickland of Yorkshire. Sir Christopher Hatton of Northamptonshire.
Sir Edward Gri^fin of Northamptonshire. Sir Robert Beuill of Huntingtonshire.
Sir Edward Harwell of Wostershire. Sir John Mallet of Somersetshire. Sir Walter
Aston of Staffordshire, Knight and Baronet. Sir Henry Gaudy of Essex. Sir
Richard Musgraue of Westmerland, Kni. and Baronet. Sir John Stowell of
Somersetshire. Sir Richard Amcots of Lincolneshire. Sir Thomas Leedes of
Suffolk. Sir Thomas Iermyn of Norfolk. Sir Ralph Harre of Hartford. Sir
William Forster of Buckinghamshire. Sir George Speak of Somersetshire. Sir
George Hide of Barkeshire. Sir Anthony Felton of Suffolk. Sir William Brown
of Northamptonshire. Sir Thomas Wise of Essex. Sir Robert Chamberlain of
Oxfordshire. Sir Anthony Palmer of Suffolk. Sir Edward Heron of Lincolneshire.
Sir Henry Burton of Leicestershire. Sir Robert Barker of Suffolk. Sir William
Norris of Lancashire. Sir Roger Bodenham of Herefordshire.
Knights of the Bath made at the Creation of Henry Prince of WALES.
HEnry Vere Earl of Oxford. George Lord Gordon, son to Marquess Huntley.
Henry Lord Clifford, son to Francis Earl of Cumberland. Henry Ratcliffe, Lord
Fitz-water, son to the Earl of Sussex. Edward Bourcher, now Earl of Bath.
James Lord Hay, now Earl of Carlisle. James Lord Erskin, son to the Earl of
Mar in Scotland. Thomas Windsor, now Lord Windsor. Thomas Lord Wentworth, now
Earl of Cleueland. Sir Charles Somerset, son to Edward Earl of Worster. Sir
Edward Somerset, son to the said Earl of Worster. Sir Francis Stuart, son to
the Earl of Murray. Sir Ferdinando Sutton, eldest son to the Lord Dudley. Sir
Henry Carey, now Earl of Dover. Sir Oliver St. John Lord St. John, now Earl
of Bullingbrooke. Sir Gilbert Gerrard, after Lord Gerrard of Gerrard Bromley.
Sir Charles Stanhop, Lord Stanhop of Harington. Sir William Steward. Sir Edward
Bruce, after Lord Kinlosse. Sir Robert Sidney, Lord Sidney, now Earl of
Leicester. Sir Ferdinando Touchet, eldest son to George Lord Audley, Earl of
Castle-hauen in Ireland. Sir Peregrine Bartey, brother to the now Earl of
Lindsey. Sir Henry Rich, second brother to the Earl of Warwick, and now Earl
of Holland. Sir Edward Sheffeild, son to the Lord Sheffeild, now Earl of
Mulgraue. Sir William Cauendish, after made Viscount Mansfield, and now Earl
of Newcastle.
Knights of the Bath made at the Creation of Charles Duke of YORK.
CHARLES Duke of York. Sir Robert Barty Lord Willoughby of Eresby, now Earl
of Lindesey. Si^ William Compton, Lord Compton, after Earl of Northampton. Sir
Gray Bridges, Lord Shandos. Sir Francis Norris, Lord Norris of Rycot, after
Earl of Barkeshire. Sir William Cecill, now Earl of Salisbury. Sir Allan
Percy, brother to Henry Earl of Northumberland. Sir Francis Manors, now Earl
of Rut^and. Sir Francis Clifford, son to the Earl of Cumberland. Sir Thomas
Somerset, now Viscount Somerset of Castile in Ireland. Sir Thomas Howard,
second son to the Earl of Suffolk, now Earl of ^arkeshire. Sir John
Harrington, son to John Lord Harrington of Exton.
Knights of the Bath, made at the Creation of CHARLES Prince of Wales.
James Lord Matrauers, eldest son to Thomas Earl of Arundell. Alg^rnon Lord
P^rcy, eldest son to the Earl of Northumb^rland. James Lord W^iothesley,
eldest son to Henry Earl of Southampton. Theophilus Lord Clinton, now Earl of
Lincoln, eldest son of Thomas Earl of Lincoln. Edward Seim^r, Lord
B^a^^hamp, grand child to Edward Earl of H^r^fo^d. George Lord Barkley, now
Lord Barkeley. H^nry Lord Mordant, now Earl of Peterborough. The Master of
F^nton, now Lord Fenton. Sir Henry Howard now Lord Matrauers. Sir Robert
Howard, fifth son to Thomas Earl of Suffolk. Sir Edward Sackuill, now Earl
of Dorset. Sir William Howard, sixth son to Thomas Earl of Suffolke^ Sir
Edward Howard seventh son to Thomas Ea^^^ ^f Suffolk, now Lord Howard of
Est^ricke in Y^^^ of shire. Sir Montagu Bartu, son and heir to Robert Earl
of Lindsey, now Lord Willoughby. Sir William Stourton^ son to the Lord
Stourton. Sir William Parker, after Lord Mor^ey and Montea^le. Sir Dudley
North, now Lord North. Sir Spencer Compton, now Earl of Northampton. Sir
William Spencer, now Lord Spencer. Sir Rowland St. John, brother to Oliver
E^rle of Bullingbrooke. Sir John Cauendish, second son to William Earl of
Devonshire. Sir Thomas Neuill, son to Henry now Lord Abergaueney. Sir John
Roper, after Lord Tenham. Sir John North, brother to Dudley, now Lord North.
Sir Henry Carry now Viscount Faulkland.
Knights of the Bath, made at the C^ronation of King CHARLES.
George Fielding, Viscount Callon second son to William Earl of Denbigh, now
Earl of Desmond. James Stanley, Lord Strange, eldest son to William Earl of
Derby. Charles Cecill, Lord Cranborne, eldest son to William Earl of
Salisbury. Charles Herbert, Lord Herbert of Shurland, eldest son to Philip
Earl of Montgomery. Robert Rich, Lord Rich, eldest son to Robert Earl of
Warwick. James Hay, Lord Hay, eldest son to James Earl of Carlile^ Bazell
Fielding, Lord Fielding, eldest son to William Earl of Denbigh. O^iuer St.
John, Lord St. John, eldest son to Oliver Earl of Bullingbrooke. Mildmay Fane,
now Earl of Westmerland. Lord Henry Pawlet, younger son to William Marquess
of Winchester. Sir Edwa^d Montagu, eldest son to Henry Viscount M^ndeuill,
now Earl of Manchester. Sir John Carry, eldest son to Henry Viscount
Rochford, now Earl of Dover. Sir Charles Howard, eldest son to Thomas Viscount
Andouer, now Earl of Barkshire. Sir William Howard, second son to Thomas
Earl of Arundell. Sir Robert Stanley, second son to William Ea. of Derby. Sir
Pawl^t St. John, second son to Oliver Earl of Bulling^rooke. Sir Francis
Fane, second son to Francis Earl of Westm^rland. Sir James Howard, eldest son
to Theophilus Lord Walden, now Earl of Suffolk. Sir William Cauendish, eldest
son to William Lord Cauendish, Earl of Devonshire. Sir Thomas Wentworth,
eldest son to Thomas Lord Wentworth, now Earl of Cleueland. Sir William
Paget, son to William Lord Paget of Bewdesert, now Lord Paget. Sir William
Russell, eldest son to Francis Lord Russell, now Earl of Bedford. Sir Henry
Stanhope, eldest son to Philip Lord Stanhope of Shelford, now Earl of
Chesterfield. Sir Richard Vaughan, eldest son to John Lord Vaughan of Molengar
in Ireland. Sir Christopher Neuill, second son to Edward Lord Abergaueney.
Sir Roger Bartu, second son to Robert Lord Willoughby, now Earl of Lindsey.
Sir Thomas Wharton, second son to Thomas Lord Wharton. Sir Saint John Blunt,
brother to Mountioy Blunt, Lord Mountioy, now Earl of Newport. Sir Ralphe
Clare of Worcestershire. Sir John Maynard of Essex, second brother to the Lord
Maynard. Sir Francis Carew of Devonshire. Sir John Byron of Nottinghamshire.
Sir Roger Palmer of Sussex, Master of the Kings Household. Sir Henry Edmonds,
son to sir Thomas Edmonds, Treasurer of the Household. Sir Ralph Hopton of
Somersetshire. Sir William Brook of Kent. Sir Alexander Ratcliffe of
Lancashire. Sir Edward Scot of Kent. Sir Christopher Hatton of
Northamptonshire. Sir Thomas Sackuill of Sussex. Sir John Munson of
Lincolneshire, son to sir Thomas Munson. Sir Peter Wentworth of Oxfordshire.
Sir John Butler of Hartfordshire. Sir Edward Hung^rford, of Wiltshire. Sir
Richard Lewson of Kent. Sir Nathaniel Bacon of Calford in Suffolk. Sir Robert
Poyntz of Glocestershire. Sir Robert Beuill of Huntingtonshire. Sir George
Sands of Kent. Sir Thomas Smith of Weston-Hanger in Kent. Sir Thomas Fanshaw of
Warparke in Hartfordshire. Sir Miles Hobard of Plomsted in Norfolk. Sir Henry
Heart of Kent, son to sir Perciuall Heart. Sir Francis Carew, alias Throgmorton,
of Bedington in Surrey. Sir John Backhouse of Berkshire. Sir Matthew Mynnes of
Kent. Sir John Stowell of Somersetshire, Sir John Iennings of Hartfordshire.
Sir Stephen Ha^uey of Northamptonshire, son to Judge Haruey.
FINIS.

