A TREATISE OF ANTICHRIST.

CONTAINING The defense of Cardinal Bellarmines Arguments, which inuincibly
demonstrate, That the Pope is not Antichrist.

AGAINST M. GEORGE DOWNAM D. of Divinity, who impugneth the same.

By Michael Christopherson Priest.

THE FIRST PART.

Si Patrem familias Beelzebub vocauerunt: quanto magis domesticos eius?

Matthew. 10. If they have called the Goodman of the house Beelzebub: how much
more them of his household?

Imprinted with License, M.DC.XIII.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOST MIGHTY PRINCE,
I HOPE it will not be deemed any presumption, but rather a just and necessary
prevention, for me to offer this my Treatise concerning Antichrist to your
Sovereign Majesty. Sure I am that it proceeds from a loyal and dutiful mind
desirous to avoid all occasion of offense, and ready to employ my best labors,
yea my life it self in your Maiestyes service. My adversary likewise has
provoked me hereunto who together with M. D. (...) Powell have taken the same
course with their disputations of the same subject.

And though they may seem to have the better hand, by reason of your Maiestyes
education, and present profession: yet I want not reasons of encouragement,
whereby I may be induced to hope and expect your Majesty's favorable patronage
and protection. At least your Majesty gives all men good leave, to dispute of
this Controversy, by accounting the Protestants proofs but bare conjectures:
yea promising to yield to the Truth, when it shall be manifested by more forcible
Arguments, and more probable Interpretations; which we have good cause of hope
to see shortly performed, by the labors of so many learned men of foreign
Nations, who have endeauored to give your Majesty satisfaction in this kind. In
the mean space, we cannot but highly extol this rare modesty in so great a
Monarch; especially when we hear M. Powell, and other such unlearned Vpstarts
protesting with full mouth, that they know as certainly, that the Pope is the
great Disput. de Antichr. in initio.
Antichrist, as that God is in Heaven, and Jesus Christ our Savior, and
Redeemer.

Certainly, it is strange, how any man could fall into a fit of such extreme,
and impudent madness, were it not that God permits sometimes such excess of
malicious folly, for the reclayming of others misled and seduced by these
erring guids and false Prophets. In which respect I have always thought this
Question very profitable, and of great importance, to omit how necessary the
discussion thereof may prove sooner then we are aware, in regard of the true,
and great Antichrist himself; whose coming we have far more reason to expect
in our days, then the Ancient Fathers had in theirs.

Thus the divine Goodness always turns evil into good, and makes all things
concur to the welfare of his Elect; and by this strange paradox and
calumniation, preuenteth and prepares us against Antichrists coming, with an
exact Discovery of his whole proceeding, and persecution: which whosoever
considers attentively, as it is laid down in the sacred Scripture, and
declared by the holy Fathers, will easily perceive that hitherto the chiefest
signs, and notes of Antichrist have not been fulfilled by any. So that indeed
there can be no doubt, or question, whether he himself be come; only some
controversy might be moved, which of his forerunners does most resemble him.

And in this also the matter may easily be decided; for who sees not, that the
false Mahomet draws nighest unto him both in name and deeds? His name
containing the number 666. which is by S. John assigned to Antichrist, and his
impiety, enmity, and persecution against Christ, and Christians is notorious to
the whole world. For which cause there have not wanted some, both Catholics,
and See Pe^erius in Apoc.
Protestants, who have persuaded themselves, that there is no other Antichrist
to be expected. But these are evidently confuted by many invincible arguments.
Notwithstanding this their error, though never so gross, may seem in some
sort excusable because they impugn a certain, and manifest enemy.

But what shall we say of those who take their mark so much amiss, that they
make the chief visible Pastor of Christ's Church a member of Satan, yea
Antichrist himself? Can any thing be more absurd, or intolerable? Is it
possible, that any Christian would give Luther the hearing, when his proud
spirit of contention, and contradiction made him first break forth into this
open blasphemy? How did not Princes perceive, that this was the high way to all
rebellion? Could they conceive or imagine, that Temporal Authority and
Jurisdiction would be regarded, where the chiefest spiritual power upon earth
was thus impudently contemned, and trodden under foot? Can they trust to their
Pedigrees, when they see the continual succession of 1500. years so lightly
esteemed? What better Title can they pretend for themselves, then the express
words of our Savior, with which he established S. Peter, and his Successors?

Your Majesty wisely observed, that unless In the conference at Hampton court.
the Authority of Bishops were mayntained, that of Princes could not stand: No
Bishop, no King, says your Majesty. And certain it is, that no lawful Bishop
can be vpholden against the Popes Authority, to which all other spiritual
Jurisdiction is subordinate. Can any Judge or Magistrate of the Realm be
independent of your Majesty? This is so evident, that even the Puritans
themselves, though otherwise never so blinded with malice against the Pope,
could not choose but see it. For which cause they stick not to protest to all
the world, that if the Prelates have the Truth (especially in this point) the
Pope and the Church of Rome (and in them God, and Christ Jesus himself) have
great wrong and indignity offered unto them, in In the Christian and modest
off^r etc. published anno 1606. page 16.
that they are rejected, and that all the Protestant Churches are Schismatic
in forsaking unity, and communion with them.

Thus then it plainly appears that the Protestants, neither according to the
Truth it self, nor in the Puritans judgment, can defend themselves, and their
pretended Bishops, but by establishing the Pope, and Roman Church. And all the
vehemence which they use against the Pope to prove him Antichrist, falls upon
themselves, who participate with him in admitting the Hierarchy of Bishops. And
as for other proofs proper to Puritans, they are enforced to answer them as
well as we; yea most of all these Arguments be such; as might very easily be
turned against any lawful Prince whatsoever; and much more against such
Protestant Princes, as besides their Temporal power make claim to spiritual
Jurisdiction. Let any discreet Reader reflect upon all particulers, and he will
easily discern, that if Catholics had been no more moderate then Luther and
other Protestants were, King Henry could not have entitled himself Head of the
Church in spiritual, and Ecclesiastical affairs, without having the name of
Antichrist applied, and appropriated unto him. For if such contumelious
inferences be made against the Pope in great part, because he is supposed
(though falsely) to arrogate more to himself in Temporal affairs, then of
right he ought; how much more would the same imputation fall upon such a
Prince, as did first vsurp spiritual Jurisdiction, without either example or
other probable pretense?

But I will not urge these odious inferences any further: your Majesty will
easily conceive how far this project might be pursued. And by perusing this
small labor of mine, which I now offer to your Majesty, it will manifestly
appear, that we have evident, and invincible Arguments taken out of Scripture
and all Antiquity, to free our chiefest Pastor, the Popes Holiness, from this
most absurd and false calumniation: and that whatsoever any Protestant can
answer to these our proofs, is without any difficulty overthrown, and
confuted. As likewise their railing inuectiues, and frivolous objections are
presently dissolved, and returned upon themselves. All which considered, I
account it no presumption to be an humble Suppliant to your most Excellent
Majesty for some release and mitigation in the pressures, and persecutions
which Catholics endure, under this pretense of the Popes being Antichrist.

For how can it possibly stand with justice or reason, that a lawful Prince
should punish his loyal subjects for performing their duty to their spiritual
and lawful Pastor? That Rebels should uphold Heretics, who are Traitors
against God and his Church, it were no marvel, since they all agree in the
impugnation of superior powers. And yet it is too notorious to the world, what
Catholics suffer for their conscience in your Maiestyes Dominions? what loss
of lyuings, and liberty, yea sometime of life it self? How busy are Purseuants
in ransacking their houses, abusing their servants, and apprehending their
persons? What insolencyes and vexations are they constrained to endure? And to
omit the generality, and severity of this persecution, from which neither
frailty of sex, nor band of matrimony, nor Nobility of birth can exempt any;
how many things lie hid and unknown, which would astonish and amaze the world
if they were laid open to the view thereof? What prying and inquiring into men's
secret actions; in so much that even ordinary provision for the sustenance of
nature, cannot be made without suspicion of Treason, as appeared not long since
by the pot of pears, which were supposed to have been balls of wildfyre. How
many are beaten, and tormented even to death in private houses, without any
public trial? Some Prentises in the City of London can give good testimony
heerof.

I might add such other particulers, as the rods kept in store by some of no
small account, for young youths under twenty years, whom they use like
scholars, thinking it not to be against their gravity to whip them privately
with their own hands. But I will not offend your Maiestyes ears with the
recital of such base, and unworthy actions. Only I will humbly beseech our
Blessed Savior to move your Maiestyes heart to take pity and compassion of
these abuses, by giving present Order for the redress, and reformation of so
much, as your Majesty already misliketh, which we hope to be the greatest part.

And for the rest, we only crave this favor, that we may be spared, until we
be heard: for we nothing doubt, but that if your Majesty would once resolve
to inform your self thoroughly of the truth, God would not be vvanting to
our just desires, and to your Majesty's so Honorable and necessary endeauours.

GOD of his goodness direct and protect your Majesty. AMEN.

Your Majesty's most faithful Subject, and humble Orator. Michael
Christopherson P.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
TO some I doubt not, this my labor, which I have taken in discussing this
question of Antichrist, will seem superfluous, or at least not so well
bestowed, as it might have been in many other subjects. And they will be much
confirmed in this their opinion, if they consider, that among so many learned
men, as have written in our language, and evidently confuted the heresies of
our times; none of them have vouchsafed to yield so far to our Adversaries, as
to handle this question of set purpose, which doubtless they omitted not without
great consideration and weighty reasons: the chiefest of which, if I be not
deceived, was for that they persuaded themselves, that few or none, especially
of the prudent and moderate sort, did indeed, and in their heart hold this
absurd paradox, though they were content to let it pass, because it served for
a motive to withdraw the common people from the Catholic faith, which in their
conceit contained other errors.

And for this cause those worthy and zealous writers endeauored chiefly to take
away this false persuasion of the Churches erring, partly by confirming and
demonstrating the infallibility of her authority, and partly by descending to
particular controversies, and most evidently conuincyng the Churches doctrine
in every one of them to be conformable to the divine Scriptures and all
antiquity. For they did easily discover, that by this course they should not
only confute this abominable b^asphemy; but also with one and the same labor
confirm and establish the contrary truth: viz. that the Catholic Church,
together with her supreme Pastor, is the pillar of Truth and the building of
Christ, against which no force of errors or heresies either has or ever shall
be able to prevail.

Which course of theirs as most prudent in it self, so likewise most
profitable to others, I am far from mysliking, but do altogether approve and
admyre it. And yet notwithstanding, I hope, that this my labor may be in some
sort profitable also. For all are not so quick wytted, as to make these
necessary inferences, but rather many are withheld from yielding to the
manifest truth in other points by a preiudicate opinion, which they have
conceived in this; and the just and discreet silence, which has hitherto been
used, ministers to them some cause of suspicion, that the Protestants have
reason for that they say; especially since they urge this point so much both in
their Writings and Sermons, and the matter is of so great importance and
consequence, that whosoever has the truth on his side in this, ought justly to
be believed in the rest, since that Antichrist can neither agree with Christ,
nor so great a calumniation as this is of the Pope (if it be false) can agree
or stand with the spirit of truth. Besides, the Protestants out of this their
doctrine make most odious inferences against Catholics, as to go no further,
we may see in M. Downams last Chapter, where he deduceth out of it six
conclusions.

First, that out of this all other controversies may be decided; and that the
doctrine of the Catholic Church is to be rejected, as the errors of
Antichrist. Secondly, that their separation from us, is warranted, yea
commanded by the word of God, and all returning forbidden. Thirdly, that all
they which partake with us, are reprobates, and to be damned. Fourthly, that
the Recusant Papists, but especialy Jesuits and Seminary Priests ought not to
be favored or spared in a Christian Common wealth. Fifthly, that there can be
no reconciliation betwixt Protestants and the Church of Rome Sixthly, that
Protestants ought to be thankful to God, who has not suffered them to be
carried away with this Catholic Apostasy. By which last words we may also
note, that if this their position of the Pope being Antichrist does fall, they
have no color left to accuse the Catholic Church of schism or heresy, and
consequently it remains evident, that she is the true Church of Christ. For
no schism or heresy can be Catholic or universal, as the Roman Church is;
only the persecution and Apostasy of Antichrist may in some sort usurp this
name; because, though it shall want the universality of time, being to remain
but a very short time, yet it shall be very universal in respect of place, as is
manifest by that, which is said in this Treatise.

Thus much shall suffice of the importance and necessity of this my small
labor. And now I will briefly say some thing of Cardinal Bellarmine, whom I
defend, and of M. Downam whom I confute. And concerning this renowned and m^st
learned Cardinal, I shall not need to use many words, his fame being spread
over the whole world by his large, and profound disputations against all sorts
of heretics which have risen or are extant in these our days. Wherefore it
shall be sufficient to note, that which makes to our purpose, that in this his
Treatise of Antichrist he uses not so many arguments as some others have don;
only contenting himself with those which are proper and peculiar to this
place; omitting others, which do rather prove, that the Pope is the chief
Pastor of Christ's Church then disprooue that he is not Antichrist, which in
him proceeds from two causes: the one is, his exactnes in the method, and
division of his disputations, which conteyne every one several questions and
arguments: the other, for that having before sufficiently discussed the
affirmative position that the Pope is, and ought to be acknowledged to be the
chief Pastor of Gods Church, he would not make any needeles repetition of
those demonstrations, but rather proceed to other which hitherto he had not
touched, and which directly concluded, that the Pope, not only by reason of his
office, but also in respect of his person can in no sort be that Antichrist,
which the Scriptures and Fathers affirm, that we are to expect toward the end
of the world. I shall not need to add any more in commendation of this his
work for that the whole Treatise following has no other subject, and I have
translated his whole Book verbatim, so that the Reader may peruse it, and
judge of it himself. It were superfluous to give any reason, why in my
allegations of this worthy Cardinal, I only mention his name for the most
part: for any man may easily perceive, that I do it for breuities sake, and
according to the use of Schools, and not for any want of respect to his place
and person, whom I honor from my heart, and defend him in this Treatise, so
far, as my poor ability will give me leave.

Concerning M. Downam (for so I commonly call him, to give him to understand,
that I impugn not his person, but his detestable heresy) I shall have
something more to say: for first the Reader must not be ignorant that he has
perverted the order of this disputation. For, whereas Cardinal Bellarmine
first demonstrateth, that the Pope is not Antichrist, and afterward answers
the objections of his Adversaries, M. Downam took it to be his best course,
first to object whatsoever either former heretics had invented, or he himself
could add, omitting altogether the answers, which Bellarmine gave; that by
this means, he might possess his Readers mind by inueighing against the Pope
at his pleasure, without any contradiction: and so have him the more favorable
when he came to make show of answering to Bellarmins arguments.

This is the cause, why I am constrained to confute M. Downams second book in
the first place; not producing the arguments without his solutions, as he dealt
with the Cardinal, but examining whatsoever he answers distinctly; in so
much, that, one Chapter excepted where his confusion would not permit Cap. 4.
it, in all the rest, every number of my confutation answers to the same in
him: so that if any man has a desire to confer, what both he and I say, he may
easily do it, by reading first one section or number in him, and then the same
in me; which I would require of all such as do any way doubt of my sincere
dealing, because he finds not M. Downams words verbatim alleged; which
could not be without great prolixity. But he that goes thus far, should also
do well to read so much in Cardinal Bellarmime, as is discussed in every
several number, which, that the Reader may conveniently do, I have also
prefixed numbers to the Cardinals discourse, and noted in the margent, where
that, which is handled in every several place, may be found in him without
difficulty.

And by this means I hope the Reader may peruse this my labor with clarity,
and profit, and discover M. Downams false dealing, as well in this point
specified, as in many other, which now it is no time to rehearse, they being
very near as many as there be leaves in this whole Book, and they may easily
be found, by either perusing the marginall notes, or seeking in the table at
the word Downam. And yet perhaps it will not be amysse to note one or two of
them in this place, which especially discover the badnesse of M. Downams cause.
For what can be more absurd or hateful to Christian ears, then to hear the
enemies of Christ, and his Church, commended and embraced, and his true
Servants and Doctors insolently rejected and accused of errors? And yet this
is M. Downams case, not once or twyce, but throughout the whole course of this
disputation: for he does not only agree in substance with the Samosatens, who
are known heretics, and condemned by his own judgment, but also joins
himself ex professo with that vile Apostata and capital enemy of Christ
Porphiry, not only against S. Hierome, who most earnestly and learnedly
confuteth him at large, but also against all other Ecclesiastical writers, yea
even the very Jews themselves, who in that point agree with the Christians;
but in another, where they are opposite to us, there M. Downam joins with
them: so that it seems, that M. Downam and his fellow Protestants seek of
purpose, how they may oppose themselves to Christ and his Church, yea that they
esteem more of Gentilles and Jews, then they do of Christian writers, though
never so many, so worthy, or so ancient.

And surely whosoever shall consider attentively, how often, and how
scornefully the ancient Fathers and pillars of Christ's Church, be rejected by
M. Downam, cannot choose but admire, yea should up his hands and bless
himself, to think, how it has been, and is still possible, that either they
themselves, or others by them should be so bewitched. Neither can there any
probable cause be given of so great blindness, and so enormous a crime, but only
the want of Gods grace, which their sins have with drawn, and deserved, that
they should be in this sort as it were given over to a reprobate sense. What
can be said in defense of this detestable excess? Deny it they cannot, the
thing being so evident, and so often reiterated. And dare they excuse it, by
telling us, That the Fathers are only forsaken, when they forsake the
Scripture? Is not this plainly to make Infidells and Heretics better
Interpreters of Scripture then the Church of Christ, and all Christians in
general, and the most learned Pastors thereof in particular? If they answer,
that it is not the authority of these Infidells, which they follow, but the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, which they experience in themselves; is this any
thing else in effect, then to acknowledge that Porphiry, and the Jews had the
true spirit of Christ, and that the ancient Fathers, and the Church of Christ
in their time had it not? For if the Protestants, have the spirit of Christ
now, it is manifest, that those others had it then, since their expositions be
all one. But who is so foolish and sacrilegious, as to deprive Gods Church and
Saints of his spirit, and it tribute it to his professed enemies, and
consequently how shall we believe the Protestants, when they tell us that they
are full of Gods Spirit, since we see their spirit to agree with that of the
Devils instruments, and to be quite opposite to that of Gods elect? Here is
no starting hole to be found, neither have they any thing to reply, but only to
stand upon their bare affirmation; which M. Downam does so often in his
disputation, still desiring to have that granted which is chiefly in question.
But I will omit this, and the rest of his absurdities, remitting the Reader to
his own experience, after that he has with diligence perused the whole.

Here I would make an end of this Preface, having said as much, as I think
necessary concerning the disputation, which follows. But because I have
lately seen two Sermons not long since preached by this our Doctor, by which
it seems, that he has resolved to relinquish Puritanisme and turn
Protestant, I thought it good to admonish my Reader of this point also; because
I rather inclined before to think, that he was a Puritan, and insinuated so
much in a place or two. And withal Chap. 10. and 13.
by this occasion, I must entreat my Reader to mark the great difference
betwixt M. Downam in these his Sermons, and the same man in his book of
Antichrist: for in this he every where rejects all antiquity, as I have said,
but in his Sermons he sings us a new song, and can tell us. that it never yet
happened that the newest things did prove the truest, and argues chiefly
from authority, obiecting still to his Puritan Adversaries, That they go
against the whole stream of all Antiquity, yea he can allege S. Augustine
lib. 4. de Bapt. con. Donat. cap. 24. and ep. 118. to prove that the consent of
the whole Church argues either the definition of a Council, or an
Apostolicali Tradition, though he corruptely translateth (Traditum, Ordained)
and likewise in the second place, where S. Aug. affirms that, Insolentissimae
insaniae est, it is a most insolent madness to dispute against that which
(vniuersa Ecclesia) the whole Church observes; he adds of his own the word
(Primitive) that so he may have some stareing hole against us, when he is urged
with the same Authority of S. Augustine, which if he would follow himself, as
he would now have the Puritans do, he must of force retire himself from the
Protestants also, and betake himself to the Catholic Church, which all
Antiquity most manifestly defends.

And surely whosoever considers the arguments, which Protestants make against
Puritans, cannot but evidently perceive, that the very same principles do
overthrow the Protestants themselves. And I marvel much, how they can defend
themselves from that terrible sentence of S. Paul, Inexcusabilises o homo
omnis, qui iudicas: quo enim iudicas alterum, teipsum condemnas, eadem enim
agis, quae iudicas. And the very same judgment falls upon the Puritans
themselves, when they go about to impugn the Brownists, Familists,
Anabaptists, Arians, or any other sect whatsoever. For this they cannot do, but
by Antiquity, which notwithstanding they are forced to reject in all those
points, in which they differ, and dissent from the Cathelike Roman Church.

I will not descend to any particulers, though I easily might; for what can be
more evident, then that the autherity of S. Cyprian and other Fathers, who urge
the neces^ity of a Bishop, for the conservation of unity, is much more to be
understood of one chief Bishop in the whole Church, then of particular Bishops
in particular Diocesses, since there can be no question, that unity is as
necessary in the whole world, as in one Diocese, and much more easily
mayntained in this, then in that? Likewise M. Downam can tell us not only of
Bishops, but also of Metropolitans and Patriarchs, and alleges for his
purpose the Council of Nice; but he will not acknowledge that in the same
Council, Rome has the first place, and is preferred before all others, as
likewise Alexandria, and Antiochia are before Jerusalem (which M. Downam would
willingly have the chief) of which there can be no other true reason given,
but the excellency of S. Peter above the other Apostles, who founded three
Churches, and placed or fixed his Sea in Rome, where he ended his life with a
most happy Martyrdom. Now if we a^ke M. Downam a reason why he sees not this,
as well as that which favors the Protestants against the Puritans, I cannot
imagine, what he can answer us, but only that by this means he should incur
the disgrace, and overthrow of his Ministry, which he esteems so highly. But
I entreat both him, and all other, even as they tender their own salvation, to
look about them in time, and not to suffer themselves to be carried away with
the sway of the time, and the desire of worldly pleasures and preferments,
which M. Downam, and all others may easily conceive not to be very great, if
his complayntes of poverty, and contempt, which he makes in his former Sermon
be true, as no doubt they are in great part, and these miseryes will daily
increase, as their credit does decrease, so that if now that pitiful (yet
ridiculou^) complaint of M. Downam be true, That not only every mean man
almost Ser. 1. page 67.
prefers himself before the Minister, but also disdayneth to bestow either
his Son on the Ministry, or his Daughter on a Minister, the time no doubt
will come, and that shortly also, that they ^halbe enforced to marry only
within their own Trib^; for I can assure him, that neither the Kings, nor the
Nobility of England will imitate those of Judah in this; and it will be their
only way to get a Law enacted, that their generation may succeed them in their
Ministry; which M. Downam seems to wish, and to mislike that law not a
little, which (in a parenthesis) he tells us has otherwise provided.

These are the base and carnal cogitations of these new Ghospellers; and yet
all will not serve: for they shall never find a remedy for this their grief
except they return to the Catholic Church, whom^ they may thank for the
living they have. But in it God has provided for this, and all other
inconveniences, that can any way arise: and in particular for the deciding of
all questions and controversies. Wherefore if the Protestants and Puritans will
have an end of this of their Bishops and Presbitery, they must of necessity
stand to the Catholic Churches judgment, in which they shall find Bishops
established, and yet sometimes, by reason of persecution, Priests only without
Bishops, as now we see in our Country, where conformable to that which in their
judgment was practiced in the Primitive Church in many places, at least for a
time, we have hitherto only Priests subordinate to an Archpriest; but yet we
are far from misliking Bishops, but do both wish, and expect them, when our
lawful Superior, who succeeds the chiefest of the Apostles, shall see it
convenient.

M. C.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS of this first Part of Antichrist.
THE disputation of Antichrist is propounded, and the first Argument from the
name it self discussed. CHAP. I. That Antichrist shall be a certain determinate
man. CHAP. II. That Antichrist is not yet come. CHAP. III. The first
demonstration, That Antichrist is not yet come. CHAP. IIII. The second
demonstration. CHAP. V. The third demonstration CHAP. VI. The fourth
demonstration. CHAP. VII. The fifth demonstration. CHAP. VIII. The sixth
demonstration. CHAP. IX. Of Antichrists Name. CHAP. X. Of Antichrists
Character. CHAP. XI. Of Antichrists Generation. CHAP. XII. Of Antichrists
Seat. CHAP. XIII. Of Antichrists doctrine. CHAP. XIIII. Of Antichrists
miracles. CHAP. XV. Of Antichrists Kingdom and wars. CHAP. XVI. Of Gog and
Magog. CHAP. XVII. The dotages of Heretics are confuted, with which they do
not so much prove, as impudently affirm, that the Pope is Antichrist. CHAP.
XVIII. The trifles of the Smalcaldicall Synod of the Lutheranes are confuted.
CHAP. XIX. Caluins lies are refuted. CHAP. XX. The lies of Illyricus are
refuted. CHAP. XXI. The fooleryes of Tylemanus are refuted. CHAP. XXII. The
lies of Chytraeus are refuted. CHAP. XXIII. The arguments of Calvin and
Illyricus are confuted, who go about to prove, that the Pope is no longer a
Bishop: where also the fable of Pope Ioane the Woman is confuted. CHAP. XXIIII.


CARDINAL BELLARMINES THIRD BOOK of the Pope.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. VVherin the disputation of Antichrist is propounded.
WE have demonstrated hitherto (says Bellarmine) that the Pope succeeds S.
Peter in the chiefest Princedome of the whole Church. It remains that we
see, whether at any time the Pope has fallen from this degree, for that our
adversaries contend, that he is not at this time a true Bishop of Rome,
whatsoever he was before. And Nilus in the end of his book against the
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, speaks thus: But let that be the sum and
head of my speech, that while the Pope keeps in the Church a convenient,
heavenly, and of ancient time appointed order, while he holds and defends
the heavenly truth, and while he cleaves to Christ, the chief and true Lord
and head of the Church, I will easily suffer him to be both the head of the
Church, and the chiefest Priest, and the successor of Peter, or else if he will,
of all the Apostles, that all obey him, and that whatsoever belongs to his
honor, be in nothing diminished: but if he be departed from the truth, and
will not return to it, he ought deservedly to be accounted of, as one that is
condemned and rejected.

But he should have showed, into what errors the Rome are fallen, and when,
and by whom they were condemned. For we know, that in the General Lateran
Council under Innocentius the third, and of Lions under Gregory the tenth, and
of Florence under Eugenius the fourth, the Greeks being convicted of error,
returned to the Faith of the Latins, and afterward always returned to their
vomit again, and were therefore most grieuouslie punished by God; but we never
read that the Latins came to the Faith of the Greeks. Neither can there any
Ecclesiastical judgment be produced against the Latins, as we bring many
against the Greeks.

Now Calvin Lib. 4. cap. 7.. 22. Let (says he) all those things be true, which
notwithstanding we have now wrested from them, that Peter was by the voice of
Christ, appointed Head of the universal Church, and that he left the honor
given unto him in the Roman Sea, that this was established by the authority of
the ancient Church, and confirmed by long use* that the chiefest authority
was always due from all to the Bishop of Rome, and that he was the judge of all
causes and men, that he was subject to the judgment of none; let them have
more also if they will: Yet I answer in one word, that nothing of this
stands in force, except the Church and Bishop be at Rome. And after. 24. Let
the Romanists untie me this knott: I deny that their Pope is the Prince of
Bishops, since that he is not a Bishop. And after. Let Rome in times past have
bin the Mother of all Churches: but since she began to become the seat of
Antichrist, she left to be that which she was. And after. 25. We seem to
some, backbyters and slanderers, when we call the Bishop of Rome Antichrist,
but they which think so, understand not that they accuse Paul of immodesty,
after whom we speak, yea out of whose mouth we speak so. And least any
object, that we wrongfullie wrest Paul's words against the Pope which perteine
to another purpose, I will briefly show, that they cannot be understood
otherwise, then of the Popedom. So he.

The like teach all the heretics of this time, and chiefly Luther in supput.
temporum, and in assert. art. 28. and 36. and often in other places. Likewise
the Magdeburgenses Centur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. colum. 434. and sequent. and in
all the following Centuries cap. 4. 7. 10. Illyricus in lib. de primat. David
Chrytraus in cap. 9. and 13. Apoc. Likewise VVolsgangus Musculus in loc.
commun. tit. de Ecclesia. Theodor. Beza in Com. 2. Thessal. 2. Theodor.
Bibliander in Chron. tabul. 10. 11. 12. and 14. Henricus Pantaleon in Chron.
Henricus Bullinger praesat. in suas homil. ad Apocal. And before all these John
VVicklisse art. 30. amongst those which are condemned in Council. Constantiensi
sess. 8. pronounced the Pope to be Antichrist.

Wherefore that this question may be diligently explicated, Caluins
objections.

For the first, some of our adversaries teach, that the VVolfga^gus Musculus in
locis cap. de potest. Ministroru^, and he proves it, because that word (...)
signifies vice, whence (...); is vice-Christi, in Christ's place, as (...)
signifies him who obtrudeth himself for Captain, that is, who will be
accounted the Captains Vicar. The Magdeburgenses cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4.
colum. 435. do teach, that the Pope is therefore the true Antichrist because he
makes himself the vicar of Christ.

But without doubt they are deceived, or endeavor to deceive, for the name of
Antichrist cannot in any sort, aemulus Christi, at emulation with Christ, and
would be accounted Christ, having cast him down who is truly Christ.

That this is the signification of this name, it is proved Grecians the word
(...) does properly signify opposition, and because not only those things
are said to be opposed, which are repugnant one to the other, but also those,
which are of equal value, from thence it proceeds, that (...) in
composition, sometime signifies contrariety, sometime equiualence, as is
manifest in the examples of all such names, (...) signifies an emulous in a
combat, (...) a contrary remedy, (...) a contrary speech, (...) equivalent,
(...) equal to God, (...) is the thumme, because it is opposed against, and is
equivalent to all the rest of the hand, and so of the rest. But a Vicar does
not signify opposition, but subordination to another, and therefore it cannot
be expressed by the word (...).

Now that (...) does not signify the Captains Latins, Propraetor or Proconsul
does not signify the Vicar of the Praetor or Consul, but him that is in some
Province, that which the Praetor or Consul is in the City: and in this Musculus
was deceived; for because he read in Budaeus that (...) does signify a
Propretor, he thought that it does signify the Vicar of the Praetor, which is
false.

Secondly the same is proved out of the Scripture: for although These. 2. which
certainly is not to be the Vicar, but the enemy of Christ. And 1. Joan. 2.
Antichrist is said to be him, who denies Jesus to be Christ, that he may sell
himself for Christ. and Matthew. 24. Antichrist is said to affirm himself to
be Christ, which certainily is not the part of a Vicar, but of an Emulous.

Thirdly out of all the Authors, who have written of S. Damascen lib. 4. de
fide cap. 28. and after the same manner does S. Hierome expound it of the
Latins, who notwithstanding was also most skillful in the Greek tongue,
quaest. 11. ad Algasiam.

Lastly so also expounds it in his Thesaurus lingnae Graecae Henricus
Stephaenus, who withstanding is one of the heretics of Geneua. Hence we have
our first argument against our adversaries. For since the name of Antichrist
signifies the enemy and emulous of Christ, and the Pope confesses himself to
be Christ's servant, and subject to Christ in all things, and in no sort says,
that he is Christ, nor makes himself equal to him, it is manifest, that he is
not Antichrist.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. FIRST M. Downam tells us of two great adua^tages that Bellarmine has
against him and all Protestants in this point. 1. In respect of his great
learning and much reading. 2. In that he is to prove the negative part, so that
it is enough for him, if he Bellarmins advantages in this co^trouersy.
can but show plainly and evidently, that any one several and essential mark
ascribed unto Antichrist in the Scriptures, does not agree to the Pope. All
which we willingly acknowledge, and from hence do infer M. Downams
ignorance and impudency, that whereas it had been enough for Bellarmine to have
disproued him in one point, it is not enough for him that he is disproued in
all, as the Reader will easily perceive in perusing the particular arguments.
Likewise we acknowledge the controversy to be of that importance and
consequence, that it manifestly conuinceth them to be the limbs of Antichrist
The importance of this co^trouersy.
who are in error concerning this point: for this consequence does not only
touch us, if we were in the wrong, as M. Downam seems to insinuate by only
naming us, but it concerns them also as fully, since that it is evident that
none but heretics can charge any, and much less the chief Pastor of Christ's
Church, with so foul an imputation. Now how true it is, that all heretics are
lymmes of Antichrist, I need not show, since that it is granted on both sides.
And therefore it behooves M. Downam and his fellows to have as great a will to
clear themselves in this behalf, as it does us, and so much the more also,
because we are but the defendants, and they are the slanderous calumniators;
and likewise, for that some of their own brethren do much condemn their
insolency and rash bouldnes in this assertion.

2. Now whereas he affirms, that the conceits of the elder Papists who lived
in the dares of our forefathers, concerning Antichrist, were mere dotages, he
only says it, and thereby discovers his spiteful spirit, which provoke him
to rail without reason, and to slander against all truth. For the Catholics
of former days, held the very same, that we do now, though Bellarmin agrees
with the elder Catholics.
they explicated not themselves so fully, as Bellarmine and others do now. In
which respect only these may in some sort be truly called the refiners of
Popery, that is, the explicators and confirmers of Catholic doctrine against
heretics. But the reason of this difference betwixt the elder and later
writers is evident, for in their days Heretics were not so impudent as to
urge so palpable and gross errors, as they are in our time: for otherwise
Bellarmine sufficiently declares the antiquity of his doctrine, by proving
whatsoever he says by the authority of the ancient Fathers. Now whether many
have contributed to Bellarmins books, or no, it is little to the purpose,
though the truth is, as those know that are best acquainted with his studies,
that they are all his own labors. And that this may not seem strange, M.
Downam may easily inform himself, that diverse other of his order, that lived
in the same time, and some in the same place, have in diverse kinds written as
large volumes, as Bellarmine has in this. Whereof Salmeron, Tolet, Valentia,
Molina, Suarez, Vasquez and others may serve for example. Well to come to the
matter, M. Downam seems to allow of Bellarmines method and division, since
that he obiecteth nothing against it, but comes

3. In which to make a good beginning, he corrupts Bellarmines argument, by
altering both words and sense: for thus he sets it down: Antichrist is
hostis and aemulus Christi, Downam corrupts Bellarmines argument.
that is, such an enemy, as is opposed unto Christ in emulation of like honor.
The Pope is not an enemy, nor opposed unto Christ in emulatio^ of like honor,
therefore the Pope is not Antichrist. Whereas Bellarmine endeavors to prove
nothing else in this Chapter, but that the name of Antichrist signifies not the
Vicar of Christ, but only some that is contrary to Christ, and contrary not
howsoever, but in such sort, that he strives with him for the seat and
dignity of Christ, so that he would be accounted Christ, having cast him down
who is truly Christ: which is not to be opposed unto Christ in emulation of
like honor, but of the same and equal honor, which are far different
matters. For who sees not, that many things are like, which are not the same?
or rather speaking in rigor, that nothing is like, that is the same? And so
likewise of equality, there be many things like, which are not equal. As for
example, the unity of Christ's servants among themselves, is like to the union
of Christ with his Father, but not the same, nor Joan. 17.
equal unto it. And in this our question, who doubts that the Vicar of
Christ, as of any other, is like unto him in honor, but yet he has not in any
sort the same or equal honor to that which Christ has; as not to explicate
other differences, it is evident, that whosoever is Vicar to another,
acknowledges dependancie of another, which the principal does not. Now then
the whole controversy being about this sense of the word (...), whether it may
signify not only an enemy or emulous of Christ, but also his Vicar or
Vicegerent, no marvel though Bellarmin wholly insisteth upon the proof
thereof: and in this he shows not himself to be a sophister, but M. Downam
proves himself to be a calumniatour and a falsifier, as is manifest. But yet
in some sort he seems to acknowledge and amend this fault by affirming that
(...) in composition, commonly signifies three things, opposition, equality,
substitution, by which as afterward he explicates himself, he understands
subordination, which indeed is that which Bellarmine denies, and M. Downam
proves only by repeating the example of Musculus, and adding two others to it
which he interprets after that manner, and says in general, that Greek
writers and Lexicographers do teach see, as (...) proconsul, (...) proprator,
or legatus praetoris, or, qui est vice praetoris, (...) the putting of one case
for another. And in this sense (says he) the sacraments of the new Testament
substituted and ordained instead of the old, are called the Downam repeateth
his fellows argument, omitting Bellarmines answer.
(...) of them. But it is marvel he saw not that, which Bellarmine had
written against Musculus, who aleadged (...), as M. Downam does, and Bellarmine
answered to them both, that it signifies not the Vicegerent of a Captain, but
ordinarily a contrary captain, as (...) is to make war against, and
sometimes him that is in the Captains place, not as subject to him, but as
equal, as among the Latins Propraetor, or Proconsul does not signify the
Vicegerent of the Praetor or Consul, but him who is in some Province, that which
the Praetor or the Consul is in the City. And in this was Musculus deceived,
for reading in Budaeus that (...) signifies Propraetor, he thought that it did
signify the Vicegerent of the Praetor, which is false. Thus far Bellarmine. By
which M. Downam might have understood the cause of Musculus his error, whose
authority, as it should seem by that he cites no other, he only follows:
and in the other examples, which he brings, there is the same reason, because
one case is equivalent with the other, and the Sacraments of the new law are
not only equal, but also of greater value, and withal opposite to those of
the old law, with which they could not stand or be in use, at the same time.

4. To Bellarmins second proof out of Scripture M. Downam How Antichrist is
taken in the Scripture.
about 2 Thessalonians. 2. and Matthew. 24. for that Antichrist is not named there,
though he and all other grant, that they are to be understood of Antichrist,
and consequently he shall be such as is there described. Likewise he would
cavil about the place in S. John's Epistle, in which he says the name 1. John
2.
of Antichrist is ascribed to such as being enemies, notwithstanding professed
the name of Christ, as the heretics of those times. Where he seems to have
forgotten, what he and Bellarmine have agreed Bellar. cap. 2. Dow. lib. 1. cap.
1. 3.
upon, that the name of Antichrist is taken either properly or commonly, as
also the name of Christ, and consequently as the members of Antichrist do
oppose themselves to the members of Christ, contending which of them are to
have that appellation; so Antichrist properly taken, shall strive with Christ
whether of them is to be accounted truly and properly Christ. And when S. John
speaks of such enemies as profess the name of the true Christ, he means
only of Antichrists forerunners and members, which are only the members of
Antichrist, and not properly Antichrist himself, who notwithstanding at the
first, till he has gotten credit and authority, will perhaps deal
deceitfully, but afterward will plainly oppose himself to Christ, as S.
Matthew. S. Paul and S. John also do teach in the place, which Bellarmine
alleges, in which S. John speaks of an open and professed enemy as is
manifest. And M. Downam should have answered to that place directly, and not
have run to others, and so bouldly affirmed, that S. John speaks only of
hidden enemies, against the express place which he was to answer. To the
third proof, he only answers, that if all Authors mean that Antichrist,
shall be such a false Christ, as shall plainly and directly affirm himself to
be Christ the only Messiah, then their affirmation Downam rejects all authors
agrees not with that Antichrist, whom the Scriptures describe; which is in
effect to admit, that all those authors are against him, but that he
understands the Scripture better then they all: only he vouchsafes to
answer in particular to his good friend Henricus Stephanus, saying, that
neither he, nor any approved author denies, but that Antichrist may signify
him, who being an enemy of Christ, professes himself to be his Vicar. Now you
must suppose, that no Authors are approved whom M. Downam mislikes: and
besides consider how any Author can take occasion to deny that which they never
heard brought in question, and withal we are to note that (may) of M. Downams,
which only imports that the name of Antichrist may be applied to his members;
but now our question is, what is the proper signification of that word, as it
is understood of the chief Antichrist himself, and not of his members.

5. To the assumption, he answers, granting it in all, that the Pope
confesses of himself in word, but in deeds he says, that the Pope in many
things matcheth himself with Christ, and in some things aduanceth himself
above him: which he says, that he has proved else where, which we are to
examine in that place. Now it is sufficient for us, that the Pope is See cap.
14.
noe open enemy of Christ, as Antichrist shall be. For of this it follows
evidently, that the Pope is not the chief Antichrist, properly so called,
which is all that Bellarmine intends to prove in this place.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. That Antichrist shall be a certain determinate Man.
Now concerning the second (says Bellarmine) Jesus Nazarenus, sometime
commonly, for all those who have likeness with Christ in being anointed, in
which sort all Prophets, Kings, and Priests are called Christ's, Psalm. 104.
Touch not my Christ's: So also the name of Antichrist sometime is taken properly
for one notable enemy of Christ, of whom there is mention 2 Thessalonians. 2. Joan.
5. and in other places, and sometime commonly for all who in any sort impugn
Christ. For 1. Joan. 2. we read, You have heard that Antichrist comes, and
now many are become Antichrists. That is, you have heard that Antichrist shall
come, and now thought that singular Antichrist be not yet come, yet many
seducers are already come, who also may be called Antichrists.

But we disagree of Antichrist properly so called, whether Kingdom, and
Apostolical seat of them who govern the Church. The Magdeburgenses cent. 1.
lib. 2. c. 4. col. 435. The Apostles teach (say they) that Antichrist shall not
be only one person, but an whole kingdom, by false Doctors ruling in the
temple of God, that is in the Church of God, in the great City, that is, in
the Roman City, gotten by the work, fraud, and deceit of the Devil. So
they. The like are in others before alleged. Their reasons are these.

First, S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. says, that already, even in his the mystery of
iniquity does work now. And notwithstanding he says in the same place, that
Antichrist shall be slain by Christ in the end of the world. From hence Beza
concludes thus upon 2 Thessalonians. 2. They are manifestly deceived, whosoever
thought, that this was to be understood of one Man, unless they give me some
one, who may remain alive from Paul's time until the day of Judgment. So
also does Calvin argue in the place which I cyted before. This reason is
confirmed out of S. John, who in the first Epistle and fourth Chapter says:
Every spirit that dissolueth Jesus, is not of God, and this is Antichrist, of
whom you have heard that he comes, and now he is in the world.

Beza's second reason is, because Daniel in his 7. Chapter by the particular
names of the beasts, a Bear, a Lion, Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2. who does wonderfully
agree with Daniel, by the man of sin, and son of perdition, does not
understand one particular person, but as it were a certain body of many
Tyrants.

The 3. reason is Caluins upon the 2. Chap. of first Epistle S. John, where he
says, that they do dote, and willfullie err, who believe that Antichrist
shall be one man, seeing that Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. has written, that the Apostasy
shall come, and that Antichrist shall be the head of it. For Apostasy is a
certain general failing, or defection from the Faith, which indeed makes one
body. and one Kingdom, and is not a matter of a few years, that it can be
accomplished under one King.

For all this the truth is, that Antichrist shall be one particular man, which is
proved out of all the Scriptures and S. John cap. 5. I came in the name of my
Father, and you received me not: if another come in his own name, him will you
receive. Musculus and Calvin in Marlor. in Comment. huius loci, will have these
words to be understood of false Prophets in general, and not of any one: but
their exposition is repugnant to the ancient Fathers, and with the text it
self. For that these words are spoken of Antichrist, do witness S.
Chrysostom, and S. Cyril upon this place, S. Ambrose upon the 2. Chap. of the
2. Epist. to the Thessalonia^s, S. Hierome in his Epistle to Algasia, the 11.
question, S. Augustine in 29. Tract. upon S. John, S. Irenaeus in the 5. book
against the herefies of Valentinus, Theodoretus in the Epitome of the divine
Decrees in the chap. of Antichrist.

Besides in this place, our Lord does oppose to himself I, Another, In the name
of my Father, In his own name, Me, Him. Wherefore as Christ was one particular
man, so shall Antichrist be one particular man.

Moreover Christ says in this place, that Antichrist Messiah by the Jews, and
it is certain that the Jews expect one certain and particular man. In like
manner all false Prophets came in the name of another, and not in their own
name, Ierem. 14. The Prophets do falsely prophetize in my name, I sent them not
etc. But here our Lord speaks of one certain man, which shall come in his
own name, that is, who shall acknowledge no God at all, but shall extol
himself, as S. Paul says, above all that is called God. Finally very many
false Prophets were come before Christ, very many also were to come afterward,
therefore our Lord would not have said, if another shall come, but, many do
come, if he would have spoken of false Prophets.

The second place is 2 Thessalonians. 2. Unless there come a revolt first and the man
of sin be revealed, the son of perdition etc. And a^^er: And then the
wicked one shall be rauealed, whom our Lord Jesus shall kill with the spirit of his
mouth. These words the Adversaries themselves understand of the true
Antichrist, but the Apostle speaks of a certain determinate and particular
person, as appears by the Greek articles (...), and after (...). For as S.
Epiphanius haeres. 9. which is of the Samaritans; teaches, the Greek articles
do contract the signification to one certain thing, so that (...) signifies
man in common, but (...) a particular man. And surely it is marvel, that none
of the Aduersaties, who notwithstanding do boast of skill in tongues, have
observed this.

The third place is where we read thus, 1. Joan 2. (...)

The fourth is Dan. 7. 11. and 12. Chapters, where he speaks S. Hierome and
Theodoretus upon that place, Irenaeus lib. 5. August. lib. 20. de Ciuitate Dei
cap. 23. yea Calvin, the Magdeburgenses, and Beza vbi supra do teach. And there
Antichrist is not called one Kingdom, but one King, who often Kings which he
shall find in the world, shall take three quite away and shall subject unto
himself the other seven Besides, Calvin says, that litterallie Daniel
speaks of Antiochus Illustris, and allegoricallie of Antichrist, whom
Antiochus figured which S. Cyprian teaches in his book of Exhortation to
Martyrdom cap. 11. and S. Hierome upon the 11. and 12. of Daniel. But
Antiochus was a certain and particular person. Therefore Antichrist must be
also one certain person.

The fifth and last place is Apoc. 13. and. 17. where S. Irenaeus lib. 5.
affirms, that Antichrist is spoken of, and it is plain by reason of the
likeness of Daniels and S. John's words: for both of them make mention of ten
Kings which shall be in the world when Antichrist shall come, and both of them
foretell, that Antichrists Kingdom shall endure three years and a half etc.
As therefore Daniel speaks of one determinate King, so also does S. John in
the Apocalypse.

The same is proved out of the Fathers, who with common corporally. Secondly
that Antichrist shall not reign more then three years and a half, and
consequently they teach, that Antichrist shall be only one man. See S. Irenaeus
lib. 5. toward the end, Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechesi 15. S. Chrysostom in
2 Thessalonians. 2. Theodoret in cap. 7. Dan. Lactant. in epit. divine. Inst. cap. 11.
S. Ambrose in cap. 21. Luc. S. Hierome in cap. 7. Dan. and q. 11. ad Algasians.
S. Augustine lib. 20. de Ciuitate Dei, in many Chapters, and upon the 9.
Psalm. S. Gregory lib. 32. Moral. cap. 12. S. Damascen lib. 4. cap. 28. and S.
Hyppolitus Martyr in his Oration of the Consumation, or end of the world.

To the first argument of Beza I answer, that in the Simon Magus, who called
himself Christ, and in Nero, who first began to impugn the Church; and yet
notwithstanding in his own person he shall not come, but in the end of the
world. Wherefore the spiritual persecution of Simon Magus, and the temporal
of Nero, is called the mystery of iniquity, because they were signs and
figures of Antichrists persecution.

That this is the true explication of the place of S. Paul, S. Paul mentions,
understand either Nero's persecution, as S. Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom upon
this place, and S. Hierom quaest. 11. ad Algasiam, or the Heretics, who do
deceive secretly, as Theodoretus and Sedulius upon this place, and S. Augustine
lib. 20. de ciuitate Dei cap. 19.

Secondly by a reason taken from the adversaries confession. of the Bishop of
Rome. If therefore Antichrist so properly called was borne in the Apostles time,
it does follow that S. Peter and S. Paul were properly called Antichrists,
although secret, and that Nero or Simon Magus were the true Christ. For it is
well known, that in the Apostles time, there were no other Bishops of Rome,
but S. Peter and S. Paul. For Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 3. does plainly affirm,
that the Sea of Rome was founded by S. Peter and S. Paul, and that they were
the first Bishops there, which all the ancient Fathers, which I cited before,
do also testify. It is also well known that both Simon Magus and Nero did
contend with S. Peter and S. Paul Wherefore if the Adversaries mislike, that S.
Peter and S. Paul were Antichrists, and Simon and Nero the true Christ, they
are forced to confess, that in the Apostles time Antichrist was not come in
himself, but only in a certain Type of his: by which means Beza's
consequence with which he concluded, that Antichrist cannot be one man, unless
we could give him one man who should live from the Apostles time to the end of
the world, is showed to be ridiculous.

To confirm this I say, that S. John does speak in that Elias, Matthew. 17.
Elias indeed shall come, and restore all things, and I say unto you, that Elias
is already come, and they did not know him: that is, Elias in his own person
shall come, but Elias in his like is come already, to wit, in S. John Baptist.

To the second Argument. First it is denied, that always Daniel by particular
beasts, does understand several Kingdoms: for by one beast he does sometimes
signify one Kingdom, as in the 7. Chap. where by the Lion he understands the
Kingdom of the Assyrians, by the Bear the Kingdom of the Persians, by the
Leopard the Kingdom of the Grecians, by the other beast unnamed the Kingdom
of the Romans. Sometimes one King, as in the 8. Chap. where by the Ram he does
understand Darius the last King of the Persians, by the Goat Alexander the
Great.

Secondly I deny the consequence of his argument: for S. Paul by the man of
sin, does not understand any of the four beasts described by Daniel, but he
understands that little horn, which as Daniel writes prevailed against the
ten horns of the fourth beast, that is, that one King, who from a little
beginning did so increase, that he subdued all the other Kings unto him.

To the last Argument I answer many ways, that it may be understood how
impudently Calvin wrote, that Rome is Antichrist.

First by the Apostasy in S. Paul, most rightly Antichrist S. Chrysostom,
Theodoretus, Theophilactus, and Oecumenius, and besides S. Augustine lib. 20.
de ciuit. Dei cap. 19. and Antichrist is called the Apostasy, both by the
figure called Metonymia, because he shall be the cause, that many forsake God:
and also by a certain excellency, for he shall be such a notable Apostata, that
he may be called the Apostasy it self.

Secondly by the Apostasy, may be taken the defection, Latins do expound, as S.
Ambrose, Sedulius, and Primasius. For as in the Chapter following we will
demonstrate that Antichrist shall not come, before the Roman Empire does wholly
perish.

Thirdly if we admit, that by the Apostasy is meant the defectio^ or failing
from the true Faith and religion of Christ S. Paul speaks of the Apostasy of
many ages, for he might speak of some very great and singular apostasy, which
shall only be in that very short time, in which Antichrist shall reign, and so
S. Augustine in the place before cited, that is l. 20. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 19.
writes, that this place was understood of many Ancients, who probably did
teach, that Antichrist appearing, all Heretics or faygned Christians should
wholly come to him, and by that means there would be at that time a very great
Apostasy, such as never had been before.

Fourthly, if we grant to Calvin, that S. Paul speaks of another Apostasy of
many ages, yet he shall get nothing. and that it is made in diverse places,
under diverse Kings, and upon diverse occasions, as now we see that Africa is
failed, or revolted to Mahomet, a great part of Asia to Nestorius and ^^^^^hes,
and other Provinces to other Sects.

Fifthly and lastly, if we should grant to Calvin, that the Catholics or the
Lutherans? Though they say, that we are those, which have failed,
notwithstanding they have not yet proved it, nor has it been declared by any
common Judge. And truly we can far more easily prove, that the Lutherans are
those, who have failed, then they prove, that the Catholics have failed. For
that they have failed from the Church, in which they were before, they
themselves do not deny. For to let pass the rest, Erasmus Sarcerius upon that
of the 2. Thessal. 2. Then the wicked one shall be revealed, does plainly
confess, that almost all the predecessors of the Lutherans, and he also did
sometimes obey the Bishop of Rome, therefore they have failed from the Church,
and Religion of their predecessors. But that we have failed from any Church,
neither have they demonstrated hitherto, neither will they ever be able to
demonstrate. Wherefore when they read in S. Paul, Unless the revolt or Apostasy
be come, and the wicked one revealed etc. and think that they are departed
from the Church, in which they were, and that we do persevere always in the same
ordinances, it is marvel, if at least they do not fear, least S. Paul spoke
of them.

Out of this second head, we have the second argument, to prove that the Pope
is not Antichrist. For if Antichrist

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downam denies, that Antichrist shall be one particular person, and
to Bellarmins first place of Scripture he answers, that in that place of S.
John, Christ speaks indefinitely of any false teacher, which should come to
the Jews Joan. 5.
in his own name, that is not sent of God. Secondly he speaks also
conditionally, If another come. Thirdly he speaks of those Jews, to whom he
speaks, and not of those Jews, which shall be in the end of the world. In
which exposition of his, and especially in the first and third point, he is
contrary to Bellarmine. Let us see therefore, how he answers to Bellarmines
reasons. First to the Fathers he says, that none of them has that word vno,
as though it were not sufficient, that they have others equivalent, and yet S.
Augustine lib. 2. contra Aduersar. legis cap. 12. expressly distinguishes the
chief Antichrist from others, in that he is vn^^ mayor ceteris, and they
multi. And S. Hierom in Dan. 7. calls him, vnum de hominibus. Secondly he
says, that the Fathers understand that place also of S. Matthew. 24. v. 24.
Matthew. 24.
where our Savior speaks in the plural number of Antichrist: as though the
chief and proper Antichrist may not be one man, because there will be others
like unto him, though far inferior in malice. Wherefore when our Savior
speaks generally of all false Prophets, no doubt, he excludes not the
chiefest of them, but includes him in the first place, so that whatsoever is
common to all, does most fitly agree to him: and therefore it is noe marvel
though the Fathers take it, as spoken principally of him. But on the other side
when our Savior makes mention only of one, he is not to be understood of all.
And this is the difference between the Fathers exposition, and M. Downams,
that they observe the first and he the second, and therefore it is no marvel
though they do not agree. Neither is it against the Fathers, that the Jews
have received more then one; but it is against M. Downam, that they have not
received all that came: besides, that it is hard to show, that so many of the
Jews received any one false Prophet, as those were that received the true
Christ; whereas our Savior plainly affirms, that they shall generally
receive him, of who^ he speaks. Wherefore thirdly, he tells the Fathers
roundly, that they had no reason to restrain those words Downam rejects the
Fathers.
unto Antichrist alone, and against them all opposes Nonius a Poet, in his
paraphrase, who expounds it thus: (...) etc. but if any other come: As though
this Poets authority were equal to all the Fathers, or ((...)) might not
signify aliquu, or quida^, as well as ^ll^^, or quis, some, or acertayne, as well
as any, especially in a Poet, who is sometime constrained to strain the sense,
to make up his verse. Lastly he adds, if these answers of his will not
suffice, the^ yet he will not yield, except he see first proved, that
whatsoever those Fathers wrote concerning Antichrist, is true. But I hope he
will be better advised, and think it sufficient, that whatsoever our Savior
says of Antichrist is true, and that in understanding his meaning, we must
rather believe such learned men as have the authority of the Fathers on their
side, the^ those that trust only to their own wits, having neither more
learning nor judgment, then the other. For I persuade my self, that M. Downam
will not prefer himself before Bellarmine in either.

2. To the first confirmation he answers, that when is taken definitely, as
Io. 18. 16. and 20. 2. 3. 4. then it is true; but where it is used
indefinitely, as Job 31. 8. 1. Cor. 3. 10. and in this place, then it is not.
And by his citing of the Greek word in the first sense, with an article, and
in the second without, it Downam mistaketh Bellarmine.
should seem, he would have that to be the sign, in whether sense it is to be
taken. But all this discourse proceeds from want of understanding Bellarmines
confirmation; for he goes not about to prove, that our Saniour speaks of the
chief and proper Antichrist, but this supposed, gathers that he shallbe one
particular man, for that he opposes him as one person, to himself, who was
one particular person also. To which M. Downam answers not, but only denies
the supposition, as though Bellarmine had gone about to prove that with this
confirmation: neither does that rule of the greek article hold always,
especially in M. Downams sense and opinion, as we shall see a little after. To
the second confirmation, he denies, that Christ foretell leth, that Antichrist
shall be received of the Jews for their Messiah. First because his speech is
conditional, and only shows them, what in respect of their present
disposition, they were ready to do. As though this were not enough for
Bellarmines confirmation: for it is certain they would not have received him
as their Messiah, if he were not a particular man, which is all that Bellarmine
intends to prove Now, besides in the Scripture, the word (if) sometime
signifies (when) which the Fathers judge also (If) for (when) Esaias. 4. 4. Joan
14. 3.
to be in this place. Secondly M. Downam says, that the word alius, is
indefinite. But that is only his own interpretation against the Fathers.
Thirdly he says, that our Savior did not say, that they would receive him for
their Messiah, but so he is to be understood. For that they were to receive
him, as they were bound, and refused to receive our Savior, for of this he
speaks. Fourthly he says, that the Jews, to whom, and of whom our Savior
speaks, shall not be aline at the coming of the great Antichrist, according
to the opinion of the Papists themselves. But M. Downam should have remembered,
that not a whole leaf before, he himself said, that Bellarmine, and the rest
of the Papists understand Christ to speak of those Jews, which shall be in the
end of the world. To the third Confirmation, first M. Downam says, that it
would prove Antichrist to be us false Prophet: which is true, if he speak of
the infeour sort of false Prophets. After he gives another exposition that he
shall come unsent of God, or as Lyra says, that he shall not have testimonies
from God, as Christ had: neither of which are contrary to Bellarmines
exposition, but rather both included in it. But besides the negative, he shall
also have the affirmatine, as both our Savior and S. Paul says, against whom
M. Downams argument concludes not, which is thus: The Jews expect their
Messiah from God, and consequently, he shall profess himself to be sent from
God; for what knows M. Downam whether he will say, that he is their God
himself, not sent by any other person, for that he will deny the Trinity: or
though at the first he should deal otherwise, it is certain, that at length,
he will extol himself above all Gods, as S. Paul says, and consequently then
he will profess himself to come in his own name, for that he acknowledges
no Superior or equal in whose name he should come. To the fourth Confirmation
he answers, that because our Savior speaks conditionally and
indefinitelie, there is not so much as any show of reason in it. But Bellarmine
proved, that our Savior spoke definitely of the chief and proper Antichrist,
and though he speaks conditionally, his confirmation is in force, for that
hinders not the particularity of him, whom he speaks of.

3. About the second place, M. Downa^ takes occasion to show 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which both S. Epiphanius and Bellarmine knew as well as himsel^e.

4. But when he comes to that part of S. Epiphanius his observation which
makes to the purpose, he has little When the Greek article signifies a
particular thing.
to say against either of them both. For S. Epiphanius his rule, as M. Downa^
interprets it, is this: Where the article is added unto some definite and
notable thing, there is always confirmation by the article. which confirmation
he will have to be, that the word is not to be understood indefinitly or
indifferently of any. Which interpretation cannot stand with S. Epiphanius his
words, which do suppose, that there is no doubt, but that the word does
signify of it self, some definite, and notable thing, and yet the article is
added to add some other confirmation, which can be only the particularity, as
Bellarmine concludes. So that Epiphanius and Bellarmine agree very well, and
Doctor Downam cannot otherwise answer Bellarmines argument, but by impugning
S. Epiphanius his rule, which he does by deniyng two of his examples, for the
other was too evident; and those two he first refuteth by our English phrases,
in which we will easily grant that M. Downam has more skill then S.
Epiphanius or Bellarmine, so that he will grant us. that they have more skill
then he in Greek, out of which Bellarmines argument is drawn. Secondly he
alleges 2. Tim. 2. 17. (...), the man of God, and Luke 11. 24. (...), the
unclean spirit, but these are from the purpose since that neither place
speaks of the most eminent man of God, nor of the most eminent unclean
spirit, which is necessary for S. Epiphanius his rule, who only speaks of
(...), which M. Downam translateth not well in the positive degree, and cannot
deny the rule it self, which is confirmed by all the examples which he
brings of Apostle, Poet, Orator, and Wise Man, and the same is evident of
King, Man etc. when we only speak of the most eminent King, Man etc. as S.
Paul does here of the most eminent Antichrist. Now as for the second part of S.
Epiphanius his rule, which M. Downam translateth thus; but without the article,
it is to be taken of any one indefinitly, that is indeterminately, we grant it
him, when it is the name of some definite and most notable thing, of which S.
Epiphanius speaks, but when it is only an Adjective, or a Pronowne, as (...)
is, the^ it is out of S. Epiphanius his rule, especially when by some other
circumstances, it is sufficiently declared, that some particular person or
thing is meant, as it happens in our case.

5. Concerning the third place, it pleases M. Downam to Bellarmine, saying,
that he thought the argument drawn from the article to good to go for one,
and so divided it 1. John 2.
into two. And yet he knew well enough that Bellarmine did not draw his
argument from the article, but from places of Scripture, or rather brings
many places of Scripture, to make one argument. But in good earnest I marvel,
why M. Downam troubles himself so much with an argument already answered in
the former: for first he brings forth 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. (...), he that
hinders, which signifies the state and succession of the Roman Emperors. As
though this did signify the most notable Emperor, which is necessary for to
verify S. Ephiphanius his rule. After this, he alleges Matthew. 1. 16. 18.
(...) upon this rock, by which he says, the Papists understand the whole
succession of Popes, and yet there is not only the article, but also the
pronowne demonstratiue. But M. Downam should have considered, that the Papists
do not otherwise understand the place of the whole succession of Popes, then by
a necessary consequence, that whatsoever is given to one Pope, is given to all,
and so this speech being used to S. Peter, as Pope, is by consequence to be
understood and verifyed of all the rest. After this, he comes back again to
2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. which he had handled so largely before, and says, that some
Downam mistaketh Bellarmine and S. Augustine.
do understand the Man of Syn, of the whole multitude of those who toyne with
Antichrist, and adds, that Augustine recites this opinion, and is so far
from misliking it, that Bellarmine alleges it as Augustines. At which
oversight of his I much marvel. For neither do those Authors speak of the
Man of sin, but of the Apostasy or revolt: nor does Bellarmine attribute the
opinion to S. Augustine, as M. Downam or any other may easily see, if it please
them to look upon the place in this Chapter,. XXIII. yet M. Downam goes on
with his examples of the Woman, and the Harlot out of the Apoc. 12. 6. and 17.
1. 18. by which are signified the Church of Christ, and the City or Church of
Antichrist. And yet he cannot choose but know, that first they signify those
women, which were showed to S. John in the form of particular Women: and
besides that which is signified by the women, is also as particular, as the
nature of those things do permit, the Church of Christ in that time, of which
S. John speaks, and the material City of Rome, which is a particular
City.

6. At length he comes to the place which Bellarmine cites, and he makes
the Apostle to reason thus: When the 1. Joan. ^. Downam corrupts the text of
Scripture.
Antichrist is come, it is the last hour, now Antichrists are come: therefore
now is the last hour. Where I marvel how he durst be so bold with the holy
Scripture, as to change (comes) into (is come) If he says that S. John might
not have 4. termini.
terms in his argument, he should rather have said, that S. John did not argue
at least in form, but rather that he did use a more brief and compendious
manner of reasoning, by putting down two arguments, almost in two lines, as
indeed he does. For if M. Downam will needs bring it into form, it is thus:
When the great Antichrist comes, it is the last hour. But now he comes.
Ergo etc. the minor which might seem obscure he proves thus: The great
Antichrist is then said to come, when many are become Antichrists. But we see
many such now. Ergo etc. And then he repeateth his former conclusion: Therefore
it is the last hour. After this, M. Downam goes to the 22. v. where S. John
says: This is the Antichrist, (...), which denies the Father and the Son.
Out of which there can no more be gathered, then that Antichrist shall deny
both the Father and the Son: for S. John speaks not generally of every
one, that denies Jesus to 1. John 4. 5.
be Christ, as M. Downam affirms. Likewise Cap. 4. 5. S. John only affirms,
that it is the spirit of Antichrist to deny Christ, and that he was to come in
himself, and was then in the world in his members: and the like he repeateth
Epist. 2. v. 7. that all those which denied Christ to be come, were 2. John 7.
members of the chief Seducer and Antichrist, which was to come after, and
teach that doctrine more then any of the former. The rest which M. Downam has
in this place, be the objections which Bellarmine makes, and solueth, as we
shall see not long after.

7. To the fourth place M. Downam answers, that Daniel speaks not of
Antichrist at all, which he proves by the authority of the learned of our
times, but names not any: perhaps because Dan. 7. 11. and 12.
he was ashamed to oppose them to those, which Cardinal Bellarmine cited,
especially to his good Masters Calwin. the Magdclurgenses, and Beza. Afterward
he proves the same Downam peruerteth Daniel egregiously.
with reason, for that Daniel describes him, whom M. Downam will have to be
Antiochus only as the tenth, and Cardinal Bellarmine makes him the cleauenth,
as if it were a beast of cleauen horns: which truly is a strange bouldnes in
M. Downam, the words of Daniel being so clear: for having said Cap. 7. v. 7.
that the fourth beast had ten horns, he forth with added ^. 8. Consideraham
cornua, and ce^^ cor^u aliud par^^ulum orium est de medio eorum etc. I did
consider the horns (no doubt the ten, which he had said that the beast had)
and behold another little horn rose up in the mydst of the^, so that he
distinguishes it from the other ten by three notes. 1. calling it another. 2.
a little one, no doubt in respect of the other ten: and 3. that it rose up in
the midst of them, signifying that they appeared before this: and that it was
not the tenth may also be gathered, by that it arose in the midst, and not in
the same place, as it should have done, if it had signified one of the ten
Kings of the Seleucida and Lagidae in Syria and Egypt, as M. Downam would have
it. Where we may also note that these 10. Kings were all of distinct Provinces,
and at one time, for otherwise this last horn could not have risen in the
midst of them. And again v. 20. he that expounded the vision to Daniel says
thus; Et de cornibus december, quae habebat in capite, and de alio quod ortu^
fuerat etc. And of the ten horns, which he had on his head, and of the other
which arose etc. ca^ any thing be more plain, the^ that the other which arose
was none of the ten? But v. 24. more plainly, porro cornua december ipsius regni
december Reges eru^t. and alius consurget post eos, and ipse potentior erit
priorib^^, etc. Moreover the ten horns of his kingdom, shall be ten Kings, and
another shall arise after them, and he shall be more potent the^ the former etc.
Now what a strange man is M. Downam to say, that he is the tenth. And by this
it is easy to gather how true his exposition is in the rest, as that those 10.
Kings ruled succeffiuelie ever the Jews, and that 6. for the most part were
dead before the 10. was borne, of which we shall have Chap. 16.
occasion to speak hereafter. Now it is sufficient to note, that Bellarmine
adds that of the subuing seven, out of the 12. 23. and 17. of the Apocalypse,
together with the 7. of Daniel, for in all those places there is mention made
of the 10. horns, but with this difference, that in the 12. chap. of Apoc. 3.
v. there be together with the 10. horns, 7. heads, with 7. diadems, and in
the 13. there be also 7. heads, and upon the horns 10. diadems; of which
difference in the diadems, that in the former place they be but 7. and in the
latter ten, the reason is, for that Antichrist shall kill three Kings, and so
there shall only 7. remain. But of this we shall likewise have occasion to
speak more hereafter. Now therefore, let us go forward with M. Downam who
says, that if Antiochus be Chap. 16.
spoken of, and Antichrist be by him figured, it follows not, that Antichrist
shall be a particular man, as Antiochus was, for that the likeness does not hold
in all things, but only in those in respect whereof the type is a figure, as
the high Priest of the Jews was a figure of Christ, and yet they were many.
Melchrsedeth was (as Papists say) a figure of their Priests, and yet was but
one. Iosuah, David and Solomon types of Christ, and yet not like him in all. As
though Bellarmine said, that Antichrist shall be like Antiochus in all things,
or in any other thing, then that which is set down in the Scripture, and
confirmed again in the new Testament, and so understood by the Fathers, as in
his victories, and such other circumstances, that cannot agree to many, but
only to one particular man as Antiochus was, and Antichrist shall be.

8. To the 5. place M. Downam answers, that S. John and Daniel speak of
diverse matters. For confirmation whereof he denies again the 11. horn in
Daniel, adding this proof, Apoc. 13. 17.
that otherwise the 4. beast, were abeast of 11. horns. To which it is easy
to answer, that before that little horn arose, that beast is described with
10. horns, and after he had but 7. left, for three of them were pulled up by
this little horn, and by See cap. 1^
this all the difference he puts betwixt the 10. Kings in Daniel and S.
John is overthrown. After he comes to the time of the persecution of
Antiochus and Antichrist, and for the former he grants, that it endured only
from the 15. day of the month Casleu, in the 145. year of the Kingdom of the
Seleucidae 1. Macah. 1. 57. unto the 25. of the month Casleu, in the year
148. 1. Macab. 4. 52. which make 3. years and ten days, which is all that
Daniel assigned by a time, and times, and parcel of a time. Where he makes
bold with Daniel, changing half a time unto a parcel of a time: for the
Prophet says plainly Downam corrupts the text of Daniel Dan 7. 12.
both cap. 7. v. 25. vsque ad tempus, and tempora, and di^^diunt temporis, and
again cap. 12. v. 7. he says, that the Angel swore by him that lives for
ever, quia in tempus and tempora, and dimidium temporis, and after he counts
it also by days, dies mill duceuts ^^naginta, and yet all this will not keep
M. Downam from taking away so much as he thinks necessary, for to make his
interpretation good. But when he comes to the Apocalypse, See cap. 8.
there he will not have the number to be litterallie understood, because it
made too much against him, who will have Antichrists reign to endure many
hundred years, and not only 42. months, as S. Io. affirms cap. 13. v. 5.
which cap. 12. v. 6. he counts also by days 12^0. and v. 14. with the very
same words of Daniel, a time, and times, and half a time: and v 12. a little
time, which is the short time he also speaks of cap. 17. v. 10. Lastly he
comes to the Fathers, Downam rejects the Fathers.
saying, that no sound argument can be drawn from it: and yet he would make a
shift to seem to say something, repeating that which he had said before, that
the Fathers do not expressly say, that he shall be but one, and then, that some
of them do expound Matthew. 24. (where our Savior speaks in the plural
number) of Antichrist. To both which I have already answered, that the Fathers
use other words equivalent, and the place of S. Matthew. is chiefly to be
understood of the chief and proper Antichrist. Finally he would feign shift of
those two proprieties of Antichrist, which Cardinal Bellarmine aleadgeth out
of the Fathers, in his proof: and to the first, though faintly he affirms,
that it might all be said of the whole succession of Popes; but he saw himself
how false that was and therefore he would have willingly denied the assertion of
the Fathers, and yet he durst not adventure upon that neither, saying, that he
will not thereof dispute. Where it is pitiful to see how poor M. Downam was
met withal on every side, and remained so perplexed, that he could not tell
which way to turn himself. But when he comes to the second propriety, he
says, that he will take heed, how he comes any more into such perplexity,
and so he thinks better to crave pardon for this time, and refer it till
another meeting, See cap. ^.
at which you shall hear what he will be able to say for himself. In the
mean time, he will try his cunning, whether it will serve him to reach
Cardinal Bellarmine one little veny at the least, since he has been soundly
thwaked and cudgelled by him, and at last made to run out of the battle with
a broken head; and so he lays down his defensive weapons, and betaketh
himself to the offensive, bringing the arguments which Bellarmine alleges
out of other Heretics, as though they were his own.

9. And yet he would feign seem to add something to the Conference betwixt Paul
and John, and in the margent cites 3. places out of S. John's Epistles, and
after puts the argument 1. John 4. 3. 2. Io. 7. 1. Io. 2. 18.
in form, but in substance adds nothing at all, but rather weakeneth it much
by a new interpretation of his own, how our Savior shall kill Antichrist with
the spirit of his mouth, that is (says he) with the Ministry of the word: and
so it shall Downam weakneth his fellows argument.
not be necessary to expect our Saviors coming to kill him, for that M
Downam, and his fellow Ministers of the Word, will take the matter upon
themselves, But then I ask M. Downam, how he knows that Antichrist shall
continue to the end of the world, in which the force of the Argument consists?

10. After this, he begins to reply to Cardinal Bellarmines he cannot deny
either the proposition or the assumption, and that he only distinguishes of
the former part of the assumption: which I cannot think that M. Downam said
for any disgrace to the solution; for if there be any fault in that kind of
answering, it will redound to the disputer, who commits a vice in arguing
which is called Equivocation, and the answerer that finds it out, is worthy
of commendation. But M. Downam goes about to overthrow the distinction, with
impugning first the explication, which Bellarmine uses by the similitude of
Christ's coming, which it pleases M. Downam to call his first proof, and to
note out of Plato, that it is a most slippery argument. But neither Plato nor
he will deny, but that it is a good kind of explication, which is all that
Bellarmine used it for, as M. Downam might have easily considered, seeing
Bellarmine begin to prove in two sorts straight Downam takes Bellarmines
explication, and answer for his argument.
after. But you must give one, that has an ill cause in hand leave to seek to
help himself by all the tricks, and fetches he can invent, for it was not
without a further purpose, that M. Downam would needs have Bellarmine prove,
and not answer in this similitude, if you consider his words. In which
similitude (says he) there is no proportion, unless that which is in question
be taken for granted, namely that Antichrist is but one particular person, as
Christ is. So that there is proportion in it, if Antichrist may be said to be a
particular person, which will be always lawful for Bellarmine, or any other
defendant to affirm, till his Adversary drive him from that assertion by some
forcible argument, and likewise to explicate in what sense he says so, by some
example, which his Adversaries themselves cannot deny. Wherefore M. Downam
comes to the protasis, or proposition of the similitude, and says plainly,
that it is untrue: which he proves first, for that the Holy Ghost makes a
kind of opposition betwixt Gods sending of the Prophets, and the coming of
Christ. As though all kind of opposition did make that proposition untrue, or
rather some kind of opposition were not necessary to make it true, as of the
figure, and that which is prefigured, the forerunner and he that is forerunner,
the member and the head. Secondly for that the Prophets or Patriarchs are not
any where called the forerunners of Christ, but only S. John Baptist, for that
he went a little before. So that M. Downam grants, that he who goes a little
before, may well be Downams absurd folly.
said to go before, but he that goes far before, may not: which is a strange
affirmation, except he means to make it good by affirming, that S. John
Baptist did prepare Cgrists way, because he only lived in Christ's time, and
pointed him out with his finger, which I am sure M. Downam will not say, and
consequently upon better deliberation he will grant, that Christ came in the
Patriarchs and Prophets as well as in S. John Baptist, since that they went
before as well as he, and prepared also the way for Christ's coming: and there
is as much opposition made betwixt S. John Baptist and our Savior, as betwixt
him and the Patriarchs or Prophets. After this, he makes an idle objection of
his own, and answers it as slightly, both which I leave also to himself to
consider. Lastly he comes to the reddition or application, which he says is
contradictory to 1. Io. 4. 3. 2. Io. 7. who says, that Antichrist with the
article prefixed, and whom they heard was to come, was already come: which you
heard Bellarmine grant with a distinction, not in his own person, but in his
forerunners, and now M. Downam proves it very substantially, by repeating the
former argument for want of another, and so he stands at a non plus, only he
confirms it by the argument, which S. John makes 1. Io. 2. 18. which I have
put Nu. 6.
down and confuted in the answer to the third place of Scripture, whither I
remit the Reader, not to weary him with so many idle repetitions of the same
thing, as M. Downam makes, which also I mean (God willing) to observe
hereafter.

11. To the first proof of Bellarmines answer, he rejects S. Ambrose,
Downam rejects the Fathers.
S. Chrysostom, and S. Hierome, by his own absolute authority. For when he
began to think how he might deceive some of the simple sort, by making a show
that the Pope is Antichrist, he did put this down for a chief Principle, that
Antichrist should be no open, but a disguised enemy, and a pretended Christian:
and this he will defend against all the Fathers, yea against the Apostles, and
Christ himself, though with this difference, that against the Fathers, who
without all doubt, were the members of Christ, he opposes himself
manifestly: but against Christ and his Apostles only covertly, by false
expositions of his own head, with which he conuinceth, that he is only a
member of that great Antichrist, and not the great Antichrist himself. But I
hope well, that both M. Downam himself and all that follow him, or join with
him against those ancient Fathers the true members of Christ, will at length
join with them against those disguised enemies and pretended Christians, of
which number, they themselves are for the present. And in the mean time, till
they amend themselves, they must give us leave to think with the holy Fathers,
that both Antichrists members, as also himself have been, and shall be not only
disguised, but also open enemies of Christ, as you see those holy Fathers
affirm of Nero and the other of the Heretics, who deceive secretly, which
both M. Downam, and we also Antichrists members sometimes open enemies to
Christ.
admit. And yet we may note, that this secrecy of the Heretics is not so
great, but that many times it contains manifest opposition against Christ, as
we see in Simon Magus, who named himself Christ, and in Montanus who would
needs be the Holy Ghost. And if M. Downam had rather have new examples he may
remember George David, and M. Hacke^ with his two Prophets. But now I would
ask M. Downam, what it makes against Bellarmine, whether the members and
forerunners of Antichrist be disguised or open enemies, so that it be granted,
that then there were some such, and yet the great Antichrist was not yet come,
as M Downam himself confesses, that the Antichrist (...) was not reveled
until 606. years after; so that till then Antichrist was come only after a
sort, that is (as after he explicateth) in some of his members, which is all
that Belarmine pretended. But perhaps M Downam will say, that he knew well
enough what he said when he only affirmed that Antichrist (...) was not then
revealed, though be were come. But then I would ask him how he was otherwise
come, then in the Heretics his members, which is that which Bellarmine
answers. And if he ca^ show us no other manner, then we may see how easy a
matter it is to understand, that Antichrist might be so said to be come in S.
Paul's and S. John's time, and yet that the chief and proper Antichrist, or
(...) is not yet come in person, but shall be one man in the end of the world.

12. To the second proof. First M. Downam answers, that it cannot be proved
out of Scripture, or by any sound argument, that Downam rejects all ancient
writers.
Pete^ and Paul were Bishops of Rome. For you must vnersta^d that the authority
of S. Irenam, or of all ancient writers is of no force at all with M. Downam:
and besid^s, he knows well enough, that S. Paul is said to have been in Rome
in the Scripture, and S. Peter also, if he will stand to his own exposition of
the would Babylon; and supposing they were there, I hope he will as soon grant
them the Bishopric, as any other. But to let this pass, M. Downam will be
twyce advised before he grant, that the Bishop of Rome at that time (whosoever
he was) was Antichrist, which is as much as Bellarmine would have denied at
this present, and M. Downam does him that courtesy; yea and to agree with him in
the exposition of S. Paul and S. John. For thus he writes. When we say, that
Antichrist was come in the Apostles time, we speak of the body of Antichrist
with S. John: when we say that Antichrist has his seat in Rome, we speak of
the head of this body: so that now you see here be distinct persons, part of
which were come, and part not come in S. John's time. But M. Downam goes about
to deceive the Reader by telling him a long tale of the Pope, without Downam
speaks from the purpose.
any proof, and from the purpose. But he must be put in mind to answer
Cathegorice, whether Antichrist, that S. Paul and S. Ihon says was come in
their time, were the same, that was to have his seat in Rome or not? If he
says yes, then he must also grant, that S. Peter and S. Paul, or whosoever
had the seat at that time was Antichrist. If he will stick to his noe; then it
is plain, that there is no consequence in Beza^ argument: Some manner of
Antichrist was come in the Apostles time: Ergo no other, that shall be only one
man can come after, unless he were alive at that time. Yet for all this M.
Downam makes the best shift he can, saying, that in Bellarmines argument there
is no consequence, vulesthis be taken for granted, that Antichrist is but one
man, which is the question; and after he frames arguments as it pleases him.
But M. Downam should have considered, that Bellarmine supposed not, that
Antichrist was but one man, neither was it much material in this place, if we
speak only of the chief and proper Antichrist, whom Bellarmine only
affirms to be one: but he supposes that which M. Downam and his Master Beza
put in their probation, if they will conclude any thing, that Antichrist of
whom S. John speaks is the same, that is to have his seat at Rome, for then
it follows very well, that he in person had his seat in Rome: in the
Apostles time, and not only in the heretics his members. For if this second
were enough, it were not necessary, that he himself should bealiue at that
time, and consequently he might well enough be shine at the end of the world,
and yet be no very old man neither; for that it is uncertain, when he was to
be borne. For certain it is, that he needed not to be in S. Paul's and S. John's
time, if they speak not of him in person, but only of some of his members,
which for ought S. Paul and S. John say, or M. Downam can prove, might be in
the world before he himself came in person, not only many an hundredth year,
which M. Downam grants of 600. but also many thousands.

13. Lastly M. Downam comes to Bellarmines answer Elias shall come in
person, before the second coming Downam censureth the Fathers.
of Christ, for a Jewish fable: and yet does he not so much as go about to
prove with any argument, that it shall not be so, but only confirms, that S.
John Baptist was called Elias, and gives the reason why he was so called, in
which there is no controversy. And at least wise he might have vouchsafed, to
have told us out of his high learning, what our Savior meant in that place
which Bellarmine cites, by saying, that Elias indeed shall come, for this
cannot be understood of S. John Baptist, who as our Savior affirms in the
same place, See Chap. 6.
was already come: wherefore till M. Downam brings some better proofs, I
take it, any wise man will not only suppose as he gives him leave to do, but
also hold for certain, that Elias shall come in person, though he be said to
have come Elias shall come in person.
in S. John Baptist: for that he had a spirit like unto his, and consequently
that it is not necessary, that there shall come no other Antichrist in person,
at the end of the world, because S. John says, that he was come in his time in
some of his members, whose spirit was like his: for Bellarmine disputes not
now, but answers by producing another place of Scripture like unto that which
is objected, which cannot be denied to be a good manner of answering. But M.
Downam brings forth a place of Scripture, where David is promised to come
after he was dead, and yet it is not understood Ezech. 34.
of King David, but of Christ: and therefore neither is Elias to come again.
But M. Downam will easily see, if it pleases him to put this argument in form
(in which he seems to take particular delight) that one may well answer him,
nego consequentiam, and withal he may note, how that name David is sometime
taken properly, and sometime for a distinct person which is figured by the
former, which is somewhat harder, then that the type should take the name of
the chief and principal in that kind, which it figureth: and as it were noe
good argument to say, David shall come, therefore he is not come, for there be
two to whom the name of David agrees; so likewise the argument which we have
been discussing all this while, concludes not, since it is only thus:
Antichrist is already come, therefore he shall not come in the end of the
world, for that there be more then one Antichrist, and the chiefest is not come
any otherwise yet then in his members.

14. Concerning Bezas second reason M. Downam adds Damel also the 11. and
besides the 13. and 17. Apoc. and says that in all these places under the name
and figure of a beast is not described one singular thing or person, but a
whole state or succession, and in the assumption instead of 2 Thessalonians 2. he
puts down Apoc. 13. where he says, Antichrist is described under the name
and figure of a beast: then he proves the proposition by induction out of the
7. and 8 of Daniel and Apoc. 13. so that he has made a Downam cannot defend
Beza.
new argument of his own, for that belike he could not save his M. Beza from
absurdities, if he should have followed his Argument against Bellarmines
answer, and yet he puts down Bellarmines answer, as though it had been
given to this new Argument, which he has coined himself. In Downam applies
Bellarmines answer to a wrong argument. Dan. 8.
which he shows less upright dealing then Bellarmine does, with the
Scriptures, by saying, that in the 8. Chap. of Daniel the Ram and the Goat
signify but two several Kings, which M. Downam thinks to be against the
Scripture, for that in the 20. v. where the vision is expounded, there is in
Hebrew, the word Kings, in the plural number, and for that afterward Daniel
adds of the Goat, that the great horn which was betwixt his eyes is the
first King namely Alexander, and consequently the Goat, whose horn this was,
could not be the same Alexander. For the first part of which objection M.
Downam must be content, that we attribute as much to S. Hierome both in skill in
the Hebrew tongue, and in Scripture, as to himself, and S. Hierome translateth
the Hebrew word in the singular number, Rex Medorum est, atque Persarum: so
that either he thought that the plural number was put for the singular, as it
is usual in Scripture, or else in the Hebrew text in his time, it was also in
the singular number: and the first reason has the more probability in this
place, for that Darius was in effect two Kings, since he had two Kingdoms,
which is also signified by the two horns, which the Ram had. And this is so
much the more plain for that it is manifest, that he who was overthrown by
Alexander was no other then Darius one King, as we read in 1. Machab. 1. and
Iustine lib. 11. and Plin. lib. 10. cap. 7. do also testify. Now for the
second part, M. Downam might easily see, that both the Goat, and the horn
being called a King in the same 21. v. either do both signify Alexander, or
else if the one do signify the King, and the other the Kingdom, he must give
us some reason, why rather the former should be taken for the kingdom, then
the latter, especially since we see in the same Chapter, that by the two horns
of the Ram, are signified his two Kingdoms; and besides, it is well known
that he who did conquer and overcome the King of the Medes and Persians, was no
other then Alexander, who is also called Hircus caprarum, after the Hebrew
phrase, which signifies a young Goat (as I might prove by many examples, but
that I suppose M. Downam to be so cunning both in Scripture and Hebrew, that he
will not contradict it for that he was not past 20. years old when he began
his Monarchy by his admirable victories, for which in the 5 verse he is said,
to have gone so swiftly, as though he had slowen in the air, and not touched
the earth. By which means, the little horn which he had betwixt his eyes, that
is the Kingdom which he governed, came to be very great and strong in a short
space and at his death was divided into four little ones, in respect of his
great Monarchy, which contained all those 4. After this M. Downam comes to
Bellarmines second answer, to S. Paul speaks not of any of the 4. beasts,
spoken of by Daniel, which in effect is to grant, that Bezas consequence was
nothing worth: and poor M. Downam had no other shift, but to say, that noe man
said so, because he meant not to say so himself. And yet to set the better
face on it, he denies also that Antichrist is the little horn, as Bellarmine
affirms. But he should have considered that the other was that which was
necessary, that the argument might stand in force, and that now Bellarmine is
the defendant, and therefore it is not enough for M. Downam to deny what he
says, but he must also prove the contrary. Thus much for Bezas argument which
as you see Bellarmine has solued even by M. Downams own confession, and
therefore he has added otherplaces of Scripture, to hold it up from falling,
or rather he has let Bezas argument fall, for that it was past recovery, and
has patched up another of his own. To which I a^swere that in all the places
which he cites, only in the 7. of Daniel, by the beasts be signified
Kingdoms; for in the 11. of Daniel there is not once any Beast named, and
Apoc. 13. there be two Beasts, but the former signifies only one man
Antichrist, and the latter his chief false Prophet, and Apoc. 17. the Beast
signifies the Devil. All which M. Downam must not put me to prove now, till it
be my turn, and then he shall see I shall be better stored both with arugments
and authority the^ he is who brings neither. And as for the assumption, that
in the 13. of Apoc. Antichrist is the second Beast, I have already denied it;
for M. Downam was in some need of Scripture, and so he was enforced to use one
place, both in his proposition and assu^ptio^, and to thrust in other which
made nothing to his purpose.

15. About the third objection M. Downam had little to (Apostasy) which is no
other, but because it pleases them to understand it so. And to Bellarmines
first answer, he says: that it does rather make infer thence, that
Antichrist is but one Man. As though he that answers were to infer any
thing, and not only to show, how his adversary infers nothing. Wherefore M.
Downam adds, that rather the contrary is to be inferred: for if Apostasy be
put by a Metonymie of the adiunct, for the subject, or rather of the effect for
the cause, that is for the parties which do revolt, then it follows, that
Antichrist signifies the whole body and Kingdom of Antichrist. In which
Downam mistaketh Bellarmine.
reply of his, I can see no other reason but want of consideration of that
which Bellarmine has said: for the interpretation, which is given by him in
his first answer of the word Apostasy is only this, that Antichrist is
called the Apostasy, for that he shall be the cause that many forsake God: so
that not those which forsake God, but he that is the cause thereof, is called
the Apostasy. And so though those that forsake God be many, yet he that is the
cause may be only one. If M. Downam has any thing to reply against this,
either he must show, that the cause of the Apostasy, may not be called the
Apostasy, or else, that one man may not be the cause that many forsake God,
and not speak so confusedly and darkly as he does, least he make Downam
speaks from the purpose.
men think that he uses that art, to seem to say something, when he has
nothing to say indeed, which may be also suspected, by that which he adds out
of S. Augustine of an opinion which he misliketh not, and which Bellarmine
alleges in his third answer, as also of Antichrists sitting in the Church;
all which he knows well enough to make nothing to the force of this argument,
nor to be against this first answer of Bellarmine, and therefore is but an idle
addition for want of matter to the purpose. About the second reason, that
Bellarmine gives, why Antichrist may be called the Apostasy, M. Downam has
nothing to say against it, but Antichrist shall be an Apostata.
only notes, that seeing none can be an Apostata which has not been a
Christian, Antichrist shall not be a Jew, but a back sliding and revolted
Christian: which if we take the name properly, as it signifies one that
falls from Christ, is a probable argument, that Antichrist shall be baptized:
but yet he may be a Jew, both by birth, as also by profession, as Julian was a
Gentile in profession, and yet a notable Apostata. But this name may also be
understood of those which fall from God, though they were no Christians. And in
this sense it is more ample, and therefore more fit for Antichrist, who shall
not only oppose himself to Christ, but also extol himself above all that is
called God. And this is all, that M. Downam replyeth to Bellarmines first
answer, for he has not so much as gone about to prove, that Antichrist may
not be understood by the Apostasy, because he shall be the cause that many
forsake God, or because he shall be a most notable Apostata; nor that one man may
not be called so for these two reasons, which be only the points that could
make against Bellarmines answer.

16. To the second answer M. Downam replieth first, that the dissension of the
Fathers, proves that their exposition can be noe good rule of interpreting the
Scriptures. Which note I would he would apply to himself, and his
fellow-Ministers: for no doubt The Protestants exposition of Scripture not much
worth.
he would find, that their expositions are not much worth, since they agree so
little; and if when the Fathers do diversely expound the same place, it is a
sign, that it is not certain which interpretation is to be followed, but that
either may be admitted, so far as they swerve not from any point of Faith; how
much less certainty can we have of M. Downam and his fellows, who many times
do not only differ from all others, but also among themselves, and that in
matters which belong to Faith, in which one houldeth against the other, and
both against all the world besides? After this M. Downam goes about to prove
that the Apostasy cannot signify the revolt from the Roman Empire, because in
other places of Scripture, it signifies a falling away from God: and for that,
afterward it is called the mystery of iniquity, which was working in, and by
the heretics of those times, and because S. Augustine expounds it so. All
which, as you see, do only confirm the former exposition, but nothing impugn
this latter, specially since M. Downam confesses himself, that the defection
from the Roman Empire was to go before Antichrists coming, and so this
exposition contains nothing against Faith, and co^sequentlie may be probably
defended, which is enough for to solue the argument, especially since it cannot
be denied, but that the word may have this signification; and S. Paul's drift
and context does favor this explication, for that he gives reasons, why the
coming of Christ was not to be thought so near at hand, as some gave out:
which he does more fully, if we understand it after this manner, especially
since, as concerning Antichrist, he speaks plainly enough after. As for the
mystery of iniquity which M. Downam will needs have to be all one with the
Apostasy, or departure, it is manifest that they be two distinct things, for
that S. Paul supposes evidently v. 3. that the revolt was not yet The
apostasy and the Mystery of Iniquity not all one. See cap. 14. 11. 3.
come, and v. 7. he affirms plainly, that the mystery of Iniquity did
work then. For now (says he) the mystery of Iniquity works, only that he
which now houldeth, do hold until he be taken out of the way, and then that
wicked one shallbe revealed. In which words he seems to repeat that, which he
had said before in other words, assigning plainly the time of Antichrists
coming, by the taking away of him, which houldeth, that is, the Roman
Emperor; and consequently it is very probable, that he meant the revolt from
him before, by the Apostasy, which the latin Interpreter considering, did not
retain the Greek word Apostasia, which seems to be How far diverse
expositions are to be admitted.
more appropriated to the falling from God, but translated it Discessio, which
may very well be applied to this other. Now it is no marvel, that S. Augustine
favors the other exposition, which he takes for the best, but yet he
refuteth not this: and it is his rule, that when diverse expositions be
comfortable to Faith, they are all to be admitted, as Bellarmine admits Aug.
lib. 12. Confess. cap. 31.
them. But M. Downam will disprooue and disallow of what misliketh him, or
hinders his heresies, and this with his own private, but yet most absolute
authority, which he presumes the holy Ghost has given him in all such
affairs. But the best is, that all men are as free from obligation to believe
him, as he and his fellows are ready to take so much upon them.

17. To the third Answer M. Downam replieth, that the event has showed, that
this general revolt has been made by little and little. Downams petitio
principij
To which (to answer him in form) I deny his Antecede^t for that it is the
chief matter in controversy, and therefore should not have been taken for the
Antecedent, but for the Consequent. Next he says, that as this revolt did grow
by degrees; so it cannot be abolished at once, but by degrees, and therefore
was notlike to be an Apostasy of three years, and a half only. To which I
answer that if it did not grow by degrees, then it may be abolished at once,
and therefore is like enough to be an Apostasy of three years and a half only.
Besides that, it is not necessary, that it should be so long in abolishing, as
it was in growing, especially when God himself takes the matter in hand, and
uses his absolute power, as he will do in this case, as S. Paul testifies 2 Thessalonians. 2. Thirdly he draws an argument from the conversion of the Jews, whom
he says, neither our Savior as he was a man, and the Minister of
Circumcision, nor the Apostles and other Disciples could for many years
convert, notwithstanding their doctrine and miracles were more effectual and
admirable, then those of Antichrist. Where first M. Downam is very bold with
our Savior, Christ's knowledge and power, is not to be limited by that which
he did.
though he speak of him only as man, limitting his knowledge and power to that
only which he did: whereas the rule thereof is far different, except M. Downam
does also think, that he had not all perfect knowledge, and power from the
beginning, which I will not charge him with all, until I hear him say so, for
that I have a better opinion of him, then that he will fall into so great folly
or blasphemy. Wherefore I doubt not, but that he will easily see, that our
Savior taught and wrought according to that which was set down by the
heavenly wisdom of his Eternal Father, who gave to the Jews such outward
means, as were very sufficient in that kind to have drawn them to acknowledge
and receive their true Messiah; but yet no doubt, could have taught them more
plainly, and not in Parables, as our Blessed Savior said, and did also to his
Apostles, and likewise could have wrought greater miracles, as well as the
Apostles, and their successors, but he wrought those which were determined to
be wrought in that time, and which were foretold in the Scriptures, and denied
flatly to work some other, as to give them signs from Heaven, and to come
down from the Cross. But besides these outward means, he used other inward,
which are far more effectual, and therefore I marvel much, that M. Downam
forgot them, for I will not suspect, that he was either so ignorant as not to
know them, or so addicted to Pelagius as to deny them: and yet in these also he
used such moderation as on the one side, the Jews had no want of them, if they
would not have been wanting themselves, and yet our Savior could have given
them far greater inward helps then he did. Neither must M. Downam urge his
distinction too far of Christ as Man; for either it will prove too much, or
nothing at all. For if he speak of the humanity of Christ, considered in it
self, and not as the instrument of his Divinity, then he could not do any
miracle at all of those which he actuallie did; and therefore I always suppose,
that M. Downam speaks not in this base and unworthy sense, by which Christ is
considered, not only as man, but also as if he were no more, nor no better then
a pure man; but if it be considered, as the instrument of his Divinity, then
his power extends it self so far, as the power of God himself, though
actually he puts not all in execution, but only that which Gods eternal
wisdom has appointed. But now to M. Downams reply, I grant the Antecedent,
but deny the Consequent, chiefly, for that we have sufficient ground to think
so, though we could not understand the reason of it: and besides, that very
obstinacy of the Jews does give a sufficient cause of this event. For if,
being assailed by such effectual and wonderful means: as the doctrine and
miracles of Christ, his Apostles and Disciples were, notwithstanding it was
forcible enough to keep them in their former sins, and to draw them into
far greater; what marvel is it, that being destitute of such extraordinary
helps, and set upon by Antichrist and his followers, who shall abound with all
power and deceitful means, and such especially as they expect; that they
yield unto his doctrine, and take him with one accord to be the Messiah, whom
they have so long expected. And as for the rest of the world that shall join
with him, it shall not come, especially at the first, so much for the liking of
his doctrine, as for desire of liberty, coldenes of charity, and abounding in
sin, which be the chains by How Antichrist shall draw men to follow him.
which men are drawn into errors, heresies, and infidelity, as both our
Savior and S. Paul teach, and the experience of all ages, and particulerly of
this of ours, does manifestly show, which I could wish M. Downam and others of
his mind to consider attentively, and they may perhaps come to know more
plainly, the ground of their new gospel, by this consideration duly weighed,
then by all the books that they can read written, either for it, or against
it. And besides M. Downam may consider what great overthrows in Faith,
temporal commodities and persecution will cause, of which he may also find
store of examples in this our miserable Country, where no small multitudes
join with Protestants, only for these respects, as would easily appear, if it
would please his Majesty to give all men liberty to use their conscience, and
profess the Religion which they believe in heart to be true. Lastly M. Downam
takes up Bellarmine very short, for abusing the authority of S. Augustine: and
yet with reading the place in Bellarmine he should have seen, that Bellar.
says only, that S. Augustine writes, that the place of S. Paul Downam
mistaketh and abuses Bellar. and other Authors.
was so understood by many ancient writers: so that in this M. Downam dealt very
hardly with Bellarmine; but after abuses not only Bellarmine, but also those
Ancient writers, and S. Augustine himself, by affirming, that they only speak
of the mystery of Iniquity, teaching that it should still work, that is, that
unsound men in the church shall more and more revolt, until they make a
sufficient number for Antichrist, but that there is never a word of this
defection caused either by one man, or in so short a time, but rather the
contrary. The cause of which rash assertion is his mistaking, for Bellarmine
cites those, which S. Augustine alleges for the exposition of the word
Discessio, or as he reads it, Transsuga, by which he says some understand
not ipsum Principem, the chief Antichrist himself, but his whole body, that
is, the multitude of men which belong to him, together with the chief
himself. By which it plainly appears that he speaks of the defection
caused by this Prince; the time of whose reign, is manifest in the Scripture
it self.

18. To the 4. answer, M. Downa^ replieth (having first made Bell. name, as
though he thought that the apostasy whereof the Apostle spoke, were to endure
many ages, though he could not chose but see, that he thought nothing less)
that this 4. answer is ouerthrown by the first. In which he is either very
simple, or deceiptful: for it is plain, that when one gives diverse answers
to one argument, he is not bound to make the^ all agree together, but every
one by it self. After he says that he has showed, that the whole body of
Apostataes, and Heretics professing the name of Christ, is Antichrist, about
which I remit the Reader to that, which has been answered to what he has said
hitherto. Thirdly he answers instead of replying, that all degrees going
before the revelation of Antichrist, were a disposition not to the being, but
to the revealing of Antichrist: for (as S. John says) Antichrist was in the
Apostasy neither could he be revealed, unless he first were. But to this
Bellarmine answered long since, that Antichrist was not in the Apostles time in
person, but only in his forerunners; and the distinction of being, and
revealing is impertinent, even in M. Downams own opinion, if he speak
Antichrists coming and revelation all one.
of the chief Antichrist in person, whom he will have to have been revealed
so soon as he came, and so likewise were his forerunners also; which is no
marvel, if we consider, that their coming is, when they begin to teach false
doctrines, by which they are also necessarily known to be come, to all such as
know those doctrines to be false: so that it is plain, that their coming and
their revelation is all one, as the coming of the sun and the light, by
which it is revealed. And the like is of any thing, that is necessarylie
co^ioyned to some manifest token, by which it may be known, as heretics and
Apostataes are if they declare themselves for such by doctrine and works, of
which M. Downam may have examples in his Masters, Luther, Calvin, and the
rest; who were forthwith revealed to be Heretics, so soon as they began to
teach new doctrines: only it may be, that they may for some space dissemble,
and seem to be Catholics though in heart they be Heretics. But this makes
nothing to the purpose, for all that time they are not come in the sight of
men, but only in the sight of God; and no man will deny, but that Antichrist
may come in this sort before he begin to teach. But this is not the coming,
which M. Downam talks of, since he says, that Antichrist was come in Simon
Magus, and others who taught Heresies, and yet he will not have him reucaled,
till the chief Antichrist come also. After this, he cites Theodoretus, who by
Apostasy understands Antichrists presence. As though Bellarmine had not
admitted and answered that interpretation before. Lastly he notes for a thing
very unlikely, that the preparation for Antichrist should be 1500. years in
making, and that he should continue only 3. years and a half. As though the
preparation for our Blessed Savior had not been as long, and the time of his
preaching and working miracles as short. Besides that Antichrist was not to
come till the Gospel of Christ had been preached over all the world; and many
parts fallen away from the Faith, which they had received, and the rest in
great disposition, by reason of their corrupt customs to do the same. All
which could not be done in few years, as neither was Antichrist to be suffered
to reign any long time, least he should overcome, even the very chosen, if it
were possible, and therefore our Savior was to destroy him in so short a space.

19. To the last answer he vaunteth, as though he had gotten a great
advantage, for that Bellarmine goes so far, as supposing all that which they
would have were true, yet Downam^ vain bragging.
it makes nothing against us. And here M. Downam braggeth of the goodness of
his argument, and yet straight way after he calls it only an a^swere. But the
poor man is deceived in thinking that when one says, transeat, because the
argument is impertinent, that he does it, because the argument is very good,
whereas indeed it is only because it is nothing worth as M. Downam might easily
have seen in this of his, by the 4. precedent answers. And there can no
argument be more fully answered, then by showing, that it may be answered many
ways, and in all opinions. And lastly, that though it were admitted, yet the
chief question remains as doubtful as before. But M. Downam says, that
none of their side make this argument: Antichrist is not one man: Therefore,
the Pope is Antichrist: which because he says it, we will believe him: but
then I must ask him, whether any of them make this argument or not, The head
of the general Apostasy, which endures many years is Antichrist: but the
Pope is the head of this Apostasy. Ergo, the Pope is Antichrist: for this M.
Downam himself sets down in the end of his discourse: and this is the
argument which Bellarmine answers by letting pass the proposition with a
transeat though it be false, and denying the Assumptio^.

20. And so at last M. Downam is content to prove it, which he does very
worshipfully, by an argument that is called petitio principij, alleging
certain points in controversy, Downams petitio principij
and supposing that we teach false in them all, as about Marriages and
Fastings, though he know well enough that we allow the Sacr^ment of matrimony,
and forbid none to marry, but such as of their own accord have bound
themselves to the essate of continency: nor command any Fastinges, for that we
think any creature of God unclean or defiled, nor adore Images as Idols, or
Gods; nor refuse any part of Scripture, or admit any thing against Scripture,
as he falsely affirms, but only deny Heretical interpretations, and admit
certain and undoubted Traditions, and Definitions, which agree with Scripture,
and are both commended, and many times insinuated in Scripture, though not so
plainly explicated, as other points of doctrine, which are held, as well by
Tradition, as by manifest Scripture, expounded by the uniform consent of holy
Fathers. But it is strange how M. Downam slippeth over that which, Bellarmine
urges Downam dissembleth the difficulty.
against him, which is, that they have plainly apostated from our Church, even
by their own confession, and that they cannot show, that ever weapostated from
any Church at al; and consequently that there is far more likelihood, that
they belong to the general Apostasy, of which Antichrist is head, since it is
plain that in some sort they are Apostataes, then we, who in no sort can be
proved to have apostated at all.

21. Hitherto you have seen, how M. Downam has replied against Bellarmine.
Now you shall here one objection of his own in these words: To the 3. former
arguments a fourth may be added: the 7. heads of that beast which signifies
the Roman estate, Apoc. 17.
are not so many persons, but so many heads or States of government, whereby the
commonwealth of the Romans has been at diverse times governed: the sixth head was
the state of Emperors: the 7. Antichrist, as the Papists confess (for which he
cites Rhem. in Apoc. 17. and Bellarmine:) the eight (which also is one of the
7.) the state of the Emperors renewed. Whereby it evidently appears, not only
that Antichrist is not one man, but also that the Pope (who is the 7. head) is
Antichrist.

To which I answer, that all or the most part of this exposition is false, and
especially that which appertains to the present purpose. For first he
brings neither author nor reason to prove, that those 7. heads did signify
7. states of government in Rome; and others as good authors as M. Downa^ do
expound it far otherwise. Secondly, though we admit this exposition as
probable, and that the head is Antichrist yet it follows not, that he shall be
any more then one man, for he may have a different government, which is to
endure but only in his own time, especially since in the same place he is said
to stay a short time, and else where it is plainly explicated, that it shall be
only three years and a half; and so it appears not so evidently, as M.
Downam weeneth, that Antichrist or the 7. head shall not be one man, even in
his own exposition, and much less that the Pope is Antichrist. For neither is
he the 7. head, since the 6. still remains; neither has he endured a short
time, as the 7, head shall. And as for the 8. which M. Downam would make an
head also (for Downam adds an head of his own to the 7. of the beast.
which he must be feign to lend him his own head, for otherwise there will be
only 7. found in the Scripture) it is manifest, that M. Downams interpretation
is most foolish, for that he makes the beast with 7. heads to have 8. and
himself to be one of them, and so to be also only one head, he being indeed no
head at all, but a beast which has 7. heads, and is said to be the 8. in
number, not of heads, but of distinct rulers or governors; for that he is
distinct from all the other 7. which are called his heads, and yet is of them,
as he whose instruments they have been, and whom he has moved and incited to
all manner of evil: which plainly discovers M. Downams folly, in applying
it to the Emperors, which now are. And so all his objection is showed to be
frivolous, of which I shall have occasion to speak hereafter, whither I remit
the Reader for further proofs.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Wherein it is showed, that Antichrist is not yet come.
ABOUT the third (says Bellarmine) concerning

First all ancient Writers, considering the malice of Thessalonians in the
Apostles time, did think that the day of our Lord drew near, whom the
Apostle does correct 2 Thessalonians. 2. In like manner S. Cyprian lib. 3. ep. 1.
Antichrist (says he) drawing near, prepares soldiars for the battle. And
lib. 4. ep. 6. You must know (says he) and believe, and hold for certain,
that the day of oppression has begun to be over our heads, and the end of the
world, and time of Antichrist is approached. S. Hierome. ep. ad Ageruchiam de
Monogamia: He which did hold, is in making out of the way, and do we not
understand that Antichrist approaches? S. Gregory. lib 4. ep. 38. All things
which have been foretold are in doing: the King of Pride is near. And in his
Homylies upon the Ghospells, he does bouldly pronounce, that the end of the
world draws near: but these were suspicions, and not errors. For these Holy
Fathers durst not set down any certain time.

Others more boldly appointed a certain time. One Judas, as S. Hierome
relates l. de Viris Illust. thought that Antichrist should have come, and the
world ended the two hundredth year after Christ, who as is manifest, was
deceived. Lactantius l. 7. cap. 25. divine. Instit. says, That all expectation
seems to be for no more then two hundred years etc. Where he teaches that
Antichrist was to come, and the world to end within two hundred years after
his time, and he lived in Consta^tines time, in the three hundredth year after
Christ, so that he thought the worlds end should have been the five hundredth
year after Christ. But he also was deceived, as experience witnesses.

S. Augustine lib. 18. de ciuitate Dei cap. 53. mentions S. Augustine
witnesses in the same place) out of the answer of some Oracle, gathered, that
Christian religion should endure only three hundred threescore and five years.
There was also a Bishop of Florence, about the year of our Lord, a thousand an
hundredth and five, who affirmed, that Antichrist was then borne, and therefore
that the worlds end was at hand. For which cause there was a Council of three
hundred and forty Bishops gathered at Florence by Paschalis the second Pope of
that name. See the Chronicle of Matthew Palmer, and Platina in the life of
Paschalis the second.

Lastly it has always been a famous opinion of many, which affirm, that the
world shall last six thousand years, since God created the world in six days,
and a thousand years are with God as one day. So teach S. Iustine Martyr q.
71. ad Gentes. S. Irenaeus lib. 5. Lactantius l. 7. cap. 14. S. Hilar. in cap.
17. Matthew. S. Hierom. in Psalm. 89. ad Cyprianum: with which does also agree the
opinion of the Thalmudists, who say, that they have a Prophesy out of the
Prophet Hely, by which it is affirmed, that the world shall endure six thousand
years.

This opinion cannot yet be refuted by experience, for S. Ambrose who l. 7. in
Luc. cap. 2. rejects this opinion, affirming that in his time there were 6.
thousand years past, is manyfestly deceived. S. Augustines moderation is very
good, who thought this opinion probable, and followed it as probable l. 20. de
Ciuit. Dei c. 7. Neither does it follow from hence, that we do know the time
of the last day, for we say that it is probable, that the world will not
endure above 6. thousand years, but we do not say, that it is certain.
Wherefore S. Augustine sharply rebukes those, who affirm that the world
shall be ended at some certain time, since our Lord said Act. 1. that it does
not belong to us to know the times and moments, which the Father has put in
his own power. See S. Augustine epist. 80. ad Hesychium in Psalm. 89. and lib.
18. de ciuitate Dei, cap. 53. But omitting these, let us come to the Heretics.

Whereas all the Heretics of this time do teach, that Rome is Antichrist, and
that he has appeared already, and is now in the world: notwithstanding they
do not agree among themselves of the time when he appeared, for there be six
opinions of theirs.

The first is of the Samosatenes, which live in Hungary and Transiluania, who
in a certain book which they entitle, Forewarnings of Christ and the
Apostles, of the abolishing the true Christ by Antichrist, do teach, that
Antichrist appeared a little after the Apostles time, to wit, when that
doctrine began first to be preached, that Christ is the everlasting Son of
God, for they think, that Christ is only man, and that in God there is only
one person, and that this faith was preached by Christ, and his Apostles: but
that a little after the Apostles death, the Roman Antichrist came, and having
abolished the true Christ, which was only man, brought in another eternal
Christ, and made a threefould God, and a twofould Christ.

This opinion besides the arguments which afterward shall make himself God and
not any other, as the Apostle says 2 Thessalonians. 2. but the Bishop of Rome, as
they themselves say has not made himself God, but preached Christ, and of
only man has made him God. Secondly because they say, that straight after the
death of Christ and his Apostles, the true faith of Christ was wholly
extinguished by Antichrist, and afterward in the whole world Christ was adored
for God. But Christ foretold that the gates of hell should not prevail
against his Church, Matthew. 16. and the Angel fortould, that Christ's Kingdom
should endure for ever, Luc. 1. and David foretold, that all Kings should
serve Christ, Psalm. 71. how therefore is it true, that in the very beginning,
the Church being yet but newly borne, was destroyed by Antichrist?

The second opinion is of Illyricus, who in his Catalogue Roman Empire began to
incline to destruction: but it is manifest that the Roman Empire began to
decline after the tenth year of Honorius, when Rome was first taken, that is,
in the year four hundredth and twelve, as Blondus does show in the first book
of the first Decade of Histories, from the declination of the Roman Empire. But
Illyricus does seem to understand this of the conception, and not of the
nativity of Antichrist for he himself Cent. 6. Cap. 1. in the beginning
says, that Anchrist was conceived after a certain manner, in the beginning of
the 400. year, after quickened, formed, and nourished in his Mothers womb
about the five hundredth year, and lastly borne the 6. hundredth and sixth
year, to wit, when Phocas granted to the B. of Rome, that he should be called
the head of the whole Church. Again cent. 1. l. 2. cap. 4. colum. 438. he
affirms, that Antichrist should reign, and tyranize with the spiritual
sword, a thousand two hundred and threescore years, and with the temporal
sword 6. hundredth 3. score, and 6. years, and that then the end of the world
should come.

He gathers the former number, out of Apoc. 11. where a thousand two hundred
and threescore days, for Illyricus will have a day taken for a year: he
gathers the latter number out of Apoc. 13. where the number of the Beast, is
said to be 666.

This opinion may be refuted in two manners. For first also dead, and
consequently that the end of the world is already come. For the Roman Bishop
began to have the Temporal sword, that is, temporal dominion at least, from
the year 699. for the^ did Aripertus give the Costian alps, where Genua is
now situated to the B. of Rome, and afterward in the year 714. Luitpr and
confirmed that donation, as Ado Vienensis writes in the Chronicle of these
years, Blondus l. 10. decad. 1. and the Magdeburgenses confess the same cent.
8. cap. 10. col. 685. and Theodor. Bibliander, who notes that, in this year
714. the first Papisticall Province was made.

Not long after, to wit in the year seaue^ hundred fifty and five, Pipin gave
to the Bishops of Rome the Exarchy of Reuenna with a great part of Italy, as
Rhegino, Ado, Sigebert, Blond. l. 12. decad. 1. Aemilius, and the Centuriators
themselves, cent. 8. cap. 10. col. 724. and Theodor. Bibliander in his Cronicle
do witness. If therefore the Kingdom of Antichrist did begin in this 755.
year, and endured 666. years, it ended in the year of Christ 1421. and so it
is more then 150. years since Antichrist died: and if the beginning of his
kingdom be taken higher up, to wit in the year of our Lord 699. then the end
is to be put in the year 1365. and there will be more then two hundred years
past, since the death of Antichrist.

Perhaps, they will answer, that Antichrist shall not die after the 666.
year of his temporal kingdom, but

Secondly the same error may be refuted, for that it follows, Centuriators
do know exactly, when the world shall be ended, which notwithstanding is against
the words of our Lord, Act. 1. and Matthew. 24. and that it does follow, is
manifest; for they know, that Antichrist did begin to reign with the
spiritual sword the year 6. hundredth and 6. They know also, that he shall
reign only 1260. years and that straight after our Lord will come to judgment,
as they themselves gather out of S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. and consequently they
know, that the last Judgment shall be in the year of Christ 1866. or if they
know not this, they must also of force be ignorant, whether Antichrist be come
or not:

The third opinion is of David Chytraeus, who in his Commentary Apoc. 9. does
hold with Illyricus, that Antichrist appeared about the year of our Lord 600.
and he does manifestly enough signify, that S. Gregory was the first
Antichristian Pope. But upon the 12. and 13. Chapters Chytraeus does not agree
with Illyricus about the time that Antichrist shall endure, but does wisely
admonish, that it is not rashly to be defined; and he proves with three
reasons, that Antichrist did appear the 600. year.

First, because at that time Gregory established the Invocation Masses for the
dead. Secondly because in the year 606. Bonifacius the third did obtain of
Phocas the title of universal Bishop. He adds a third reason in his
Commentary upon the 13. Chap. for that this time does plainly and evidently
agree with the number of the name of Antichrist, which contains 666. Apoc.
13.

Chytraus adds in the same place, that out of this same number of Antichrists
name, is gathered the time, in which Pipin, for there be almost so many years
from the 97. year, in which S. John wrote his Apocalypse, until Pipin, to wit
666. And in like manner that the time is gathered, in which the Pope was first
designed and declared Antichrist by John Husse. For there be almost 666. years
from Pipin, to John Husse.

This opinion may easily be refuted, for it is founded S. Gregory was not the
first, which taught to call upon Saints, and offer Masses for the dead. All
other ancient writers taught the same, as we have elswher demonstrated. Now
only S. Ambrose suffices, who lived before S. Gregory 200. years lib. de
viduis. The Angels (says he) are to be earnestly beseeched, as also the
Martyrs. and lib. 2. ep. 1. ad Faustinum de obitu sororis. Therefore (says he)
I do not think, that she is so much to be bewailed, as to be helped with
prayers, nor to be mourned for with thy tears, but that her soul be commended
to God with oblations. Neither did Phocas give the title of Universal to the
Pope, but called him the Head of the Churches. But long before, Justinian ep.
ad Ioannem 2. had done this same; and before that also the Council of
Chalcedon in ep. ad Leonem: without cause therefore is the coming of Antichrist
put in the time of Phocas.

Now that which Chytraeus adds of the number 666. is altogether Chytraeus
would have Antichrist to have appeared, or to have been confirmed or declared.
For from Christ to Phocas his decree, there be 607. years, not 666. from the
revelation of the Apocalypse to Pipin, there be 658. years: from Pipin to Io.
Husse there are, as he himself says 640. years. But S. Io. in the Apocalypse
noted a precise number, since he adds also the least particles. Moreover John
Husse declared not first the Pope to be Antichrist: for VVickliss had done so
before: yea John Husse never said, that the Pope was Antichrist, for in the 19.
article condemned at Constance, he says, that Clergy men by their covetousness
prepare the way for Antichrist. Finally all Lutherans boast, that Antichrist
was discovered by Luther.

The 4. opinion is Luthers, in the Computation of time, Phocas called the B. of
Rome head of all Churches, where he also says, that S. Gregory was the last
B. of Rome. Another with the temporal sword, after the year of our Lord 1000.
Bibliander teaches altogether the same in his Chronicle tabula 11. and 13.
wherefore in the first coming Luther and Bibliander agree with the
Centuriators and Chytraeus, excepting that Luther and Bibliander say, that S.
Gregory was a good and holy Bishop, but the Centuriators cent. 6. cap. 1.
colum. 2. and Chytraeus say, that S. Gregory above all other procured the
introduction of Antichrist, and therefore was a very naughty man: which is a
most horrible blasphemy. In the second coming, Luther and the Centuriators do
manifestly disagree.

This opinion besides the common arguments, which shall be made afterward, is
easily refuted. For altogether without reason puts Luther the coming of
Antichrist in the years of our Lord 600. and 1000. And of the first we spoke
in the consutation of Chytraeus. Of the year 1000. it may easily be proved.
For therefore Luther at that time, puts the beginning of the temporal
reign of Antichrist, because then Pope Gregory the 7. deposed the Emperor
Henry the 4. and had temporal dominion, and made war. But all these things
were done before also, for Gregory the 2. excommunicated the Emperor Leo, and
deprived him of the Kingdom of Italy in the year of our Lord 715. as
Cedrenus and Zonaras testify in the life of the same Leo. And we have alredie
showed, that the Bishops of Rome had temporal dominion from the year 700.
that is, three hundredth years before the year 1000.

Finally the Magdeburge^ses testify cent. 8. cap. 10. that Stephen Adrian the
first, and of other their successors. Likewise about the year 850. Leo the 4.
an holy man, and a worker of miracles, made war against the Saracenes, and
had a notable victory, and fortified the City of Rome with bulwarks and
fortresses, and besides compassed the Vaticane hill with a wall, which
afterward of him was called the Leonine City, as almost all the
Historiographers of that time do write, and the Magdeburgenses themselves
Cent. 9. cap. 10.

The fifth opinion is Henry Bullingers, who in his Preface to Apocalypse
writes, that Antichrist appeared in the year of our Lord 763. which opinion
disagreeth from all the former, and may easily be refuted, for that it is
grounded upon a most weak foundation. For Bullinger says, that in the 13.
chap. of the Apocalypse, where the number of the name of the beast is put down,
by that number is signified the time of Antichrists coming, that is, how many
years after the writing of the Apocalypse, Antichrist was to come. And for that
it is manifest out of Irenaeus lib. 5. that the Apocalypse was written about the
end of Domitia^s Empire, that is about the year of our Lord 97. he gathers,
that Antichrist was to come in the year 763. for so many there are, if 666. be
adds to 97.

Hither may bereferred the opinion of certain Catholics, who as I^d^c^s
Clicthonem rehearses in his commentaries upon the 28. cap. of the 4. book of
S. John Damascene de side, think that Antichrist so properly called was
Mahomet, because he came about the year 666. as S. John foretold. But this
reason is nothing worth. For first the Magdeburgenses gainesay and contend,
that the number in the Apocalypse signifies not the time of Antichrists birth,
but the time of his death. And S. Io. the Evangelist cap. 13. Apoc. rejects
both Illyricus and Bullengers fiction, for explicating himself he says, that
that number, is the number, not of the time, but of the name of Antichrist,
that is, that Antichrist shall have a name whose greek letters shall make the
number 666. as Iraeneus lib. 5. and all others expound him.

Moreover this year 763. there was no mutatio^ made that Rome, neither did
Mahomet come: for he was borne the year of our Lord 597. and afterward died in
the year of our Lord 636. as Palmerius witnesses in his Cronicle. Wherefore
he came not to the year 666.

The sixth opinion is of VVolsegangus Musculus, who in his places tit. de
Ecclesia cap. 12. affirms, that Antichrist came a little after S. Bernards
time, that is about the year 1200. and he proves it, because S. Bernard sermon.
6. in psalm. 90. having reckoned many vices of men, and especially of the
Clergy, and most greiuous persecutions of the Church, adds; It remains
that the man of sin be revealed. But this opinion also is easily confuted.
For S. Bernard ghessed by the evils which he did see, that Antichrist was
near, as we also said, that S. Cypria^, S. Hierome, and S. Gregory ghessed in
their times, and all their ghesses were false. Besides, there were worse Popes
without comparison from the 900. year to the 1000. then from the 1100. year
to the 1200. Wherefore if they were not Antichrists, why should these be?

M. Dovvnams addition, and reply confuted.
1. MASTER Downam has little to say, about the ancient opinions, only he
affirms, if you will believe him upon his word, that there is a great
difference betwixt the Fathers opinions, concerning the approaching of
Antichrist, The difference betwixt Catholics and Heretics concerning the
coming of Antichrist.
which they held (says he) according to the Prophesies of the Scripture (and
he cites in the margent 1. Io. 2. 18. 2. Io. 7. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. compared with
the event: and their conceit of Christ's approaching unto judgment, grounded
not so much upon the Scriptures, as upon their own conjectures, which are
confuted by experience.

But he might have done well to have disproued Bellarmins distinction betwixt
Catholics and heretics, which he affirms to consist in this, that
Catholics know, that Antichrist shall not come but in the end of the world:
but Heretics think that antichrist shall come long before the end of the
world: and so we see, that all the Fathers, which thought that Antichrist was
at hand, thought the same likewise of the end of the world. So that, if they
had lived so long that they might have seen their conjectures about the end of
the world confuted by experience, they would have been far from M. Downams
opinion, who thinks that their arguments, concerning the coming of
Antichrist, are confirmed by experience. And the reason would have been, for
that they would still have remained Catholics, who join both together; and
not have been of M. Downams crew, whom Bellarmine calls Heretics, which
seuereth them far asunder. And the poor man had nothing to help himself
withal, but only to recite S. Hieromes and S. Gregory's words, which
Bellarmine had alleged, and took them to be so plain and easy (as they are
indeed) that they needed no exposition. And it should seem that M. Downam
Downam tra^slateth not well.
thought so too, and therefore he thought it necessary to falsify them in his
translation, for, de medio fit, translating, is taken out of the way, whereas it
being the present tense, signifies only that it was not yet done, but was in
doing, as it has been ever since; and so he should have translated, is in
taking out of the way, and then we shall easily answer to the argument, See
cap. 5. nu. 4.
that a thing in doing is not done, and consequently that Antichrist is but
coming, and not come. For the removing of the Imperial seat from Rome, the
taking of Rome by the Goths, the decay of the Empire, are not sufficient for M.
Downam to make it good, that the Empire was taken away, but only that it was in
taking away; that is, in decay, not subverted or perished. And besides, if M.
Downam bethink himself well, it will be a little with the soonest for him and
his friends (whom Bellarmine calls Heretics) to affirm, that Antichrist
was come in S. Hieromes time. As for the Scriptures, which M. Downam notes, it
is not necessary to explicate them now, since we have had, and shall have often
occasion to handle the^ at large: only I will ask M. Downam, what he meant to
say, that Bellarmine thought to discredit the arguments of the Fathers, by
reckoning them among erroneous conceiptes, since Bellarmine expressly says,
that the opinions of these Fathers, were suspicions, and not errors, because
they durst not set down any certain time?

2. Now then let us come (as M. Downam likewise inuiteth Bellarmines heretics,
where he takes upon him to defend all those opinions, but the first of the
Samosatenes, whom he is content with Bellarmine to call heretics, but takes
it very ill at his hands, that he would number them among Protestants, which
notwithstanding he has no reason to do, since Bellarmine tells but the
truth, and gives his reason why he does so, because they all agree in this,
that Antichrist is come, and that he is the Pope; which will How much the
protestants agree with the Samosatenes and all other heretics.
be thought a greater agreement, then Christ has with the wicked: which
comparison it pleases M. Downam to use, though if others had done far less,
he would have been ready to have called it blasphemy, if he be not more
temperate then many of his fellow Ministers; and besides he might have
considered, that all the arguments, which Bellarmine uses against the
Samosatenes, make as much against the Protestants; his men which have soundly
confuted their heresies, will seem ridiculous; except they had confuted this
opinion likewise, which they could not do, except they would confute
themselves. And the nippe which he gives the Papists for houlding their peace,
will make some think, that either he has not read so much, as the titles of
Bellarmines whole books, or else that he is very forgetful, if not malicious,
since it is evident, that he has not omitted those heretics, no more then the
rest; neither in other heresies, nor in this; in which he is as exact, as M.
Downam can desire, since he tells us in what they differ from him and his
crew, which is but in a nice point, God knows (to wit in the circumstances of
time) if we consider the other two main points, in which they agree; and
besides here M. Downa^ says, that even in the Apostles times, Antichrist had as
it were set his foot in the Church, which is something before that, which the
Samosatenes affirm, who only think, that he appeared a little after the
Apostles time, so that all the fault will light upon M. Downam, and his
fellows, who will needs make themselves so like to those, and all other
heretics, that none but themselves can see any other difference among them,
but material; to wit, that every one choseth this, or that matter, in which
they differ from the Catholic Church: but all agree in this, that they chose
their Religion out of their own private judgments and spirits, by which they
take upon them to explycate the Scripture, every one after his own fashion;
but none of them will subject their spirits to the spirit of truth, which is
according to Christ's promise only in the Catholic Church, and consequently
they will be still accounted formal Heretics till they amend this general
fault of theirs.

3. Concerning the other 5. opinions which Bellarmine From X. to XVII.
rehearses M. Downam would feign make an agreement, by affirming, that the
constant opinion of the learned is that of the revealing or manifest appearing
of Antichrist (...) (for the rest is impertinent) there were two principal
degrees, the first about the year 607. the second after the year 1000. Where
first we may note, how Downam nothing Scrupulous in his account.
cunningly he brings it in, with an (about) and an (after) both which may
comprehend one or more years. And it must be no little, nor nice difference,
which will break any square in this man's conceit: but you must bear with
him, for he was enforced to enlarge his conscience, and to be nothing
scrupulous, because otherwise he could hardly have made any one to agree with
himself or any other; for they which come nearest, differ in a year, since
Illyricus, Chytraeus, and Luther put that title, which was given by Phocas The
Protestants disagreement about Antichrists coming.
to Pope Boniface the third, in the year 606. and not 607. as M. Downa^ does,
who leaving his Rabbines, is content to join with Bellarm. in this account.
But there is a greater difference betwixt Luther and Bibliander on the one
side, and the Centuriators, and Chytraeus on the other side about S. Gregory,
whether he did belong to Christ, or to Antichrist; which M. Downam wisely
passed over in silence, with being content to go about. And yet he must fetch a
fargreater compass to comprehend Bullenger, who puts Antichrists coming
more then a 100. yeeares later then any of these, so that by that word (about)
we must understand a 100. years sooner or later. And yet the word (after) has
a larger scope since Musculus will have Antichrists coming to have been about
the year 1200. But M. Downam stoutly denies, that Bullenger puts
Antichrists coming the year 763. yet mentions not the place which
Bellarmine cites, which is as plain, as plain may be; but thinks it
sufficient to allege another place out of Bullenger, where yet he names not
once Antichrist, but explicateth, how in his opinion the Popes dominion
increased and was confirmed; which only shows, that Bullenger either did not
think, that Antichrists appearing, and the Popes dominion was all one, or else,
that he is contrary to himself; of which two I will give M. Downam good leave
to choose which he lists. He would also feign excuse Musculus, but that the
matter is too plain; since he would found his opinion upon S. Bernard, who
plainly affirms, that he expected Antichrists appearing or revealing, and
consequently thought, that he was not revealed at that time: so that Musculus
following S. Bernard, must needs think so too, howsoever of his own head he
adds, that Antichrist was come, which as it is foolish in it self, since he
could have no certain ground to think so, unless he had appeared in some
sort: so is it also impertinent to the matter we have in hand, since our
question is about his appearing: and they which put it latest (which are Luther
and Bibliander) make him to come even with the temporal sword, which cannot
choose but appear, after the year of our Lord 1000. And this is the notable
consent, which M. Downam has found among all his writers whom Bellarmine
alleges in this main point, concerning the time of the coming of Antichrist.

4. After having labored to make an agreement betwixt his Doctors, with the
event which you have seen, he makes a show, as though he would answer all
Bellarmines arguments against them, beginning thus: Now let us see what he
obiecteth against this received truth: but coming to the point he only
chooses out Bellarmines answer to Chytraeus his second proof for the first
degree of Antichrists coming, to wit, with the spiritual sword, which as you
see is no argument at all, but a piece of an answer to an argument; so that to
do well M. Downam should reply and not answer. But let Downam answers when
he should reply.
us not urge the poor man too far, for it is pure want, that drives him to
these miserable shifts. Wherefore let us see, how he can avoid Bellarmines
answer. Chytraeus proof was this. In the year 606. Bonifacius the third, did
obtain of Phocas the title of universal Bishop: ergo Amichrist appeared about
the year 600. To which Bellarmine answers in these words: Phocas gave not
the title of Universal to the Pope, but called him the head of the Churches.
But long before Iustinia^ ep. ad Ioa^. 2. had done the same, and before that
also the Council of Chalcedon in ep. ad Leonem. Without cause therefore is
the coming of Antichrist put in the time of Phocas. To which first, as I have
noted, M. Downam says, that Bellarmine objected this, whereas it is most
manifest that he answers an objection. Secondly he adds, that good authors
Phocas gave not the title of Universal to the Pope, and that which he gave,
the Pope had before.
affirm, that he received from Phocas, both the title of the Head of the
Church, and also of Universal or Oecumenicall bishop: but they are too good to
be named, or else M. Downam was ashamed of the^ and therefore he must pardon us,
if we believe neither him, nor them, till we know what they are. Thirdly he
avouches that, there is no doubt, but that Bonifacius sought for, and by suite
obtained that, which John of Constantinople had before claymed. But if he had
remembered, what himself wrote in his 1. chap. of his former book, of S.
Gregory the great, his dislike of that title in John of Constantinople, he
would have seen, that there had been great doubt, whether Bonifacius were not
more likely to approve his holy predecessors judgment in refusing that title
for due respects, though otherwise never so due to him, rather then his proud
adversaries opinion in desiring, or using it at that time, when at leastwise in
that John of Constantinoples sense, it was not only scandalous, See part. 2.
Chap. 1.
but perfidiouslie false also. Wherefore keeping the dignity it self, they
used such words as might modestly express, what they had, and no way
signify that which they had not themselves, and much less John of
Constantinople, who most arrogantlie usurped that false, and also foolish
title, being taken in the sense, in which he usurped it. Fourthly M. Downam
would shift of the matter, with saying, that there is no great difference
betwixt these two titles, as they are now given to the Pope, save that to be
the head of the Universal Church, is the more Antichristian style. But this
will not serve his turn neither, for howsoever these titles be all one in
substance, yet since Chytraus and others will give us a reason, why they
assign the first degree of Antichrists coming in the time of Phocas; to wit,
because he first gave the Pope the title of Universal Bishop, it is not
enough, when this is denied, to tell us, that at least, if he gave him not
that, he gave him another as great: for all the force of the argument
consists in this, that this title of Phocas is a new one, which the Pope
never had given him before; for otherwise there is no reason, why Antichrist
should be thought more to come in Phocas his time, then before. And this was
that which Bellarmine answered, and M. Downam hitherto has not said any thing
to the purpose against him.

Wherefore lastly he goes about to make us believe, that though he cannot
deny, but that the Pope had the same title which Phocas gave him long before:
yet there was a great difference in the sense and meaning. For he affirms,
that before this grant of Phocas, the Church of Rome had the pre-eminence and
superiority, over all other Churches, excepting that of Constantinople, not in
respect of Authority and Jurisdiction; but in respect of order and dignity,
and for this cause especially, because Rome whereof he was Bishop, was the
chief City: for which he cites the Counsels of Chalcedon and
Constantinople. And for the same cause (says he) was the Patriarch of
Constantinople sometimes matched with him: for which he cites Council.
Chalcedon: sometime preferred above him; for which he notes in the margent
tempore Maurity; because Constantinople (which they called new Rome) was become
the Imperial seat: yea he adds, that the Bishops of Rauenna, because their
City was the chief in the Exarchy of Rauenna, whereunto Rome was for a
Downams answer or reply confuted by Bellarmine in other places.
time subject, strove with the Bishop of Rome in the time of the Exarchies, for
superiority. But all this discourse of his, is refuted at large by Bellarmine
in his second Book of the Pope: and if M. Downam will loose so much labor
about the answering of that, as he has done about this other, which is the
third, he shall be confuted, and I hope fully satisfied in this point also. But
now it were to great a labor to put down all Bellarmines proofs. Wherefore
both I and M. Downam must of reason be content with briefly answering his
objections, though that also in truth were not to be expected in this place,
but that I desire that M. Downam should have no reason to complain. And first
that the reason, why Rome had the pre-eminence The reason of Romes pre-eminence
is not because it is the chief City.
over all other Churches, was not because it was the chief City, as M.
Downam would prove out of the Councels of Chalcedon and Constantinople,
Bellarmine proves by the authority of S. Leo. ep. 54. ad Martianu^, where
inueighing against the ambition of Anatolius then Bishop of Constantinople,
which he had discovered in that very Council of Chalcedon which M. Downam
mentions, he has these words. Let the City of Constantinople have, as we
wish her, glory and Gods right hand protecting her; let her enjoy a long
reign of your Clemency: Alia tamen ratio est rerum saecularium, alia
diuinarum etc. Yet worldly, and divine things have different reasons: neither
will any other building be firm and stable besides that rock which our Lord
has put in the foundation. He loses his own, who desires those things
which are not his due. Let it suffice that by the foresaid help of your Piety,
and by the consent of my savor, he has obtained the Bishopric of so great a
City: non dedignetur Regiam Ciuitatem, quam Apostolica^ non potest facere
Sedem, let him not disdain a Kingly City, which he cannot make an
Apostolical Sea. So that M. Downam in S. Leo his judgment confounds worldly
and divine things by going about to make us believe, that Rome had the
prehemine^ce of an Apostolical Sea, because it was the chief City, which as
you see S. Leo says, by no means can be. Likewise Bellarmine brings the
authority of Gelasius, Epistola ad Episcopos Dardaniae, who likewise reasons
thus. Millan, Rauenna, Syrmiu^, Treuers and Nicomedia were the Seats of the
Empire many times, and yet the Fathers never gave any pre-eminence or Primacy
to those Bishops, as neither they would have done to Rome only for that respect.

And as for the authority of the two Counsels, M. Downam must know, if he be
ignorant of it, that the first of Chalcedon was not confirmed by S. Leo, but
only in matters of The Counsel of Chalcedo^. See Paralelus Tortiac Tortoris
cap. 4. The Canons of the 6. general Council.
Faith: and in this point was by him expressly rejected, as may be seen in the
Epistle already recited, and in diverse others ad Anatolium, ad Pulcheriam, ad
Maximum, ad Iuuenale^. In which likewise, as also in the 16. Act of the
Council it self, it appears, that this Decree was made in the absence of
the Popes Legates, who had the chief place in that Council, and that they did
afterward openly gainesay, and resist it. And if by the Council of
Constantinople he means the Canons, commonly called the Canons of the sixth
General Council (as it seems he does) he must likewise be told, that those
Canons, are of no account, as not made by that Council, but by certain
Bishops, which afterward met privately together, as appears by the beginning
of the Canons themselves and by the confession of Tharasius, Bishop of
Constantinople in the 7. general Council Act. 4. and Bid calls them,
Erraticam Synodum, an erring Synod, and moreover writes, that Sergius then
Pope, rejected them lib. 6. de sex atatibus, in Iustiniano Iuniore. And all
this, and much more to the purpose might Downam seems not to have read so
much of Bellarm. as he impugneth.
M. Downam have learned out of Bellarmine himself, if he would have taken the
pains to have read him over, or at least so much as he meant to impugn, as it
was good reason he should have done, before he had gone about to answer him.
Neither shall I need to spend any more time in this matter since his chiefest
authorities are out of these two Councels. For what he means by that which
happened tempore Mauritij, I cannot yet conjecture; for it were too absurd for
him to defend John of Constantinople against S. Gregory, as likewise the
Bishops of Rauenna, whose arrogance and ambition is condemned and contemned
also by the whole world. But it is no marvel though in so bad a cause M.
Downam can find no better Patrons.

5. Concerning the coming of Antichrist with the temporal sword, which is the
second degree, M. Downam goes about to iuggle with us after a strange manner.
For whereas Bellarmine in the confutation of Luther, confuteth three grounds,
which Luther built his opinion upon. I. the deposition of the Emperor Henry
the 4. II. the having temporal dominion. III: Downams seely iugling.
particular examples of every one; M. Downam very cunningly, as he thought, but
indeed very seelily, as it will appear now that he is taken with the manner,
answers, that true it is, that the Popes had a temporal dominion before, but
not general; and so with granting one part, he thinks he may safely deny the
other, without ever troubling himself to examine Bellarmines instance any
further. But we must put him in mind, that when Gregory the second deprived Leo
the Emperor, of the Kingdom of Italy, he did not only show himself to have
right to the patrimony of S. Peter, which could only have warranted him to have
kept that from the Emperor; but The pope has power to depose Princes for the
spiritual good of Christ's Church.
likewise to have a general authority to deprive Princes of their own
dominions in some cases, and for some causes, which he could not do but by a
general power, though we will not much stand with M. Downam about the name of
Temporal power; for that we rather think it to be spiritual, and therefore
cannot be exercised by the Pope, but for the spiritual good of Christ's Church;
as M. Downam may see largely explicated by Bellarm. in his 5. book; where also
he shall find diverse other examples to this purpose; to which it will not be
enough for him to oppose his heretical author Auentinus; Of Auentine See part
2. Chap. 3. n. 6.
for we will at any time take M. Downams own word, so soon as any other of
his mind, except they bring better profs then he does. And this is all, which
M. Downam has to say against Bellarmine; wherefore he concludes in these
words: And thus have I answered whatsoever is in his 3. Chapter. pertinent to
the matter in hand, omitting (as my manner is) his other wranglings, as being
altogether either impertine^t, or merely personal. Where I will only crave the
Judicious Reader, to look over Bellarmines whole discourse, and if he finds
nothing in it, but which directly impugneth the opinions and not the persons,
which he alleges, and withal that he does it so inuincibly, that there can
be no evasion, as I verily persuade my self any Downams manner to omit that
which he cannot answer.
indifferent man will easily see: then let him know, that whatsoever M. Downam
has omitted, was because he could by no means make so much as any show of
answering it, as he has gone about to do in this, which we have examined: and
withal let him know also, that this is M. Downams manner as he himself
affirms, and make account of the Man accordingly.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. In which is explicated the first demonstration, that
Antichrist is not yet come.
WHEREFORE the true opinion is (says Bellarmine) that Antichrist has neither
begun to reign, nor is yet come; but is to come, and to reign about the end
of the world; which how far it is off, can by no means be known. This
opinion, which overthrows all the former and clearly shows that the
Bishops of Rome are not Antichrists, is demonstrated by six reasons.

For we must know, that the Holy Ghost in the Scripture Henoch and Helias, and
a most huge and manifest persecution, so that public Holies shall wholly
cease: two following, to wit the destruction of Antichrist after three years
and a half, and the end of the world: none of which we see yet extant.

Wherefore the first demonstration is taken from the Matthew. 24. This Gospel
of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole world, in testimony to all
nations. And that this shall be before Antichrists coming, might be proved by
that reason, because in Antichrists time the cruelty of that last persecution
shall hinder all public exercise of True Religion.

But because the adversaries admit not this reason and S. Hilarie cap. 25. in
Matthew. expounding those words: This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached
in the whole world, and then the consumation shall come, plainly teaches,
that Antichrist shall not come, whom he calls the Abomination of Desolation,
unless the preaching of the Gospel in the whole world goes before.

The same is expreslie taught by S. Cyrill catechesi 15. Theodoret in 2 Thessalonians.
2. S. Damascen lib. 4. cap. 28. and others. And besides the same is gathered
out of the text, for it is said, that the Gospel is to be preached before
that greatest and last tribulation comes, what manner of one, neither has been before, nor shall be after. By which tribulation that Antichrists persecution
is signified, the Fathers teach, and chiefly S. Augustine lib. 20. de ciuitate
Dei, cap. 8. and 19. And that the Gospel was not preached in the whole world
at that time, when the new Samosatenes say, that Antichrist came, that is,
about the year of our Lord 200. or 300. is manifest by Origin, who Homil. 28.
in Matthew. affirms, that in his time the Gospel was not yet preached every
where. Likewise by Ruffinus, who lib. 3. hist. cap. 9. testifies, that in the
time of Constantyne the Emperor, that is, after the year of our Lord 3^0. the
Gospel was preached to the more remote Indians: whereas, before that time,
they had never heard any thing of Christ. Finally by S. Augustine who in his
80. epist. says, that he had found by most certain experience, that in his
time, there were many nations which had heard nothing of Christ.

And that the preaching of the Gospel was not accomplished Centuriators,
Chytraeus, Luther, and Bullinger put the coming of Antichrist, is m^nifest b^
the conversion of the Vandals, Polonians, Morauians, and the like, who as it is
well known heard not the preaching of the Ghospel, until after the year of
Christ 800. as also the Centuriators confess centur. 9. cap. 2. col. 15. and
18. and cent. 10. cap. 2. col. 18. and 19. In like manner that the preaching
was not co^plete in the time of S. Bernard, at which time VVolfgangus Musculus
puts the coming of Antichrist is manifest out of S. Bernard himself lib.
3. de consider. where he affirms, that yet in his time, there were Nations
which had not heard the Gospel.

Finally, that also in our time, the Gospel is not

Against this Demonstration, there can only one objection be made, to wit,
because perhapps the Scriptures, Luc. 2. where it is said, There went out an
Edict from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be described, otherwise,
that will be false, which S. Paul says Romans 10. even then in his time, That
the sound of the Apostles was gone forth into all the earth, and that which he
says Coloss. 1. The Gospel which is come to you, as it is in the whole
world, fructifying and increasing. And after, Which is preached to all
creatures, which are under Heaven.

I answer without doubt, not by any figure, but properly S. Augustine ep. 80.
ad Hesychium, and the other Fathers alleged think the same, and besides
Origin and S. Hierome, and others in cap. 24. Matthew.

It may also be proved by three reasons. First, Christ says of the world, for
so he adds forthwith; and then the consummatio^ shall come; but if not
properly, but by Synecdoche the Gospel were to be preached in the whole
world, that sign were nothing worth; for in that manner the Gospel was
preached in the whole world the first 20. years. Secondly as S. Augustine
reasons, properly all Nations are promised to Christ Psalm. 71. All Nations
shall serve thee. And Christ died generally for all, and therefore Apoc. cap. 7.
the elected are described out of all Nations, and people, and tribes, and
languages. Wherefore the preaching also must properly be general. Finally
Match. 24. it is said, that the Gospel is to be preached in the whole world
in testimony to all Nations, that is, least any Nation in the day of Judgment
might excuse their infidelity, by the pretext of ignorance. Wherefore before the
general judgment the general preaching must be.

To those places of S. Paul, S. Augustine answers epist. S. Paul, when he
says Rom 10. their sound is gone out into all the earth, took the time past
for the time to come, as David had done, whose words those are. And when he
says Colloss. 1. that the Gospel is in the whole world, he would not say
that it is actuallie, but vertuallie, to wit, because the seed of Gods word had
been cast into the world by the Apostles, which fructifying and increasing by
little and little, was to replenish the whole world: as one that had put fire
to diverse parts of a City, might truly be said to have set all the City on
fire, because he had applied the fire, which increasing by little and little,
was to consume the whole City. And this very same signifies the Apostle
when he says, in the whole world, it is fructifying and increasing; for it had
not taken possession wholly of the whole world, seeing it was yet more and more
spread afterward abroad, and yet in a certain manner it had taken possession,
that is vertuallie, and not actuallie.

We might also answer with S. Hierome, in Matthew. 20. and S. Thomas in Romans 10.
that the Gospel came to all in two ma^ners: one way by fame, another way by
peculiar preachers, and foundation of Churches; and that in the first manner,
the Gospel came to all Nations of the whole world then known in the time of
the Apostles; and that S. Paul speaks of this: in which sort also S.
Chrysostom in Matthew. 24. is to be understood. But in the second manner, that
it came not then, but is to come in the time appointed, and that our Lord
Matthew. 24. Luc. vlt. and Act. 1. speaks of this.

Add lastly, that it is not absurd, if we grant, that our Lord spoke
properly, and the Apostle figuratiuelie. For the reasons which compel us to
take our Lords words in a proper signification, have not the same force, if
they be applied to the words of S. Paul, especially seeing our Lord spoke of
a thing to come, and S. Paul of a thing past.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. IT pleases M. Downam to be a little merry about these 6. Demonstrations,
calling them six slender conjectures, and thinking Bellarmyne troubled with
melancholy, for deeming otherwise. But I will leave it to the Readers
judgment, if it be not more likely, that he is laden with folly. Afterward he
iesteth at Bellarmine, for making Antichrists death, and the end of the world,
which shall be after his death, to be two signs of his coming. As though all
this were not to fall out within 3. or 4. years after his coming: and
consequently did not plainly demonstrate, that he came not a 1000. years
since, which is that, which Bellarmine goes about to prove, and so might
very well use these signs to demonstrate his not coming so long ago.

2. But coming to answer the first demonstration, it is wonderful to see how
many words he spends in vain, and how few to the purpose. For he being to
answer Bellarmines proofs, which I have alleged, he scarce ever touches
any of them, but makes a long discourse altogether frivolous, about the
exposition of that whole place Matthew. 24. Wherefore I shall be enforced to gather
up here and there some scattered denialls, and so reply to this his broken
and confused answer.

3. And first to the Fathers which Bellarmine alleges Or to what end (says
he) should I spend my time in answering the Testimonies of the Fathers, who
supposed that the Gospel should be preached in all the world, before the
coming of Antichrist, seeing according to the meaning of our Savior Christ, it
was to be preached in all the world, before the destruction of Jerusalem? And
is not this a wise answer, think Downam rejects the Fathers.
you, to accuse the Fathers to be against Christ, because their doctrine is
contrary to M. Downams? But I take it, few will believe him upon his bare word
against Bellarmine alone, and much less having so many ancient Fathers joined
with him.

4. Bellarmines other proof was out of the text, because S. Augustine
understands Antichrists persecution. But M. Downam never mentioning S.
Augustine, or other Father, flatly denies their doctrine in this point, as he
had done in the former, and therefore indeed, never goes about to answer the
argument, but to deny the conclusion, whatsoever the proofs be.

5. Yea, that which is worse, because he would seem Bellarmine had been so
simple, as to prove his conclusion only Downam omitteth Bellarmines proofs
and answers his own.
out of those words Matthew. 24. This gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached
in the whole world in testimony to all Nations. And then he answers very
gravely. But our Savior Christ does not say, that the Gospel shall be
preached throughout the world, before the coming of Antichrist, but before the
end. And is not this to get himself out of his Adversaries reach, and then to
show great valor in playing his prize by himself alone, and beating the air?

6. Another trick of M. Downa^s is, to answer an argument which Bellarmine
thought better for breuities sake to leave unproven: that is, that in
Antichrists time, the cruelty of the last persecution shall hinder all public
exercise of true Religion. To which M. Downam answers: That it is not
necessary, that the Gospel should be preached generally throughout the world
at one time: for it might suffice, that in one age it were preached to one
Nation, and in another age to another people and so in Antichrists time it
might be preached to some Nations, where it had not been formerly preached; and
therefore might be preached to all Nations before the destruction of Antichrist,
though it were not before his coming. But Bellarmine never affirmed, that the
Gospel should be generally preached throughout the world at one time: but M.
Downam dreameth it. And if he would have said any thing to the purpose, he
should have told us, how the Gospel can be preached to any Nation, when the
persecution is so great and general, that all public exercise of true
Religion does cease in all places, throughout the whole world. And this is all,
that he brings in answer to the arguments. Wherefore only there remains,
that we see, whether he proves his own exposition in those two points, in
which he is contrary to Bellarmine and the Fathers, any better.

7. For first, he will needs have the consummatio^ of which Matthew. 24.
our Savior speaks, to be the destruction of Jerusalem, and not the end of
the world, but yet never answers to any of those arguments, which Bell. has
in his answer to the objection; three o^ the which, namely the authority of
the Fathers, M. Downam Downam dissembleth the difficulty.
dealt very politikely in dissembling them, since he could not answer them. And
to prove his own exposition, he brings a conceited invention of his own, to
wit, that our Blessed Savior would comfort his Disciples by telling them,
that the success of their Ministry should be such, that before the desolation
of Jerusalem, the Gospel should he preached throughout the world, for a
testimony to all Nations verse. 14. And therefore that they should not fear,
least together with Jerusalem his Church should be overthrown: for be ore
the destruction of Jerusalem he would by their preaching to all Nations both
Jews and Gentiles, plant his Church in many nations of the world. And for
as much as the Temple and City of Jerusalem were types and figures of the
Church of Christ which were to be abolished when the Church o^ Christ should be
established; therefore he adds, that upon the planting of the Church by their
Ministry, should the end and destruction of Jerusalem come.

8. But this is not only doubtful, since o^ I M. Downams Downam expounds
Scripture childishly.
authority is not sufficient to make it certain but also altogether childish
and foolish. For how could the Apostles fear, least together with Jerusalem
Christ's Church should be overthrown? since as he himself says, the Temple
and City of Jerusalem were Types and figures of the Church of Christ, which
were to be abolished when the Church of Christ should be established, and
consequently the Apostles should never have greater hope, that Christ's Church
should be established, then when they should see the Temple and City of
Jerusalem, and in them the Jews Synagogue abolished. And were not he a wise
man, think you, that would go about to comfort Catholics, by telling them,
that they must not be afraid, though they see heretics abolished, who are
their chiefest adversaries? since that the prevailing of Catholics consists
chiefly in the abolishing of heretics? But by this we may see to what
absurdities, such men as M. Downam are brought, when leaving the exposition of
the Fathers, they will follow their own private newfangled inventions.

9. After this again he says, that we may not think, that our Savior
Christ would intermingle the Prophesies, concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the end of the world, thereby to nourish the The prophesies
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the world intermingled.
error of his Disciples, who imagined that the end of Jerusalem should not be
before the end of the world, as appears by their question. But on the other
side the Fathers tell us, that we must think, that our Savior did intermingle
these Prophesies of purpose, to let them be in continual expectation of the
end of the world, and that when they should see the subuersio^ of the Temple,
they should not be secure, that the end of the world was not also very near.
And this experience also teaches, since as Bellarmine in part shows in the
former Chapter and first opinion, the holy Fathers expected our Saviors
coming every one in his time. And this is that which they think to appear
both by the Apostles question, and our Saviors answer; for they seemed to be
doubtful of it, and our Savior leaves them as doubtful in this point.

10. Thirdly, M. Downam goes about to confirm his opinion by those words of
our Savior: Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass, until
all those things (pointing as it seems (says M. Downam) toward Jerusalem,
as he sat on the Mount Oliuet) be fulfilled. But by this exposition of his, he
intermingleth these Prophesies more then any Catholic does, for he makes the
last words to appertain to the former part only: and to have no coherence
with that, which goes immediately before, which is as great a co^fusio^ as may
be. And because he saw it himself, he imagines our B. Savior upon the
sudden only, while he pronounces these words, to Downams fond imagination.
point toward Jerusalem. But we are not bound to believe all his imaginations,
nor reports neither, since he is no Evangelist, and therefore we also think
that he took somewhat to much upon him, when he presumed to change one only
letter in this narration, because it favored his imagination more then that
which he should have left, if he had been a faithful translator, which indeed
belonged unto him. For our Savior says not (all those things) as though they
were things a far of, but (these things) of which he had spoken. S.
Matthew, Omnia haec, S. Mark, Omnia ista, and S. Luke, only Omnia. So that me
thinks since all three Evangelists, were so diligent to repeat the word (All)
he should not have been so Downam corrupts the thxt of Scripture.
bold as to change it into (some) by applying it to part only of our Saviors
speech, and to the further part also. But we think our selves more bound to
believe the Evangelists, and the holy Fathers expounding them, then these far
fetched devises of M. Downam; and so we doubt not, that before this generation,
that is, this corruptible world passes, and both heaven and earth be renewed,
all those things shall come to pass. And this our Savior signifies, when
he immediately adds, that Heaven and earth shall pass, and not continue
always, as now we see them: but his words shall not pass unfulfilled.

11. Neither can M. Downam help himself, by telling us Luc. 21.
that Luc. 21. The question concerning Jerusalem is propounded alone: for well
we may grant him, that S. Luke only mentions that question, but we shall
still think our selves bound to believe S. Matthew, telling the same story,
and rehearsing the other questions also, which S. Luke answers as well as he,
though he omitteth the questions for breuities sake. And this very circumstance
of preaching the Gospel in the whole world, was not omitted by S. Luke, but
rather very particulerly signified in those words, donec impleantur tempora
Nationu^, while the times of Nations be fulfilled, that is, till all Nations
have had the gospel preached unto them, as S. Mark, and S. Matthew do
explicate, and S. Paul repeateth the very same Romans 11. Caecitas ex part
contigit in Israel, blindenes has happened in part in Israel, which S. Luke
said, Jerusalem calcabitur a gentibus. But how long? S. Paul, donec plenitudo
Gentium intraret, until the fulness of Nations should enter, which is the very
same, that S. Luke says in the words following already rehearsed.

12. Finally M. Downam is content to cite S. Chrysostom Downam makes much
account of one Father if he favor his fancies.
for his opinion, for it is the property of such men to e^^e me more the
authority of one Father, which favors their conceits, then of never so
many, if they be against their fancies: and so now we see this man, who would
not vouchsafe the Fathers, which Bellarmine alleged, so much as a word, is yet
content to bring out S. Chrysostom for himself, and he seems to mean the
place which a little after he cites again Homil. in Matthew. 24. And though we
might oppose many against one, and so think our selves before M. Downam: yet
we would have him know, that our doctrine stands not so much upon denials, as
his does; but rather upon the affirmative; Catholic doctrine stands not so
much upon denialls, as that of Protestants.
and so though we affirm and prove, that the Gospel is to be preached in the
whole world, before the end of the world; yet we deny not, but that it was in
some sort so preached before the destruction of Jerusalem, and think that our
Savior with his divine wisdom comprehended both in the same words: for the
one being a figure of the other, the same words may very well be understood of
both, as we see they were by the Fathers, though chiefly and for the most When
the proper exposition is to be preferred.
part of the proper and distinct preaching in the whole world as the words
properly taken do import. And we think S. Augustins rule very true that when
the words may be so taken, without manifest absurdity, that is the true
sense, and most certain: for otherwise we should have no certainty lib. 3. de
doct. christia. cap 7.
in understanding Scripture at all; and in this case, admitting both senses,
may fitly be used that vulgar saying of the Mathematicians: Quod fit in
circulo, fit in caelo: that which agreeeth in a circle, may (due proportion
observed) be applied to the Heavens, which are like to a circle in being round
as likewise the end of the world is to the destruction of Jerusalem in many
things. And thus much for the first difference about the word Consummation.

13. But now there remains another about the great Tribulation, which M.
Downam likewise denies to be any other, then that of the Jews, and would
feign father this exposition upon S. Chrysostom also; which as in the other
we may grant to be probable; but only M. Downam will deny that of S.
Augustine and other Fathers; for none of the^ By the great Tribulation Matthew.
24. is meant the persecution of Antichrist a little before the end of the world.
are so forward as he in denying, because they had not his spirit of
contradiction: and indeed the matter is so plain, that he had need to have an
hard forhead that should deny it. S. Mark cap. 13. says: In illis diebus post
tribulationem illam sol contenebrabitur etc. In those days after that
Tribulation, the sun shall be darkened etc. which happened not after the
destruction of Jerusalem, except M. Downam will run to that shift to say, that
it happened after, though it were long first: which though it were very
ridiculous and absurd in it self, yet S. Matthew. also wholly excludes it, with
adding statim, forthwith: Statim autem post tribulationem dierum illorum sol
obscurabitur etc. And straight after the tribulation of those days, the sun
shall be darkened etc. And here I leave M. Downam in this strait, hoping he will
learn to attribute more to the Fathers expositio^s hereafter, seeing them so
conformable to Gods word.

14. And to conclude this Chapter, let us see, what M. Downam has replied
against Bellarmines answer to the objection, Bellarmine proved his Minor, to
wit, that at none of those Bellarmines two latter solutions, not misliked by M.
Downam; though if his distinction of preaching, but not receiving the Gospel
in the whole world, were to the purpose, he should grant the preaching to have
been properly in the whole world, and so contradict himself and fall into the
absurdities before mentioned, or else be enforced to yield to Bellarmines first
solution also, which he so eagerly impugneth, that S. Paul Romans 10. took the
time past for the time to come, which he calls a cauillation, Romans 10.
thinking that he may be bold with Bellarmine: but yet he might have borne a
little more respect to S. Augustine, whose Downams immodesty.
solution it is, especially having so little to say against it. You shall
hear his own words. But say I, the Apostle proves, that the Jews had heard
the Gospel, because the sound of the preachers thereof, was gone through all
the earth, and therefore they from whom the Gospel proceeded to other
Nations, ca^^not be ignorant thereof. And now let any man judge, if it had not
been more wisdom and modesty for M. Downam, to have alleged S. Chrysostom
whose exposition this is, as Bellarmine did S. Augustine, then to come out with
an (I say) only affirming but proving nothing, neither by authority or reason,
as likewise to have admitted both these expositions for probable, as Bellarmine
does, and not set one Father against another, who agree well enough, and are
not so addicted to their own private judgment, that they condemn any other
probable opinion, though they think their own more probable. Now whether of
these two opinions is more probable, I leave to others to examine, since it
were from my purpose to discuss that question. But if M. Downam will needs
contend, I remit him to Cardinal Tolets exposition upon this place, where he
explicateth, and defends S. Augustines opinion, against whom if he has any
thing to say in this point, he shall not go unanswered. But I would wish him
rather to prove, then to scoff, especially at S. Augustine and other
Fathers; otherwise to any discret Reader he will seem too ridiculous, though
he uses all his Sophistry, as he does here, by telling us, that the Gospel
could not bring How the Gospel was in the whole world in the Apostles time.
forth fruit, unless it were actuallie; and to show his great learning notes
the same sense in the margent both in latin and greek. But he must know, that
as it is necessary, that the Gospel should be actuallie in some place of the
world, before it brings forth fruit; so is it sufficient, that it be
vertuallie in the whole world: and the very increasing and extending it self,
is one manner of ^ringing forth fruit, of which the Apostle speaks; which
could not be, if already the Gospel had been actuallie in the whole world,
and therefore it is to be understood only vertuallie, in respect of the whole
world, as is well declared by the example of a City set on fire in some
places, which may truly be said to be all on fire vertuallie, though actuallie
only some parts of it be so. And thus we have seen what M. Downam has been
able to say for himself, not having omitted any shift of his, except he
would have us repeat the same thing as often as he does, as now at the very
end, citing afresh those words of S. Paul, that the Gospel is preached among
all creatures, that are under Heaven; which Bellarmine did put in objection,
and answered three ways, as we have seen.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. Containing the second Demonstration.
THE second demonstration (says Bellarmine Roman Empire; for we must know that
the Roman Empire is at length to be divided into ten Kings; of which none
shall be, or be called the King of the Romans, although all of them shall occupy
some Provinces of the Roman Empire, as now the King of France, the King of
Spain, the Queen of England, and perhaps some others do hold some parts of
the Roman Empire, and yet are no Roman Kings, or Emperors, and so long as
this is not effected, Antichrist cannot come.

This Iraeneus proves l. 5. out of Dan. cap. 2. and 7. and Apocal. cap. 17.
for in the 2. chap. of Dan is described the succession of the chiefest
Kingdoms, unto the worlds end, by a certain Statua or Image, whose golden
head signifies the first Kingdom, that is of the Assyrians; the silver breast
is the second Kingdom, that is of the Persians: the brazen belly the third
kingdom, that is of the Grecians. the Iron legs the fourth kingdom, that is
of the Romans which for the longest space, was two fould, as the legs are
two, and longest. Furthermore out of the two legs there grew ten toes, and in
them the whole Statua ended; for that the Roman Empire was at length to be
divided into ten Kings, none of which shall be the King of the Romans, as none
of the toes is a leg. Likewise in the 7. Chapter, the Prophet Daniel most
clearly designeth the same 4. Kingdoms by 4. beasts, and adds that out of
the last Beast, there shall arise ten horns which signifies the ten last
Kings which shall arise out of the Roman Empire, but shall not be Roman
Emperors, as the horns arise out of the Beast, but are not the Beast it
self.

Finally S. John cap. 17. Apoc. describes a beast with 7. Rome, and that the
seven heads are those 7. hills, and likewise 7. Kings; by which number are
understood all the Roman Emperors. The ten horns he says to be ten Kings,
who shall reign together at one time. And least we should think, that these
shall be Roman Kings, he adds that these Kings shall hate the harlot and make
her desolate, because they shall so divide the Roman Empire amongst themselves,
that they shall utterly des^roy it.

Besides the same is proved out of S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2. where And now what
deteyneth, you know, that he may be revealed in his time only, that he which
now houldeth do hold, until he be taken out of the way, and then shall that
wicked one be revealed. etc. where S. Paul not daring to write plainly of the
overthrow of the Roman Empire, which notwithstanding he had by word of mouth
plainly explicated unto them, speaks in that sort; and the sense is: You know
what hinders the coming of Antichrist: for I have told you, that the Roman
Empire hinders, for that their sins are not yet at their full height; and
Antichrist shall not come before, who shall take away this Empire for their
sins. Therefore let him that now holds the Roman Empire, hold it still: that
is, let him reign till he be taken out of the way, that is, abolished; and
then that wicked one shall be revealed. So do the Greek and Latin Fathers
expound it, S. Cyril Catechesi 15. disputing of this place. The foresaid
Antichrist (says he) shall come when the times of the Roman Empire are expired
S. Chrysostom upon this place: When the Roman Empire shall be taken away then
shall Antichrist come, Theophilactus, and Oecumenius write to the same effect.

Of the Latins, Tertullian in Apologerico cap. 32. says, that Christians do
pray for the continuance of the Roman Empire, because they know, that when
that Empire is overthrown, there shall a great calanuty fall upon the world.
And Lactantius l. 7. cap. 15. explicating those things which shall go before
Antichrist, and the end of the world, says: the Roman name by which the world
is now governed my mind is afraid to speak it, but I will speak it, because
it shall be shall be taken from the earth, and the Emptre shall returneinto Asia,
and the East shall ruie again, and the west serve. S. Ambrose upon. 2 Thessalonians.
2. says, that after the defection, and abolition of the Roma Kingdom,
Antichrist shall come.

S. Hierome quaest. 11. ad Algasiam expounding the a me S. Paul says: Unless
there come a revolt first that all Nations which are subject to the Roman
Empire, revolt from them; and vides the Roman Emotre be first desolate, and
Antichrist go before, Christ will not come, only that the Roman Empire which
now houldeth all Nations, pass and be taken away, and then Antichrist shall
come. Finally S. Augustine lib. 20. de ^iuitate dei, cap. 19. expounds the
same place thus: Only let him which now reigns, raygne till he be take out of
the way and then that wicked one shall be revealed, by whom no man doubts, but
that Antichrist is signified.

Now that this sign was not fulfilled at those times, in Anti trinitarians of
Transiluania say, that Antichrist came, that is about the year of our Lord
200. it is manifest, because then most of all did the Roman Empire flourish,
and so continued long after.

Likewise that it has not bin fulfilled at any time hitherto, Roman Emperors,
and by the wonderful providence of God, when the Empire failed in the West,
which was one of the legs of Daniels Statua, the empire of the East remained
sound, which was the other leg. But because the Empire of the East was to be
destroyed by Turks, as we see now it is, God erected again the former leg
in the West, that is, the West Empire, by Charles the Great, which Empire
lasts still.

Neither is it any obstacle, that Rome it self, according to S. John's
prophesy, is after a certain manner fallen, and has lost the Empire, for the
Roman Empire may well stand without the City of Rome, and he be called the
Roman Emperor who has not Rome, so that he succeeds another Roman Emperor
in the same dignity and power, whether he has more or fewer Provinces under
his empire: otherwise neither Valens, nor Arcadius, nor Theodosius the younger,
nor other their successors to Justinian, none of which had Rome, could have
been called Roman Emperors. Neither Charles the Great, and his successors, who
likewise enjoyed not the City of Rome had ever been Emperors, which is
manifestly false, for two reasons.

First, because for this only respect the Emperor which Charles was created
Emperor, by the consent of the Romans, as Paulus Diaconus testifies lib. 23.
rerum Romanarum, and was saluted Emperor from the Greek Emperor himself, by
his Ambassadors, as Ado testifyeth in his Cronicle of the year 810. and
honored as Emperor with presents by the Persians and Arabians, witness Otho
Frisingensis lib. 5. cap. 31. Finally the Lutherans boast, that they have three
Princes Electors of the Roman Emperor: therefore they cannot deny, but that the
Roman Empire lasts still.

Wherefore rightly Orosius lib. 2. cap. 4. comparing the Babylonicall Empire
with the Roman, says; that God has dealt far more mildly with the Romans,
then with the Babylonians, for after 1164. years that Babylon was builded, in
one day Babylon the head of that Empire was taken, the Emperor slain, and the
Empire overthrown and destroyed. But after as many years, that is 1164. that
Rome had been, Rome was taken by the Goths, but the Emperor Honorius, who
then governed, and the Roman Empire being in safety.

Hence appears how our Adversaries are deceived: for they thought that the
declination of the Roman Empire was S. Paul, S. John, and Daniel, and the
Fathers S. Irenaeus, S. Cyril, S. Chrysostom, Theophilactus, Oecumenius,
Tertullian, Lactantius, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome and S. Augustine say, that not a
declination, but a desolation is necessary.

But Luther, Illyricus and Chytraeus, object, that this demonstration makes
most of all for them: for it was foretold by S. John Apoc. 13. that the Beast,
which signifies the Roman Empire, was to be wounded to death, and healed
again by Antichrist, which surely was then done, when the Pope restored
again the west Empire which was almost perished, by giving to Charles the
Great the title and dignity of Emperor: therefore out of this transferring or
restoring of the Empire it is manifestly gathered, that the Pope of Rome is
truly Antichrist. See Illyricus l. contra primatu^ Papae. and Centur. 8. cap.
10. col. 751. and Chytraeus in cap. 13. Apoc. Illyricus confirms this
argument out of S. Ambrose who expounding the words of S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2.
saying, that Antichrist shall restore the Romans their freedom, but under his
own name: which the Pope seems to have done, when he created an Emperor for
the Romans, who notwithstanding should depend upon him.

I answer, we read not in S. John, that Antichrist Roman Empire; but this we
read, that one of the Beasts heads should dye, and a little after rise again
by the dragons, that is, the devils means, which almost all the ancient
writers expound of Antichrist himself, who will faigne himself dead, and by
the devils art will rise again, that he may imitate the true death, and
resurrection of Christ, and by that means he will seduce many.

So expounds it S. Gregory l. 11. ep. 3. Primasius, Beda, Haymo, Anselmus,
Richardus, and Rupertus in cap. 13. Apoc. and Charles the Great, but
Antichrist; for that head as S. John writes had power only two and forty
months, and blasphemed God, and those which dwell in Heaven, and ruled over
all Tribes, People, Languages and Nations, and all which dwell upon the earth
adored it; of which things we have not seen or read any in Charles the
Great, or in any of his successors: for Charles reigned longer then 42.
months, neither did he blaspheme God and his Saints, but rather gave them
wonderful reverence, and many of his successors have imitated his piety.

Finally neither Charles himself, nor any of his successors Tribe, People,
Tongue, and Nation, as is manifest to all men. Now S. Ambrose says not, that
Antichrist shall create a new Roman Empire which the Pope did, but that having
overthrown the Roman Empire, he shall restore the Romans their liberty; which
we read not that any Pope has done.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downa^ utterly, denies that there should be such an utter
desolatio^ of the Empire, as that there should not remain so much as the name
of the Emperor or King of the Romans, and then Bellarmines argument: wherefore
having denied the assertion, let us see, what he can say to the proofs, for
all the rest is altogether impertinent.

2. First then he answers to the two places of Daniel 2. and 7. together,
seeking many silly shifts to escape the upon the desolation of the Empire in
the West, it was divided among ten Kings at the least; whereof none was
called King of the Romans. Whereby he would infer, that the division Ten
Kings shall divide the whole Roman Empire among them, so that there shall be no
Roman Emperor in their time.
of the Roman Empire into ten Kings, argues not the utter desolation thereof,
since at that time there were 10. Kings at the least, and yet besides a Roman
Emperor in the East. But I would ask M. Downam, whether those ten Kings had
all, or only part of the Roman Empire divided amongst them? and if he must
needs answer, only part, the^ it is no marvel, though there were a Roman
Emperor together with them; but the miracle had been, if M. Downa^ could have
showed us ten Kings, that had all the whole Empire divided among them; and yet
have found us a Roman Emperor that had some part of it; which because he
neither has, nor can do, therefore when those ten Kings shall come, that
Daniel speaks of, there shall be no Roman Emperor as there was in the time of
those Kings which M. Downam mentions, by which we plainly see, that he
spoke from the purpose of a quite different matter from Daniel, who likewise
speaks of ten Kings who should succeed the Roman Emperors: even as they had
succeeded the Grecians, and these the Persians, and these again the Assyrians;
whereas M. Downam tells us of 10. Kings, who lived together with the Roman
Emperors. And by this time I think M. Downam will wish, that he had not
returned Bellarmines argument upon him, since he sees, how little credit and
how great shame will return to himself by this returning. For not only
Bellarmine, but any other, though never so mean a scholar will laugh to hear
M. Downam infer upon the coming of those his western Kings, the coming of
Antichrist also, who they know is not to come, so long as there is any Roman
Emperor remaining, how many Kings soever besides come or go; and they will
likewise smile at M. Downams cunning, which he used to bring in this returning
Argument, in that he puts Bellarmins argument into a new form, and makes
him immediately infer the not coming of Antichrist, by the not coming of the
Downam changes Bellarmines argument.
10. Kings, whereas he only proves the utter desolation of the Roman Empire by
their coming, and succeding in all the Dominions of that Empire; and finally
some of his friends will wish, that he had kept that diversity of reading the
Scripture (some having after the Beast, others with the Beast) Apc. 17. 12.
till it might have stood him in better steed.

But yet you shall hear M. Downam dispute more deeply, for having cited part
of Bellarmines words, he sets down his first answer in these words.
Answer 1. This argumentation of Bellarmine implies a contradiction for if
there be in Daniel described a succession of Kingdoms, which shall continue to
the end of the world, whereof the Roman is the last; then the Roman Empire shall
not viterly be destroyed before the coming of Antichrist, which goes before
the end of the world. But what will you say, M. Downam, if the Roman Empire be
not the last Kingdom, which Daniel describes? Will you confess that it
shall be destroyed, before the coming of Antichrist, as well as before the end
of the world? Does not Bellarmyne urge out of Daniel, as the last succession,
ten Kings signified by the ten toes, and the ten Downam forgets what he
impugneth
horns? Is not all this disputation about them? Are you grown into that heat
of passion, that you forget what you impugn? Surely the^ it is time for you to
dispute no longer, and if you will needs be doing, at leastwise, take heed of
these returning arguments.

Thirdly M. Downa^ confessing, that he leaves the common opinion, and
follows another of the learned, especially of these later times, affirms,
that the 4. Kingdom mentioned in those Chapters of Daniel, is that Kingdom of
the Seleucidae, and Lagida which tyrannized over the people of Jury; the former
being Kings of Syria, and the later of Egypt: but this he proves not any
otherwise, but by a bare repetitio^ of the same assertion, though he begins
with a (For) as though he would have said something, but we are content to
think, that he has somewhat in store for hereafter: since he promises, that
hereafter this shall be showed to be most true, only in the mean time he must
give us leave to hold the common opinion till we know who See. Chap. 16.
these learned men be, that durst invent a new particular opinion except they
can prove it most clearly, as M. Downa^ says and we will believe, when we see
it, for now it seems very probable, that those iron legs signify the Roman
Empire, as well for their length, as Bellarmine well noted, and M. Downa^
negligently if not craftily omitted in the alleg^tion of his words, putting in
an (etc.) when he came to that place, as also for their strength, in which the
4. Beast also excels, The Roman Empire signified by the 2. iron legs of
Nabucodonozors statua and the 4. beast. Dan. 7.
as the Prophet himself expresses: Quomodo ferru^comminuit and domat omnia,
sic co^minuet, and conteret omnia haec. As iron breaks and tameth all
things, so shall (that kingdom) break and tear in pieces all these former
kingdoms: neither would I have the Reader deceived with the opposition of
learned, to common, which he finds made by M. Downam, by thinking that he
meant, that the ancient opinion was houlden only by the common sort of people:
for no doubt he will acknowledge Bellarmine to be as learned as him self, no
disprayse to him, who is the only learned man that yet he expresses to hold
this new opinion; and besides he will not easily condemn S. Irenaeus, whom
Bellarmine cyteth for unlearned; and yet his once not vouch safing to name him,
may make some doubtful, and therefore I will add S. Hierome, whom no man but
an ignorant will account unlearned. He therefore upon this very place Daniel
2. says: Regnu^ quartum perspicue pertinet ad Romanos. The 4. Kingdom
perspicuously belongs to the Romans: and cap. 7. Quartu^ quod nunc orbem
tenet terrarum, Imperiu^ Romanoru^ est. The fourth which now possesses the
world, is the Empire of the Romans. Thus much for the fourth Beast, and Iron
legs.

But now concerning the ten toes, and ten horns, M. Downams learned opinion
is, that by them were signified the ten Kings of the two foresaid Kingdoms,
which successively usurped dominion over the Jews, but for his proofs and
authors, By the 10. toes of Nabuchodonozors Statua and the 10. horns of the 4.
beast Dan. 7. are signified the ten Kings which shall divide the Roman Empire
among them.
he remitteth us to hereafter, as in the former, and so we must be content
to expect his leisure: neither will we do him that injury, to account
Porphyrius, against whom S. Hierome writes cap. 7. to be one of his great
learned men, though his opinion be somewhat like; for by the 4. Beast he
understands not the Roman Empire, but Alexander the great his 4. successors:
and afterward for the ten horns reckons up ten Kings, till Antiochus
syrnamed Epiphanes, which ruled in Macedonia, Syria, Asia, and Egypt, and all
this to the end, that those words osloquens ingentia, might be thought to be
spoken of Antiochus, and not of Antichrist. But howsoever M. Downam will be
ashamed to partake with this Apostata: yet am I sorry, that he comes so
near, and must be enforced to oppose himself, not only against S. Hierome,
but also against all Ecclesiastical writers till his time, for so he
affirms: Dicamus, quod omnes Scriptores Ecclesiastici tradiderunt, in
consummatione mundi quando regnum destruendum est Romanorum, december futuros
Reges, qui orbem Romanum interse diuidant, and vndecimum surrecturu^ etc. Let
us say that which all Ecclesiastical Downam joins with Porphyry an Apostata
against all Ecclesiastical writers.
writers have delivered unto us, that in the end of the world when the Roman
Kingdom is to be destroyed, there shall be ten Kings, who shall divide the
Roman world among them, and that there shall arise an eleventh little King etc.
But if M. Downam will be so mad, as to oppose himself to them all; surely we
have no reason to follow him, but rather to endeavor to recall him, as we
heartily wish we might.

Finally M. Downam is content to suppose, that Daniel had spoken in those
places of the Roman Empire, and then he will have the 10. horns, and 10. toes,
to signify the several Kings of that kingdom; which evasion very worthily
he confirms by the example of the Seleucidae and Lagidae their Kingdoms and
Kings, which were not all one, and yet the Kingdoms in his exposition were
signified by the fourth Beast and iron legs, and the Kings by the 10.
horns, and 10. toes. And is not M. Downam a wise man, think you, to confirm
one absurdity with another far greater, and which he knows his adversary
will much less grant, then that, Downam childishly confirms one absurdity
with another far greater.
which he goes about to prove? Besides that, this devise is so foolish that
every child will laugh at M. Downam for it; for who sees not, that the King
succeeds not his Kingdom, as the ten toes do the iron legs, and the ten
horns by the consent of all Ecclesiastical writers the 4. beast; but must of
force be united together? except we will make the Kingdoms of the Seleucidae,
and Lagidae, or of the Romans, to have been without their Kings and Emperors,
and afterward again the Kings and Emperors without their States: which is so
gross an absurdity, as me thinks M. Downam should see it; and it is little
less, to call these Kings the toes of their Kingdoms, whereas every man else
accompteth them the heads, in respect of their own Kingdoms, howsoever in
respect of others, they may be called toes, because of their succession in the
last place. And by this, that has been said, I doubt not it will appear to the
judicious Reader, whether Bellarmines argument, or M. Downams answer be more
impertinent and frivolous.

3. To the second proof out of the Apocal. 17. M. Downam Apoc. 17.
of every word spoken obiter, and by the way; as that Rome is the Harlot,
whereof S. Io. speaks, and that the seven heads signify all the Emperors of
Rome: the first of which M. Downam likes very well, but the second he
affirms to be untrue, because they are numbered, five are fallen, the sixth is,
and the 7. is not yet come; in which point I will not now much contend; because
M. Downam confesses, that it is besides the purpose. And if hereafter he can
bring any other exposition more probable, he shall find me very ready to allow
of it, though he might have used more moderation in his censure, Downam not
moderate in his censure.
since he cannot choose but know, that many great authors have taken the number
of 7. in this place indefinitely; as without all question in many other places
it is to be taken; and his difficulty must be solued by himself, since that in
this very chapter he affirms that Apoc. 13. by the Beast with 7. heads is
meant the Roman State, and that under the Roman Emperors especially: and yet
by the head which was wounded, which he makes the 6. he likewise understands
the State of the Emperors, which besides the difficulty common to Bellarmine,
inuolueth a contradictio^ peculier to M. Downam. Neither will I stand now to
discuss with M. Downam, whether Rome be the Seat of Antichrist or no, or how,
and in what state; only I must advise him, that Bellarmine affirms not, that
the Whore of Babylon is the seat of Antichrist, as neither that Rome after
the desolation of the Empire is the Whore of Babylon: but these are M. Downams
own additions, See cap. 13.
which if he will have granted, he must first prove them in their due places.

But now to come to that, which Bellarmin would prove; M. Downam first is
enforced to yield, that these ten horns signify 10. Kings, which shall reign
together, and only can help himself with affirming, that these are not the
same ten horns whereof Daniel speaks, which reigned successively. For which
point I remit my self to that, which has been said in the former proof;
besides that it is no small confirmation that S. John must needs be understood
of 10. Kings, which reign together, since their words are so like, and S.
John may be thought to expound Daniel, whom here M. Downam cites cap. 11
perhaps through the Printers fault; since that chapter makes not to his
purpose, and therefore was never mentioned in the whole precedent discourse.
Well it is now at length agreed upon, that there shall 10. Kings reign
together. Wherefore it only remains to prove, that in the time of these 10.
Kings, there shall be no Roman Emperor, and consequently that the Roman Empire
shall be utterly destroyed; and so it is time for M. Downam to bestirre himself:
and to use al his iugling tricks. First then he brings in Bellarmines first
proposition, in the beginning of the question for an argument in this place,
and not truly neither. But it will be best to hear M. Downams own words. How
then (says he) does Bellarmine prove, that before Antichrist comes, the
Roman Empire shallbe so utterly destroyed, as not the name of a Roman Emperor
or King of the Romans should remain? because the Empire shallbe divided among
10. Kings which are not Roman Kings etc. Whereas Bellarmines words are these:
We must know that the Roman Empire is at length to be divided into ten Kings,
of which none shall be, or be called King of the Romans: where you see not only
the being, but also the name of Roman Kings is excluded. But (says M. Downam)
he that is none of those 10. Kings, may have the name of the Emperor or King
of the Romans; as namely the beast which was, and is not, though it be, which
is the 8. head, and is one of the 7. that is to say, the Emperor erected by
the Pope.

This found and foolish conceit, that the beast which was, and is not, is the
Emperor erected by the Pope, shall in other places be largely confuted. Now I
would only know, how this Emperor can be, when the whole Empire is divided
among those other 10. Kings, as Bellarmine affirms, and proves out of this
very place, as we should have seen ere this, had not M. Downam interrupted us
with his impertinent disgressions, which perhaps foreseeing and fearing, he
puts another question somewhat more to the purpose. And why may none of
these be called the King of the Romans? first forsooth, because they shall hate
Rome, and make her desolate. But he might have kept his (first) and (forsooth)
in his purse instead of money: for Bellarmine gives but one reason, which is
the foresaid words of Scripture, adding only the exposition of them, which
because M. Downam could not impugn, he though best to divide, that so having
separated the exposition from the place of Scripture, the one might want
authority, and the other be easily shifted of, as he does in these words: As
though he that has the title of the King of the Romans, may not hate Rome,
notwithstanding that title, as indeed some of the Emperors have done: which
evasion had been too ridiculous, if he had added Bellarmines exposition, to wit,
that the Scripture testifies that these Kings shall hate the harlot, and make
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire,
because they shall so divide the Roman Empire amongst them, that they shall
utterly destroy it. Where by the way M. Downam may understand, The Roman
Empire destroyed by the 10 Kings.
that by Rome is not only understood the particular City, but also the whole
Roman Empire, of which in S. John's time Rome was the head, and so denominated
the whole, as that which the Logicians would call principale Analogatum. Now,
how can the utter destruction of this Roman Empire be more significantlie
declared, then by being hated, made desolate, and naked, have her flesh eaten,
and finally be burnt with fire? And how can any man imagine, but that the 10.
Kings which shall bring all this to pass shall be utter enemies as well of the
Emperors so long as there are any, as likewise of the Empire? And by this time
I imagine M. Downam will be persuaded that Bellarmine used no circular
disputation, but confirmed his doctrine by an express place of Scripture. But
least there should want a circular disputation, M. Downam brings in an
experience approved only Downams petitio principij.
by his own opinion, but altogether denied by Bellarmine and all Catholics,
of the Roman Empire already dissolved, and divided betwixt Antichrist and ten
Kings, the title and name of Emperor still remaining; by which to any
judicious Reader he makes himself so ridiculous, that his bragging of his
former proofs out of this place, that Antichrist is come, and that the Pope is
Antichrist, will hardly be believed, and at leastwise I doubt not, but men
will stay their censure, till they see those proofs examined.

4. M. Downam coming to the third proof, very courteously admits it,
because it is so manifest that he These. 2. is to be understood of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the Roman Empire: but then he manfully denies that either the Apostle or any
of the Fathers, excepting Lactantius, whose prophecy (says M. Downa^) in this
point the Papists themselves do think to be erroneou^, do say that the Empire
of Rome shall so utterly be abolished, as that not so much as the name of the
Emperor or King of the Romans shall remain. Where first we have the
authority of Lactantius so plain, as no evasion can be found to shift it of;
and therefore M. Downam is enforced to call his prophecy erroneous, and is not
ashamed to affirm, that it is held so by Catholics, even in this point. For
cofirmation of which he is alleged by Bellarmine, which no doubt is a point
of egregious impudency. But we see noe cause, why we Downa^s impudency.
should not more esteem the authority of Lactantius, so ancient and learned a
writer, then of a thousand M. Downams, especially since both the Scripture,
and Fathers favor his opinion so greatly. For what is de medio fieri, but to
be quite taken away? and I believe M. Downam would be loath to stand to the
hazard, if there were order given by some in authority, vt ipse de medio
fieret. And this the Fathers took to be so plain, that they thought it needed
no exposition, though sometime they use other words, which signify the same
utter desolation, as S. Cyril, when the times of the Roman Empire are expired;
Tertull. when the Empire is overthrown; S. Ambrose, after the defectio^ and
abolitio^; S. Hierom, except all Nations which are subject to the Roman Empire,
revolt from them: and unless How many waves the Fathers affirm the utter
destruction of the Roman Empire and why they spoke sparingly of this point.
the Roman Empire be first desolate, pass, and be taken away. And S.
Augustine opposes to be taken out of the way, to reigning. So that when the
Emperor is taken out of the way, he shall reign no longer, which is all one
as to say, he shall be no longer Emperor. Surely it is hard to express the
utter desolatio^ of any Kingdom, with more significant words. And yet
Bellarmine told M. Downam a very good reason, why both the Apostle, and the
Fathers would speak somewhat sparingly in this point, to wit least it might
be offensive to the Roman Emperors, in whose times they lived, and therefore
we see how fearefullie Lactantius speaks, and how Tertullian brings it in
without offense, saying, that Christians pray for the continuance of the Roman
Empire. And M. Downam S. Hierome, Qui tenebat, de medio sit etc. which he
translateth, He which held, is taken away etc. putting the preter-perfect,
Downam translateth not well.
for the present tense, and so he should have said, He which held, is in taking
away, or have added some other sign, which might have signified that it was in
doing, but not done, which is most true, both in S Hieroms time, and ever
since, and before too; and the nearer we see the Roman Empire to draw to an
end, the nearer we may likewise think, that Antichrist draws, as S. Hierome
affirms: but till that (fit) be made (factus est) that is, till the Roman
Empire be utterly overthrown indeed, Antichrist shall not come, how near
soever he be, which S. Hierome, and all the Fathers plainly affirm, as we
have seen. Neither can M. Downam himself think, that the Empire was taken
away in such sort in S. Hieromes time, as was necessary before Antichrists
coming and revealing, since that he himself dares not affirm, that he came
then in such sort, as S. Paul describes 2 Thessalonians. 2. Wherefore he must either
reject S. Hierom in this also, or else expound him, as I have done. And it is a
pretty matter, that the Apostle, and the Fathers telling us, that the Roman
Empire hinders Antichrists coming, M. Downam should still bear us down,
that the Empire as it is now, hinders not Antichrist, but rather furthereth.
But I hope men will rather have the Apostle, and the Fathers to stand by them
in the day of judgment, when they shall give account of their faith, in this
point, then M. Downam, who will have more then he can do, to answer for
himself. The Holy Ghost well foresaw, that the Roman Empire should be in these
times, as we now see it, and no doubt would not have affirmed so absolutely,
that it hinders Antichrists coming, if at any time it could have been
together with him, or have furthered him; otherwise M. Downam There now a
Roman Emperor indeed, and not in name or title only.
would give us to understand: for there is now an Emperor of the Romans
indeed, and not only in title without the thing it self, as we see the whole
world acknowledges, even the Protestants themselves; and who but M. Downam
would affirm that the Emperor that now is, has no Provinces? For as for Rome
he grants, that it is not necessary, that he should Germany nothing with M.
Downam? It should seem, that he is become a great despiser of the world, since
that which all Christian, and Infidel Princes and people esteem so much, he
accoumpteth nothing.

5. To conclude this Chapter, M. Downam goes about to reply upon Bellarmines
answer to the objection of Luther and the rest; and tells us, that it is
evident, that the former Beast Apoc. 13. figureth not Antichrist, but the Roman
state, and that under the Roman Emperors especially; but it had been well, that
he would Bellarmine cites, to whom we may add S. Irenaeus l. 5. cap. 28.
Arethas, S. Methodius, and S. Hippolytus in orat. de The former beast, Apoc.
13. signifies Antichrist. Apoc. 13. See cap. 15.. 3. and 4. and part. 2. c. 3.
n. 8.
consummatione mundi, can see any such evidence, but rather the contrary, to
wit, that the former beast signifies Antichrist at least in one of his heads,
which might be plainly gathered out of the Text, if it were our turn to prove,
as it is M. Downams. But since we must answer, only his authority auouching a
new exposition without reason, moves us very little. Secondly M. Downam
tells us, that it is not said, that one of the heads did saigne it self
dead, and by the help of the Devil did rise again (which needs not (says
he) if the death were counterfeit) but that one of the heads had received a
deadly wound, and was cured again. But we knew thus much before he told us
so; neither does Bellarmine affirm, that the Scripture has that exposition in
it self, for then what need we seek for any other. The words of the Scripture
are, Vidi vnum de capitibus suis, quasi occisum in mortem. I saw one of his
heads, as it were slain to death. Where we se a (quasi) which M. Downam
omitted, but the Fathers made so great accoumpt of it, that they chiefly
grounded their exposition upon it, especially because they knew very well, that
if it had been no feigned, but a true and real death, it had passed the devils
cunning to have recovered him; except M. Downam will think that the Devil can
do true miracles, as he seems to insinuate, by saying, that the Devils help
neded not, if the death were countersait; but yet we will think better of
him, then that he will fall to open blasphemy, and will only tell him, that the
Devils cunning was very needful to make this wound seem so desperate and
mortal, and to faygne death so cunningly, that al should remain so fully
satisfied, and verily persuaded, that the head had been dead indeed, and was
risen again by the power which the beast had by the Devil.

But here we must not pass over in silence M. Downams iuggling tricks: for
in his opinion the second Beast with two horns is Antichrist; for so he
obiecteth to Bellarmine, that he might have read, that the second beast which
is Antichrist, causes the Image of the beast, that is, the new Empire to be
made, and puts life into it. Now, this second beast had not yet appeared to
S. John, when the head of the former beast was healed by the power, which the
Dragon had given to the former beast: yet is M. Downam content to apply this to
the Pope also, not caring (as it seems) what he says, so that he may seem
to say something against the Pope. But by the former beast, as we have seen,
and Luther, Illyricus and Chytraeus in their objections suppose Antichrist is
signified, by the latter his chief Precursor, and false Prophet, who shall
cause his followers to errect Statua's, and Images of Antichrist, out of By the
later beast
which by his procuring the Devils shall speak, and give a^swers, and other
signs of life, as sometimes happened among the Apoc. 11. is signified
Anticrists false Prophet.
Paga^s and Idolators. And this is the exposition of the ancient Fathers: by
which all M. Downams devise of the new Empire erected by the Pope, becomes
too too foolish and ridiculous. And if I were to dispute, and not to answer, I
would ask how the Roman Empire came to have 7. heads together? Perhaps he
might have found two horns, as the second beast had, by reason of the East and
West Empire. But now I will not urge him any further, since his folly is more
then notorious already.

6. Finally M. Downam would make us believe, that Bellarmine fights with his
own shadow, when he inuincibly proves, that the head which was healed, is
not Charles the Great, for (says he) by the head is not meant any one Man, but
the state and succession of Emperors. And has he not amended the matter well,
think you, that whereas Bellarmine proves, that it could not be Charles,
because he reigned longer then 42. months, M. Downam answers it is true, it
could not be Charles, but yet it might be the State and succession of
Emperors, as though this endured less time then Charles, containing both him
and all the other Emperors? Can there be any Downams ridiculous absurdity.
thing more ridiculous then this? And is M. Downam any better then a shadow
for Bellarmine to fight withal? But yet he will have one saying more, and so
he tells us, that which is added concerning the Universality either of
worship or rule is not spoken of the head which was revived, but of the beast
which was to have one of his seven heads wounded to death, and cured again.
Well then, let M. Downam show us, where, or by whom the Roman Empire had either
worship or rule after the head was healed, that is (in his opinion) after the
Empire was restored by the Pope, but only in Charles the Great, and his
Successors? If he cannot show us any such matter any where else, let him
confess, that this Universality of rule and worship cannot befound in the
Roman Empire, but only in Antichrist; as neither he can show us, that any of
the Roman Emperors after Charles the Great blasphemed God and his Saints, so
as this head or beast is said to do. But yet to do him a courtesy, we will
not stick much to grant him as probable, that Whether the wounded head. Apoc.
13. be Antichrist or not.
the head is not Antichrist himself, but one of the 7. Kings, which shall
continue with Antichrist, and follow and assist him in all his wickedness, as
he may see learnedly expounded in Ribera one of Bellarmines religion and order.
And thus we will conclude, leaving the judicious Reader to judge, whether the
Protestants are deceived, thinking that the declination of the Empire was
sufficient for Antichrists coming, as Bellarmine modestelie affirms, after
evident proofs: or the Catholics be in an error, who think that Antichrist
comes not before the utter desolation of the Roman Empire, as M. Downam
rashelie avouches, only because he would exceed Bellarmine in words, since he
cannot come near him in proofs.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. Containing the third Demonstration.
THE third demonstration (says Bellarmine) is taken from the coming of Henoch
and Helias, who live still, and to this end, that they may oppose themselves to
Antichrist, when he comes, and conserve the elect in the Faith of Christ, and
at length convert the Jews, which notwithstanding without doubt is not yet
fulfilled. There be four places of Scripture concerning this matter; the first
Malac. 4. Behold I will send Elias the Prophet unto you, before the great day
of the Lord comes, and he will convert the hearts of the Fathers to the
Children, and the hearts of the children to their Fathers. The second, Eccle.
48. where we read of Helias: Who were received in a whirle-wynd of fire, in a
whirle-wynd of fyery horses: who art written in the judgments of times; to
assuage the Lords anger, to reconcile the heart of the Father to the son, and
to restore the Tribes of Israel. And cap. 44. Henoch pleased God, and was
translated into Paradise, to give to Nations penance. The third Matthew. 17.
Helias indeed is to come, and shall restore all things. The fourth Apoc. 11. I
will give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy 1260. days.

Theodorus Bibliander alleges also all these places in his Chronicle tab.
14. but he says, that by Henoch and Helias are Luther, Zuinglius, and the
rest, and at length he concludes. Wherefore (says he) it is a childish
imagination, or a Jewish dream to expect either Helias or Henoch, as persons
described by their particular proprieties. And the same teaches Chytraeusin
Comment. Apoc. 11. and they prove it, because those things, which are said of
Helias by Malachie, our Lord taught us to be understood of S. John Baptish,
Matthew. 11. He is Helias who is to come. And S. Hierom in cap. 4. Malach.
expounds it of all the quire of Prophets, that is to say, of the doctrine of
all the Prophets.

But to us it seems not a childish imagination, but a Henoch and Elias shall
come in their persons, and that the contrary is either an heresy, or an error
next door to heresy. It is proved first out of those four Scriptures: for
that the words of Malachie cannot be understood of any Doctors whatsoever, as
of Luther, Zuinglius, and the like, it is manifest, for Malachie says, that
the Jews are to be converted by Helias, and that he is chiefly to be sent for
the Jews, as is manifest by that: I will send unto you. And in Ecclesiasticus,
to restore the Tribes of Jacob. But Luther and Zuinglius have converted none of
the Jews.

That also they cannot be understood litterallie of S. John Baptist, but only
of Helias, it is manifest, because Malachie speaks of the second coming of
our Lord, which shall be to judge: for so he says: Before the great and horrible
day of the Lord comes: for the first coming is not called, a great and
horrible day, but an acceptable time, and the day of salvation. For which
cause, it is also added, Least perhaps coming, I strike the earth with
anathema and curse, that is to say, least coming to judgment, and finding all
wicked, I condemn all the earth: therefore I will send Helias, that I may have
some to save. But in the first coming our Lord came not to judge, but to be
judged, not to destroy, but to save.

To the words of our Lord Matthew. 11. we will answer a S. Hierome Isay, that
though in Comment. Malach. he did not think, that Malachie did speak of the
true Helias: yet in comment. Matthew. 11. and 17. he thinks and teaches the
contrary. Finally S. Augustine. lib. 20. Ciu. cap. 29. witnesses, that this
is the common interpretation of the faithful.

That likewise Ecclesiasticus speaks of the persons of Henoch and Helias, and
not of some other, it is proved; for Ecclesiasticus says, that Henoch shall
come to give the Nations penance, who is translated into Paradise, and that
Helias shall come to restore the tribes of Israel, who was taken away in a
chariot of fiery horses, which certainly agree not, but to those particular
persons.

In which place I cannot sufficiently marvel, what Iansenius his mind, that
expounding this place, he should write: Although it be the opinion of all the
Ancients, that Helias shall come, yet it is not convinced out of this place:
for it may be said, that Ecclesiasticus wrote that according to the opinion
received in his time, by which it was believed out of the words of Malachie,
that Helias shall truly come before the Messiah in his own person; whereas it
was not to be fulfilled in his own person, but in him who was to come in the
spirit and virtue of Helias. For if it be so as Iansenius says, it follows,
that Ecclesiasticus erred, and wrote false things. But if I be not deceived,
Iansenius changed his opinion, for writing in Cap. 17. Matthew. he teaches that
the place of Malachie cannot be litterallie understood but of the true Helias,
which he is likewise compelled to say of the place of Ecclesiasticus, who
without doubt expounds Malachy.

Now that the words of our Lord Matthew. 17. are understood of the true Helias,
yt is plain; because S. John was Helias shall come: and that they are not
understood of all doctors, but of one true Helias, it may be proved, first,
because the Apostles, who moved the question of Helias, where S. Peter, S.
James, and S. John, and they took occasion by the Transfiguration of our Lord,
where they saw Moses and Helias; wherefore when they ask; why therefore do
the Scribes say, that Helias must come first? they speak of that Helias, whom
they had seen in the mountain with Christ. Therefore Christ answering, Helias
indeed shall come and restore all things, speaks also of that particular
Helias who had appeared in the Transfiguration. Secondly the same is manifest
out of those words, and he shall restore all things; for S. Io. Baptist nor
any other has don that: for torestore all things is to recall all Jews, and
heretics, and perhaps many Catholics (deceived by Antichrist) to the true
Faith.

But Bibliander urges, because our Lord Matthew. 11. says S. Io. Baptist, He is
Helias, who is to come, as if he had said: He is the Helias promised by
Malachy. I answer: Our Lords meaning is, that S. John was the Helias
promised, not literally, but allegoricallie; for therefore he said first, and
if you will receive him, as if he said, Helias indeed promised in his own
person is to come in the last coming; yet if you will have also some Helias in
the first coming, receive John; Therefore also he adds: He that has ears
to hear let him hear, signifying, that it was a mystery, that he had said S.
John to be Helias.

Finally that the words of S. Io. Apoc. 11. are understood Henoch and Helias,
not of all teachers, it is manifest by that which S. John says in the same
place, that they were to be killed by Antichrist, and that their bodies should
remain unburied three days in the streets of Jerusalem, and that, after
three days they should rise again, and ascend into Heaven; which never
happened to any hitherto.

Notwithstanding David Chytraeus goes about to answer S. John would signify,
that many Lutheran Ministers were to be slain by the Papists, whom
notwithstanding God restores to life, when he takes them up to Heaven to live
for ever. Secondly he adds a little after, that those slain Ministers shall
have their corporal life restored them in the last day of Resurrection.
Thirdly and lastly he adds in the same place, that by this restoring to
life, may also be signified, that we see many other Ministers raised by God,
instead of those which were slain, with the same zeal and virtue.

But these answers are too light: for the first cannot be defended, because
the blessedness of the soul, is not the restoring Apocalypse shall rise again
before many, and shall be lifted up in Body, which certainly is not fulfilled in
the blessedness of the soul. Likewise the second solution is nothing worth, for
S. John says, that those two witnesses shall rise again, before the last
day, to wit, while the state of this world endures, for S. John adds, that
their enemies shall be stricken into a great fear by that resurrection, and that
a little after, there shall be an earth-quak and that 7000. men shall perish.
Finally the third solution is not to the purpose, for the Scripture says, that
the very same which were dead shall be raised again, and assumpted into Heaven.
But yet we see not any Lutheran Minister rise again, or be taken up to heaven.
Likewise S. John says, that Henoch and Helias, shall preach in sackcloth, and
the Lutherans bear such an hatred to sackloth, that if peradventure they have
any when they become Lutherans, they forthw^th cast them away.

Secondly, it is proved that Helias, and Henoch shall come in their own
persons in Antichrists time, by the consent Helias so affirm S. Hilarie, S.
Hierome, Origin, S. Chrysostom, and all other interpreters of S. Matthew. in
cap. 17. Likewise Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 17. and Theodoret in cap. vltimum
Malachiae, and S. Augustine tract 4. in. Joan. and Primas. in cap. 11. Apoc.

Of Henoch and Helias together, so affirm many which Apoc. as Bede,
Richardus, Arethas, who also adds, that it is without variety believed by
the whole Church, that Henoch and Elias are to come to oppose themselves to
Antichrist. Likewise S. Damascen lib. 4. cap. 28. S. Hippolytus martyr in orat.
de consu^matione mundi, and S. Greg. lib. 14. cap. 12. and lib. 9. cap. 4.
moral. and S. Augustine lib. 9. c. 6. de Genesis ad literam.

Thirdly it is proved, because otherwise there can be no reason given, why
these two were taken away before their Rab. Salomo^ in c. 5. Genesis do say, that
Henoch was slain by God before his time, because he was light and inconstant;
and they affirm that Helias, when he was carried up in a fiery chariot was
wholly consumed in body by that fire, and perhaps the Lutherans think the same,
who deny, that they shall return: yet all Catholics certainly believe, that
both of them live in their bodies: for that Henoch is not dead, the Apostle
teaches Heb. 11. Henoch was translated, that he might not see death; and that
neither he, nor Elias be dead, and yet shall dye, besides the already cited, S.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, and Ephiphanius do teach.

S. Irenaus lib. 5 speaking of Henoch and Helias. The Priests (says which are
the Disciples of the Apostles affirm, that those which are translated, are
translated thither (to terrestrial Paradise) and remain there until the
consummation, contemplating incorruption. Tertull. lib. cont. Iudaeos cap. 1.
of Henoch says thus: Who has not yet tasted death, as pretending eternity.
S. Epiphanius in Ancorato, of Henoch and Helias says thus: These two remain
in body and soul in respect of hope. S. Hierome in epist. ad Pamach. contra
Ioanne^ Hierosolymitanum. Henoch (says he) is translated in flesh: Helias
being in flesh is taken up to Heaven, not yet dead, and now inhabitours of
Paradise etc. S. Aug. lib. de peccato orig. cap. 23. Henoch (says he) and
Helias we doubt not, live in the bodies, in which they were borne.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downams first answer is, that though all this were true, to wit,
that Enoch and Helias were to come in their own persons, before the second
coming of Christ, and to oppose themselves against Antichrist (all which he
means in his second answer to deny:) Yet it follows not, that therefore
Antichrist should not be come before their coming. It is sufficient (says he)
that they come before his overthrow, and the second coming of Christ: and
therefore, if they were indeed to come, their coming might be yet expected,
notwithstanding the truth of our assertion, that Antichrist is already come.
But M. Downam did wisely not to stand much upon Helias and Henoch are to preach
in a manner as long as Antichrist is to reign.
this solution, for he could not choose, but know, that Henoch and Helias were
to preach very near as long as Antitichrist was to persecute and reign, since
that Apoc. 11. the time of their preaching is appointed to be 1260. days which
wants not much of three years and a half, or 42. months; which both S.
John, and Daniel appoint for Antichrists Kingdom, and therefore Bellarmine had
reason to affirm, that they were to come together, and to accompany one
another, which likewise must needs be granted by them, which admit that the
cause of their coming shallbe to oppose themselves to Antichrist, for it would
be very late to come a thousand years after, especially for them, which are
dead so many years before; wherefore M. Downam was something to free in this
first answer, but he will make a mends in his second, where he means to deny
all, that either the Scriptures or Fathers have affirmed, concerning the
coming of the setwo divine witnesses.

2. And to begin this his second Answer, he first cites Bellarmines words
falselie, making him say thus: There be 4. Scriptures to prove that Henoch and
Helias in their own persons shall come against Antichrist. As though
Bellarmine had affirmed, that in every Scripture of these four, both Henoch
and Helias had been named, or at leastwise spoken of; for so M. Downam seems
to charge him saying forth with: Howbeit this is a manifest untruth, for no
place of Scripture speaks of Henoch his return. But Bellarmines words are
these: Quatuor Scripturae exsta^t de haec re. There be four Scriptures
concerning this matter. Now whether any of these places speak of Henoch his
return or no, we shall see Downam alleges Bellarmines words falsely.
ere long: in the mean time it is sufficient, that the Reader note M. Downams
shuffling, and that Bellarmine affirms not that all these Scriptures speak
of Henoch, nor yet that he is named in any of them; wherefore his note in the
first place, is either malicious, or foolish, that this place makes no mention
of Henoch, but only of Helias: for of this there was never made any question,
but by himself.

Wherefore leaving these his shifts, let us hear what he can answer to that
place of Malachy. He denies that Elias, is meant Elias the Thesbite, but John
the Baptist: which he Malach. 4.
will needs prove also, because Luc. 1. the Angel says, that S. John should
go before our Lord in the spirit and virtue of Helias, Luc. 1.
that he may turn the hearts of the Fathers unto the Children etc. but who
sees not, that this is only to be Helias spirituallie and vertuallie, or as
Bellarmine speaks, allegorically? which no Catholic denies; but withal we
affirm, that Helias litterallie is to come in the time of Antichrist, as
Bellarm. proves out of the place of Malachy; which it seems M. Downam is
loath to hear of, and therefore he interrupteth him so disorderly with
proving, when it is his turn to answer. But we will bear with his rudeness,
so that he will be satisfied with any reason. Wherefore secondly, be brings
Matthew. 11. where he says, that our Savior most plainaly affirms, I. IX.
that John Baptist is that Helias who was to come. But we must Matthew. 11.
tell him ere he pass any further, that he is somewhat too bold to change our
Saviors words, who not without great cause said not, who was to come, as M.
Downa^ would make Downam corrupts the Scripture.
him; but who is to come; signifying plainly, that S. John Baptist coming had
not fulfilled the prophecy of Malachie, since that Elias was still to come
after him, and consequently that S. John Baptist was only Elias spirituallie
etc. as has been said; because he endeavored to convert the Jews, which
lived then, as Elias shall do those, which shall live in the time of
Antichrist, and both of the^ have for office to prepare for our Saviors
coming, S. John for the first, and Elias for the second. I omit M. Downams
exposition of the other words in that place as impertinent, because they are
not to this purpose: and as for his railing, we must be content to put up that
and more, at such good fellows hands.

Thirdly M. Downa^ alleges S. Hierome, who affirms, that the Jews and
Iudaizing Heretics think, that before their Messiah, Elias shall come, and
restore all things. Hence it is, that unto Christ this question is propounded
in the Gospel, what is that, which the Pharisees say, that Elias shall come?
To whom he answered: Elias indeed shall come, and if you will believe, he is
already come: by Elias meaning John. And therefore (says M. Downam) in
Hieromes judgment it is but the opinion of a Iudaizing heretic to expect the
coming again of Elias in his own person. But sure we are, that this is not
S. Hieromes judgment, if we speak of the second coming of our Savior,
since he himself in the 17. of Matthew. affirms of Helias, that he shall come
then iuxta corporis fidem, in bodily presence, and that in the first coming,
he came by S. John in virtue and spirit; by which it most plainly appears,
that he only condemns them for Jews and Iudaizing heretics, which will
not receive any Messiah, till they first see Elias in his own person, because
they expound the Prophet Malachy of the first coming of the Messiah, as M.
Downam does: only they differ that M. Downa^ thinks, that Helias is not
literally spoken of. In which point he erreth more grossly then they, as we
shall see afterward.

3. Now, that M. Downam has spent his own proofs be is content to begin to
answer Bellarmines, who proves that Malachy speaks of the second coming,
because he calls it a great and horrible day. Where M. Downam is not ashamed
to say, that Bellarmine gives the lie to the spirit of God, speaking in the
Angel, Luc. 1. and our Savior Matthew. 11. and 17. But Downame impudenty.
surely he deserves to have the lie given him, that is not afraid nor ashamed
to behave himself so impudently. Well it is our hard hap to have to do
with such men. Let us see, what he answers: for the application of the
Angel, and our Savior, we have already seen, that it was only a spiritual,
vertuall, or allegorical application, which hinders not the litterall sense
of the second coming, as Bellarmine proves. Malach. 3. v. 1.
But M. Downam answers to his argument, that the first coming may also be
called terrible, which he confirms out of Malac. 3. v. 1. where he speaks
most plainly of the first coming, and yet says: who may abide the day of his
coming? and who shall endure, when he appears, for he is like a purging
fire, and like fullers soap, and he shall sit down to try, and fine the
silver. But we may well oppose the authority of S. Augustine to M. Downam,
without doing him injury. He therefore lib. 18. Ciu. cap. 35. and lib. 20. cap.
25. and 26. as likewise Eusebius. lib. 5. demonst. Euang. cap. 28. and Theodoretus
expound these words of the second coming, though immediately before the
Prophet spoke of the first. But yet we will do M. Downam the courtesy to grant
that they are to be understood of the first with S. Cyril, Rupertus and others,
so that he will admit their interpretation in other points: for the sense is;
who can so much as think how great the glory of this day is, by reason of the
benefits which the Messiah shall bring with him to mankind? and who can
sufficiently admire or rather look upon so great a light and goodness? For he
shall be like a purging fire, by reason of the labors and afflictions, or rather
of the holy Ghost, which shall come in fyery tongues, with which he shall purge
the hearts of those which believe in him, and like the soap or her be of
Fullers, by reason of his grace, with which he shall make the souls of men
most pure and white; and he shall do this most seriously, and with great
diligence All which signifies not the torrible and horrible day, but an
acceptable and healthsome time. And here by the way we may note, what little
reason M. Downam, and his fellows have to leave S. Hieromes vulgar
translation, who Downam admits what inpretation, and Translation he lists
has: Quis poterit cogitare, and translate with other interpreters, Quis
sustinebit? Except they would admit the former exposition of them, which read
it so? But they will admit what they list, and reject what they list, and one
while they will have us believe, that the Gospel terrifieth not at all, and
an otherwhile, that it terrifieth as much as the old law, yea much more, even
as much as the second coming of our Lord to judgment. But since they take so
much liberty to teach what they list, we may likewise take leave to believe
them, so far as we list.

Well, let us see how M. Downam goes forward to prove that the first coming
of our Lord may be called terrible: Of the same coming (says he) the prophet
speaks in the beginning of the 4. Chap. Behold the day comes that shall
burn Malach. 4.
as an oven etc. showing how terrible it shall be to the wicked. But unto you
that fear my name (says the Lord v. 2.) shall the sun of righteousness
arise, and health shall be under his wings etc. But here we are constrained to
forsake M. Downam, since both Jews and Christians consent, that these words
are to be understood of the day of judgment, and the words themselves are so
plain, that they need no interpretation: and it was time for him to add
(etc.) in both periods, for otherwise every man would have seen, that the
proud and wicked are not to be consumed as stubble cast into the fire till
then, as neither, that they shall be trodden under the seete of the just like
ashes, as the Prophet affirms that they shall be in this great and terrible
Downam cutteth of the words which make most to the purpose.
day. Wherefore this illation makes plainly for us, if M. Downam will show us
as much courtesy now, as we did him in the former Chapter, that is, to grant,
that the Prophet continues still to speak of the same coming; though indeed
we need no such favor, since that in the very place in controversy, this
coming is called great and horrible, as Bellarmine urges. But M. Downam goes
on still with his citations Matthew. 3. 10. Now is the axe laid to the root of
the tree etc. Matthew. 3.
and verse 11. and 12. He that comes after me is mightier then I: he will
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, who has his sa^e in his hand
(using the like fimilitude that Malachy did) and will purge his floor, and
gather his wheat into his Granary, but will burn up the chafe with
unquenchable fire. All which makes very little to the purpose: for the sense
is, that hereafter the Jews shall have no privilege above other Nations, by
being the children of Abraham, except they did imitate his works: and that our
Saviors Baptism was of more force, the^ S. John Baptists, because he would
send the holy Ghost visible in tierie tongues, for which cause he is said to be
mightier then S. John, as likewise, because he will purge his floor in this
life with tribulations, and with the holy Ghost (as the Prophet Malachy said)
and after at the day of Judgment, gather his wheat into his Granary, and burn
up the chaff with vnque^chable fire; which who sees not, that it shall be
chiefly at his second coming, and in some sort in every man's particular
judgment, but in no wise at his first coming? And the rest seems nothing
terrible, except perhaps to the Jews; but that were without reason also,
since they are not made in any worse estate, then they were before, but only
other Nations are in better; so that their priuiledg is made common with
others, or rather instead of their particular privilege, they receive a common
benefit greater without comparison.

Finally M. Downam brings the prophesy of old Symeon Luc. 2. that our
Savior was put to the ruin, and rising of many: and Romans 9. he is called a
stumbling stone, and a rock of offense; Luc. 2. Romans 9.
upon which stone whosoever falls, shall be broken in pieces: but upon
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall all to grind him, Matthew. 21. But these
places are less to the purpose the^ the rest, for true it is, many Matthew. 21.
by their own fault and want of faith came to ruin by occasion of Christ's
coming, but this makes not his coming terrible, no more then any other
benefit can be accounted so, because the abuse of it causes harm to the
ab^sers, and in this sense and no otherwise is he called a stumbling stone, or
a rock of offense, for otherwise of it self, his first coming is only in
resurrectionem, and lapis summus, angularis, electus, pretiosus, 1. Pet. 2.
as S. Peter speaks, and to fall upon this stone, is to be scandalized, and
not to believe in Christ, which is a great misery Apoc. 2. and 21.
signified by S. John Apoc. cap. 2. and 21. by the first death, but they upon
who^ it falls taste likewise of the second death, which is a far greater
misery, and is to befall them in the second coming of our Lord to judgment as
a proper effect of that coming: whereas the other is not the effect of our
Saviors first coming, but of men's own wickedness, by which they are said to
fall and stumble upon him, by whom they might have risen, if they had taken
that benefit by him, which he came to procure them. And thus we see that the
first coming of our B. Savior was no way terrible Christ's first coming was
not terrible, as his second shall be.
of it self, but altogether comfortable and pleasant; so that this great and
horrible day of which the Prophet speaks, must needs be the day of his
second coming, which shall of it self, and properly be terrible, as
containing rather Justice and Judgment, then Mercy; which only was to be
found in the first, even toward the wicked themselves, whom he came not then
to judge, but to call to penance.

All these places of Scripture being thus easily answered, it was no marvel,
though M. Downa^ rested not content, and therefore answers further, that the
Hebrew word Norah signifies also Reverend, to be feared, or had in reverence,
as Genesis 28. 17. Deuteronomy. 7. 21. and so is translated by Tremelius and Iunius in
this place of Malachie. And thus both that word, and others of the same root
are used in the signification of reverence, or filial fear. And he cites in
the margent psalm. 13. 4. But M. Downam must know, that we esteem more of S.
Hierome, and other ancient interpreters, then of his new Tremelius and Iunius,
who we doubt not will favor their new opinions so much as they may, by any
color they can devise. Wherefore since the word may signify both reverence
and terror, and besides most usually it signifies terror, and particulerlie
in this place by the consent of all ancient interpreters and Fathers; we see no
reason why we should embrace this new particular opinion, but rather take the
same sense in this place, which is manifest, that the same words have Joel 2.
except M. Douma^ can show us, that the Sun was turned into darkness, and the
Moon into blood, before the first coming of our Savior. Finally there is no
doubt, but that the second coming is as full of reverence, and filial fear
as the first, and consequently even in this sense also were to be called
horible and terrible. Thus much for the 1. proof, that Malac. spoke of the
second coming.

Cardinal Bellarmine his second proof is, because it is added, least perhapps
I come, and strike the earth with a curse: which M. Downam applies to the
first coming, because our Savior at his second coming, shall without
peradventure strike the earth. But he might easily have bethought himself,
that at his first coming, without peradventure, our Savior was resolved not
to strike the earth with curses, but to replenish it with blessings: and this
resolution arose not from any merits, or good disposition of any, that lived
either then, or before, or after: but from his own infinite mercy and goodness,
by which he vouchsafed to make us his friends: being of our selves his enemies
so universally, that there was not one that could appease his wrath: and I
marvel much, that M. Downam should upon the sudden, only to avoid an
argument, attribute more to merits then ever any Downam attributes more to
merits the^ ever any Catholic did.
Catholic did, wherefore we may well hope, that he will admit free will also,
without which there is no merit, and which indeed that (peradventure)
signifies in this place: for in respect of Gods decre and knowledge, there
could be no doubt, what he was to do at either coming, but only how we would
dispose our selves, which by all probability those, which shall live at our
Saviors second coming, and above others the Jews, would not do in any good
sort; especially having then more hindrances, by reason of Antichrists
persecution, then ever before; had they not the assistance of these two holy
Prophets Henoch and Helias.

Finally the authority of Arias Montanus will stand M. Downam in very little
stead, though he accounts him the most learned writer among the Papists; for
how learned soever he was, his private exposition plainly both against Arias
Montanus
the exposition of the Fathers, and the text it self (as Bellarmine has
proved) can have no great force: and indeed this was the fault of that man,
that he trusted more to his own judgment, then to the authority of others,
which must needs please M. Downam well, and we are content to let it pass, so
long as he was content to submit all his private opinions to the Churches
censure, which M. Downam will not do; and therefore where the other was
sometime rash, he is still headlong, that is an heretic: and so we admit that
Arias in a rashness favored to much some of M. Downa^s heresies. And this shall
suffice for the first place of the Prophet Malachy.

4. Bellarmines second Scripture is the book of Ecclesiasticus, Helias, and
the other for Henoch, to which M. Downam answers: Ecclesiasticus Canonical
Scripture.
First, that although this book be very commendable, yet it is not of
Canonical authority, being but an humane writing, as appears not only by the
former place alleged, but also by that erroneous conceit concerning Samuel
Chap. 46. 23. But that this book is canonical, he may see manifestly proved
in Bellarmine l. 1. de yerbo Dei, cap. 10. and 14. by the authority of
Counsels and Fathers. Neither could Calvin D. Downams good Master find any
objection against this book in particular, though he censured it more hardely,
then M. Downam does. By which we imagine, that it will be an easy matter to
answer to these two objections, which M. Downam makes in this place: and
indeed they are plain fooleries, and therefore no marvel, though Calvin had
wit enough to omit them: for what can be more foolish, then to deny the
authority of Scripture, only Downa^s petitio principij.
because it favors his adversary in some questions in co^trouersy? Did ever
any Heretic deny any part of Scripture, with less reason then this? And for
the present question, I hope the Reader will remain satisfied with that, which
shall be said in this Chapter: and for the other of Samuel cap. 46. 13. I remit
him to that, which Bellarmine writes lib. 2. de Purgatorio cap. 6. Only I will
oppose to M. Downam the authority of S. Augustine, who as Bellarmine well
notes, having been doubtful lib. 2. ad Simplicianu^ q. 3. whether Samuel
himself appeared to Saul or no, affirmed without doubt that it was Samuel,
lib. de cura pro mortuis cap. 15. citing the place of Ecclesiasticus, which
before he had omitted. M. Downams second answer is, that in neither place it
is said, that either of them should come to oppose himself against Antichrist.
But what then? at least wise it is said, that they shall come to appease Gods
wrath, and to reconcile the heart of the father to the son, and to restore the
Tribes of Israel: and of Henoch, to give penance to Nations: all which we
learn out of the other places of Scripture, and by the exposition of the
Fathers, that it shall be in the time of Antichrist not long before our Saviors
second coming, and consequently that they shall oppose themselves to
Antichrist, since he shall strive to draw both Jews and Gentills from Christ,
and they will labor to convert them to Christ. And here I would have my
Reader note one of M. Downams ordinary shifts, to tell us what the argument
Downa^s ordinary shifte.
does not prove, omitting directly to answer to that, which it proves, and
for which it is brought. Thirdly he answers severally that Ecclesiasticus in
the first place wrote, according to the received opinion of his time, which in
M. Downams opinion was Eccles. 48.
false. But surely we have no reason, to believe him better then
Ecclesiasticus, and the Jews of his time, who were no doubt the true people of
God; which (whatsoever M. Downam may persuade himself by his special Faith)
others will greatly doubt of him; and as for our Saviors, and the Prophet
Malachies words, we have and shall sufficiently prove, that they were not
against Ecclesiasticus, nor the received opinion of his time, as neither
against us, who all agree, that Elias in person, and literally is to come,
before Downam condemns Ecclesiasticus and the Jews of his time.
the second coming of our Savior. And surely M. Downam is to bold with
Ecclesiasticus, and those of his time, to attribute unto them, the errors of
those Jews, which lived in our Saviors time, and were so addicted to this
world, that they would by no means understand, that their Messiah was to come
in that humility, in which our Savior came, which notwithstanding was plainly
foretold in the Scriptures which we have no reason to think, but that
Ecclesiasticus, and those of his time did understand aright, and consequently
knew well enough, that Elias was not to come at our Saviors first coming, but
at his second, since it is manifest in this place, that they expected his
coming literally, and in person. Now as for the authority of Iansenius, who
M. Downam prayseth, as he did before Arias Montanus, because he Iansenius
makes for him, to be one of the best writers among the Papists, there had been
no great cause of his commending him, if M. Downam had been disposed to have
dealt sincerely, since Bellarmine showed, how he changed his opinion in Matthew.
17. where he writes that the Prophet Malachie cannot be understood but of the
true Elias, and consequently must needs Downam deals not sincerely taking
the objection and omitting the answer
think, that Ecclesiasticus was not deceived in understanding him so. But this
is another of M. Downams tricks, to steal an objection from Bellarmine, and
omit his answer: where we might marvel at his impudent folly, but that it is
no new nor strange thing in him, as it was in Iansenius or any Catholic
Writer, to attribute an error to Canonical Scripture, which was the cause of
Bellarmines meruayling at Iansenius, and of his changing so absurd an opinion,
or rather error in his later writings, in which he does not only avouch and
prove this truth, but also affirms that it is the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, which none but Henoch, M. Downam triumphs, saying, that it is
Ecclesiast. 44.
a wonder, that Bellarmine would allege it for this purpose. But that having
nothing to say to the purpose, he is desirous to say something to bleare the
eyes of the simple. The original text has; Henoch pleased the Lord God, and
was translated for an example of repentance to the generations; that is, that
the generations present and to come, might be moved by his example to turn
unto the Lord, and to walk before him, knowing by his example, that there is a
reward laid up for those that turn unto the Lord, and walk before him, as
Henoch did. But will Bellarmine hence conclude, that therefore Henoch is to come
again in the flesh, to oppose himself to Antichrist?

Hitherto M. Downam. And this is all he has to say. Where first we see, that
he cannot deny, but that the latin text, which Bellarmine cited, made much for
this purpose: and there is no reason, but that we should attribute as much at
least, to the latin interpretation, as to M. Downams interpretation: since it
cannot be denied, but that there is The latin interpreter not to be rejected.
less suspicion of partiality in him, being so ancient, who made no doubt of
the sense, and therefore translated it in that sort, as it were to exclude M.
Downams devise; and since the latin Church has all this time received this
translation for Scripture, we must not deny it now, because it is contrary to
some Protestant opinions, especially since we see far greater difference in
other parts of Scripture, betwixt the original text, and some interpretations
allowed by the Church: neither of which the Fathers durst reject, but rather
embraced and expounded them both, as the word of God: and indeed who knows
not, that the chiefest certainty, that we have of either, depends upon the
approbation and authority of the Church, which cannot err in matters of this
moment. And I believe M. Downam will hardly give us any other sufficient
reason, why he belieueth these books to be Scripture, rather then others, or
this interpretation to be good, and others bad. But besides the authority of
the latin text, we think the Greek to be for us also, at leastwise no man can
deny, but that our exposition is conformable to the Fathers doctrine, who
affirm our assertion of Henochs coming, and consequently we are sure, that we
may safely expound it so, without danger of error, and that M. Downam has no
reason to deny our sense so peremptorily, M. Downams opinion of Henochs
translation makes as much for any other virtue, as for repentance contrary to
the Scripture.
though he think his own better, which we marvel not at. But further we
cannot well see, why Henochs translation should rather serve for an example of
Repentance, then of Hope, Religion, Justice, Innocence, Faith, Charity, or any
other virtue, if we admit M. Downams exposition; and yet he is said
particulerly, to be an example of penance, which comes very fitly for the
latin interpreter, and our explication, and agrees passing well with that,
which S. John writes Apoc. 11. that these two divine witnesses shall preach
amicti saceis, in sackcloth, which will be a good example of penance indeed.

5. About the third place Matthew. 17. 11. his first answer is, that by the
Evangelist Mark, who speaks in the present tense, Elias I. VIII.
indeed, coming first restores all things: the meaning of our Savior
Christ, appears to have been this, Elias quidem venturus fuit primum, and
restituturus omnia: Elias indeed was to come first, and was to restore Matthew.
17. Mar. 9. M. Downam egregiously corrupts S. Mark and S. Matthews Text.
all things. And you must note, that he puts S. Marks words, as he cites
them, as also his own interpretation in latin, in a distinct character, to
bleare the eyes of the simple, and make them believe, that they are both very
Scripture. And surely howsoever he may excuse the later, the first is somewhat
hard, since that S. Marks words are; Elias cum venerit primo, restituet omnia:
which the Protestant English Bible translateth; Elias verily when he comes
first, restores all things, where we see a (when) which sufficiently shows,
that Elias was not yet come; and besides both (venerit and restituet) are the
future, and not the present tense, and in the words following S. Mark has an
(and) which clears this matter greatly, Sed dico vobis, quia and Elias venit.
But I say unto you, that Elias is also come, which shows plainly that in the
former clause our Savior spoke of a future coming, as if he had said, Elias
shall come in person, and also is come in spirit in S. John Baptist, which only
was required at the first coming of our Savior. But nothing will serve
headstrong Heretics, and therefore M. Downam corrupts S. Matthew. Matthew. 11.
11. also, making him say, John Baptist is that Elias, who was to come, putting
it down in a distinct letter, as before: whereas the words are, Ipse est
Elias qui venturus est, where he could see the first (est) and translate it
truly, but not the second, because it was against him. But in this he deserves
some more favor then before, because he follows his Protestant translation,
which has, this is Elias, which was for to come: so sincerely do these men
translate Scripture. But yet he has one trick of his own here also, for he
adds the word (that) which his Bible has not, nor the Greek, because he
would have us think, that our Savior alluded to the place in Malachy, and
that S. John was that Elias there promised. But by this we see, that all, that
M. Downa^ says, is not Scripture, and therefore we are not bound to believe
him, when he tells us, that Elias was not promised literally, and that both
our Savior, and the Angel understood not the prophesy Malach. 4.
of Malachy literally of Elias the Thes^ite, especially since he brings no
other proof, but that they understood it allegorically of S. John Baptist,
which is rather against himself since that place must not only have an
allegorical, but also a litterall sense.

After this he comes to answer Bellarmines proof who inferred by the vision
which the Apostles had seen a little before of the true Elias, that they asked
of him, and consequently that our Saviors answer is of him also. To which M.
Downa^ answers, that it follows not, for the disciples spoke according to
the erroneous opinion of the Scribes, who understanding Malachy literally,
thought that Elias was to come in his own person, and thereupon (as it is
thought) inferred, that Christ Downam condemns the Apostles, and in some sort
our Savior himself.
was not the true Messiah, because Elias came not before him. But Christ etc.
where you see that the Apostles are condemned as followers of the erroneous
Jews, as before Ecclesiasticus, and the Jews of his time were also: and our
Savior is behoulding to M. Downam, that he did him the favor to let him go
fre from this imputation, though he charge him also with not answering to the
purpose, and not freeing, but rather co^firming his disciples in their error,
by telling the^, Elias quidem ve^turus est, and restituet omnia. Elias indeed
shall come, and restore all things, to wit, as you think; for otherwise no
doubt, he would have rather told them the contrary, that he was not to come,
but was already come: but now he no less affirms the one then the other.
Wherefore if it were true, that Elias was come in S. John Baptist, it must
needs be true also that he was to come in his own person, as our Savior
affirms, and the Apostles thought, as likewise all other, that will believe
our Savior and his Scripture more the^ themselves: out of which number we must
exclude M. Downam and his associates, and then our Savior, and his Disciples,
and Ecclesiasticus, and all other which follow them will agree well enough: for
as S. Hierome expounds their meaning the Apostles did not only speak of
Elias properly, but also of the second coming of our Savior in glory:
Aestimant ergo discipuli etc. (says he) Wherefore the disciples think, that
this transformation which they had seen in the mountain, was that of glory,
and they say, If thou be now come in glory. why does not thy forerunner
appear, chiefly because they saw Elias was departed. Bellarmines second proof
was, that S. John Baptist did not restore all things, as our Savior affirms
that Elias shall; that is (says Bellarmine) recall all Jews and heretics,
and perhaps many Catholics deceived by Antichrist, to the true faith. To
which M. Downam answers, that this does not agree with the Prophecy of our
Savior Christ, concerning the want of faith at his coming Luc. 18. 8. The
son of man when he comes, shall he find Faith upon earth? But if this
conceit of the Papists were true, there shall be more Luc. 18.
true belieuers at the end of the world the^ ever bad been at one time before.
Thus argues M. Downa^. Where first I could wish he had observed, that
Bellarmine speaks not absolutely of all Jews and heretics, but only of
such as were deceived by Antichrist: for many there shall be then, as there are
also now, that would be incredulous Jews, and perfidious Heretics, How Elias
shall restore all things.
though Antichrist had never come. And of these Bellarmine speaks not, but
only houldeth with S. Augustine l. 1. Quaest. Euang. quaest. 21. Quod dixit
Dominus: Helias quidem venturus est, and restituet omnia; id est, eos, quos
persecutio Antichristi conturbauerit. That which our Lord said, Elias indeed
shall come and restore all things, that is, those whom the persecution of
Antichrist shall disorder. So that now by M. Downams confession S. Augustine
enters into the number of the Papists. Wherefore Bellarmine, and we all are
content to hold our peace, and let him answer M. Downams argument, as he
does at large in his book de vtilitat. credendi cap. 15. where this very
place was objected to him by the Donatists, who S. Augustine answers Downa^s
objection.
were something a kyn to M. Downam, and he tells them both, that our Savior
spoke those words, vel propter ipsam fidei perfectionem, quae ita difficilis
est in hominibus, vt in ipsis quoque admirabilibus Sanctis, sicut in ipso Moyse
inueniatur aliquid vbi trepidauerint, vel trepidare potuerint: either for the
perfection of Faith which is so hard for men to have, that even in the great
and admirable Saints them selves, as in Moses himself (Exodus 20.) there may
be something found, where they have feared or might fear. And then he gives
a second solution, vel propter illam iniquorum abundantiam, and paucitatem
bonorum: or by reason of that abundance of the wicked, and scarcity of the
good. And of this he adds an explication, which may serve also for a third
solution: Propterea enim ta^quam dubitans Downam omitteth this putas.
hoc Dominus dixit: Neque enim ait, veniens filius hominis, non inueniet fidem
in terra, sed, putas inueniet fidem in terra? Cui vtique cu^cta scienti, and
praescienti de aliqua re dubitare non conuenit, sed illius dubitatio nostram
dubitationem figurauit; quia propter multa scandala circa finem saeculi
pullulantia, hoc quoque erat quandeque infirmitas humana dictura. For this
cause our Lord spoke as being in doubt, for he says not, The son of man
coming shall not find faith in the earth, but, think thou, shall he find
faith in the earth? To whom doubtless knowing and foreknowing all things, it
is not incident to doubt of any thing, but his doubt signified ours, for that
by reason of the many scandals arising toward the end of the world, the
infirmity of man was at length to utter these doubtful words. Thus far S.
Augustine. So that the conversion of the deceived Jews, and heretics, may
well stand with this doubt, since it is chiefly to be understood in the time
of Antichrists persecution, which shall be so great that if God had not provided
this extraordinary help of Enoch and Elias, it might seem at least to
weaklinges impossible The necessity of the coming of Enoch and Elias.
to preserve the faith in any sort, and much more in that perfect manner, of
which our Savior speaks, as S. Aug. understands him in this place, and
ser. 36. de verbis Domini secundum Lucam; and likewise S. Hierom. dial. contra
Luciserianos cap. 6. And all this explication is greatly confirmed by the last
words of the Prophet Malachy, where our Lord gives a reason, why he would
send Elias, saying: Ne forte veniam, and percutiam terram anathemate: least
perhaps I come and strike the earth with a curse, to wit, for the want of
Faith, which were likely to be, if Elias were not sent.

The other objection, which M. Downam intrudeth in this place of the
uncertainty of our Saviors coming, belongs to the next chapter but one,
where it shall be answered. Now it is sufficient to examine that, which is
brought in due place, of which sort there remains nothing, but M. Downams
interpretation, how S. John Baptist did restore all things, to wit inchoatiue,
which how improperly it is spoken, may easily appear to any, that will but
consider what the words (restituet and omnia) do import; but to our purpose it
is enough, that Elias coming before the second coming (in which our Savior
shall restore all things in a much more ample and perfect manner, then he did
at his first) may be said also, to restore all things much more properly then
S. John in this manner of inchoatiue, which may also be confirmed by that,
which S. Peter says Act. 3. that our Savior is to remain in Heaven, vsque in
tempora restitutionis omnium: until the times of restoring all things, which
can by no means be understood of his first coming. And thus I would conclude
this third place, but that I have hope that it may be for the good of M.
Downam, or at least of others as also for the greater glory of this great
Doctor of the Church to cite at large the words of S. Aug. tract. 4. in Euang.
Joan. Where he excellently explicateth this very place: In ^o Dominus Jesus
Christus etc. Our lord Jesus Christ would prefigure his future coming in S.
John Baptist, and say that S. John was come in the spirit of Elias, and that
which S. John was at the first coming, Elias shall be at the second: as there
are two comminges of the Judge, so there are S. Aug. makes no more doubt that
Elias shall come, the^ that S. Io. Bap. is come.
two cryers; the same Judge, but two cryers, not two Judges: and the Judge was
first to come to be judged; he sent before him his first crier, called him
Elias, because Elias shall be that in the second coming, which S. John was in
the first. For let your Charity consider how true it is, that I say, when S.
John was conceived, or rather when he was borne, the holy Ghost prophesied thus
of him, and he shall be the forerunner of the highest in the spirit and virtue of
Elias. Then he was not Elias, but in the spirit and virtue of Elias. What
signisyeth, in the spirit and virtue of Elias? In the same spirit, instead of
Elias. Why instead of Elias? Because that which Elias shall be in the second
coming, S. John was at the first. Wherefore rightly S. John answered. Joan 1.
now properly. For our Lord said Matthew. 17. figuratively Elias is John, but he
(as I said) properly: I am not Elias. If thou considerest the figure of a
forerunner, S. John is Elias, for that which he was at the first coming, the
other shall be at the second. If thou seek for the propriety of the person,
John is John, Elias is Elias: wherefore our Lord for the prefiguration, said
rightly, he is Elias, and S. John said rightly for the propriety, I am not
Elias etc. And a little after: Numquid tu Elias es? Art thou Elias? Now if he
should say, I am Elias, therefore Christ coming now in his second coming
should judge, and not as yet be judged in his first. As if he had said, Elias
is as yet also to come: I am not, says he, Elias: but respect him, being
humble, before whom John comes, least you feel him, being high, before whom
Elias is to come. For our Lord also ended so: John Baptist is he that it to
come. He came in prefiguration, as Elias is to come in propriety. Then Elias
shall be Elias by propriety, now S. John was Elias by similitude: Now John is
John by propriety, then Elias shall be John by similitude. Both these Cryers have
given one another their similitudes, and have kept their proprietyes, but there
is one Lord Judge, whether the one or the other Crier go before him. Thus far
S. Augustine. Where you see, he makes no more doubt, that Elias shall come,
then that S. John Baptist is come. But he is like to be accounted among the
erroneous Jews, for his labor by M. Downam, and S. Augustine will be content to
take part with his betters the Apostles, as all other that are wise will also:
and let this insolent Heretic go seek other companions like himself.

6. Concerning the fourth place, M. Downam having very Enoch and Elias live
not in mortal bodies, and consequently being in Heaven cannot Apoc. 11.
return into this world to die again. But let us see how he proves this
supposition: If they were not in Heaven, in soul at least (says he) their
estate were worse, then of the rest of the faithful departed, and so their
translation should rather have been a punishment, then a blessing or
prerogative unto them. And this is all the Scripture or reason he has for his
opinion, against the consent of the Church of God and ancye^t Fathers, who
allege so much, and so plain Scripture for their assertion. But M. Downam
shall not need to take any thought for these blessed men, for they think their
estates happy though it were much worse, then it is, in that they know, that
God is most Enoch and Elias are in Heaven
honored in them so, and his blessed will most perfectly fulfilled, which
they, and all other perfect men esteem much more of, then of their own joy
and happiness. But least this doctrine should not sink into the Ministers head,
we may also put him in mind, that it was always among all people accounted a
great happiness to live long in this world, specially in good estate, and at
ease; and it may be doubted, that it M. Downam might be well beneficed to his
liking, he would content himself to have this privilege, to remain so,
without molestation to the worlds end; for it is not every man's case to be so
desirous to see God, that they would forth with forsake all worldly things,
yea embrace death it self, not to have this happiness differed: for very few so
long as they live in this world, have their spiritual eyes so clear, as to
have so great and effectual a conceyt of Calvin thinks that only Christ is
in Heaven and that others stay without.
Heaven; and those which have, are of those perfect, who easily conform
themselves to Gods blessed will in this, and all other things. And here
likewise I might put M. Downam in mind, that his great Master, Calvin l. ^.
Instit. cap. 20.. 20. affirms, that only Christ is entered into the Sanctuary
of Heaven, and all other stay without in the Court, and there expect until the
end of the world. And. 24. he says, that the souls of the Saints have faith
still, as we have: which being so, no doubt he must needs think, that they
enjoy not the vision of God, in which our essential happiness consists. So
that in this man's opinion, there is no great difference betwixt Henoch and
Elias, and other Saints. But I am glad to see M. Downam leave his Master in
this: would to God he would do so in the rest also, that my joy for him might
be complete.

Another trifling objection of M. Downam is, that S. John mentions neither
Enoch nor Elias. As though it were not sufficient that the holy Fathers
expound it so, and that the circumstances are such, as that they cannot with
any show of probability, be applied to any other, which is the reason that he
himself only goes about to impugn, but dares Downam dares not defend his
fellows.
not take upon him to defend his fellow heretics expositio^s, which Bellarmine
co^futeth, nor bring any other of his own. And surely, it is a great wonder,
that in the Apocalypse S. John should be so ouerseene, as to speak so darkly,
that he would leave out the names of these two witnesses. Fir allie he
threatens Bellarmine with another answer, saying: But if I should add, that
Bellarmine cannot prove, that this place treats of Antichrist, but rather of
the Beast with seven heads arising out of the sea, that is the Romayne State,
either generally or specially under the Emperors, as may be gathered by
comparing verse 2. and 7. of the 11. Chap. with the 1. and 5. of the 13. I
would then know to what purpose he alleges this text to prove, that Enoch
and Elias shall come against Antichrist, if neither the one nor the other be
here meant? Well Sit, put Bellarmine to prove this, when you will, and you
shall see, how many Authors he will bring you to prove that both these places
are to be understood of Antichrist: and for the later which you think most
hard, you may take a view of those, which he cited in the former Chapter; where
I also added a few more. And this proof shall suffice for this time: for
before you and I part, I doubt not, we shall discuss this matter more fully.

7. After that M. Downa^ has thus substantiallie answered Bellarmines first
argument out of the Scripture, he comes Downam rejects the Fathers.
packing; for first seeing, that they all consent about the coming of Elias,
his a^swere is in plain words to tell the^, that they were all deceived, but
yet he does them so much favor, as to confess that they had reason to be so,
because they followed the corrupt translation of the 72. who Malach. 4. v. 5.
read Elias the Thes^ite so that now all the fault is laid by M. Downam upon
these Interpreters, at which the latin Interpreter of Ecclesiasticus has good
cause to rejoice, since by this means Downam rejects the 72. Interpreters.
his case is no worse, then that of these 72. Interpreters, who yet were
approved by our Savior himself, and his Apostles, who were wont to cite the
Scripture as they translated it, and all the holy Fathers to expound it also as
undoubted Scripture: and this place in particular was approved by S. Hierome in
his traslation of the 70. as also in his Commentaries, and by S. Cyril, and
Theodoretus ibidem, S. Augustine l. 20. de. ciuit. cap. 22. where he also
says, that the 70. Interpreters prophetice interpretati sunt, did interpret
as Prophets, and not as bare Interpreters. And lib. 18. cap. 42. he
acknowledges in them universally, mirabilem ac stupendum, planeque diuinum in
eorum, verbis fuisse consensum: that there was an admirabley wonderful, yea
manifestly a divine consent in their The 72. Interpreters not to be rejected.
words. And a little after, reuera spiritus erat vnus in omnibus; verily they
had all one spirit, to wit, the spirit of truth, and of prophesy with which the
Scriptures were first written, conformably to which S. Hierome, praesat. in
Paralip. acknowledges, that the 70. did add some things, vel ob decoris
gratiam, velob Spiritus sancti authoritate^: either for ornament, or for the
authoritate of the Holy Ghost. But this place in particular is likewise
approved by Euthymius in Matthew. 17. and Arethas in Apoc. 11. and finally by S.
Chrysostom hom. 58. in Matthew. where he also says: Vides exactam etc. Thou
see the exact diligence of the Prophets prediction, for because S. John might
also be called Elias for the likeness of the mystery, to avoid confusion, he
added the Country, calling him Elias the Thesbite; for S* John was no
Thesbite. Secondly he says, that some Author* disagre about Enochs coming, in
whose place they put either Elizaeus, or Moses, or Hieremy. But what is this
to the purpose, since Bellarmines argument has still the same force? For all
consent that Elias is to come, and as yet he is not come; and besides the
common opinion is, that Enoch shall come with him, though perhaps it be not
altogether so certain of him, as of Elias.

Lastly he would make us believe that among all the ancient, which Bellarmine
cites, only S. Gregory is alleged to the purpose, whose authority he
rejects with a scoff. But this is to show himself in his colors, that is a
ridiculous scoffing Minister. For any man, that has but moral honesty Downam
scoffeth at S. Gregory.
cannot choose but much condemn this his profane spirit to contemn this
Saints auctority, because he morally expounds a place of Scripture, with the
received doctrine of the Church, not proving it out of that place, but only
affirming, that by a moral application, those words might have that sense,
which the very title of that whole book might have given this Minister to
understand, if he had either wit in his head or honesty in his heart. Well he
is content to grant, that S. Gregory was flat for Bellarmine. But why does he
deny it of the rest? Surely it is hard to imagine, since their words are so
plain, and therefore till he gives us a reason, we may justly think, that he
has none, but was willing to delude his Reader, either by scoffiing or any
other lewd trick he could devise, for lightly he could not inue^t a worse, then
to scoff at Gods Saints, and particulerly at those, to whom we are most
behoulding, among which in the first place S. Gregory is to be accounted, for
the great love he bare to all English men, and the great good he procured them,
for which he is worthily called and honored, as the Apostle of our Nation.

8. Finally M. Downam answers to Bellarmines reason, that of Enoch and Elias
their translation, there is this reason, that there might be evident examples
of reward and happiness, laid up both for the upright in Enoch, and for the
zealous in Elias: of their yet living in mortal bodies, if they did so,
according to the opinion of some of the Fathers, that reason might be given
which they allege, to wit, to convert Downam makes Enochs translation an
example of vprightnes contrary to Scripture.
the Jews. Where, in the first part I only note, that M. Downa^ makes Enoch
an example for the upright, whereas the Scripture makes him an example of
pe^nance. But indeed according to this explication, he may (as I noted before)
be as well an example of the one, as of the other: yea hardly of penance since
we read none he did, but rather that he was always upright, and just. But now
the second reason which only makes to the purpose, is the same which
Bellarmine urges, if M. Downam understands it aright as the Fathers held it,
to wit, that these two witnesses shall labor to convert the Jews, at the end
of the world, when Antichrist shall most labor to pervert them: which will be to
oppose themselves M. Downam thought best to retire himself, Downam rejects
the Fathers.
and to tell the Fathers flatly, that it is untrue (which they say) that they
live in mortal bodies, or that they shall ever dye: and he offers to dispute
this matter with them. And first he asks them where they live in mortal
bodies? To which S. Augustine, lib. 2. de peccato originali, cap. 23.
answers, That S. Augustine answers to Downa^s objection.
this is one of those questions which pertayne not to Faith, where Enoch and
Elias are, quostamen non dubitamus, in quibus nati sunt, corporibus viuere:
whom notwithstanding we doubt not to live in the bodies in which they were
borne. By which oppositio^ he plainly declares that he takes this to be a
matter of Faith. And in the same place he testifies that Christian says
doubts not, but that the paradise where Adam was placed, is; though it be
doubtful where or in what manner it is; all which is alleged by Bellar. lib.
de gratia primi hominis, cap. 14. to prove that paradise is yet extant; but I
cannot find that distinction which M. Downam brings out of him lib. 1. de
Sanct. beat. c. 3. that although the place remain, yet no paradise remains,
and in the former place he seems to teath altogether the contray

Secondly, if they be in the earthly paradise, and not in heaven, he asks how
it is said of Elias, that he was taken up into Heaven. To which demand S.
Gregory will answer him, if he may be so bold Hom. 29. in Euang. Aliud est
caelum aereu^, S. Gregory a^swereth another.
aliud aethereum etc. vnde and aues caeli dicimus etc. In caelum aereum Elias
subleuatus est, vt in secretam quandam terrae regionem repent duceretur, vbi
cum magna iam carnis and spiritus quiet viueret, quousque ad finem mundi
redeat, and mortis debitum soluat. Ille etenim mortem distulit, non euasit. The
air is also called Heaven, for which cause we say the birds of heaven
(according to the phrase of Scripture) and into this heaven was El as taken up,
that he might forthwith be carried into a certain secret Region of the earth,
where he might live in great quiet of body and mind, till he returns at the
end of the world, and pays death his due: for he has deferred not escaped
death. Where also M. Downam may learn, what privilege Enoch and Helias have
above others, and how Enoch was said to have been translated, that he should not
see death, to wit, at Heb. 11.
that time, nor according to the course of nature: the^ which a great deal
less is sufficient, that one has escaped death. And if M. Downa^ be capable
of so high and perfect doctrine A great happiness to be put to death by
Anticrist.
here he may be told, that Enoch and Helias think it no misery, but an
exceeding great happiness that they shall be put to death by Antichrist, by
reason of the great desire they haueto do and suffer whatsoever for the love
of God, and this not for the reward which they expect at his hand, but because
he deserves much more, then we are able to perform.

9. But I will conclude, leaving the indifferent Reader to judge whether it
has not been sufficiently proved, that Enoch and Elias are still in their
bodies, and that their bodies are mortal, and that they are to return into
the world and die, and that in the time of Antichrist, to oppose themselves
against him, and consequently, that Antichrist is not yet come, which if he
judges to be so; as I persuade myself he cannot otherwise choose, I will also
crave him to Downa^s bragging.
give his verdict of M. Downam, whether he think him more foolish, or impudent
to deny all these particularyties with this flourishing brag; Must not this
needs be a good cause, that by so learned a man is so stoutly proved?

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. Containing the fourth demonstration.
THE fourth demonstration (says Bellarmine) is Matthew. 24. Then there shall be a
great Tribulation the like whereof has not been from the beginning of the
world, nor shall be. And Apoc. 20. where we read, that Satan shall be then
loosed, who until that time was bound.

Of which place S. Augustine disputing l. 20. de Ciuitate Dei cap. 8. and 9.
says, that in Antichrists time the Devil is to be loosed, and therefore that
persecution shall be more grievous, then all the former, by how much the Devil
can rage more cruelly being loosed, then being bound. Wherefore he says, that
the Devil then shall vex the Church with all his own and his followers
forces, and S. Hippolytus Mart. in orat de mundi consum. and S. Cyril catechesi
15. do say, that the Martyrs which Antichrist shall put to death, shall be more
renowned, then all those, which went before: because they fought against men
the devils ministers, but these shall fight against the Devil himself,
persecuting in his own person. But certainly we have experienced no such
thing from the year 600. or 1000.

The Heretics indeed say, that they suffer great persecution Nero, Domitian,
Decius, Dioclesian, and others, since that for one heretic which is burnt,
there were in times past a thousand Christians put to death, and that in the
whole Roman Empire, not in one only Province, and whereas now the greatest
punishment is to be burnt, then there were incredible, and innumerable
torments, of which see Cornelius Tacitus in Nerone, and Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical History.

S. Damasus in the life of S. Marcellinus writes, that there Dioclesia^: and
Eusebius who lived at that time writes lib. 8. cap. 6. hist. that al priso^s
were so full of Martyrs, that there was no place for offenders; and in all that
book he affirms that there were so many put to death within the space of two
years, that it is impossible to number them. Besides the heretics of our
times have put to death more Catholics within these 20. or 30. years, in
France and Flanders, then the Inquisitors have burnt heretics perhaps these
hundred years. Wherefore they cannot call this a persecution, but rather a
civil war, for as S. Augustine teaches ep. 80. ad Hesychium, when the true
persecution of Antichrist shall come, only the children of the Church shall be in
tribulation, and not their persecutours, as in the time of Dioclesian, and the
former Princes, only Christians were persecuted, but did not persecute again.

And if this be to be called a persecution, rather Catholics Lutherans and
Caluinists: for Catholics are cast out of many Provinces, and have lost their
Churches, their Inheritance, and their Country it self, these new Ministers of
this Gospel intruding themselves into other men's possessions: and as we said,
and may be seen in the Commentaryes of Laurence Surius, and other
Historiographers of our time, the fury of Caluinists consumed more Catholics
in few years, then there have been Heretics punnished, by the judgment of
Catholic Princes for denying their Faith.

Now that the persecution of Antichrist, shall be most S. Aug. proves lib. 20.
de ciuitate Dei cap. 11. out of those words of the Apoc. 20. And they
compassed the tents of the Saints, and the beloved City: for by these words,
it is signified, that all the wicked shall be together in Antichrists army, and
shall with open war impuge all the Church of Saints: for now there are many
feigned in the Church, which hiding their malice, are in heart out of the
Church, and in it only in body. But the^ all shall break forth (says S.
Augustine) into open persecution, out of their lurking corners of hatred. This
surely is so far of from being fulfilled at this time, that there was never
almost a greater number of false brethren, and faygned Christians, and this
persecution is so far of from being known and manifest, that neither they
which say they suffer it, nor we that are said to cause it, can tell when it
began.

Certainly the persecutions of Nero, Domina^, and other Roman Princes, were
diligently noted by Eusebius, Orosius, Sulpitius, and there is no doubt when
they began, and when they ended, as likewise the coming of Christ, because it
was true and manifest, we know very well when it was, and to whom first
manifested, and there is no diversity of opinions among us, concerning this
matter. But the heretics, which say, that Antichrist is come, and has
persecuted so long, cannot produce one author, who has noted the time, when
Antichrist came, or to whom he first appeared, or when he began his
persecution; and they disagree so among themselves, that one says he came in
the year 200. another in the year 606. another in the year 773. another in
the year 1000. another 1200. So that they seem rather to dream in their
sleep, then to speak waking.

Finally that in Antichrists time the public and daily Daniel plainly
teaches cap. 12. from the time that the continual Sacrifice shall be taken
away, M. CC. XC. days: where by the consent of all, he speaks of Antichrists
time, and as S. Irenaeus lib 5. S. Hierome, and Theodoretus upon that place, S.
Hippolytus Martyr in orat. de consu^matione mundi, and Primasius in cap. 11.
Apoc. expound it, the is sense is, that Antichrist shall forbid all the divine
worship, which is now exercised in the Christian Churches, and especially the
holy Sacrifice of the Eucharist, but that this sign is not yet fulfilled,
experience teaches.

Out of which three things may be gathered. First that Rome is not Antichrist,
but most contrary to him, since he does chiefly adorn and defend the
Sacrifice, which Antichrist shall take away. Thirdly, that the heretics of
this time above all others are the forerunners of Antichrist; since they wish
nothing more earnestly, then utterly to abolish the Sacrifice of the Eucharist.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downam very courteously admits that Antichrists persecution was
to be very grievous; Bellarmines proofs, affirming that The persecution of
Antichrist most grievous.
the great tribulation which our Savior speaks of Matthew. 24. is no other,
then the calamyties which at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans the
Jews sustained; which how true it is, may be sufficiently seen by that which
has been said in the 4. chapter. Now it is sufficient that we agree in the
conclusion.

2. Wherefore all his long discourse about the thousand years Apoc. 20. is
altogether impertinent, and foolish also, in that he understands those 1000.
years definitely, The 1000: years Apoc. 20. are to be taken indefinitely.
which indefinitely signify all the years and space from Christ's Passion, when
the Devil was bound, until Antichrists time, when he shall be loosed; and it
is false, that any were put to death, by the chief Antichrist within those
thousand years. For how could that be, since he was not to come, before they
were expired, as all but Heretics agree? But all this, as also the question of
Gog and Magog, is from the present purpose, which M. Downa^ could not choose
but see, though he were content to cast this mist before the Readers eyes that
he might not see the force of Bellarmines argument, which consists in this,
that the persecution of Antichrist is to be most grievous, which he is content
to The persecution of Antichrist shall be greater then the calamities of the
Jews.
grant, because he cannot deny it, and would help to prove it also, though
very simply, God wot; but we will accept his good will, since his meaning
seems to be only to confirm Bellarmines assertion, which we only request
him to grant: though we would not have him afraid to think, that the
persecution under Antichrist shall be greater then the calamities of the Jews,
since the same words are understood of both, and that of the Jews was but a
figure in comparison of the other. Wherefore Dan. also cap. 12. writes, that
this shall be such a time, as has not been, since the Nations began to be. And
surely no persecution can be greater, the^ that in which the Devil shall use
the uttermost of his own, and all his followers forces, as S. Augustine
affirms he shall in this, being then loosed from his long imprisonment, as S.
John affirms, whatsoever M. Downam imagines.

3. Well this supposed, M. Downam will needs make us believe that this great
persecution has been made by the wherein (says he) he takes such liberty to
himself; that if he carry whole troops of souls into hell no man may say
unto him, Sir why do you so? But this is a A shameleslye.
shameslye, especially now that it has been so fully discovered by the author
of the VVarn-word against Sir Frauncis Hastings and O. E. otherwise M.
Sutcliffe, who patched up a lie out Encount. 2. cap. 13. 11. 16.
of two places of the Canon law, whereof one had no co^nextion at all with the
other, as that Author at large declares, who likewise tells him where, and
when some Catholics were bayted by dogs in bears skins, which to him is
such great news. Ibid. cap. 2. n. 4.


4. And besides, this allegation of spiritual persecution is from the purpose,
and a fault by some called petitio principij, Downa^s petitio principij
because all Catholics count it a great blessing, and no persecution at all.
Secondly he goes into France for Martyrs, where he takes into his accoumpt
the Albigenses and VVallenses, and joins the^ with his H^gon^^s, and so he
may well enough, for they be Martyrs al alike, to wit, of the Devil; since they
were al Heretics, though of diverse sects, as he may be fully instructed by the
same Author I mentioned before, in his Treatise of Fox his Calendar-Martyrs.
And yet M. Downam part. 1. cap. 3.
shall not find so many Martyrs of these neither, except he will number them
who were miraculously slain in lawful war by Simon Momford the^ Earl of
Leicester and after of Tolosa, which were plain rebels against their King and
Country. And John Fox could only find 13. of these two sects, which he thought
worth the putting into his Calendar, as the same Author shows, and every man
may see in Fox himself.

After France he comes into the Low Countries, and there nu^breth 36000.
which the Duke of Alba caused to be executed, which how many soever they were,
as all the world knows, were open rebels, as likewise those 40000. if they
were so many, killed in the Massacre at Paris. But M. Downams religion has
this virtue in it, that houlding but one or some few points Downa^s Martyrs,
Heretics and Rebels
of it, a man may safely dye for any other heresy, or crime, and yet by his
fellow Hugonots be accounted a Martyr. Lastly he cites Vergerius and in the
margent quoteth Io. Bale de act. Pontif. who witnesses, that within the space
of 30. years, there were put to diverse fearful deaths, by the bloody
Inquisition, an hundredth and fifty thousand Christians. But we must have better
proofs, then only the testimony of two most violent, and lying heretics,
before we believe this: and besides it were necessary for M. Downam to prove,
that all those Christians were of his religion, which will be very hard for him
to do, since that these his Authors affirm no such matter.

5. But why does not M. Downam answer to Bellarmine, who tells him, that all
this persecution is but a ciuist S. Augustine tells us, that in Downam flies
the difficulty.
Antichrists persecution, only the children of the Church shall be in
Tribulation, and not their persecutors. The cause of this was, because he saw
there was no show of answer to be made, and therefore he thought it best to
pass it over in silence, hoping that the Reader would not take the pains to
look upon Bellarmine, nor any other to discover his follies* for he cannot
deny, but that Catholics have been persecuted by Protestants, and yet he would
feign diminish these persecutions against Catholics by his brethren; and first
he avouches plainly, that the wars which have been undertaken by the
Hugonots in France and Flanders for their own defense, that they Downam
maynteyneth open Rebellion and treason.
might be free from their Princes outrages, were lawful battles: even as
when the Machabees resisted: Antiochus and other Tyrants. So that you see open
rebellion and treason mainteyned for lawful by this new Ghospeller, which
defense notwithstanding cannot comprehend the manifold murders of Priests,
Religions and others which these Hugonots committed in cold blood, and out of
battle, of which M. Downa^ could not be ignorant. But let us see, what he
says of our English persecution, for he is not afraid forthwith to charge all
Priests and Catholics put to death in our Country, of treason, and to
complain greatly of the favor which the Prince in some sort has used to
them in durance; so cruel and bloody a mind carries this Minister with him,
being not ashamed to affirm, that the life of the prisoners The persecution of
Catholics in England.
in Wisbech and Framingham, has been more easy and pleasant, and mayntenance
more plentiful, then of the Students and ministers of his crew; which all wise
men will easily laugh at, except he should speak of spiritual and heavenly
comfortes, which this poor Minister never tasted of: for other ease, pleasure,
or maintenance, it were hard for them to have, living in prison, and often in
chains, and having no other maintenance, then the alms of poor Catholics,
many of them being so impouerished with oppressions for their conscience, that
they should scarce be able to mainteyne themselves, and their families, were
they not content to live within their compass, and under their degrees, whilst
a sort of married Ministers feed upon their substance; which is another kind of
persecution which Bellarmine urges, and M. Downa^ passes over in silence, to
wit to be cast out of their Churches, and Church-lyuings, Universities, and the
like, which were instituted for Catholics by their Ancestors, and are now
usurped by Protestants, altogether against the Founders will and intention:
and the like is of the Inheritances in some, and of their Country in many. And
this shall suffice for these persecutions or rather the cyuill wars of this
time betwixt Catholics and Heretics: only I could wish my Reader to reflect a
little upon the Christian Princes, in whose dominions at this day there is The
difference betwixt the Catholic and the Protestant Princes.
diversity of Religions, and he shall find, that all the Catholic Princes
tolerate in some sort their Heretical subjects, as the Emperor, the King of
France, the King of Poland, and now the Archduke in Flanders, whereas here in
England the Catholics canfind no such favor, who, that they suffer for
Religion, and not for treason none but impudent Ministers and their mates can
deny.

Neither is this craft of Protestants any great glory for the^, who by reason
of the distrust which they have in their own cause, use to put Catholics to
death under the name of Treason, Catholics are put to death for Religion by
Protestants.
though they can prove nothing against them, but the exercise of their
Religion. For in this they imitate the Jews who dealt so with our Savior, and
some other Tyrants, but chiefly Julian the Apostata, which were always accounted
the greatest and worst persecutors. Whereas Catholics have always punished
heretics directely for their heresy, esteeming it (as it deserved) a far
greater crime then treason, as being committed against the King of Heaven, who^
all earthly Princes are bound to respect more then themselves, and so we see
in Queen Mary's time, Bishop Cra^mer had his Treasons pardoned, but not his
heresies, for which he was burned. And so it appears by the proceeding of
our adversaries that we are free from heresy: and how false their imputations
of treasons are, is proved by many, and lastely by W. R. in his Co^futatio^ of
O. E. alias Sutcliffes vaunting challeng, in the last chapter, to which I remit
my reader. And this shall suffice for the greatness of the persecution under
Antichrist.

6. Touching the manifestnes of it, M. Downam is not of Bellarmines mind, yea
he thinks his doctrine contrary to our Saviors, who has said, that the good
and bad shall grow together like wheat and tares, until the day of the great
harvest. But M. Downam Antichrists persecution most manifest. Matthew. 13.
may understand, that Bellarmine houldeth with S. Augustine quaest. 11. super
Matthew. that this is to be understood of the whole world, in which Bellarmine
denies not, but there will be store of tares in this time of Antichrist; and
besides our Savior only wills his servants not to root out all the tares,
when there is danger, that the corn may also he destroyed by that means. But
now we speak of his enemies who partly by persecuting, partly for fear of
persecution will separate themselves of their own accord, from among Gods
wheat, to wit, his elect; and yet are to be separated also in the day of
Judgment against their wills, which is all that the place alleged does prove.

To the authority of S. Augustine alleged by Bellarmine he gives two
answers. First, if he had said so, we might have Downam rejects S. Augustine
esteemed his speech to have been but a human conjecture, rather then a
prophesy divine: so that it is no matter, what S. Augustine, or any other can
say. For if it please not M. Downams vain fancy, it shall be accounted but an
humane conjecture, though he gather it out of Scripture, as S. Augustine does
this. But secondly, says M. Downam, Bellarmine without all shame falfifieth
his words, who speaks of the Devil alone, and not of all the wicked,
saying: Now it is said, that he shall go forth, viz. into open persecution: he
shall break forth of the couerts of hatred: for which we must note, that S.
Augustine interprets the depth into which the Devil was put, to be their
hearts which hate the Christians, in quorum (says he) quotidie velut in
abysso, Bellarmin unjustly charged by M Downam
cacis and prosundis cordibus includitur. cap. 8. In whose blind and profound
hearts, he is daily enclosed, as in a depth. Which exposition he mentions
again cap. 11. which Bellarmine cited, where he expounds, how he is said to
come forth out of this depth, to wit, out of the couerts of hatred, within
which he was enclosed, into open persecution, because he shall seduce those,
whose hearts he possessed to make war against Christians, which before he
hated, but was not permitted to hurt; all which, that he means of all the
wicked, the words following immediately declare. Haec enim erit nouissima
persecutio no^issimo imminente iudicio, cum sa^cta Ecclesia toto terrarum orb
patietur, vniuersa scilicet ciuitas Christi ab vniuersa Diaboli ciuitate,
quantacumque erit vtraque super terram. For this shall be the last persecution,
the last judgment being at hand, which the holy Church shall suffer over all
the world, to wit, the whole city of Christ, by the whole city of the Devil,
how great soever either of them shallbe upon the earth. Can any thing be more
plain then this? And after again he says* that the holy Church shall be
environed ab omnibus inimic^^ suis, by all her enemies: yea he repeateth the
very like words to those, which he had spoken in the singular number, again
in the plural, speaking of the Nations, quae sunt in quatuor angulis terrae,
in the four corners or quarters of the earth, in apertum odium de operto
erupturae sunt: they shall break forth into open hatred of their hidden malice.
Wherefore let any man judge, whether Bellarmine changed S. Augustines sense,
though for brenity and perspicuities sake he cited his words in the plural
number, as they were to be understood, and are repeated also by S. Augustine
himself. All the Churches enemies shall join to impugn her in Antichrists
time.


7. Now, that all that hate Christians or the Church, have not hitherto joined
against them, is so manifest, that M. Downam cannot deny, and therefore granting
it, he only turns to ask: whether they shall do so when Antichrist comes
or no? To whom we return answer, that they shall, as has been sufficiently
proved, and therefore it is manifest, that Antichrist is not yet come. To the
second part of Bellarmines proof he answers, that the uncertainty of the
beginning of Antichrists persecution, if it were true, does not disprove the
greatness: but argues the length. As though now we treated of the greatness, and
not of the manifestnes of this persecution, Downam forgets what he impugneth.
which surely is plainly disproued, if it were so secret, that no man can tell
when it began. Secondly he says, the persecutions under Nero and the rest,
were well known when they began, and when they ended, because there was some
intermission of them, but these now, have no end, nor yet intermission, except
it be when they have none to persecute. And is not this a wise answer think
you, to tell us that the beginning of a persecution cannot be showed, because
it has no intermission, nor end? Except he would have us to understand him,
that he means, that it has had no beginning: neither to which we likewise
willingly agree, for the time was, and that An invisible persecution of an
invisible Congregation
within these hundred years when there was no Protestant in the world to
persecute, so that this is an invisible persecution of an invisible
Congregation, which he makes so much ado about, and will needs have it to be
the great persecution of Antichrist. Finally he would willingly bring his
brethren to an agreement, about the time of Antichrists coming, but he
labors in vain, and brings nothing, but that which is already confuted in
the third chapter. Wherefore it remains clear and manifest, that the
persecution of Antichrist is not yet come.

8. The third part of this Demonstration was, that in The public and daily
office and Sacrifice of the Church, shall cease in Antichrists time.
the time of Antichrists persecution, the public and daily office, and
sacrifice of the Church shall cease, which M. Downam denies flatly, but yet
would seem to moderate it, by adding, that at least it shall not be so at his
first coming: and the^ sets down certain degrees invented by himself of
Antichrists appearing, which so far as they make any way against us, have and
shall be sufficiently confuted. But now we must entreat M. Downam not to go
from the difficulty, but to answer directly to Bellarmines argument, taken
out of an express place of Scripture, joined with the exposition of the
Fathers, whom he easily rejects in few words saying; Downam rejects the
Fathers.
the he needs not run with Bellarmine to the Fathers, for the exposition
of this place: but I am afraid we shall find him running to worse men, who
will lead him into most absurd errors; for that is most true, which S.
Hierome writes in the end of Dan. 11. having learnedly confuted M. Downa^s
chief Captain in the exposition of this whole place, which we have now in
hand. Hoc ideo prolixius posui (says he) vt and Prophyrij ostendam calumniam
(qui haec omnia ignorauit, aut nescire se finxit) and Scripturae sanctae
difficultatem, cuius intelligentiam absque Dei gratia and doctrina maiorum sibi
imperitissime vel maxim vendicant. I have put down this the more at large,
both to show Prophyries calumny (who either was ignorant The difficulty of the
Scripture, and why many err in the interpretation thereof.
of these things, or saygned that he knew the^ not) and also the difficulty
of holy Scripture, the understanding of which the most unskillful above all
others, challeng to themselves without Gods grace, and their Ancestors
learning. And may not M. Downam be ashamed to defend this very calumny, and to
show himself, as ignorant, or malicious as wicked Prophyrie himself? and
consequently to be without Gods grace, which S. Hierome joins with the
learning of our elders, whom M. Downam professes to set little by; and so by
S. Hieromes judgment is a graceles, impudent, and most unlearned heretic. And
will any man be so mad, as to adventure his salvation upon the conduct of such
blind giudes?

But yet let us discover his folly more fully, that if it be possible, he may
by shame be brought to leave it, or at least others which are not so far
engaged, may see it, and abhore it. Wherefore S. Hierome in the same 11.
Chapter Dan. 11.
upon those words: Et saciet iuxta voluntatem suam Rex etc. shows, that now
not only all Christians, but even the Downam follows Prophyry an Anpostata,
against both Christians and Jews.
very Jews themselves, who before had their particular interpretations,
agreed, that from that place the Prophet was to be understood of Antichrist, Ab
hoc loco (says he) Iudai de Antichristo diciputant. And a little after: Quod
quidem and not de Antichristo intelligimus. Prophyrius antem, and caeteri qui
sequuntur eum, de Antiocho Epiphane dici arbitrantur. From this place the Jews
think, that Antichrist is spoken of; which truly we also understand of
Antichrist: but Prophyrie and those which follow him (among whom M. Downam
will needs make one) suppose it to be spoken of Antiochus Epiphanes. But
coming to the 12. Chap. out of which Bellarmine alleged Dan. 12.
his testimony, S. Hierome writes thus: Hactenus Prophyrius vtcumque setenuit,
and tam nostrorum imperitis, quam suorum male eruditis inposuit. De hoc
capitulo, quid dicturus est, in quo mortuorum describitur resurrectio, alijs
suscitat is in vitam aternam, and alijs in opprobrium sempiternum? Nec potest
dicere, quifuerint sub Antiocho fulgentes quasi splender firm amenti, and alij
quasi stella in perpetuas aeternitates. Sed quid non facit pertinacia? Quasi
contritus coluber cleuat caput, and moriturus in eos, quimorturi sunt, venena
diffundit. Hitherto in some sort Prophyrie has defended himself, and deceived
as well the unlearned among us, as the evil learned among them. What will he
say of this Chapter, in which the resurrection of the dead is described, some
being raised to life everlasting, others to everlasting reproach? Neither can
he tell us, who under Antiochus they were that shined, as the brightenes of the
firmament, and others as stars for everlasting eternities. But what does not
pertinacie? She lists up her head like a bruised snake, and dying spitteth out
her venom Downa^s and Prophyries pertinacy.
upon them which are likewise to die. And will M. Downam join with Prophyrie in
his pertinacie? Will he needs be one of these brused-dying-snakes, and still
continue to spit out his heretical, and persidious poison? If he be thus
obstinate, yet I beseech my Readers, yea all my Countrymen to fly from him,
least he kill them with his venomous tongue. For if they will not approach too
near, they may perhaps hear him hiss like a goose, but sting them he cannot.

But let us hear what S. Hierome writes upon the very words which Bellarmine
cites: Hos mill ducentos nonaginta dies Porphyrius in tempore Antiochi, and
in desolatione Templidicit completos, quam and Josephus and Machabeorum liber
tribus tantum annis fuisse commemorat. Ex quo perspic^^^^ est tres istos, and
semis annos de Antichristi dici temperibus, quitribus and semis annis, hoc est,
mill ducento nonaginta diebus Sanctos persecuturus est. Postea corr^iturus in
m^nte in^^y^o and sancto. A tempore igitur (...) (quod nos interpretari sumus,
Judge sacrificium) quando Antichristus orbem obtinens, Dei cultum interdixerit
vsque ad intern^cionem eius, tres and semis anni, id est, mill ducento and
nonaginta dies complebuntur. These thousand two hundredth and ninety days
Porphyrie says were fulfilled in the time of Antiochus, and in the desolation
of the Temple, which both Josephus and the book of the Machabees mention to
have been only three years. By which it is manifest, that these thret years
and a half are spoken of Antichrists times, who shall persecuie the Saints
three years and a half, that is, a thousand two hundredth ninety days, and
after shall perish in the famous and holy Mountain. From the time therefore
(...), which we have translated, the continual sacrifice, when Antichrist
co^quering the world, shall forbid the worship of God, until his destruction,
three years and a half, that is, a thousand two hundredth and nynety days.
Thus far S. Hierome: where we have not only his opinion, but also his
proofs, even out of the conference with scripture, which M. S. Hierom
confuteth Porphiry and Downam
Downam appealeth unto: but perhaps he means only if we give him leaue^ to
choose the places, and make the conference himself. But we must know him better
before we give him so much liberty, except it be reserving the like to our
selves, so that after we have heard what he can say, we may confer it with
other surer principles then his expositions are, and only admit of that which
we find agreeable to them. And upon this condition we will see how well he
conferreth in this place. First then he conferreth this place with Chapter 7.
where he says, that the time from the interruption of Gods service, to the
first restitution thereof by Judas Machabaeus, which was three years and ten
days, namely from the 15. of the month Casleu in the 145. year of the
Seleucidae 1. Machab. 1. 57. unto the 25. Dan. 7.
of the month of Casleu in the year 148. 1. Machab. 4. 52. is called by
Daniel a time, and times, and partell of a time. But now we Downa^s petitio
principij
return to the same difficulty: wherefore not to be too tedious, remitting my
Reader for the rest to that, which has been said about this 7. Chapter of
Daniel in the 5. Chapter, I will only recyte S. Hierome upon these very words
in controversy. Tempus annu^ significat (says he) tempora iuxta Haebraici
sermonis proprietatem, qui and ipsi dualem numerum habent, duos a^nos
praefigurant; dimidium autem temporis sex menses, quibus Sancti potestati
Antichristi permittendi sunt, vt condemnentur Iudaei, qui non credentes
veritati susceperunt mendacium; de quo tempore and Saluator in Euangelio
loquitur; Nisi abbr^^iati essent dies illi, nequaquam salua esset omnis caro.
Non conuenire haec tempora a Antiocho in extrema visione dicemus. A time
signifies a year, times according to the propriety of the hebrew speech,
which have also the duall number, prefigure two years; and half a time, six
months, in which the Saints are to be permitted to Antichrists power, that
the Jews may be condemned, who not believing the truth received a lie; of
which time our Savior also in the Gospel says; Except those days should be
shortened all slesh thould not be safe. That these times agree not to Antiochus,
we will teach in the last vision. Thus far S. Hierome.

Where we see that both these places are to be understood of Antichrist, and
neither of Antiochus; which appears also by that in this Chapter, as well as
in the 12. there is express mention made of the last judgment, as S. Hierome
noted in The interruptio^ of the Jews Sacrifice was only three years.
the place which I alleged before. So that his computation of the times out of
1. Machab. are not to the purpose: and besides as S. Hierome also noreth, that
time is only three years: for so it is rather to be accounted from the 25. day
of the month Casleu, when 1. Machah. 1. it is expressed, that the Gentiles
first sacrificed super aram, quae erat contra altar: upon the Are which was
against the Altar; and so the Scripture it self accompteth in the place
alleged by M. Downam 1. Machab. 4. secundum tempus, and secundum diem, in qua
contaminauerunt illud gentes; according to the time, and according to the day,
in which the Gentills defiled it; and by this reckoning M. Downam has lost his
ten days, which he made so great account of, that he was not afraid to
corrupt the words of Scripture, Downam corrupts the Scripture.
by changing half a time into a parcel of a time, as though because half is
not the whole, but a parcel; therefore every parcel had been half. But now
by the Scripture and S. Hieromes account, he has neither half nor parcel
above three years, and yet they must have an entyre half of M. Downam, or else
he is like to smart for it one day.

And is not this a strange conferring of Scripture think you, to allege a
place of Scripture against himself, and then to change it, because otherwise
it will not serve his turn? whereas indeed, if it had been, as he would have
it, a parcel and not half, it had been least of all to the purpose, except by
that parcel we should have understood an half: for otherwise it had been
clear, that these two places were Downa^s conferring of Scripture.
spoken of diverse things. And this M. Downam did in some sort see: wherefore
he tells us, that unto the victory obtained by the Machabees, whereby the
forces of Antiochus were expelled out of Jury, and thereby the restitution
before begun, established, were 3. years and a half, as Josephus testifies.
But this makes nothing to the purpose, as neither his other accomptes of 1260.
days to the striking of Antiochus, and 1335. unto his death (for which two
later he neither cites Scripture, or other Author) for See the next Chapter.
here is no conference of Scripture at all; and besides, if all this were so,
which we can hardly believe, till it be better proved, it only shows a
wonderful correspondence betwixt Antiochus the figure, and Antichrist whom he
figured, but no way proves, that in the places of Dan. 7. and 12. there is any
mention of Antiochus; which S. Hierome has evidently disproued, and much less
that they were only to be Antiochus not spoken of at all Dan. 7. and 12.
understood of him; which is that, which it behooves M. Downam to demonstrate:
for otherwise Bellarmines argument has his full force, and much more now, that
there is no mention of Antiochus.

This then being so, I doubt not any discreet and indifferent Reader will
grant, that not only the Jews, but also the Christians were to have a
continual sacrifice, and worship of God, which was not wholly to be
interrupted until Antichrists time: and against all M. Downams railing, I need
to oppose no other argument, but only this place, which is sufficient to
convince any but obstinate heretics. And he brings not any one argument, but
only affirms many blasphemies without all proof; and therefore at this time,
the discreet Reader must expect no more but a bare Downam and his fellow
Ministers their manner of disputing.
denial to a bare affirmation, for otherwise we should never make an end of
iangling, if whenever he will blaspheme, I should leave the principal
question, and refute other particulers altogether from the present purpose,
which seems to be that, which this Mynister desires now, and the whole crew
of them are wont to practice in all disputations. Wherefore I will end this
Chapter, requesting my reader to consider attentively if it be not evident out
of this last proof, that Antichrist is not yet come, that the Pope is most
contrary to him, and that Protestants are his forerunners, as Bellarmine
inferred.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER. containing the fifth Demonstration.
THE fifth Demonstration (says Bellarmine)

Now, that Antichrists reign shall be three years and a Dan. cap. 7. and 12.
and Apoc. 12. where we read, that Antichrists reign shall endure for a time,
and times, and half a time: for by a time is understood one year, by times
two years, and by half a time half a year. For so S. John explicateth, who
Apoc. 11. and 13. says, that Antichrist shall reign 42. Months, which
rightly make 3. years and a half: and cap. 11. he says, that Henoch and
Helias shall preach 1260. days. which make the same time, for the Hebrews did
use the years, and months of the Moon, though they did reduce them to those
of the Sun by adding every sixth year one Lunation. And three years and a
half of the Moon make just 42. months, or 1260. days. For a full and
perfect year of the Moon consists of 12. months, every one of which has
30. days, as S. August. teaches l. 15. deciu. Dei. c. 14.

Neither is it against this, that Dan. 12. Antichrist is said to reign 1290.
days, that is 30. days more, then S. John S. John speaks of Henoch and
Elias which shall be slain by Antichrist one month before he perish.

To this the Adversaries a^swere in three sorts: first Chytraeus cap. 11. and
13. Apoc. says, that these times cannot be taken for three years and a half,
because it is against experience, and S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2. says, that
Antichrist shall endure until Christ's coming.

Secondly he says, that a certain time is put for an uncertain, Bullenger
sermon. 46. in Apoc. whose reason seems to be that, which Luther insinuates in
supput. temporum, because it is manifest Apoc. 20. that the Devil is to be
loosed in the thousand year: wherefore the coming of Antichrist with the
temporal sword was the thousand year after Christ; therefore now he has
reigned more then five hundredth years: wherefore we must take those 42. months
for an uncertain time.

Thirdly the Magdeburgenses answer cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. col. 438. that
Daniel and John take a day for a year, and therefore Dan. 9. the 70. weeks are
understood of all, to be weeks of years, and not of days: and Ezech. 4. it
is said, I have given thee day for a year: and Luc. 13. I must walk to day,
and to morrow, and the next day, that is, live three years; which reason
Chytraus gives in cap. 11. Apoc. where he says, that these manner of years
and months are called Angelical, and not Humane.

But against this, is the common opinion of the Ancients, who affirm by reason
of the places cited, that Antichrist S. Hippolytus Martyr in orat. de
consu^matione mundi Antichrist shall reign upon the earth three years and a
half, afterward his kingdom and glory shall be taken away. S. Iren. lib. 5.
in fine. He shall reign three years and six months, and then our Lord shall
come from Heaven. And S. Hierome in cap. 7. Dan. A time signifies a year,
times according to the propriety of the Hebrew speech, who have also the duall
number, presigure two years, and half a time, six months, in which the
Saiutes are to be permitted to the power of Antichrist. S. Cyril catechesi 25.
Antichrist shall reign only three years and a half, which we speak not out
of Apocriphall books, but out of the Prophet Dan. And S. Aug. lib. 20. de
Ciuitate Dei, cap. 23. That Antichrists kingdom against the Church shall be most
cruel; though to be sustained for a small space of time, he that reads these
things even half a sleep is not suffered to doubt; for that a time and
times, and a half time, are one year and two, and one half, and consequently
three years and a half, it is plain by the number of days, which is put
afterward, and sometime it is declared also in the Scripture by the number of
months. The like has Theodoretus in cap. 7. Dan. Primasius, Beda, S. Anselme,
Arethas, Richardus, Rupertus.

Secondly it is proved, for that the Scriptures say, that Apoc. 12. VVoe be to
the earth, and the sea, because the Diuill goes down to you, having great
anger knowing that he has a small time. And Apoc. 20. he bound him for a
thousand years, and after this he must be loosed a small time. How I pray you,
shall this be true if Antichrist shall raygne 1260. years? For so he shall be
longer loosed, then bound.

Thirdly, because, as S. Aug. argues lib. 20. de ciuitate Dei cap. 8. and S.
Gregory lib. 33. moral. cap. 12. unless that cruel persecution were most
short, many would perish, which shall not perish. Wherefore our Lord says
Matthew. 24. unless those days had been abreuiated, all flesh should not be
safe. But how shall it be most short, which shall endure above a thousand
years?

Fourthly, Christ preached only three years and a half, therefore it is also
decent, that Antichrist be not permitted

Fifthly, because the sum of 1260. years which the Adversaries appoint,
cannot any way be accommodated to Dan. and S. John, a time, and times, and
half a time; for by a time without doubt must be understood some one number,
as one day, one week, one month, one year, one Luster, one Iubily, one age,
one Millenarie or thousand; and if we take this last, then Antichrist shall
reign 1500. years which the aduer saries admit not: if we take one age,
Antichrists time shall be 350. years, which likewise they admit not: and the
same is manifest of a Iubily etc.

Sixtely, because when Dan. 4. we often read, that 7. times shall pass in
which Nabuchodonosor shall be out of his kingdom, Nabuchodonosor lived out of
his Kingdom 2555. years.

Neither is it hard to solue their slender reasons; for Chytraeus says, that
the three years and an half, of which Daniel and S. John speak, cannot be
taken properly for our usual years, because experience witnesses that
Antichrist has tyranized much longer already; he manifestly repeateth or
beggeth the principle, or beginning, as the Logitians speak, for he takes or
assumeth that which is in controversy: for that the question is, whether
Antichrist be come or not. And when he adds that Antichrist by S. Paul's
opinion shall reign till the second coming of Christ, and thereupon
concludes, that he must reign longer then three years and a half, he
sees not that he either repeateth the principle again or says nothing; for
that illation proves nothing, unless it be assumed, that Antichrist is already
come, which notwithstanding is in controversy.

And to that, which both he and Henry Bullenger say, a certain number is
taken for an uncertain in this place: I answer, that then only a certain
number is put for an uncertain, when some full and perfect number is put, as
10. 100. 1000. and not when there are diverse numbers assigned, where there are
great and little mingled. Wherefore then is a certain number to be taken for
an uncertain, when the Scripture says Apoc. 12. that the Devil was bound for
a 1000. years, as S. Augustine expounds it, lib. 20. de Ciuitate Dei cap. 8.
and S. Gregory 33. moral. cap. 12. and not when he assigns a time, and times,
and half a time, or 1260. days, or 42. months: for to what end is that
diversity of numbers, if an uncertain time be designed?

To the argument of Illyricus, I say, that in the Scripture there are indeed
found, and rightely called weeks of years, weeks of years we read Leuit.
25. Thou shall number to thy self seven weekei of years etc. and that
rightly, it is manifest, because a week is denominated of the number of 7. in
greek, in latin, and in hebrew; for the hebrews call a week scabuagh, of
scheuagh, which is seven, as also in Greek it is called (...), and in Latin
septimana, of the number of 7. Wherefore as 7. days are called a week of
days; so, seven years a week of years but we no where read a month of
years or a day for a year: neither were it rightly spoken. For a month is not
denominated of any number, but of the course of the Moon, which is finished in
30. days, for which cause the hebrews call a month jareach, that is a Moon,
or chiresch, that is a renewing, to wit of the Moon, and in greek a month is
called (...), because the Moon is called (...)

Likewise a Day, does not signify number: but the time of light, Genesis 1. God
called the light Day, and darkness Ezech. 4. against this, I have given thee
a day for a year: for the meaning is not, that by days literally are
signified years, otherwise Ezechiel should have slept upon his left side 390.
years, which is impossible. For God commanded him to sleep upon his left side
390. days, and added, I have given thee a day for a year. If therefore those
days be taken for years, Ezechiel should have slept upon his left side 390.
years: but he lived not so long: wherefore days are taken there truly for
days, but are said to be given for years: because those 390. days in which
Ezechiel slept, were a sign of the sleeping of God, by which he tolerated the
sins of the Israelites 390. years.

To that which Chytraeus obiecteth out of Luc. 13. I must walk to day, and to
morrow, and the day following: I answer that S. Hierom writes lib. de
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, in Ioanne, and the thing it self shows, S.
Matthew. S. Mark, and S. Luke wrote not the deeds and words of Christ of the
former two years, but only those of the third. Wherefore our Lord by those
three days either understood the three days, which he was to spend in the
journey to Jerusalem, as Albert and Caietan expound it; orels by that manner
of speech would signify that he should live and preach a little time after, as
I ansenius rightly teaches. Therefore let Illyricus and Chytraeus bethink
themselves, where they found Angelical days and months, for they are not to
be found in Scripture.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. BEFORE M. Downam begins to answer any thing to this demonstration, he
childishly bears his Reader in hand, that Bellarmine teaches us not to look
for Antichrist, until he be gone, nor to expect his coming till the world
have an end: because in this, and the next demonstration he proves, Downa^s
childish cavil.
that Antichrist is not yet come (as the Heretics affirm) because if they
said truth, he should likewise have been gone, and the world also have been
ended long ere this, since he was not to reign, but three years and a half,
and the world was not to endure long after. And the heretics, even M. Downam
himself affirm, that Antichrist came a thousand years since. Wherefore this
silly shift will not serve his turn; but except he can disprove Bellarmines
assertion of the short time of Antichrists reign, and of the speedy end of the
world afterward, it will be manifest to any indifferent Reader, that he and his
fellows have most shamefully abused the world, in affirming that Antichrist
came so many years agone. Wherefore let us see, what he can answer to
Bellarmines proofs.

2. But first you must give him leave once more to bewray Downam changes
Bellarmines argument.
his shameless folly, for he will needs resolve Bellarmines argument, and so
make him bring the main question for an argument. But these are his idle
conceiptes, for the matter is plain enough, since Bellarmine argues thus:
Whosoever shall be Antichrist, shall reign only three years and a half, but
none hitherto has done so: Ergo, none hitherto has been Antichrist. Wherefore
except M. Downam answers to this argument in form, he may well dance in a
round, but will say nothing to the purpose; which he himself seems to
acknowledge, saying immediately after: But to come to the purpose, viz. from
which he had spoken all this while.

2. And now we shall find him far more cool: for first he grants the
assumption or minor, so far as is necessary, to wit, that the Pope has
reigned more then three years, and a half: viz. a thousand years, which is
sufficient for our purpose, and therefore I will not strive with him about the
other Antichrist shall reign three years and a half. Dan. 7. and. 12.
500. years, because I would not be like him in speaking from the purpose.
Wherefore let us see what he can say to the proposition, concerning which, he
affirms, the whole controversy to be. And so he flatly denies it,
affirming that the places of Daniel, are to be understood of Antiochus, and not
of Antichrist, and repeateth his Chymericall distinctions invented by himself
of the 4. degrees, in the deliverance of the Jews from the Tyranny of
Antiochus, for which hoe has neither Scripture nor other author, but Josephus
corrupted.
only Ioseph^^ corrupted by some favorite of Porphyrie, and of his own
exposition of Daniel, for S. Hierome found no difference betwixt Joseph, and
the Machabees, but both affirmed, that the desolation of the Temple lasted only
three years, and by their authority he manifestly conuinceth, that Daniel
cannot be understood of the time of Antiochus, but of Antichrist, because he
puts half a year more then the sacrifice ceased among the Jews in the
time of Antiochus. Wherefore it is manifest, that S. Hierome found but 3.
years in Joseph, and that the 6. months were added since: and if See the
precedent Chapter.
Joseph had written otherwise, he were to be evidently convinced of falsehood
out of the Machabees, which M. Downam would gladly conceal, and therefore he
makes Joseph to speak of another degree, and puts his words only in
Greek: but all these devises will not serve his turn, since he expressly
affirmed, that the daily sacrifice ceased 3. years and six months. Ipse
(Antiochus) and Templum spoliauit, and quotidianae religionis assi^^itate^ per
annos tressexque menses inhibuit: which is flatly against the Machabees, and
M. Downam himself also, who will have it to have been only 3. years and ten
days, and so makes Daniel to agree with him, by changing half a year into a
parcel; and would no doubt willingly have done as much for Joseph, but that
he could not convey it cleanly, because he expressly reckons 6. months, as
now Hierom. in cap. 12. Dan.
we have him, but indeed only accounted three years, as S. Hierome cites
him, and so he agrees passing well with the Machabees; and it is evident, that
Daniel spoke not of Antiochus, but Antichrists time, as has been sufficiently
proved, as well by this number of three years, and a half, as by other
circumstances, which agree not to Antiochus, in the former Chapter. And this is
all he has to say about the places of Daniel, only he repeateth an objection,
which Bellarmine made to himself, that Daniel reckons 1290. days, and S.
John but 1260. 30. less. To which he answered, that Anticrists last month is
not accounted in his reign.
S. John speaks of the preaching of Henoch and Helias, and Daniel of the
death of Antichrist, which shall be 30. days after, in which he shall notraigne
so absolutely as before, and therefore this last month is not commonly accounted
in his reign, as neither the years before, in which he obtained to the
height of his greatness. For after the death, resurrection, and assumption of
Enoch and Helias, the third part of the City shall fall, and 7000. shall be
slain with an earthquake, and the rest shall be terrified, and give glory to the
God of Heaven, as S. John writes Apoc. 11. by which Antichrists kingdom
shall be much diminished, though he shall live one month Ionger, Dan. cap. 12.
and persecute so much as he may, as the Angel told Daniel, being desirous to
know what was to follow after the 3. years and a half.

3. The places of the Apoc. trouble M. Downam shrewdly, and therefore he gives
six solutions (such as they are) poor ones, God wot. First then he denies
that the times Apoc. 11. 12. 13.
mentioned in the 11. 12. and 13. chapters are the same, and puts Bellarmine
to prove it, because he himself has neither reason nor authority to impugn it
withal, both which Bellarmine has alleged for his exposition, in which there
is no difficulty, where we are to begin the account. Neither will M. Downams
bare word be taken, affirming, that all these times are not to be taken
literally, and that none of them defines Antichrists reign. For Bellarmine
expressly proves the contrary. But, says M. Downam, the 42. months in the
11. and 13. Chapters signify the time of the persecution under the Roman
Emperors, either only or specially. For cap. 11. v. 2. it is said, that the
Gentills shall tread upon the holy City 42. months. But Antichrist as the
Antichrist shall be the Prince of all the wicked in general.
Papists hold, shall be the Prince of the Jews, and counterfaite Christians: and
of all the wicked in general also, as M. Downam cannot choose but know, if he
would deal sincerely, and not seek for shifts, and starting-holes. For in
the last Chapter that was plainly, not only affirmed, but also proved, as
afterward it shall again: as likewise in due place, that the great City,
where the two witnesses shall be slain, is Jerusalem and See cap. 13.
not Rome; though if it were Rome, it were no proof, but that they might be
slain by Antichrist there, in whose time they shall preach, as has been largly
convinced. By which it is likewise manifest that these places are to be
understood of Antichrist. But nothing conuinceth this more evidently The
foolish dream of the fool Fox.
then the foolish dream of the fool Fox, whom the devil which seems to
have persuaded him, rightly so called, because he was so blockish, as to
believe so absurd a devise, which notwithstanding M. Downam is content to make
his chiefest ground, because he has no better, to wit, that by 42. months
should be understood so many sabbaths, or weeks of years. Was there ever a
more absurd or ridiculous devise invented, or maintained? Is this the sincere
exposition of Scripture, which they so greatly brag and boast of? what
connection has 30. days with 7. years? Surely a month contains 4. weeks.
Wherefore if they will have these 42. months to be understood of years, they
must not tell us of 42. weeks of years, but of so many months, which they
cannot do; and besides Bellarmine well proves, There are no months of years.
a mere madness to imagine, and altogether as absurd as to think that Foxes
head was of glass, as he is reported to have most fo^dly imagined. And yet is
M. Downa^ co^te^t thus to shift of the difficulty of all these places, thinking
it sufficient to have found this goodly Gloss for the 42. months, and that the
number of days, or years need no further explication, but is to be reduced to
these 42. weeks of years though neither himself, nor any man else, can
possibly invent how to make the^ agree. For first concerning the days, if we
take a day for a year, and after this account, we can take it for no less,
they make 4. times as many years as the 42. Downam and Fox their absurd
exposition of Scripture.
sabbothes come to at least, and then what shall we make of the three years
and a half? Surely this is an endless labor and labyrinth; but to this pass
must these good fellows needs come, that will go about to frame Scripture to
their own brittle and beetle brains.

But yet M. Downam will give one attempt more about the three years and a
half, which he thinks may be understood of the time, wherein the Church of
Christ, which was at Jerusalem, after it was admonished by a voice out of the
Sanctuary to depart, and accordingly removed to Pella, was sustained there. In
which devise; First he must grant that the 1260. days, signify also 3. years
and a half, for the same space in this Chapter is twice accounted, once by
times, and again by days: by which it will seem more the^ probable, that the
months are to be understood so also, and so the fool Fox has lost his babble;
and besides, many things in this 12. Chapter cannot be applied to those few
Christians which were at Jerusalem, as the battle betwixt Michael and the
Devil, the great persecution which was raised against the woman etc. But M.
Downam obiecteth, that in this 12. Chapter, there is no speech of Antichrist,
but of the Devil, who first seeks to overthrow the Church of Christ among the
Jews, and afterward comes to the Gentiles, and therefore it is said, that he
stands upon the sea shore, from whence he rayseth the Beast with 7. heads
etc. where it is marvel, that Apoc. 12.
he did not mark, how the Serpent or Dragon had 7. heads and ten horns,
as well as this beast, and consequently, that they are both to be at the same
time; and to be the chief causers of this great persecution: yet with this
difference, that the devil is the cause of all other, as well as this. Wherefore
not unfitly Antichrist is here called his tail, in which chiefly the venom of
this serpent lies: so that whatsoever The devil and Antichrist described after
the same manner.
Antichrist shall do either by himself or his instruments, may be peculiarly
applied to the Devil. For which cause the Devil in Antichrists time cannot be
more lively set forth then by the same description, which represents
Antichrist himself, by which M. Downams devise is quite overthrown and become
ridiculous, as also his proof, for that the Devil is said to stand upon the
sea shore, from whence he raises the beast with 7. heads etc. for this
proves nothing but that Antichrist, is a beast of the Devils raising, and
has his power from him, which no man denies: though I marvel how M. Downam
forgot his Greek in this place, in which we read (...) (steti:) as also
Andreas Arethas, Erasmus, Rupertus, and Codex Complutensis have it; and
consequently were to be referred to S. John himself, who signifies whither
he was carried in spirit to see the beast (which follows) arise; for which
cause diverse ancient writers begin the next chapter at those words.

4. In the second place M. Downam adds, that by Bellarmines interpretation of
those times, it would follow, that after Antichrist is once revealed, all men
that be acquainted with the Scriptures, may precisely define before hand the
very day of Christ's coming unto judgment, which the Lord notwithstanding will
not have known Mar. 13. 32. as Bellarmine himself must needs grant, seeing
he uses this, as the chief argument against those who by 1260. days Whether
those that live at Antichrists death, may gather how long they have to the end
of the world or no?
understand so many years. To which I answer that no such thing can be
gathered out of Bellarmine, who lately also Apolog. cap. 10. has plainly
declared, that in his opinion, there can no more be gathered out of the Prophet
Daniel, then that the world shall endure at least 45. days after Antichrists
death, but whether longer or no, that the Scripture declares not: but indeed
S. Hierome writes plainly, that 45. days after Antichrists death, Christ
shall come to Judgment. Out of which we willingly grant, that those which
live, at the time of Antichrists death may easily gather out of Scripture, how
far the day of judgment is off. Neither is this against Mar. 13. 32. where our
Savior only says, that at that time it was only known to God, which
hinders not, but that hereafter it may be gathered by Daniels prophecy, when
it is within so few days.

But M. Downam adds further in his 6. Chapter, that our Savior Matthew. 24.
39. and Luc. 17. 26. has foretold, that the end of the world shall be sudden,
and unlooked for even as it was in the days of Noah and Lot. This is the
objection which I referred to this place, as belonging to it, and Daniel
answers it with a distinction, that at the death of Antichrist there shall be
both good and wicked men, as there were in the time of Noah and Let, and ever
since. Now says Daniel, Only the just and learned shall make this collectio^.
impieagent impij, neque intelligent ownes impij: porro docti. intelligent. the
wicked shall do wickedly, and none of them shall understand (these mysteries,
though they be so plainly fortould) and of these speaks our Savior when he
says, that the day of judgment shall come unlooked for. But Daniel adds
further, porro docti intelligent; the learned shall understand them, and may
make a certain collection of the time of the day of Judgment, when they once
see Antichrist dead, that is, such pious interpreters as S. Hierome was. And
this difference we see in the time of Noah and Lot, and now also: for though
the Scripture speaks plainly of Antichrist and his persecution, and how long
it is to continue: yet wicked Porphyrie, M. Downam, and the rest of that crew
understand it not: but S. Hierome and other holy Saints and Catholics
instructed by them understand it plainly. So true is, and ever was, and shall be
that saying of the Wiseman, In maleuolam animam non introibit sapientia.
Wisdom will not Sap. 1.
enter into a wicked and malicious soul; such as all heretics have, and always
had, though they brag never so much of Scripture, and their private spirit,
which is one of the chiefest branches of their impiety. Neither does this any
whit infring Bellarmines argument against those which expound the 1260. days
to be so many years: for they cannot have any ground at all, to affirm that
those years are to Downa^s iugling.
begin more at one time, then at another, and yet every one by assigning what
time it pleases him, must needs grant, that from that time until Christ's
coming there are just so many years, which is, to take upon them to know
that, which Christ said was so hydden, that without an evident revelation, as
that of Daniel is, after Antichrists death, no man, nor Angel can know it. So
that Bellarmine uses that argument, only to disprooue the time, which
Illyricus and others appoint of Antichrists coming, and not absolutely to
reprove that interpretation; as M. Downam would have his reader think.
Wherefore in all this Chapter, in which he so largely refuteth that
interpretation, he never urges that illation. But this is no iugling at all in
M. Downa^s conceit.

Thirdly, says M. Downa^, It is incredible, if not impossible, that so many
and so great things, as they assign to Antichrist should be effected, and
brought to pass in so short a time, as Hentenius a learned Papist does
confess, and as has been showed heretofore. If M. Downa^ In praefat,
translat. Areth.
had set down these many and great things we might perhaps have showed him
how many of them were not to be done in these 3. years and a half, in which
notwithstanding Antichrist may do very many by himself, and his Ministers,
having all the world at command; and thus is Hentenius to be expounded, who
only thinks it impossible for Antichrist to obtain so many Kingdoms and
Provinces in so short a space: which makes nothing at all against us, who
rather think, that this short time is to begin after those victoryes be ended.
M. Downa^s other proofs are to be examined in their due places.

Fourthlie (says M. Downa^) When we proved that Antichrist is not any one
man alone, but a whole State and succession of man, we proved this by
consequence, that his reign was not to continue only three years and a half.
He says well: for when he can prove the one, he may prove the other; but he
will never be able to prove either, as the Reader will easily see, by
conferring See chap. 2.
his proofs, and my answers together: which now it is no time nor place to
do.

Fifthly (says M. Downam) Antichrist according to the conceit of the Papists
is to reign before the preaching of the two witnesses, and as Enoch and Elias
shal-begin to preach in the beginning of Antichrists Reign.
Bell says, is to continue one month after their death. Seeing the^ the two
witnesses preach 1260. days, which as Bellarmine also says make three years
and a half precisely; how can the term of Antichrists reign, be three years
and a half precisely? First M. Downa^ might have done well to have named those
Papists who co^ceipt Antichrists reign before the preaching of the two
witnesses, for we would have been so bold, as to have told them, that they
were in a wrong conceit, unless they mea^t that he should be of great power
before; but yet not of so great, as he shall be for the space of three years and
a half, in which these two glorious witnesses shall preach, as neither in his
last month after their death, by which he shall receive such a blow, that his
kingdom shall be so much diminished, that the last month is not accounted to
belong to the height of his reign, as before we also explicated out of Apoc.
11. and so there remains just three years and a half for Antichrists
reign, Supra nu. 2.
and these two holy witnesses preaching. Lastly he remitteth himself to his
proofs, that Antichrist was come in the Apostles time, and revealed in the
year 670. for answer of which bare assertion (for here he goes not about to
prove any thing) I must likewise remit my Reader to the answers See Chap. 3.
which I gave to those his proofs in their due places, and so leave him to
judge how well M. Downam has answered Bellarmines allegations, and confuted
his assertions.

5. After Bellarmine had proposed his own argument Downam insolently rejects
the Fathers.
those places in that sense: to which M. Downam gives no other answer, but
that they could not understand those prophesies; which is plain dealing
indeed, and sufficiently manifests Downa^s proud private spirit, which dares
tell so many holy Fathers, and pillars of Gods Church, that he knows more,
then they all, and that they said they knew not what, when they interpreted
those prophesies in that sort: which I would think should be sufficient for
all souls, to fly from such proud Luciferian spirits, as this fellow, and his
Companions have.

To Bellarmines second proof M. Downam has more to say: for first he
reprehendeth Bellarmine, for saying, that the Scriptures affirm, the time of
the devils loosing and Antichrists reign, to be breuissimum, Bellarmin
unjustly charged.
very short, or most short, they only saying, that it is short, or small. But
his VVisdome should have considered, that Belarmine puts that breuissimum
for the sense, and not for the words of the Scripture; which afterward he
alleges as they ly; so that if they import a very short, or most short time,
Bellarm. is not to blame. But M. Downa^ denies this also, showing at large,
that many times a thousand years or more Apoc. 12.
in Scripture are accoumpted but as a day, or a very short time, in respect of
the Lord, who speaks in the Scripture: which we willingly grant: but he
should have showed us, that these places now in question are to be understood
in respect of the Lord, and not rather in respect of the thousand years, in
which the Devil was bound. And cap. 17. it is yet more p^aine, that Antichrist
shall reign a small time in respect of The time of Antichrists reign very
short. Apoc. 17.
the 6. Kings, which went before him, which howsoever M. Downam understands
them, cannot be said to have reigned much more then a thousand years a piece.
Neither is it true, that Antichrist not only was, but also persecuted those,
that refused his mark, within the thousand years of Satan's imprisonment:
though S. John. Apoc. 20. saw the Martyrs in the time of Antichrist, Apoc. 20.
together with those which were before; of which only he speaks, when he
says that they lived and reigned with Christ in the thousand years: except
some will say with S. Ambrose, that the Martyrs in the time of Antichrist are
said to reign (before they were) in the former Martyrs, because they were
members of the same body: or that the thousand years are diversely taken. And
thus we see plainly, that the time of Antichrists reign, and the Devils
being loose, is said to be a very short time.

6. To the third argument he answers briefly, that S. Augustine etc. did
mistake the place Matthew. 24. 21. and that Matthew. 24. Downam rejects S.
Augustine and S. Gregory.
it is to be understood of the calamity of the Iew^s, as he has manifestly
proved (if you will believe him:) but if you will take a view of my answer to
his proofs, perhaps you will think them manifestly fond and foolish. Secondly
he says, that we are to distinguish betwixt the time of Antichrists
continuance, and the time of his heatest persecution; which we willingly admit,
See chap. 4.
though so, that we always think, that his whole persecution shall be most hot:
for we find no cold persecution of his at all. Wherefore if he will grant us,
that the great and hot persecution of Antichrist, which is spoken of in the
Scripture shall be very short, least in a manner all perish, we desire no more;
and thus much we must have whether he will or no, since the Scripture truly
interpreted by the holy Fathers expressly affirms it.

In answering the fourth congruence, he is somewhat large. First he says, that
Bellarmine presupposes that Antichrist is but one man, which is true in some
sort, because he had proved it before, and yet proves it now again thus
far, that it is very improbable, that more then one should be necessary for
the space of 3. years and a half, longer then which Christ preached not; and
therefore in likelihood Antichrist shall preach no longer neither.

Secondly he takes up Bellarmine very short, for making himself Gods
Counsaylour: which yet is far otherwise, for he only seeks reasons of that,
which is already known that God has done. For I would have M. Downam know,
that Bellarmine is too wise to have delivered any certainty only upon this
congruence, and therefore would by no means make that inference, which he
would have him, that Antichrist shall pervert no more then Christ converted,
because The converting of one, argues more power the^ the perverting of many.
it is far more easy to pervert, then to convert, and so the converting of
those few, or any one of them which Christ converted, shows far more power,
then all that perverting does in Antichrist, which bewrays no power at all,
but malice and hatred: and yet would not Bellarmine say neither, that Christ as
man could convert no more, the^ he did, but that he used sufficient means to
convert far more, and could have used more; but he is wont to proceed
sweetly, though effectually with his elect, whereas Antichrist uses all
cruelty and extremity, and finds men more disposed to follow him, then
Christ did, and therefore there is no comparison betwixt them two in this, but
only it seems unfitting for us to think, that Gods goodness will give
Antichrist a longer time to use all those barbarous and tyra^nycall means,
then was allotted to Christ, only to allure men by his divine persuasions, and
admirable works.

Thirdly he would make a difference betwixt Christ and Antichrist, in that
Christ has spoken by the mouth of his Prophets and Ministers. As though
Antichrist has not always had his Ministers also, all heretics; and now M.
Downam, and his rabble must be content to let all the world but themselves
think, that they are his Ministers. Fourthly he Antichrist may raise a
universal persecution, ^^ one time,
would begin to prove, that Antichrist cannot do all those things which
Catholics attribute to him, in so short a time. But this is another matter
now, and he cannot deny but that Antichrist may raise a general persecution in
all his Kingdoms in one time, from which day forward, let M. Downam begin to
reckon the three years and a half of his reign, and if any thing cannot be
well comprised with in this space, we will not stick to grant, that it was to
be done before, as the subduing of so many Kingdoms etc.

To the 5. and 6. proof he only says; that they are not worth the mentioning.
But it should seem he meant, they were too that the time, and times, and half
a time, as has been showed, belong not to antichrists reign, and that he
takes times for years. How he has showed that this belongs not to
Antichrists reign, we have already seen and refuted. But now Bellarmine
urges, how the 1260. days being taken for years can agree with three years
and a half: and here M. Downam was feign to skippe, for otherwise he could not
have escaped: and it is Downam omitteth what he cannot answer.
enough in this place that he grants us, that a time, and times, and half a
time signify three years and a half: for by this it is manifest, that both
the 42. months, as also ^he 1260. days, signify the same, and consequently
that Antichrist is to reign no longer, since that it is euydent, that they are
understood of his time, as has been plainly proved.

7. In the last place M. Downam goes about to reply to Bellarmine gave to his
fellows reasons; and first to keep Chytraeus out of the ditch, he lends him
his authority, saying, that he says it as well as Chytraeus, at which I
imagine the Reader will laugh; and then because he saw that the place of S.
Paul proved nothing neither, unless it might be granted, that Antichrist was
already come, he lends him another of S. John, affirming that the Antichrist
was come in his time: at which I suppose Chytraeus would chafe. Chap. 2. Downam
cannot defend his fellows.
For now we shall have Antichrist to e^dure as long as Christ; and besides S.
John affirms not, that the Antichrist was come in his time, but that he had
many members then, as has been sufficiently proved in due place; so that
Chytraeus remains in as ill case, as he was before M. Downam laid to his
helping hand. But yet once again he will try what he can Henry Bullenger
together, which he perfourmeth with a very subtle distinction, saying: that
they speak of the time, and Bellarm. of the number; so that there shall be just
42. and 1260. but no man can tell of what. And is not this a wise exposition
think you? Will not Chytraeus and Bullenger be ashamed of such a P^^cter, who
make the say they know not what themselves. But M. Downa^ will save their
credit if they will be ruled by him by bringing their uncertainties to some
certainety, as to the 4^. sabbothes of John Fox, and the 1260. years of the
Magdeburge^ses, the former of which I refuted before, and the latter is here
exploded by Bellarmine: in defense of which M. Downam has nothing to say, but
to repeat their Argument out or Ezechiel, without seeming to understand
Bellarmines distinction, denying that days are literally taken there for
years; which is necessary for their argument, though they may be a sign or
figure of years, and consequently signify the^ mystically, as those 390.
days in which Ezechiel slept upon his left side, were a figure and sign of so
many years, even as his sleeping was a sign of the toleration which God used
toward the people of Israel: but yet none but a mad man will Ezechiels
sleeping is to be understood literally of Gods tolerating, so that when he was
bidden to sleep so many days, God was literally commanded to sleep so many
years. Neither is M. Downams addition out of some of the Ezech. 4.
learned, namely Iunius, any thing to the purpose. For Apoc. 2. only the number
of 10. is put indefinitely, as is usually in Scripture, so that 10. days is
all one, as if he had said many days. And this is all, that M. Downa^ can say
for his fellow Days are not taken for years
Ministers. Now he will say some thing against them, telling them plainly that
if they take days for years, it will follow, that the special time of
Christ's coming may be fore told after the Revelation of Antichrist, which he
thinks Apoc. 2.
must in no wise be granted: and we have showed how far the Catholics may
fortell it without danger of any inconvenience. Wherefore we may now conclude
this Chapter, in which it sufficiently appears, that Antichrist is not come,
as the heretics affirm.

THE NINTH CHAPTER. Containing the sixth Demonstration.
THE sixth Demonstration (says Bellarmine) is taken from the last sign, which
David cap. 7. speaking twice of Antichrist, once telling his vision, and
afterward expounding it, both times adds, that after Antichrist, shall forth
with follow the judgment. I considered (says he) the bornes, and behold
another little horn arose, and three of the first horns were pulled of before
his face. I beheld until the Thrones were placed, and the Ancient of days
sat etc. And after expounding the vision: The fourth beast (says he) shall be
the fourth Kingdom, and the 10. horns shall be 10. Kings, and another shall
arise after them, and he shall be more potent then the former, and shall humble
3. Kings etc. and they shall be delivered into his hand for a time, and times,
and a half a time, and Judgment shall sit etc.

The like Prophecy has S. John Apoc. 20. After these things, he must be
loosed a tittle time: and I saw seats, and they sat upon them, and judgment
was given unto them etc. And again the Prophet Dan. after he had said cap.
12. that Antichrists Kingdom should endure 1290. days, adds: Blessed i^ ^e
which expels, and comes to 1335. days, that is to 45. days after
Antichrists death, for then will our Lord come to judgment, and will restore
the Crowns of Justice to the conquerors, as S. Hierome, and Theodoret expound
it in their Commentaries upon this place.

Besides, the same is gathered out of Matthew. 24. This Gospel of the Kingdom
shall be preached in the whole world, for a testimony to all nations, and then
shall the end be: that is, a little after shall the end of the world be, and
after forthwith. After the tribulation of those days the sun shall be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light, and then shall the sign of the Son
of man appear etc. The same appears out of 2 Thessalonians. 2. Then shall that
wicked one be revealed, whom our Lord Jesus shall kill with the spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming etc. where the
Apostle teaches, that almost immediately after Antichrist, Christ shall come,
viz. there shall be a very little time betwixt them: and the frauds and
deceiptes of Antichrist, which were begun to be destroyed by Helias and Henoch,
shall be wholly destroyed by the coming of Christ himself, and the fearful
signs which shall go before.

Finally we have the same 1. Joan. 2. My children it is the last hour, and as
you have heard, that Antichrist comes, and now there are many become
Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last hour. Where S. John says
that this time from Christ to the end of the world, is the last hour, that is,
the last time, or the last age, as S. Augustine expounds it: and he proves
it excelle^tly out of this principle, because we know that Antichrist shall
come in the end of the world. For S. John makes this argument. We know that
Antichrist shall come in the end of the world: but now we see many of his
forerunners, or little Antichrists present; wherefore it is a certain sign,
that this is the last hour or age. As one might argue of the hour last of the
night: we know that the sun shall rise in the end of the night: but now we
see many of his beams enlighten the air, wherefore we know that this is the
last hour of the night.

To conclude, the same is confirmed by the common Iren. l. 5. in fine. Tertul.
l. de resurrect. August. l. 2. ciu. cap. 19. and others; and by our Adversaries
confession: for our Adversaries acknowledge, that Antichrist shall reign to
the end of the world, and therefore a little after his destruction, the and of
the world shall be. From this sign then, together with the former, we have
invincible demo^stration, by which it is proved, that Antichrist is not yet
come, nor is the Bishop of Rome. For if forth with after the death of
Antichrist the world shall be ended; and Antichrist shall not live after he has
appeared, and begun to reign, but 3. years and a half: then he shall not
appear, nor begin to reign, but three years and a half before the worlds
end. But the Pope has already reigned with both swords, even in the opinion
of our Adversaries, above 500. years, and yet the world endures still.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downam first cauelleth with Bellarmine because he will not prove
that Antichrist is not yet come, but only, that he is not come long since. As
though Bellarmine had taken upon him to fight with the wind, and not to impugn
M. Downam, and his fellows, who affirm, that the coming of Antichrist, and
his death, are two things; so that though it be true, that he is not utterly
to be destroyed before the second coming of Christ, yet he came even in the
Apostles times, as S. Paul insinuates, and S. John plainly teaches. Where
we must put M. Downam in mind, that these The end of the world shall not be long
after Antichrists coming.
two Apostles only teach, that Antichrist came in their time only in his
forerunners, but now we seek for him in person, or as M. Downam speaks
(...), in which sort, he and his fellows make him to have reigned a 1000.
years which Bellarmine impugneth, because presently after his destruction the
world must end, and he shall be destroyed within 3. years and a half after his
being in that height, and consequently the world should have been ended 1000.
years since, if the Protestants opinion about the time of Antichrists coming
in that sort were true. In the Protestants opinion the world should have been
ended many hundred years since.


2. Feign would M. Downam weaken Bellarmines proofs, by telling us, that some
are not to be understood of Antichrist Dan. 7. Apoc. 20. Matthew. 24. 14. but we
have proved the contrary at large in diverse places, to which the Readers may
have recourse. Others, says M. Downam, are against himself, Dan. 12. out of
which he draws these consequences. 1. that the reign of Antichrist is not
just 3. years and a half, but 1290. days. But we have already given the
reason, why the last month that Antichrist shall live, is not accoumpted in
his reign. 2. that Antichrist shall be destroyed before the end of the world.
VVheras Paul tells us, that Christ shall destroy him at his appearing, and
not 45. days before. But M. Downam should have noted, that S. See chap. 4. 5.
7.
Paul makes two degrees of the destruction of Antichrist: first his particular
death by Christ's special commaundment, or apparition: and secondly the
destruction of his Kingdom Dan. 12.
by his coming, and the signs which shall go before.

M. Downams third inference is, that the day of judgment shall be certainly
known after Antichrists revealing: but of this we have said enough before,
that there is no doubt, but that the day of judgment may be known when God 2.
These. 2.
reuealeth it, though the wicked will not understand it so neither, as Daniel
affirms: by which M. Downams last inference 2. degrees of Antichrists
destruction.
is also answered, and the Papists will prove true, by following Christ and
his Prophets, when M. Downam and his companions must needs be liars, leaving
either of them, though they protest never so much, to cleave to the other.

3. After this he comes to Matthew. 24. 29. where he confesses, that the
signs of Christ's coming are to follow the tribulations Matthew. 24.
under Antichrist; which is as much as Bellarmine desires at his hands; but
yet he will needs infer out of this place also, that Antichrist shall not be
one man, because v. 23. 24. our Savior speaks of many false Christ's, and
false Prophets, which we know very well; and have daily experience, how true it
is by seeing so many sectaries in our days: but we also know, that every false
Christ or false Prophet is not Antichrist, though we will not deny, but that he
shall be a false Christ, and a false Prophet also; yea the falsest of them all.
But what is this to the purpose, to prove that he shall not be one man? Next
he comes to 2 Thessalonians. 2. where he repeateth his distinction of Antichrists
coming and ending, but to as little purpose as before, though he explicateth
many Chymericall degrees more largely, which so far as they make against us,
are elsewhere confuted. Lastly Joan. 2. where he impugneth the 1. John 2.
argument that Bellarmine frames out S. John, making him prove, that it is
now the last hour, because we see many petite Antichrists. For, says M.
Downam, by the like reason we might prove, that the fulness of time was from
the beginning, because there were always Prophets, which Bellarmine calls the
forerunners of Christ. But M. Downam should have considered, that it is not
absolutely true, that it is the fulness of time, whenever it may be said that
Christ comes, but only when he comes in person, and therefore it is no
marvel, though he comes in his forerunners from the beginning of the world,
Antichrist cannot be said to come at al but in the last hour.
and yet the fulness of time was not come; but Antichrist cannot be said to come
at all, but only in the last hour, and therefore S. John proves very well,
that it was the last hour, because Antichrist was already come in his members
and forerunners.

After he has thus checked Bellarmine for framing of S. John's argument, M.
Downam takes upon him to put it in form himself. This then (in his opinion)
is the Apostles reason. When the Antichrist comes, it is the last hour.
Now, says he, Antichrists are come (meaning by Antichrists, the same with the
Antichrist, which elsewhere he affirms was then entered into the world, or else
there are 4. termini, 4. terms in the Apostles argument:) Therefore now is the
last hour. But in this manner S. John's argument should not only have 4. but 5.
terms. For Antichrist, and Antichrists Downam peruerteth S. Io. text and
argument.
are not all one, nor comes, and are come; to omit that the words of S. John
be (are become.) Wherefore M. Downam shows himself a veric poor Logitian, if
he can frame no better arguments then this. Neither can we believe him when he
tells us, that the Antichrist and Antichrists are all one in S. John: for
besides, that the article is put only in one place as has been noted before,
why should S. John change both number and phrase, and so obscure his sentence,
if there were no difference in the thing it self? And if M. Downam would be
ashamed to speak thus absurdly himself, much greater cause has he to blush
for attributing so gross an absurdity to S. Io. or rather to the Holy Ghost
who speaks in him. And by this it is plain that in these few words of S.
Io. there are contained two arguments, if we will reduce them to form, as
before I have showed, and Bellarmine supposes Chap. 2.
in this place.

4. But at length, though M. Downam cauilleth with Bellarmines or continue
until the end of the world, and likewise acknowledges, that if the former
argument concluded (which I willingly remit to the Readers censure) then this
demonstration is likewise unanswerable, which is that, that Bellarmine
pretended in this whole Chapter. Neither does M. Downa^s distinction, which he
repeateth here again of Antichrists coming and end, any whit avail him: for
Bellarmine proved in the former argument, that Antichrist was not to continue
in his kingdom past three years and a half, and in this, that the world was
to end very shortly after him, by which it is evident, that it cannot be a
1000 years, since he began his reign, as M. Downam and his mates affirm.

The other objection, which he makes concerning the length of Antichrists
reign, is a mere cavil: for Bellarmine in his whole discourse sufficiently
explicateth in what sense he says, that Antichrist shall not begin his reign
but 3. years and a half before the end, viz. before the end begin, for he
takes not the end for the very last instant, but for that space in which God
shall begin to confound Antichrist, and destroy his kingdom; which in all
will be 75. days, as Daniel foretells, which space helps M. Downams The e^d
of the world is not only the last instant.
cause very little, who has need of many times so many years, to make his
position good, that Antichrist came 1000. years since, and yet the world
indureth: and that this was Bellarmines mind, he himself has now sufficiently
explicated in recognit. operum page 18. where he notes, that he said that
Antichrist shall not appear, nor begin to reign but 3. years and a half
before the end of the world, because the space betwixt the death of Antichrist,
and the end of the world, shall be so little, that it may be accounted nothing:
for otherwise he had not forgotten, that he had proved a little before, that
there should be 45. days betwixt the death of Antichrist, and the end of the
world, out of Dan. 12. And thus we will conclude these 6. demonstrations which
make Bellarmines third argument, and desire the Reader to consider attentively,
whether Bellarmines proofs, or M. Downams solutions, be more substantial; and
what is to be thought of such men as will open their mouths in such
blasphemous manner, against all authority and reason, in a matter of this
importance, upon which al other questions in controversy in great part depend.

THE TENTH CHAPTER. Of Antichrists name.
THERE follows (says Bellarmine) the fourth disputation of the proper name
and S. Io. Apoc. 13. do certainly belong to Antichrist: And he shall make all,
little with great, rich and poor, free men and slaves, to have a character in
their right hand, or upon their foreheades, and that none can buy or sell,
unless he has the character, or name of the beast, or the number of his name.
Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding reckon the number of the
beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number 666.

There are many opinions of this number. The first is, Bulle^ger, who praefat.
Hom. in Apoc. thinks, that the time of Antichrists coming is signified. In
like manner the Magdeburgenses, who cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. think, that the time
of Antichrists death is designed. Likewise others, who as witnesses
Clictonem in l. 4. Damasceni c. 28. think, that the death of Mahomet is
degsined, whom they say was Antichrist: with whom agrees Lyranus upon this
place, though he thinks not, that Mahomet was Antichrist; yet he imagines
that by this number is signified, that the death of Mahomet was to be in the
year 666. from Christ's coming.

This is a most absurd opinion. First because S. John says, that he speaks
of the number of the Beasts name. Secondly because the beast, whose number
this is, will command all Merchants to use it for a sign in contracts, as is
manifest Apox. 13. Wherefore it is not the number of the death of the Beast, but
belongs to him alive. Thirdly, because it is also false, that Mahomet died
the year of Christ 666. For some say he died in the year 637. as Matthew
Palmer: some the year 630. as Cedrenus in compend. hist. some the year 628.
as Joan. Vaseus in chronico Hispaniae.

The second opinion is of David Chytraeus in cap. 13. Apoc. who says the name
of Antichrist is (...), or in the Romiith, Romanus. Therefore the Pope, who is a
latin Prince, since he ruseth in Latium, and is the Bishop of Rome, is
Antichrist. The same teaches Theodorus Bibliander tab. 10. and therefore he
makes the inscription of the 11. table of his Cronologie, which begins at
the year 600. Latinos Papa. Their reasons are two: the first, because S.
Irenaeus lib. 5. teaches, that it is very like, that this shall be the name of
Antichrist. The other, because indeed the letters of his name make that number,
as is manifest.

Resc. 200. l. 30. t. 300. Vau. 6. a. 1. e. 5. Mem. 40. t. 300. i. 10. Iod. 10.
e. 5. t. 300. Iod. 10. i. 10. a. 1. Tau. 400. n. 50. n. 50. o. 70.. 200. 666.
666. 666.

This opinion is altogether temerarious: for first Irenaeus says indeed, that
the name lateno may probably be applied to Antichrist; but he adds, that it
is much more probable, that Antichrists name shall not be lateno, but teitan
which also expresses that number: and is a far more noble name, since it
signifies the Sun.

Besides Irenaeus his conjecture which might have some probability then, now
has none: for he says, that it is probable, that Antichrist shall be called
Latinus, not because he shall in Latiu^, but because in his time the Latins
had greatest dominions, and in a manner the whole world. For because Antichrist
shall be a most pote^t King, without doubt he shall possess the most potent
kingdoms, which he shall find at his coming: but the most potent kingdom is
that of the Latins, says Irenaeus, for they now most truly reign. Surely
this conjecture now is nothing worth: for the Latins reign no longer over all
the world, but the Turks are those which most truly reign, and among us the
Spaniards and French, not the Latins.

Moreover the name of Latin, as it signifies a Roman, is Iota, and then it
makes not that number. In which manner the devise of the name Romiith may
likewise be confuted. For Romanus cannot end in Tau, since it is the masculine
gender, for that it is the termination of the Feminine gender among the
hebrews: but if we remove the letter Tau, there want 400. to make the number
of Antichrist. Likewise the name (...), if it be the name of Antichrist, it
shall be proper to him, as Arethas teaches, and his most usual name, for it
must be showed for a sign by all that buy and sell. But the name (...) is
common; for there was never any Pope, that by his proper name was called
Latinus. Neither is this an usual name, for the Popes never call themselves
Latins, but Bishops, or Popes The name Romanus was proper to one only Pope,
who notwithstanding could not be Antichrist, since he lived but 4. months, and
otherwise it is a common name.

Finally, if only this name (...), or Romanus, made the Hippolytus Martyr in
orat. de consummatione mundi, noted another name which makes the same number,
viz. (...), that is nego, I deny. Arethas named seven, (...), id est,
Illustris. (...), id est, Sol. (...), id est, Victor. (...), id est, pra^us
dux. (...), id est, vere nocens. (...), id est, olim inuiden^. (...), id est,
agnus nocens. Primasius adds another, (...), id est, contrarius. Rupertus,
and before him Haymo invented two other, viz. (...), which is a Goths name,
and, DIC LVX, a Latin, which makes 666. if after the Latin manner we take D:
for 500. l. for one, C. for 100. L. for 50. V. for 5. and X. for 10.

Of the later writers Lindanus l. 3. Dubitantij, notes, that Martyn Lauter
makes the number 666. if the Latin letters be taken for numbers after the
manner of the Greek and Hebrew thus: A. 1. B. 2. C. 3. D. 4. E. 5. F. 6. G. 7.
H. 8. I. 9. K. 10. L. 20. M. 30. N. 40. O. 50. P. 60. Q. 70. R. 80. S. 90. T.
100. V. 200. X. 300. Y. 400. Z. 500. Gilbert Genebrard in the last book of his
Cronologie noted also, that the name of Luther in hebrew, makes that number
Lulter. I add two more in favor of Luther and Chytraeus, to wit, Dbid Citriu,
id est, David Chytraeus, and saxneio, which later agrees as well to Luther, as
the name Latinus to the Pope.

Daleth. 4. s. 200. Beth. 2. a. 1. Iod. 10. x. 60. Daleth. 4. o. 70. Caph. 20.
n. 50. Iod. 10. e. 5. Tau. 400. i. 10. Resc. 200. o. 70. Iod. 10. s. 200. Vau.
6. 666. 666.

The third opinion is of many Catholics, who guess Primasius, Anselmus, and
Richardus.

This opinion is well confuted by Rupertus, because the name which S. John
insinuates in this place, shall not be given to Antichrist by his Adversaries,
but taken by himself, as glorying therein, insomuch that he shall make it be
written in men's foreheades. And yt is not probable, that he will take to
himself any hateful or vile name, such as (...), and almost all the other
above rehearsed.

The 4. opinion is of Rupertus himself, who thinks

The fifth opinion is Bedes, who takes the contrary course, and teaches that
the number of 6. is perfect, because lib. 3. Reg. cap. 10. that the weight of
gold which was brought every year to Solomon was 666000. talents. These two
opinions seem not sufficiently to agree with that which S. John says, that,
that number is the number of the name, not of the dignity or preuarication:
neither would these Fathers have their opinions otherwise accounted of, then as
suspicions, and conjectures.

Wherefore their opinion is truest who confess their ignorance, and say, that
Antichrists name is yet unknown, S. Irenaeus upon this place of the Apocalypse,
and of others. And I will set down S. Irenaeus his words, because Chytraeus
exhorts his reader to peruse them. I exhort (says he) the studious Reader to
peruse the last pages of Irenaeus upon this place, which are the 333. and the
334. who disputes of this number of the Beast modestly, and piously, and among
other things shows, that Antichrist shall be a Latin or Roman by the name
(...), etc. Wherefore Irenaeus says thus: It is therefore more certain, and
without danger to expect: he fulfilling of the Prophesy, then to suspector
guess at any names, since there may be many names found which have the
foresaid number. And notwithstanding there remains the same question; for if
we find many names, which have this number, the question is which of them be
shall bear that is to come. Neither do we say this, for any scarsity of names
which have the number of his name, but for the fear of God, and zeal of
truth: for the name (...) has the number we seek; but we affirm nothing of
it. Likewise the name (...) has the number 666. and is very likely, because
this name has the truest Kingdom, for the Latins are they which reign now.
But we will no beast of this. But (...) having the first syllable written by
the two greek vowells ^, and ^, is the name which deserves most credit of
all, that are sound in our language etc. And after. Since therefore this name
Titan has so many persuasions, and so great likelihood, that we may gather by
many things, that peradventure he that is to come, shall be called Titan; yet we
will not hazard our selves in it, nor affirm with asseueration, that he shall
have this name, because if his name were to be publicly manifested at this
time, doubtless it would have been declared by him, who saw the Revelation. So
he.

Wherefore let Chytraeus give ear to Irenaeus disputing modestly, piously, and
learnedly, and let him not falsely impute that unto him, which he never said.
For Irenaeus did S. John himself. And he added that he did not speak thus for
any want of names, but for the fear of God, and zeal of the truth. For which
cause he rehearsed three names (...), and (...), of which he affirmed that the
second was more likely then the first, and the third then the second, but that
none of them was certain.

We may also add a third reason out of the same Irenaeus: for a little before
disputing against them, which gathered be most easily seduced by Antichrist.
For when he shall come, and have another name then they persuade themselves he
shall have, he shall not be held by them to be Antichrist, and consequently
shall not be avoided. All which inconveniences will doubtless happen to the
Lutherans, and especially this last, for because they have persuaded themselves
that the Pope is Antichrist, when that true Antichrist shall come, he will not
easily be discerned by them, and therefore not avoided.

But here we must note, that Antichrists name will be Sybills (as we find in the
first book of their verses) had noted the number of Christ's name and said that
it was 888. as S. John wrote of Antichrist, that the number of his name is 666.
And yet until Christ's coming men knew not, that he was to be called Jesus.
But since Christ's coming all controversy is taken away, and all know that he
is called Jesus.

The Sybills verses are these Sed quae sit numeri totius summa docebo. Namque
octo monadas, totidem decadas super ista atque hecatontadas octo, infidis
significabit Humanis nomen, tu vero mente teneto.

i. 10. e. 8. s. 200. o. 70. u. 400.. 200. 888.

S. Irenaeus rightly teaches and proves lib. 4. c. 43.

Hence we may take an insoluble argument to prove Rome, there would be no
question of his name, foretold by S. John, as because our Christ is come,
there is now no question even amonst the Turks, Jews, and Pagans, how he is
called. But there is very great Controversy about the name of Antichrist, as is
manifest by so many opinions as we have rehearsed and refuted. Wherefore the
Prophesy of S. John is not yet fulfilled, and consequently Antichrist is not
yet come, neither is the Pope Antichrist.

Add a confirmation out of the confession of Augustin^^ Marloratus, who in his
great explication upon the new Testament, gathered out of diverse Lutheran and
Calumist writers, says thus of this place: There are almost as many
expositions, as expositours of this place: by which it appears, that it is
most obscure and dark. Thus he. But if this Prophesy be still most obscure and
dark, it is not yet fulfilled; wherefore Antichrist is not yet come; for all
Prophesies are made most clear when they are fulfilled. Why then do thou
Marloratus brag in thy Preface upon the Apoc. that, it is so manifest, thee the
Pope is Antichrist, that if you held your peace, the stones would excla^me.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. FOR answer. First M. Downam deemeth, that this name of Antichrist shall be
commonly known so the name of Antichrist cannot be known, as the name of
Antichrist, until Antichrist himself be known and acknowledged, which was
not to be at his first coming, for then he could not be able to seduce many,
few or none being so desperately mad as to follow him whom they know to be
Antichrist. But M. Downam should have considered, that Antichrists name shall be
known when he is come.
Bellarmine speaks not of any secret coming of Antichrist, but of his
revelation and reign, which M. Downam and his crew affirm to have happened
many hundred years since, and Bellarmine confuteth them by this argument, that
if it were so. Antichrists name would be well known, as we see Christ's is, and
yet many are so mad, as to refuse Christ, though they know his name: and in
like manner no doubt, many will embrace Antichrist after that his name shall be
certaynely known.

2. Secondly M. Downam tells us, that in the similitude taken from Christ
there is no likeness, because Christ was ore particular man, but Antichrist is
not, but a State which cannot have a proper name: which as you see is no
answer at all, if Antichrist shall be See. chap. 2.
one particular man, as has been proved in due place, to which I remit my
Reader: and besides I see no reason why a State may not have a proper name
also. Yet M. Downam gives us another difference, for that Christ coming to
save, his name Jesus, the name of the Savior was to be made known, that he
might the rather be embraced: Antichrist coming to deceive, and to destroy M.
Downams iugling.
was (according to his devilish policy) to conceal that name, whereby he
should be known to be Antichrist; where you must mark how cunningly M. Downam
concealeth the diligence which the Devil used to obscure the name of Christ,
and likewise the power and wisdom of God to make Antichrist known, for
otherwise his Reader would very easily have conceived how God is as able to
manifest Antichrists name, that he may be avoided, as he was to make our
Saviors name known, that he might be embraced. And besides it is more then
probable, that Antichrist will not be so humble, but that he will desire to
have his name known: for this is the great and powerful wisdom of God to
overthrow the wicked by their own courses. Wherefore it is not certain, that
Antichrist shall either know, or make account of this Prophesy, nor reflect
upon his name, whether it conteyneth this number or no. But though all this
should be so, yet he will think to overcome this difficulty, as well as the
rest, especially when he is come to that height of pride to extol himself
above all that is called God. And sure we are, that by one means or other his
name shall be manifest, for otherwise this revelation of S. John concerning it,
would serve to small purpose.

After this M. Downam makes a little digression from his purpose to tell us,
that the Sybil did not only foretell, that our Saviors name should conteyne
the number 888. but also, by certain Acrostiches foretold that he should be
Jesus Christ, the son of God and Sauieur But of Antichrist she speaks
nothing so plainly: howbeit she calls Rome Babylon as Io. does. And in the 8.
book describing Antichrist as some think, she calls him a Prince with many
heads: which The Sybills verses of Adrian are expounded.
M. Downam will have to be understood, either by a Metonymie for the Popes
triple crown, or by a Synechdoche for the succession of Popes. Likewise the
Sybil adds, that he shall have a name near to Ponti, that is Pontisex, the
Pope, says M. Downam. Now how Rone is Babylon we shall see afterward. And as
for that thought of some, it is evident, that not Antichrist, but Adrian the
Emperor is spoken of in those verses, in which See Florimond Reymond of
Antichrist cap. 22.
among other things, his little God Antin^^^ is described. Neither is he called
a Prince with many heads, as M. Downam supposes, but is only said to have one
white, or gray head, as Spartianus testifies in his life, that Adrian had, and
that either by these verses of the Sybil, or by those of Virgil, ^n which he
describes Numa Pompilius, by his gray head also, Nosco crines, incanaque
menta, Adrian prognosticated that he Aeneid, 6.
should come to be Emperor. Bullenger and Castalio differ from M. Downam, and
the truth also; for they will not have it to be a white head, but a white hat,
or helmet, deriuing it rather from (...), then (...), contrary to the common
use of such compounds. But even by Castalio his consent, he that in this 8.
book is by the Sybil called (...), in the fifth book is also named (...), in
which place he is expressly said to succeed Traian, as Adrian did. And in both
places he is said to have a name near to the sea, which in greek is called
(...), in respect of the Adriatike sea, which was denominated of a City called
Adria, near Venice, in which this Emperor was also borne, and from thence had
his name Adrianus. That other conceypt of M. Downam, who thinks that this
name near to Ponti, is Pontifex, is very far fetched; for what connection is
there betwixt (...) in greek, and Pons in latin? especially since that
Pontifex is no greek word, and the Sybil wrote in that language, and
consequently the name which she spoke of, must not be only among Latins.
Finally, if we should admit this fond conceit, yet all might be applied to
this Emperor, who, as Platina writes in vita Alexandri, repaired one bridge
at Athens, and built another at Rome of his own name, and besides was
consecrated Bishop of Ceres; but this refuge is needless, since we have the
former most manifest explication. I have stood longer upon this, then was
necessary, since that M. Downam confesses, that it is from the purpose, to
which now he promises to return.

3. And he goes about to answer Bellarmines other is, that although they
become more clear after then before; yet many times they remain dark and
obscure to very many. And he exemplifieth in the Prophesies of Christ, which
are clear to good Christians, but not to the Jews; and confesses, that many
Prophesies concerning Antichrist are plainly understood of the true
Professors, yet they seem dark and obscure to the followers of Antichrist.
Where me thinks he grants all that which he denied before, viz. that the
name of Antichrist being once come, shall be as well known, as that of Christ:
and besides, he openly gainsayeth Marloratus, who affirms, that even among M.
Downams true Professors, there are as many expositions, as expositors of M.
Downam contradicts himself and Marloratus.
this place. And besides Bellarmine shows, that even the Jews, Turks, and
Pagans grant, that the name of our Christ is Jesus, which manifestly
conteyneth the number 888. But all Catholics, and others are far from thinking
that the Pope is to be called Romanus, and Latinus, except something else be
added; and besides these names conteyne not justly the number 666. as
Bellarmine proves. Having thus put off the Argument, M. Downam makes another
digression, taking hold of the former part of Bellarmines proposition, that
prophesies till they be fulfilled are (for the most part) dark and ambiguous:
and hereupon he infers, that therefore the writings of the Fathers, who
lived before Antichrist, were most uncertain ghesses in their expositions of
the Prophesies concerning him: which illation we deny, and rather infer the
quyte contrary, that since the Prophesies are The necessity of the Fathers
expositions.
obscure, and ambiguous, we had the more need to take some light and certainty
from the Fathers writings, who received their expositions from the light of
Gods spirit, and the certainty of the Apostles Traditions. But M. Downam
proves his inferrence by Bellarmines confession, even in this Chapter, and
cyteth his words in the margent. Sed necisti Patres voluerunt sententias illas
suas alio loco haberi, quam suspicionum and co^iecturarum. Neither would these
Fathers have those their opinions otherwise accounted of, then as suspicions,
and conjectures; which assertion of Bellarmine comes far short of M. Downams
position, for he speaks only of two Fathers Rupertus and Beda, M. Downam
speaks in general of all the Fathers; Bellarmine calls only those two
particular opinions of theirs, suspicions and conjectures: M. Downam would
prove, that all the opinions of all the Fathers concerning Downam proves an
universal by a particular.
prophesies not fulfilled, are but ghesses, which is to prove an universal by
a particular; a fit argument for M. Downams Divinity, if not for his Logic,
which perhaps the badnes of his Divinity makes him either to forget or
forsake. The like fault he commits again in alleging S. Irenaeus, who only
speaks of this one prophesy of Antichrists name: and Andraeas makes as
little to his purpose, only affirming with Bellarmine, that experience will
make manifest to them that are vigilant, both the exact computation of this
number, and all other things which are written of Antichrist; which M. Downam
seemed before to deny, and now is as far The auctority of the Fathers.
from proving, that the Fathers expositions when they all agree, make not a
Prophesy certainly to be understood; though when they are divided, their
expositions be but probable, and therefore, because they were so in this place,
we see that Bellarmine grounded not his argument upon any of them, but upon
another certain rule, which they all agree in, and M. Downam himself cannot
choose, but confess in great part.

4. Thus much for this digression. Now M. Downam Bellarmines Assumption; which
is, that Antichrists name is Antichrists name yet unknown.
yet unknown, where M. Downam distinguishes, confessing that in the Church of
Rome, it is not known of the ignorant, nor acknowledged of the obstinate; but
in the true Church of God Antichrist is known, and his name acknowledged. But
Marloratus affirms the contrary, and M. Downam insinuates as much saying,
that to the opinions which Bellarmine alleges many more Downam contradicts
him self and Marloratus.
might be added: which he will hardly make good, except he have recourse to his
new Ghospellers, who though they be united in malyee against the Pope, yet
their proud heads cannot agree in the exposition of this, or almost any other
place of Scripture. And besides the agreement of Protestants in this or in any
thing else must needs be of little account, except they could bring better
proofs, that they are the true Church of God: which affirmation whilst it be
proved is petitio principij, and the Jews, Turks, and Pagans will say as much
for themselves, if any man will be so foolish as to believe them, which he has
reason to do as soon as heretics, of which number to us, it seems evident,
that Protestants are.

5. Next M. Downam makes Bellarmine to prove, that Irenaeus, which he
impugneth, because Irenaeus lived before the fulfilling of this Prophesy, which
he affi^meth to be now fulfilled; which objection I think deserves no other
name then the M. Downams Petitio principij.
former; for it is a plain petitio principij. And M. Downam might easily have
discerned, that Bellarmine was in that place discussing and searching out the
most probable opinion among Catholics, who all agree, that Antichrist is not
yet come no more then he was in Irenaeus his time, and therefore his authority
among them proves very well, that his name is not yet known. As for M. Downam
and his Mates, who have forsaken the Catholic Church and faith, he argues
against them from their own authority, and manifest experience, as we have
seen. Wherefore all Irenaus his proofs are good and firm for the end that
Bellarmine brings them, as likewise his inference is evident to all
Catholics, that The danger of Protestants
the Protestants are in great danger to receive Antichrist when he comes,
since before he come they so verily persuade themselves that he is already
come, which is a good warning for Protestants also to look about them, and to
take heed, that they be not so confident, but upon better grounds, for the
danger is great. But here I must desire my Reader to mark attentively M.
Downams devise, who will needs be so foolish as to seem to think, that M.
Downam mistaketh Bellarmine.
the proofs which Bellarmine brings to convince that Irenaeus was of that
opinion, that Antichrists name should not be certainly known before his
coming, were brought by him to prove absolutely against Protestants that
Antichrists name is yet unknown: whereas he begins not to propose his
argument to this purpose, till he had fully examined both Irenaeus, and all the
other opinions.

6. Well, you must give M. Downam leave to mistake sometimes, otherwise he
should have very little to say to the purpose: Yet he will try what he can say
to Bellarmines true proof, which is, that Antichrists name is not yet known,
because there is a great controversy about it. Against which he obiecteth: that
by the same reason Bellarmine may conclude, that few points of religion are
yet known, because there be few, concerning which there is no controversy. But
M. Downam must consider the difference, which is great. For first about
Antichrists name, there is not only a question betwixt Catholics and
Protestants, but likewise even Protestants M. Downam contradicts himself.
themselves do vary, and Catholics also are not all of one opinion, which M.
Downam insinuates in some sort, saying, that in other controversies the truth
is known of those which are Orthodoxall, howsoever others will not acknowledge
it. But of this matter he dares not go so far, but only aduentureth to say,
that he doubts not, but that the truth of it is known, although some cannot,
and others will not as yet see it. So that in this, some cannot know the truth
but in other controversies, all may that will. And besides M. Downam might have
noted, that not only the Orthodoxall, but all others must know and acknowledge
Antichrists name thus far, that they confess, that he whom the Orthodoxall
take to be Antichrist has that name which has this number of 666. as all
Pagans, Turks, and Jews confess, that the name of Jesus, which Christian
should to be the name of Christ, is indeed the name of our Christ, and
contains the number 888. But here it is otherwise; for though M. Downam and
his fellows give the Pope the name of Romanus and Latinus: yet neither the
Popes themselves, nor any other give them that name without addition,
especially that of Latin cannot be attributed to him, for he is head as well of
the Greek as the The name of Latin cannot be given to the Pope.
Latin Church: and his particular Sea or Bishopric, to which this supreme
jurisdiction is annexed, is only Rome. And besides there is much controversy
whether these names contain the number 666. or no, as we shall see presently.
Neither can M. Downam help himself with telling us that without doubt the
Roman State is signified by the beast, whose name contains this number 666.
for this he knows is denied by us, and his proofs whereof he braggeth are all
discussed, and confuted in their due places.

7. Wherefore now let us see, how he will confute Bellarmines Answer to the
reasons which Chytraeus, and Bibliander bring for their opinions. And here
Bellarmine must be content to put up an iniuryous imputation that M. Downam
lays upon him, that it is his manner to make choice of the easiest Bellarmine
slau^dered by Downam.
objections, omitting the harder; which is so manifest and notoriou^ a slander,
that I dare remit the judgment to any indifferent, or moral Protestant. For
no man, that has read Bellarmine, can deny, but that he urges all arguments
against himself to the uttermost, in so much that it is the common censure of
Protestants, that he is a good Author to be read against himself, because his
objections are so forcible: but their meaning is, that the Reader should stay
in them, and not pass to his answers, because they are also most plain and
evident. But to come to our particular, M. Downam should have showed us those
hard objections of Chytraeus and Bibliander which Bellarmine omitted; but he
has no such matter, only he writes thus: We produce three other arguments,
as you have heard, speaking of himself in the plural number, and as it
seems using the same figure in numbering his arguments; for I can only find
one of his own adding, which is that the number of 666. is not the name of
Antichrist himself, but of the former beast, which signifies the Roman State.
But how can Bellarmine be blamed for not answering this argument, which M.
Downam has framed so many years after his book was written? Downam contrary
to his fellows.
For Chytraeus and Bibliander could not use this argument since they were not
of M. Downams opinion in this point, but took that number to be understood of
the name of Antichrist himself, as all other Authors, but M. Downam, do also,
for ought I can perceive, since he alleges none for See cap. 5. n. 5. etc.
his opinion: and indeed the matter is plain, as you may see in those places,
where it is discussed at large.

The first reason then which Bellarmine answers is the Irenaeus, to which he
says that Irenaeus preferred another name before (...), and M. Downam
grants, that it is true indeed, that he seems to do so, and adds, that
they buyld not upon Irenaeus his authority, but upon those reasons whereupon
his conjecture is grounded, which are two; the one because it is the name of
that Kingdom which is figured under the former beast Apoc. 13: 7. whose
authority Antichrist was to usurp: and he translateth Irenaeus thus: It is the
name of that which most truly is called the Kingdom, for they are the Latins
that now reign; and adds his Apoc. 13.
own exposition, making Irenaeus say, that it is the name of the former Beast,
spoken of Apoc. 13. 1. which figureth verissimum Regnum, Downam corrupts
Irenaeus his words and meaning.
that Kingdom which most truly is called a Kingdom, that is the Latin or
Roman State. All which is a plain corruption, both of Irenaeus his words, and
meaning. For there can be nothing more plain, then that Irenaeus attributes
this number to Antichrist himself, whom also he understands to be signified
by that former beast as commonly all other Bellarmine truly explicateth, and
withal shows, that though that reason might seem to have some force in
Irenaeus his time, now it has none at all, because the Kingdom of the Latins
is decayed since that time. And if Irenaeus had thought that this name was to
be attributed to a Kingdom or State, surely he had no reason to prefer the
name of Teitan before Lateinos, as he did. Neither are we to make any account
of M. Downams confirmation, upon supposition that Antichrist it come, for this
is his ordinary fault, and is called petitio Antichrist shall be a most potent
King.
principij: and his denial, that Antichrist shall be a most potent King, is
tooto shameless, and disproued upon diverse occasions; and in this very place,
according to the best exposition, he is said to have the power of the 4.
Monarchs: for the 10. Princes which shall deuyde the Roman Empire amongst
them, shall belong to him, and he shall be like to a Pard, and have feet like a
Bear, and a mouth like a Lion, which are the three beasts, to which the other
three Monarchs are compared by Daniel, and lastly the Devil signified Dan. 7.
by a Dragon, shall give him his force and great power.

The other reason of S. Irenaeus, upon which M. Downam Bellarmine obiecteth
that the name of Latin, as it signifies a Roman, is not written with ^, but
which a simple iota, and then it makes not that number. M. Downam answers
that the ancient Latins used to write and pronounce ^, long, by ^, dipthong,
and the Grecians usually express ^, long, by ^, and he observes, The name of
Latin contains not the numbe^ 666,
that S. Irenaeus setting down these two names (...) and (...), as containing
666. takes it for granted, that (...) may be so written; whereas of (...) he
says that it makes that number, if it be written with ^, dipthong. For
answer of all which, I reply: first, that M. Downam should have showed us,
that the ancient Latins ever wrote their own name by ^, diphong, which I can
hardly believe, since they took it from Latium, which can hardly be so
written. Secondly the Grecians did not usually write ^, long, by ^: and we need
go no further then to the word (...) for an example. Thirdly, the reason why S.
Irenaeus expressed the diversity of writing in (...) and not in (...) is
plain, because he writing in greek could not alter the greek Orthography
without much note in the word (...), which is a greek word: but for the word
(...), he made no such difficulty, because he respected only the sound and
pronunciation, as we commonly do in all Greek words, which we write or use
as Latin. But this hinders not, but that there is a difference betwixt (...),
and Latinus, except M. Downam thinks, that the changing, or taking away of a
letter will not alter the signification, which were too absurd and gross. And
no doubt, we must rather stand to the Latin then to the Greek Orthography of a
Latin word. The like objection makes Bellarmine The name Romansh co^teynet^
not the number 666.
against Romanus, for it makes not the number, except it ends in Tau, and be
a feminine, whereas Antichrist is to be a man by the consent of all Authors. To
which M. Downam answers, that collectyue names in Hebrew, are indifferently
expressed in either genders: but he neither tells us, what names be
collectiue, nor shows that Romanus is one of them, nor produces any
authority for that he says: and therefore we are rather to stand to Bellarmines
judgment, who has written an Hebrew grammar, then to M. Downams, of who^ we
are not sure, that he can read Hebrew: and if by a collectyue name, he exclude
a proper, he is far wide. His second answer is, that because the name here
spoken of, is the name of the Roman State, it may be feminyne, since that
elsewhere that State is called the whore of Babylon, and a woman. But we deny,
that the name is to be attributed to any other then to Antichrist himself: and
with us agree in a manner all Authors, and indeed the matter is evident, and
else where sufficiently See cap. 5. n. 5. etc.
proved.

Another objection of Bellarmine is, that the name signified by this number, is
to be the proper and usual name of The name which co^teyneth the number 666.
shall be the proper and usual name of Antichrist
Antichrist, whereas Latinus is neither, and Romanus was only the proper name
of one Pope who lived but 4. months. To which M. Downam gives no other
answer but this in these words: Neither ought it, seeing it is the name of
the beast which signifies a whole State, and in setting down Bellarmines
objection he omitteth the one half, that it must be usual, only making
mention of the other, that it must be proper. And as you see, his answer is as
slender, still running upon that erroneous conceit of his own, that this is
not Antichrists name, but of the Roman State.

Finally Bellarmine obiecteth that there are innumerable M. Downam after a
little cauilling at some of the names, which Bellarmine brings, answers,
that though it be so, yet none can be the name here spoken of, unless also it
be the name of the beast, that is the Latin or Roman State, and unless it be
such a name, as he, to whom all other notes of Antichrist do agree, causes
men to take upon them; which is to harp still upon the same string, and to
sing the same song like a Cuckoo; for this name belongs to no other beast,
but Antichrist: and the other part is the main controversy, and therefore to
assume it as a thing granted, is petitio principij, a figure wherewith M.
Downam is well acquaynted, and therefore chooses to make it his conclusion
also, as the Reader may see, if he please, to whose judgment I leave it to
consider whether M. Downam has answered Bellarmines argument, or rather that
it is altogether unanswerable and invincible, as Bellarmine deservedly
affirms.

THE ELEAVENTH CHAPTER. Of the Character of Antichrist.
THERE are also (says Bellarmine) two Rome yet they do not explicate after the
same manner, what that sign is Hemicus Bullengerus scr. 61. in Apoc. will have
it to be the unction of Chrisme, with which all Christians that are obedient to
the Pope are signed in their foreheads. Theodorus Bibliander in Chron. tab. 10.
says, that the Character of the Pope is the profession of the Roman faith: so
that he is not accounted a true Christian, who professes not, that he cleaves
to the Roman Church. David Chytraeus besides these two, adds the Oath of
Fidelity, which many are compelled to make to the Pope. Likewise the Preistly
unction, which is received in the crown, and hand, and imprinteth, as the
Papists call it (quoth he) an indeleble Character. Finally to fall down
before Images, and consecrated bread, and to be present at Masses of Requiem.

Neither are these things unlike to those which Sebastianus Meyer, and others
alleged by Augustinus Marloratu^ in Apoc. 13. do teach. But it is an easy
matter to confute these toys, both because they agree not with the words of
the Text, and also because all these signs were in the Catholic Church before
that Antichrist had appeared, in their opinion.

First therefore we have out of the text, that the Character S. John speaks.

Secondly, that Character shall be common to all men He shall make all; little
and great, rich and poor, free and bound to take his Character. But the Oath
of obedyence and Priestly unction agree to few.

Thirdly, the Scripture declares, that the Character He shall make all men
receive his Character in their right hands, or foreheads. But none of those
things, which our adversaries bring, is such: That the unction of Chrisme
cannot be received in the right hand. The profession of the Roman Faith, is
neither in the hand nor forehead, but in the mouth by confession, in the heart
by faith. The Oath of Fidelity is taken with the hand and mouth, but can in no
wise be carried in the forehead. The Priestly unction is neither received
properly in the right hand, nor in the forehead, but upon the head and fingers
of both hands. Finally to be present at Masses for the dead, to kneel before
Images, and the Eucharist, belong not to the forehead or hand, but to the whole
body, and chiefly to the knees.

Fourthly the same Scripture says, That in the Kingdom Jews, even in the
very City of Rome where the Pope has his Sea, negotiate publicly, buy and
sell, although they have none of those signs?

Let us come to the other reason and prove that all these Tertullian lived
about the year 200. and yet makes mention of Chrisme lib. de resurrectione
carnis. The flesh (says he) is washed, that the soul may be cleansed: the
flesh is anointed, that the soul may be consecrated. S. Cyprian lived about
the year 250. and makes mention of Chrisme lib. 1. epist. 12. He must
necessarily be an noynted (says he) who is baptized, that having received
Chrisme (that is unction) he may be the aunoynted of God, and have in him the
grace of Christ. S. Augustine lived about the year 420. and yet he says
tract. in Joan. 118. What is it, that all know the sign of Christ, but the
Cross of Christ? Which sign unless it be applied, either to the foreheads of
the faithful, or to the water with which they are regenerated, or to the oil
with which they are Chrismed, or to the Sacrifice with which they are
nourished, none of these things is rightly performed.

Likewise to cleave to the Roman Church was the sign S. Augustine writes
epist. 162. of Caecilianus, who lived about the year 300. He needed not to
care for the multitude of enemies which conspired against him, since he saw
himself united by communicatory letters to the Roman Church, in which the
principality of the Apostolical chair always flourished, and to the other
Countries from whence the Gospel came into Africa. S. Ambrose, who lived
about the year of our Lord 390. in orat. de obitu fratris sui: He asked the
Bishop (says he) if he agreed in doctrine with the Catholic Bishops, that is
with the Roman Church.

Victor Vticensis, who lived about the year of our Lord lib. 1. de persecut.
Vandal. writes, that an Arian Priest going about to persuade the King not to
put a Catholic to death, used these words: If thou put him to death the
Romans will account him a Martyr. In which place, by the name of Romans, the
Catholics of Africa are designed, who doubtless are not called Romans by the
Arians for any other cause, but for that they followed the Faith of the Roman
Church, and not the misbeliefe of the Arians.

We find the Oath of obedience made to the B. of Rome S. Gregory lib. 10.
epist. 31. and therefore before the year 606. for S. Gregory lived not so
long.

Of Priestly unction we have the testimony of S. Gregory Nazianzen, who lived
about the year 380. in Apologet. ad Patrem suum, when he was made B. of
Safimi. There came upon me again (quoth he) the unction and spirit, and I have
new cause of mourning and sadness. In which place, he makes mention of a double
unction, the one when he was made Priest, and the other then at his
consecrating Bishop. Likewise orat. 1. de pace, speaking of S. Basil, who being
made Bishop refused the exercize of that authority: Although he has the
spirit, and talents, and the care of a flock committed unto him, and is
anointed with the oil of Priesthood and perfection, yet his VVisdome delayeth
to take upon him the Prelacy.

Now for the Sacrifice for the dead, it shall be sufficient S. Augustines
testimony, who lib. de hares. cap. 53. says. That it was the peculiar fancy of
Aerius the Arch-Heretike, that we ought not to offer oblation for the dead.

Of the Adoration of Images, only S. Hierome who lived in vita Paulae, says
thus: Prostrate before the Cross, she adored, as though she had seen our Lord
upon it. Finally of the adoration of the Eucharist S. Ambrose may deservedly
suffice, who lib. 3. de Spiritu Sancto cap. 12. explicating that place, Adore
his footestoole: Therefore (says he) by the footestoole is meant the earth, by
the earth the flesh of Christ, which at this day also we adore in the
mysteryes, and which the Apostles adored in our Lord Jesus, as we have said
before: which S. Augustine says, almost in the same words in explicat. Psalm.
98.

Since therefore all these things, which our Adversaries which we prove. Thus
much shall suffice for this rash and most absurd opinion of our Adversaries,
which they have not proved by any witnesses, or reasons.

The second opinion is of certain Catholics, who Primasius, Beda, and
Rupertus, who seem to be deceived, because they read, But he who has the
Character of the name of the beast, or the number of his name. But S. John
says not so, but thus, But he who has the Character, or the name of the
beast, or the number of his name, and the Greek text agrees with this, (...),
(...).

The third opinion is of S. Hippolytus Martyr orat. de consummatione mundi, and
some others, that the Beasts Character shall be not to use the sign of the
Cross, but rather to execrate and abolish it. In which the Caluinistes are
egregious forerunners of Antichrist. I rather think that Antichrist shall
invent a positive Character also, as Christ has the sign of the Cross known
to all: but it is not known what this Character is, until Antichrist comes,
as we said of the Name.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. THOUGH Bellarmine frame no particular argument from this discourse of
Antichrists Character, yet M. Downam will needs by resolving the discourse it
self, and by conferring it with the former Chapter, make him argue from the
Character, as he did from the number of the name. About which we will not
strive with him, but rather supposing that this was Bellarmines mind, we will
examine the solution he gives to this argument, so framed by himself.

2. And first he would deny that Antichrists mark shall be known at his
coming, in the very same manner that he denied before, that the number of his
name should be known. Wherefore for this point, I remit the Reader to that
which has been said before.

3. As also for the other, that this Character is not yet known, because there
is so much controversy about it* for he only teaches briefly that which he
explicated more at large, about the number of his name, which we examined and
confuted before.

Wherefore let us see, what he can say for the Protestants Bellarmine
impugneth: by which we shall also discover, how much his explication helps
them, and what absurdity the opinion of Catholics conteyneth. Which two points
M. Downam thought good to touch before he came to answer Bellarmines two
proofs.

4. And first to that out of the Scripture, M. Downam is but one, meaning (as
he explicateth himself) in substance, although the same by diverse The mark or
Character of Antichrist but one.
means, may be diversely expressed and testified, that is, subjection to the
Pope as their head, and the acknowledgment of the Sea of Rome, and of the Popes
Supremacy etc. But what he means by one in substance, is not easy to
conceive, except it be this, that all the outward signs, Characters, and
marks agree in this, that they signify the same subjection to the Pope etc. so
that the marks shall be distinct, and diverse in themselves, and in their manner
of signification, though the thing by them signified be one. But this is not
sufficient to affirm, that the Character of Antichrist is but one, for in this
sort the name, and the number of the name, and the Charcter are all one in
substance, since they signify the same thing; and all signs which signify the
same thing may be said to be one in substance, as writing, speech, gesture, and
the like: and all the figures in the old Testament, which signified Christ are
but one figure in substance, and all the Sacraments of the Church which signify
grace, shall be but one Sacrament, which is too great an absurdity for M. Downam
to defend, and consequently he must needs grant, that his fellow Ghospellers
assign more Characters then one, contrary to the Scripture, and therefore they
are so far from truly interpreting the Scripture, that they wholly pervert it.

To Bellarmines second instance, out of the Scripture, M. Downam gives no
direct answer at all, but would same put it off, by telling us, that the Pope
has declared, that it is necessary to salvation, to be subject to the Pope.
But this is only to show, that the body must be united with the head, in which
all Religions whatsoever, yea all Societies must The mark of Antichrist shall be
common to all in his King dome.
needs agree. But Bellarmines instance impugneth two of the marks, which some
Protestants affirm to be the Characters of Antichrist, by this evident proof,
that the Character of Antichrist shall be common to all men in Antichrists
Kingdom as the Scripture plainly affirms: but the oath of Obedience, and
the Priestly unction agree to few, therefore these cannot be the Character
whereof the Scripture speaks. To this M. Downam answers not a word, neither
indeed could he, for every part and parcel is most evident and plain, and
therefore he was enforced to run to his old shift, and to bring us his wonted
figure of petitio principij, by which he desires us to grant him his
conclusion, that the Pope is Antichrist, without any further proof. But he
must pardon us, because it imports us much to hold with Christ, which we
cannot see how we can possibly do, if we oppose our selves against his
substitute and Vicegerent, as though he were Antichrist, as M. Downam would
have us.

To the third instance, M. Downam answers more formally, of the carrying of
this mark, and the carrying of it indifferently either in the forehead or in
the Antichrists Character may be carried either in the right hand or forehead.
hand. But by M. Downams leave, the Scripture mentions both the forehead and
the right hand, and that with disjunction, that all must have the mark in the
one or in the other: by which it is plain, that either of them will serve: so
that it is indifferent to Antichrist in which of them his mark be carried, so
that it be carried in the one of them: for that it must be carried, is evident
by the Scripture even according to M. Downams translation, which is this: That
he may give them a mark on their right hand, or else on their foreheads. For
surely if he give them a mark on either place, they must carry it perforce.
Now as for his Mystical interpretation, that they shall receive this mark on
their forehead by profession, or in the right This Character is not profession
or practice.
hand by practice and operation: first it is hard to understand, how profession
is made with the forehead, except there be some mark upon the forehead, and it
will be no very easy matter for Antichrists Ministers to examine every man that
would (...) or (...) practice and operation; and finally those vactions, which
are assigned can hardly be drawn to either of these two heads, if profession
be taken properly for declaration, by speech, and practice for our own actions
and operations, since they do rather import a suffering and passive receiving,
then any active operation, in which notwithstanding they draw nearer to this
mark which shall be given by Antichrist, and received by all others; and
therefore neither profession, not practice agrees well to this M. Downam
contradicts himself.
mark. Finally M. Downam seems to contradict himself: for on the one side
he will have profession and practice to answer to the forehead and hand, and
consequently to be the mark, and yet a little after he says, that the
subjection it self is the mark, which is not only contrary to the former, but
also foolish: since that this subjection is the thing signified by the mark,
and not the mark it self. For what wise man would ever say, that subjection
is a sign or mark, but rather that other things are signs and marks of it,
as appears plainly to any, that will consider the subjection of servants to
their Masters, subjects to their Prince, and of Christians to Christ and God
etc.

To the fourth instance M. Downams answer is, that Antichrist permit the Jews
etc. But we find no such exception in the Scripture, which generally affirms,
that he shall not permit any, little or great, rich or poor, free or bound,
under which divisions, no doubt, not only the whole nation of the Jews, but
even every particular Jew is comprehended. And besides, we find no such rigor
in the Pope toward M. Downams Christians: for though that Bull of Martinus
Quintus had been general for all The Bull of Martinus Quintus against the
Hussites.
times and places, as it was not, yet does it not exact that every man should
profess by word or work his subjection to the Pope, before he be admitted to
buy or fell any thing at all, especially such things as are necessary for daily
sustenance, but only excludes all Hussites etc. from all human conversation
(when voility or decessity, or some other lawful circumstance does not
otherwise require) which are openly, manifestly, and notoriously such: which is
far less rigor, then Antichrist shall use, and yet much more then we see
used in many Countries now, even by Martinus Quintus his authority, where
Catholics and Heretics are permitted to live peaceably together. Yea even in
Italy and Spain, and Rome it self, where they are most careful to avoid this
contagion, there is no such rigor used as M. Downam See part. 2. cap. 8.. 7.
speaks of; the reason of which we shall afterward declare more at large. But
though all this be true, yet we must not omit to observe, that Bellarmine in
this instance only impugneth three of the marks, which M. Downams brethren
assigned, viz. Chrisme, the Oath of Fidelity, and Preisthood. All which three,
it is evident, that not only all Jews, but likewise very many Christians, yea
Catholics also have not, and yet are permitted to buy and sell: neither are
they once questioned withal about any of them. All which M. Downam could not
choose but see, though because he could find no solution for Bellarmines
instance thus lymited, he thought best to run to generalityes, where he might
roue a^ random, and make his Reader believe, that he had something to say,
though he saw himself that he could say nothing directly to the purpose.

M. Downam having this dispatched the first argument though those things had
been used in the Catholic Church before the revelation of Antichrist, yet that
hinders not, but that now they may appertain to the mark of the beast,
because he doubts not to affirm that there were many corruptions crept into
the Church before the revealing of Antichrist, which he was to retain with
increase. So that as you see, the mark of Antichrist was in the world before
himself, yea in the Catholic Church, which consequently must The Church of
God cannot have the mark of Antichrist.
needs belong to Antichrist, and be a great friend of his, as indeed she is to
the Pope, and ever was, and will be as to her chief Pastor upon earth. But how
she should bear and universally embrace any mark or corruption of Antichrist,
seems as impossible, as that Christ and Antichrist shall have both one mark,
or one Church, and therefore M. Downam must either persuade us, that even from
the Apostles times the Church of Christ bare Antichrists mark, and
consequently that he was then come, or else he must grant, that his brethren
have not rightely assigned the marks of Antichrist, but rather have uttered an
horrible M. Downams blasphemy.
blasphemy, charging Christ's Church, and consequently Christ himself (who
teaches his Church) with the marks and doctrine of Antichrist. But M. Downam
gives us two differences, betwixt these marks before Antichrists coming and
after. First until the year 607. there was not (says he) in the Catholic
Church an universal subjection to the Pope as the head, and consequently till
then, these things could not be used as signs thereof, as since they have. But
M. Downam may when it pleases him, take the pains to peruse what Bellarmine
The Church was always subject to the Pope.
brings in the 19. and last Chapter of his second book concerning this
point, and I doubt not, but he will acknowledge an universal subjection to the
Pope even from the Apostles; or if he be obstinate, and will nor yield to an
evident truth, yet I am sure, he will never be able to answer Bellarmines
proofs; and if his pride be such that he presumes that he can; let him begin,
when he will, and see what he shall gain by it. The second difference which M.
Downam alleges is, that before the year 607. these things were not imposed
and enjoined upon all by the laws of the Pope as since they are; so that the
cause of using them now is not the example of the ancient Church, but the
authority of the Popes law. But this is a very poor difference, and argues a
wonderful corruption in the ancient Church, since that she was so forward to
take Antichrists marks, that she needed no command: and besides, if M. Downam
makes the ancient Church to be very corrupt.
Downam will take the pains to peruse the ancient Counsels, and Decrees of
Popes, which Bellarmine brings in these particular controversies, he shall
find, that there was the same necessity for all men to perform these things
then, that there is now, many of them being commanded by Gods law, and others
not exacted of all, and some not of any, as the Reader may easily distinguish
by considering the particulers.

6. Wherefore now let us consider how M. Downam answers VII.
Bellarmines particular obiectio^s. And first concerning Chrisme used in the
Church before the year 607.
Chrisme he answers, that those three Fathers speak of the annoynting with
oil used in the Sacrament of Baptism; and adds, that this also without
warrant of the Scripture is retained among the Papists. Where you see he makes
these three Fathers Papists in that point at the least: and though it be true,
that they acknowledge that Cerimony of Baptism; yet in these places, they
speak most plainly of Chrisme, and the Sacrament of Confirmation. For
T^rtullian, and S. Cyprian compare it with baptism, attributing to it the
effects of grace, as well as to Baptism: and S. Augustine places it betwixt
baptism and the Eucharist, and calls it Chrisming, which is the proper name
of this Sacrament. Wherefore M. Downam must of force confess, that these
Fathers were Papists in this point also, and that this mark was long before
the year 607. Now whether this unction were used in the primitive Church, or
no, is a new question belonging to another place, and it is enough for us now,
that it was long before Antichrist came, according to the Protestants account:
and that they do not much use even the imposition of hands, which they
acknowledge was used in the primityue Church: of which M. Downam can give no
better reason, then for that it was abused by us. By which in their opinion
they might also leave off Baptism, Eucharist, and all other rites and
exercises of How chrisme makes us Christians. de Consecrat. did. 5. c. Vt
ieiun. Ibid. c. De bis vero.
Christian Religion, as indeed they have done in great part; only they love to
hear themselves talk in a Pulpit, though they say never a true, nor wise
word. I omit his other impertinent objections out of the Canon law, where first
that holy Pope and Martyr Melchiades says, that a man shall never be a
Christian (meaning a strong and valiant, or perfect Christian) except he first
receive this Sacrament: for so he uses the name (Christianus) as the Latins
use (Vir) and the Aurelian Council says, that this Sacrament is more to be
reverenced, then Baptism, if we respect the person of him who ministers it,
because he must of necessity be a Bishop, How Chrisme is more to be reverenced
then Baptism.
and besides this Sacrament supposes, and in some sort includes baptism, and
in that respect is said to be more venerable, then baptism by it self. And
this is all that M. Downam can say for himself, or against us; for that which
he adds concerning the ordayning of the Sacrament, as though it were ordained
by the Church, and not by Christ, is a fond Chymera of his own. For we affirm
that it was instituted by Christ, as all other Sacraments were: and besides it
is now from the purpose, since our whole question is, whether this Sacrament
were used before the year 607. which Bellarmine has evidently convinced that
it was.

To the second objection M. Downam answers with a distinction; that to cleave
to the Roman Church in ancient time, was the note of a good Christian, because
then that Church was Apostolical; but now it is the mark of an Antichristian,
because now that Church is Apostaticall. Where you find him still in the same
fault of petitro principij. And besides you see, he grants as much as
Bellarmine would have him, that in old time the cleaving to the Roman Church
was so far from being the mark of Antichrist, that it was the (chiefest) note
to know a good Catholic Christian, from a false and wicked heretic: and
consequently it is to be accounted so still. For the heretics in those times
could say as M. Downam does, that the Roman Church was Apostaticall, but they
were not able to prove it any more, then M. Downam is: and all good Catholics
were then, and are now certain, that it can never be so, since Christ has
promised the contrary to S. Peter and his successors. And besides it is very
strange, that Christ and Antichrist cannot have both one mark
Christ and Antichrist should both have one mark. And that the arguments,
which the old Fathers used against heretics, should come to be used by
Antichrist against Catholics. But to these absurdities must they needs fall,
who call light darkness, and darkness light, as M. Downam and all heretics
do. M. Downam goes forward with his distinctions and differences, affirming,
that in ancient times, at other Churches did cleave to the Church of Rome, so
did the Church of Rome cleave to them. Now it acknowledges no Church besides
it self. All which is false; for now also other Churches cleave to the Church
of Rome, as to their head; and the Church of Rome cleaves to them as to her
members; and it acknowledges many other particular Churches besides it self
still, though all subject and subordinate to it as they were ever. How the
Church of Rome is united and stands with other Churches.
And that which he adds is a mere cavil; for the Church of Rome, if we
understand that particular diocese, is still accounted but a part of the
Catholic Church: and in this sense, a man may still be a good Christian,
although he be not of the Church of Rome. And in ancient times, the Church of
Rome alone (that is the Church, of which the Bishop of Rome is the chief
Pastor) was accounted the Catholic Church. And consequently that he that was
not a member of that Church was not taken for a Catholic or true Christian, as
appears sufficiently by the places, which Bellarmine cites, to which I will
only add one more out of S. Hierome in his Epistle to Pope Damasus. I am
united in Communion (says he) to thy Blessedness, that is, to the Chair of
Peter. I know that the Church was built upon that rock; whosoever eats the
Lamb out of this house, is profane: if any man be not in the Ark of Noah, he
will perish in the deluge. I know not Vitalis, I refuse Those which belong not
to the Church of Rome belong not to Christ but to Antichrist.
Meletius, I esteem not Paulinus, whosoever gathers not what thee
scatters, that is, whosoever belongs not to Christ, belongs to
Antichrist. Now let M. Downam compare the writing of any Catholic at this
time, and see if they attribute more to the Pope or Church of Rome at this
time, then S. Hierome did at that; and with all consider, if in S. Hieromes
judgment, it be not a plain mark of an Antichristian to be against the Roman
Church, and of a good Christian to be united to it.

8. To the third objection M. Downam answers, that the Oath which Bellarmine
alleges, is not an Oath of obedience, and allegiance to the Pope, but of
faith and Religion toward God, conformable to the faith, and Religion then
professed by the Bishop and The oath of obedience made to the B. of Rome before
the year 606.
Church of Rome. But by M. Downams leave, the words of the Bishop are these:
Sub meiordinis casu spondeo, atque promitto tibi, and perte Sancto Petro
Apostolorum principi, atque eius Vicario Beatissimo Gregorio, vel successoribus
ipsius, me numqua^ etc. ad schismata reuersuru^, sed semper me in vnitate
Sanctae Ecclesiae Catholicae, and communione Romani Pontificis per omnia
permansurum. Under peril of loosing my place, I profer and promise to thee,
and by thee to S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and to most blessed Gregory his
Vicar, or to the successors of him, that I will never return to schism, but
will always in all points remain in the unity of the holy Catholic Church,
and in the communion of the B. of Rome. By which we see, that the promise to
remayme in the communion of the Pope, was as absolute, as that other to remain
in the unity of the Catholic Church: which I suppose M. Downam will admit to
be perpetual without limitation of any time. And this promise he presently
confirms with an Oath by Almighty God, by the 4. Ghospells which he held in
his hands, and by the health of Nations, and of the rulers of his Common
wealth. Now it is a frivolous cavil to say, that this Oath was taken upon the
occasion of his lapse; for this Bellarmine denies not, but only affirms that
it was taken before the coming of Antichrist, according to the Protestants
account. Neither is it to the purpose, that now such Oaths are more general,
and common; for this Bellarmine denies not: and who sees not that the
exaction of Oaths may proceed upon diverse occasions? And if the Oath be
lawful, the often exacting of it is not culpable, but rather If the Oath be
lawful, the often exacting of it is not culpable.
commendable: arguing greater vigilance in them, which govern. And the like
may be said of some other clauses more expressly set down in some other forms
of oaths, according to the necessity of times, and the qualities of them, who
are to swear. M. Downam should show us that there is any oath exacted of any
now, that is not fit to be performed by them, which think it necessary to live
in the communion of the Pope, as this Bishop did, as appears by his Oath;
wherein he promises as much in general, as any other can express in
particular: for he protests, that he will never be drawn from this communion
by any persuasions or any other means, and consequently that he will always
remain in the obedience of the Pope; for he renounceth not any heresy, as M.
Downam supposes, but only schism, which he performed by returning ad vnitatem
Sedis Apostolicae, to the unity of the Apostolic Sea, which I heartily wish,
that M. Downam and his fellow Protestants may also do; for otherwise it would
not be sufficient to renounce their heresies, though this were a good step to
that.

To the fourth, after a fit of railing, M. Downam answers Priestly unction
used before the year 606. Desacra unction c. Cum venisset.
at length, that both the places of S. Gregory Nazianzen are to be understood
figuratively of consecration to the Ministry: and this he endeavors to prove
by the testimony of Innoc. 3. by which it appears that this cerimony of
annoynting was not used in the Greek Church, whereof Nazia^zen was; but
rejected as Jewish, until he imposed the same upon them about the year 1200.
But M. Downam goes beyond Innocentius, for he only affirms that they, to
whom he wrote, that is at the most, the Grecians of his time, were not wont to
use this cerimony of annoynting: but that the Greek Church had not used it
before, Innocentius affirms not, and much less, that they had rejected it as
Jewish. Wherefore these are M. Downams additions, which we may bouldly reject,
since he has no proof for them, and consequently his figurative
interpretation falls to the ground, and we are to take the words of S.
Gregory Nazianzen, as they sound, especially since others as ancient as he both
of the Greek and Latin Church make express mention of this Cerimony, as M.
Downam may see in Bellarmine lib. 1. de Sacramento Ordinis cap. 12. where he
also handles this objection out of Innocentius 3. and urges it further then
M. Downam Bellarmin urges Downams objection further then he does himself.
does: whom I must entreat not to be angry though I pass over his railing in
silence, since he says nothing to the purpose which is not already answered;
for now all our question is, how ancient this Cerimony is, and for the
lawfulness thereof I remit him to the place of Bellarmine already alleged,
where he solueth that objection taken from the Jews, and whatsoever else M.
Downam can invent.

10. To the fifth objection M. Downams answer is, S. Augustine is to be
understood of Sacrifice of prayer, and not of any propitiatory Sacrifice; but
by M. Downams leave he cannot carry it so; for we will appeal to S.
Chrysostom, S. Sacrifice for the dead used before the year 606.
Cyril, and S. Augustine himself. For first S. Chrysostom lib. 6. de
Sacerdotio writes thus. The Priest is an Ambassador for the whole world, and
an intercessour with God, that he will be propitious to the sins of all men,
not only of the living, but also of the dead. Cyrillus Hieros. cateches. 5.
mystag. We believe (says he) that it is the greatest help of those souls for
which the obsecration of that holy and dreadful Sacrifice which is laid upon
the Altar is offered. And S. Augustine himself quaest. 57. in Leuit. affirms,
that in this Sacrifice, vera fit remissio peccatorum, sins are truly
forgiven: and tract. 84. in Joan. answering directely M. Downams distinction,
he writes thus: Therefore at the Table in self we do not so make
Commemoration of the Martyrs, as of others, who rest in peace so that we also
pray for them: but rather that they may pray for us. By all which, it is
plain, that in the time of these Saints, Masses were offered for the dead, in
the very same manner, that they are offered now, and consequently this is no
mark of Antichrist, except M. Downam will be so bold, as to mark these holy
Fathers with it, by which amongst wise men, he shall only get to himself the
opinion of an impudent heretic, one of the forerunners of the true Antichrist
indeed.

11. To the sixth (for we will omit his citation of Bishop Jewel, as
sufficiently answered by D. Harding) M. Downam answers first, that the
adoration, which holy S. Paula Adoration of Images used before the year 606.
used, was not a common practice, but peculiar to her. But we must entreat him
to let her have S. Hieromes company at least, who commends this her devotion.
Secondly he says, that it was not usual unto her, but only at that time, and
that place. But how will he prove this? Was it not as much to kiss the stone
of the Sepulcher, and to lick the place where Christ's body lay, as to kneel
down before the Cross? Thirdly he says, that the did not worship the Cross
as Papists do, but falling before that Cross, worshipped Christ. Well then,
will M. Downam be content to do as much? We will only desire thus much of him,
that he will apply that outward reverence to the Cross, because it
represents Christ, whom he inwardely submits himself unto, and adoreth.
And so much it is plain, that S. Paula did in this and her other actions of
kissing and licking the Sepulcher: and in this sort How Latria is given to the
Cross by Catholics.
only do we attribute the worship of Latria to the Cross, so that the outward
reverence be exhibited to the Cross, as a thing belonging to Christ, to whom
the inward submission is wholly and entirely given.

To the authority of S. Amborse for the adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, he
answers, that Christ may be adored in his Sacraments; but the Sacrament is
not to be adored. To which I Adoration of the Eucharist used before the year
606.
answer, that we adore the flesh of Christ in the Sacrament, which the
Protestants will not allow of, but S. Ambrose does, and the Sacrament it self,
that is, even the form of bread and wine may be adored in that manner, that we
have explicated of the Cross, that is, as a thing belonging to Christ; but
always the inward submission and adoration is to be referred to the person of
Christ, which must needs be in the Sacrament, since his body and humanity is
there, as S. Ambrose affirms. Now that which M. Downam adds out of S.
Ambrose in the same place, is nothing to the purpose. For we know very well,
that our B. Lady is not to be adored with that adoration, which is due to the
Holy Ghost and Christ, which is all that S. Ambrose there affirms, as
appears evidently even by those words which M. Downam alleges. Finally his
evasion to the authority of S. Augustine is very frivolous, for he never goes
about to answer the words, but supposes that S. Augustine would not affirm
the real presence which yet his words must needs import, since he says that
we eat Christ's flesh, and that no man eats, but he first adoreth: which is
the very same, that M. Downam will needs have to be the mark of Antichrist:
so that if we will believe him, all the Christians in S. Augustines time had
the mark of Antichrist: for which his pleading no doubt if M. Downam live to
see Antichrists reign, he shall have a good fee; and howsoever, he cannot go
unrewarded, since the Dragon to whom Antichrist belongs takes a record of
all such worthy enterpryzes, that tend so highly to the advancement of his
Kingdom. God grant that M. Downam may take a better course in time.

12. Thus we might conclude this Chapter, but that we will not omit to examine
how M. Downam impugneth the Catholics opinion in general, for that they seem
to number. 3.
agree in this, that the Character is a visible mark of Antichrists name which
notwithstanding he might have seen Bellarmine, proving out of the Scripture
that the mark of Antichrist and his name, or the number of his M. Downam
chiefly impugneth is, that it shall be visible, and yet in this number. 2.
also he is deceived. For S. Hippolytus Martyr thought, that i^ should be a
privative sign, that is, the not using the sign of the Cross, which is the
mark of Christ: for which M. Downam was so angry with him, and with
Bellarmine both that he calls him a counterfaite Author, and charge the
other with falsifying his testimony. But for S. Hippolytus, Eusebius l. 6. cap.
14. and S. Hierome in Scriptoribus will answer, who recount many of his
learned works, and S. Hierome names this of Antichrist. and S. Ambrose the
Martyr thought him a fit man to propose to learned Origin to imitate* Now how
Bellarmine has falsified his testimony, M. Downam does not tell us, nor we can
imagine, except it be, for that illation of his, that in S. Hippolytus his
judgment, Protestants are notable forerunners of Antichrist, which
notwithstanding is most manifest, since they neither use themselves, nor will
suffer others by their good will, to use the sign of the Cross upon their
foreheads, or to carry the picture of it in their hands, or to have it before
their eyes, as the Christians used in S. Hippolytus days (who lived not 200.
years after Christ's Passion) and Catholics use to this day.

But let us see, how M. Downam impugneth those Catholic Antichrists mark
shall be visible.
Authors, that think it shall be a visible mark: his first argument is, because
it is a gross thing to imagine, that Princes and Magistrates, and men of all
sorts would ever suffer themselves to be branded, as it were with Antichrists
visible mark. To which I answer, that it were gross indeed to imagine so, if
these Princes etc. were not forced unto it by danger of incurring otherwise
some greater inconvenience, because it is not probable, that all shall be so far
gone that they will glory in Antichrists mark, though no doubt many will, and
others will seem to do so, though in their hearts they mislike it. Neither are
we to think, that Antichrist shall want devises how to do this without pain
or deformity. But I would feign know, where M. Downam found this imagination of
branding, for I cannot see why all Catholics may not be understood to speak
only of such a visible mark, as the sign of the Cross, which is visible
enough, and yet we see no man branded with it. His second Argument is* that if
this were Antichrist, practice, every man would be able to discern him. But
what means M. Downam by discerning. No doubt men shall discern him to be an
enemy of Christ, and the question in those days will be, which of them is the
true Christ, for he will affirm himself not only to be the true Christ, but
also will extol himself above all, that is called God. Thirdly M. Downam
obiecteth the ordinary gloss, Downam contradicts him self.
Antoninus, and Lira, and refers himself to some places of Scripture: by
all which he only overthrows his own assertion, that all Catholics agree
that Antichrists mark shall be such a visible sign, as he impugneth, since now
he himself has found some who think otherwise: and besides, this is a new
confirmation, that this Character is yet unknown since that Authors are so
divided in their opinions concerning it. Finally, so far, as these Authors
agree See part. 2. cap. 8.. 4.
with the heretics or differ from Bellarmine, they are sufficiently confuted
by him, with the same arguments with which he impugned the heretics
themselves. And as for the Scriptures we shall more commodiously discuss them
in another place, where M. Downam urges them somewhat more in particular, for
now he alleges them only in general, and so we answer in general, that
though other places cannot without absurdity be understood of visible marks,
yet that proves not, but that this place is so to be understood, since no
doubt, some marks may be visible, and all circumstances argue a visible mark
in this place, though we cannot in particular certainly tell, what this mark
shall be, which is a plain token, that Antichrist is not yet come as M. Downam
makes Bellarmine to reason in this place, and he himself demonstrateth a
little before, applying it to Antichrist name, as we have seen.

THE TVVELVTH CHAPTER. Of Antichrists Generation.
AS for the fifth (says Bellarmine) of the

This error is reported by the Author of the Treatise of Antichrist which
goes under S. Augustines name in the end Rabanus: certainly it is not S.
Augustines. This is a manifest error for it is only the work of God (who can
supply all efficient causes) to produce a man without the seed of man, because
he only is of infinite power and contains virtually all the perfection of
crea^ures. The Devil who is a creature can indeed do meruaylous works by
speedy application of active things to passive, but he cannot supply the
actiuity of causes. Wherefore S. Augustine ep. 3. ad Volusian. says, that to be
borne of a Virgin was such a miracle in Christ, that there could not be a
greater expected from God.

Yet it were no error to say, that Antichrist shall be Incubi: for though the
Devil cannot by himself without the seed of man produce a man, yet he can in
a body assumed in the form of a woman, receive the seed of man, and after in
the form of a man cast that seed into a woman's womb and so beget a child.
This S. Augustine testifies lib. 15. de ciuitate Dei cap. 23. and adds, that
this has been proved by so great experience, that it may seem madness to go
about to deny it still.

The second error was of the blessed Martyr Hippolytus orat. de consummatione
mundi teaches, that Antichrist shall be the Devil himself, who shall assume
false flesh of a false Virgin: for as the word of God, who is truth it self,
took true flesh of a true Virgin; so S. Hippolytus thought it probable, that
the Devil who is the Father of lies would faigne himself to have taken man's
flesh of a Virgin. This opinion is refuted, both because 2. Thessal. 2.
Antichrist is called a man, as also because the rest of the Fathers with common
consent do write, that Antichrist shall be truly a man.

The third error is, that Antichrist shall be a true man S. Hierome in cap. 7.
Dan. Beda in c. 13. Apoc. and S. Damaseen l. 4. c. 28.

Origin thought this opinion possible: for Tom. 2. in Joan. S. Hierome
confuteth in praefat. in Malach. and in cap. 1. Aggaei. And doubtless it is
erroneous, for no created, and consequently finite person can sustain two
perfect natures as the Word of God who is infinite can. Neither is there any
controversy of this now among Deuines: for though some say that it does
altogether imply a contradiction, others teach it does not: vet all agree in
this, that it cannot be done by the force of only a creature, as the Devil is.

The fourth error is, that Nero shall rise again, and that he shall be
Antichrist, or else that he lives still, and is secretly Sulpitius lib. 2.
sacrae hist. insinuates this error; yet lib. 2. dial. de virt. S. Martini, he
writes plainly, that Nero shall not be Antichrist himself, but that he shall
come with Antichrist, and at length be slain by Antichrist. But because all
these things are said without any reason, S. Aug. lib. 20. de ciu. Dei. cap.
19. deservedly calls this opinion a meruaylous presumption.

Besides these errors, there are two probable opinions S. Damascen lib. 4. c.
28. and some others. But since it cannot be proved by Scripture, it is
probable, but not certain.

The second opinion is, that Antichrist shall be borne of Dan: so affirm S.
Irenaeus l. 5. S. Hippolytus Martyr orat. de mundi consummat. S. Ambrose l. de
benedict. Patriarch. c. 7. S. Aug. quaest. 22. in Iosue. S. Prosper de
promission. and praedict. Dei part. 4. Theodoret. quaest. 109. in Genesis S. Greg.
l. 31. moral. c. 18. Beda, Rupertus, Arethas, Richardus and Ansel. in Apoc. c.
7. They prove it out of Genesis 49. Fiat Dan coluber in via, cerastes in semita
etc. and ex Hier. 8. Ex Dan audiuimus fremitum equorum eius etc. Finally
because Apoc. 7. where 12000. are signed by the Angel out of every Tribe of the
children of Israel, the Tribe of Dan is omitted, which seems to be done in
hatred to Antichrist.

This opinion is very probable, for the authority of so Genesis 49. Jacob seems
to speak literally of Sampson when he says: Let Dan be made a Snake in the
way, an horned Serpent in the path: and let him byte the heels of the horse,
that the ryder may fall backward. For Sampson was of the Tribe of Dan, and he
was truly like a snake in the way to the Philistians, for he met them in every
place and vexed them. So S. Hierome expounds it in quaest. Hebr. and surely
Jacob seems to wish well to his Son, when he says these words, and
therefore not to foretell evil, but good.

And if it be allegorically applied to Antichrist, it can Hieremie cap. 8.
speaks not of Antichrist, nor of the Tribe of Dan, but of Nabuchodonosor who
was to come to overthrow Jerusalem through the Country which was called Dan,
as S. Hierome rightely expounds it upon that place. Now why Dan is omitted
Apoc. 7. is unknown, especially since Ephraim also is omitted, whose Tribe is
one of the greatest.

Besides these two probable assertions, there are other Messiah. The other that
he shall be borne of the Nation of the Jews, and be circumcised and observe the
Sabbath at least for a time. This is proved, first out of the Gospel Joan. 5.
where our Lord says to the Jews: I came in the name of my Father, and you
have not received me: if another come in his own name, him you will receive.
Which place that it ought to be understood of Antichrist we have proved before
cap. 2. Likewise out of the Apostle 2. Thessal. 2. Because they have not
received the charity of Truth, that they may be saved: therefore God shall send
them the operation of Error, that they may believe a lie etc. Calvin and other
Heretics in their Commentaries upon these words expound this place of us, who
because we have not received their Gospel, are suffered to be seduced by the
Antichrist of Rome. But first they bring forth no witnesses, but we have all
the Interpreters of our side who expound it of the Jews. See S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, Theodoretus, Theophilactus, Oecumenius.

Besides these, S. Hierome quaest. 11. ad Algasiam, says thus: Antichrist
shall do all these things, not with power, but by the permission of God; for
the Jews, that because they would not receive the charity of Truth, that is
the spirit of God by Christ, that receiving our Savior they may be saved; God
shall send them, not the worker, but the work or operation, that is, the
fountain of Error, that they may believe a lie etc. And also without the
Commentaries of so many Fathers, the thing it self speaks, that the Apostle
speaks of the Jews: for he says that Antichrist is to be sent to those who
would not receive Christ. Now, who ought more, and would not receive Christ
then the Jews? Where it is also to be noted, that the Apostle said not,
because they will not receive the Truth, but, because they have not received.
Wherefore he speaks of them who would not believe when Christ and the Apostles
preached. Now it is manifest, that in the Apostles time, the Gentills received
the Gospel with exceeding great desire, and the Jews would not receive it.

Moreover, besides S. Hierome and the others already alleged, S. Irenaeus lib.
5 S. Hippolytus Mart. orat. de co^summatione mundi, Theodoret in epit. divine.
decret cap. de Antichristo. Sulpit. ex B. Martino l. 2. dial. S. Cyril catech.
15. S. Hilar. can. 25. in Matthew. S. Ambros. l. 10. in Luc. in cap. 21. S.
Chrysostom. S. August. S. Cyril. Alex. in cap. 5. Joan. S. Gregor. lib. 31.
moral. cap. 10. S. Damascen lib. 4. c. 28. And reason also persuades the same.

For without doubt Antichrist shall first join himself

Now that Antichrist shall be a Jew and circumcised, Messiah. Yea because the
Jews expect their Messiah of the family of David and the Tribe of Judah,
without doubt Antichrist although he be truly of the Tribe of Dan, will faigne
himself to be of the family of David. Secondly all the Ancients teach most
clearly, that Antichrist shall be a Jew, as those 12. alleged a little before,
who say that he shall be of the Tribe of Dan; and besides S. Ambrose, who in 2 Thessalonians. 2. affirms that he shall be circumcised, and S. Hierome, who in cap. 11.
Dan. says that he shall be borne of the people of the Jews, and S. Martin apud
Sulpit. l. 2. dial. that Antichrist shall command that all be circumcised,
according to the law of Moses, and S. Ciryl, who Cateches, 15. affirms, that
he shall be very careful of the Temple of Jerusalem, that he may show himself
to be of the progeny of David. Finally S. Gregory who lib. 11. ep. 3. says
that Antichrist shall be a reuerencer of the Saboth and other Jewish Ceremonies.

Hence we have a most evident demonstration, that the Pope is not Antichrist.
For from the year 606. in which our Adversaries say that Antichrist came, it
is manifest, that no Pope was a Jew, neither by Nation nor by Religion, nor in
any sort. It is also manifest, that the Pope was never yet received by the
Jews for the Mesias, but contrary wise is accounted their enemy, and chief
perfecutor. Wherefore they in their daily prayers ask of God, that he will
give the Pope the^ living a good mind toward the Jews, and that in his days
he will send the Messiah, viz. that he may deliver them out of the Popes power:
and they call a Bishop, as chiefly the Pope is, in the Syrian language Zanbon,
which signifies a Tail, and is opposite to an head: for because we call the
Bishop the Head of the people, they contrary wise call him the Tail in
reproach; so far are they off from being ready to receive the Pope for their
Messiah.

Finally Rab. Leui Gerson cap. 7. and 11. Dan. expounds Pharao, and opposes
him to the Messiah which is to come. See orationes Mahasor, sol. 26.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. TO this Argument, first M. Downam obiecteth in general, that in all this
dispuration Bellarmine presupposes, See cap. ^.
that Antichrist is but one singular person; which though it were trne, yet he
did presuppose nothing but what he had proved before, which I remit to the
Readers judgment. Downams absurdity.
But now indeed this argument presupposes no such thing, but is of much
moreforce, if we speak of many then if we speak only of one, for it is most
evident, that neither all the Messiah: both which things shall be verified in
Antichrist, be he one man or many, as Bellarmine most certainly proves.

Secondly M. Downam notes briefly three points out Bellarmine rejects.
First his cunning in that he imitateth crafty tradesmen, who being desirous to
utter their bad wares at a good price, first show those that are worse, that
the naughtines of the worse may comnend and set forth those that be not so bad.
But where M. Downam learnt this cunning, or of what tradesmen I know not,
except he means those of his own profession: but sure I am that no tradesman
can deal more plainly and sincerely, then Bellarmine does, telling us what
wares are so bad, that by no means they are to be dealt withal. Again what
wares are likely to be very good, Bellarmines sincere dealing.
but yet some doubt may be made of them, which he declares and urges to the
uttermost. Finally what they are also, that are out of all question, being
generally warranted by all the most skillful and honest Merchants. This is
Bellarmines proceeding in this, and all other difficulties, as the Reader may
easily perceive by perusing his works, and in particular this place. Now, how
this can be disliked by any good and substantial chapman, I cannot imagine;
only some crafty and deceiptfull Merchant may be hindered thereby to utter his
broken trash, and therefore out of envy cavil at him, as M. Downam does. His
second note is, that S. Hippolytus is the Father of one of these errors: upon
whose counterfaite authority (says M. Downam) the Papists in other points
concerning this controversy do so muchrely. But it M. Downam had as much wit, as
he has malice, he might have noted out of this place in what manner we esteem
the authority of any Father, though never so ancient or grave, viz. if he
holds any thing against all the rest, and against a plain place of
Scripture, in the interpretation of which all the rest agree, we altogether
reject the authority of that Father. If he affirms any thing without evident
proof, How Catholics esteem of the Fathers.
in which the rest are silent, and yet he has probability for that he says,
we admit of his authority as probable: and this so much the more or less, as
we find more or fewer of his opinion, or that they affirm it with more
certainty and resolution, or bring better proofs for that they say. But yet so
long as we find any controversy among the Fathers, or that they vary in their
expositions of any place of Scripture, we hold it not altogether certain
that the greater part affirm, except the matter be decided by the successors
of S. Peter, and the other Pastors of the Church to whom it does belong to
decyde and define such controversies. But when all the Fathers agree it were
more then rashenes, yea plain madness to go against the whole stream of all
antiquity either in opinions belonging to faith, or in the exposition of the
Scripture. And by this M. Downam may see, that though we esteem the authority
of S. Hippolytus much, yet it alone is no certain ground of our Faith, though
we are far from rejecting him altogether, or calling him counterfaite, as M.
Downam does, without any other reason then that he displeases him, as commonly
all other Fathers do. M. Downams third observation is, that these opinions
(which Bellarmine calls errors) show into what absurdities men do fall,
when as they will needs be comparing Christ with Antichrist, as the Papists in
many things do. But he should have added, that these absurdityes fall out,
when these comparisons are made without any sound or sufficient ground, which
the Papists do not in any thing at all, as appears plainly by this whole
Treatise, and may in part be gathered by this, that Bellarmine rejects those
conceits that were only grounded upon these similitudes, because they were
only builded upon them, and are repugnant to other former grounds.

2. Thus M. Downam passes over the errors, and Bellarmines judgment well
enough, in that he thinks M. Downams iugling.
neither of them certain, but makes no mention of the other part in which he
affirms that the latter is very probable for the authority of the Fathers. M.
Downam likes also so well of Bellarmines interpretation of the two first
places of Scripture, that he would challeng them to be his own, or at least to
belong to his fellows. For in the first he plainly says, that Bellarmine
answers with them; and in Genesis 49. Ierem. 8.
the second he relates it so cunningly, that if the Reader be not very wary,
he will easily think, that Bellarmine were against S. Hierome, and that M.
Downam had found it out.

In the third place, M. Downam goes against Bellarmine, affirming that the
trybe of Ephraim is not left out, but understood by the Tribe of Joseph, in
which I like his judgment very well, for indeed (as Ribera and others upon
this The tribe of Ephraim, not omitted. Apoc. 7.
place, prove very well) the Tribe of Ephraim is in other places called the
Tribe of Joseph, as Psalm. 77. Ezech. 27. Amos 5. and the reason is, because
though Ephraim were the younger brother, yet he was preferred before Manasses
the elder Genesis 48. But what has M. Downam gained by this? Is not this rather a
confirmation of the Fathers opinion, that Antichrist M. Downam impugneth
himself.
shall be borne of the Tribe of Dan, since that only was omitted in this place?
Yea but (says M. Downam) Symeon is not mentioned in the blessing of Moses
Deuteronomy. 33. no more then Dan in the Apocalypse. But he himself confesses, that
Symeon is comprehended under Judah, but that Dan is altogether omitted, Deuteronomy. 33.
which as you see is a great difference. And besides though Symeon were
altogether omitted also, the reason were to be found out and not put off with
another difficulty. Wherefore Why Moses omitted Symeon in his blessing.
there be two reasons why he was not mentioned by Moses. First because that
Tribe was not to have any particular possession distinct from the rest in the
land of Promise but only some small portion among those of Judah, for which
cause, as it seems M. Downam says, that Symeon is comprehended under Judah in
this place, to which we may add that other observation of S. Hierome in
quaest. Hebr. that in process of time, the Tribe of Symeon was constrained to
go into the desert because they had not possession sufficient for them, after
they were multiplied, which he proves out of 1. Paral. 4. But though this
reason be probable, ^et the two Apollinarij give another more certain, for
this reason would also have excluded the Tribe of Leui which had no particular
possession in the Land of Promise, but was Why the Tribe of Leui is often
omitted.
divided among all the Tribes: for which cause when mention is made of the
Tribes in respect of their temporal possessions, the Tribe of Leui is omitted.
But here we see, that Moses makes most honorable mention of Leui. Wherefore
the two Apollinarij with whom also agrees Caietan, and Lippomanus rather
think, that Moses made no mention of Caiet. in Genes.
Symeon, by reason of the curse which Jacob laid upon him, together with Leui
upon his deathbed, from which the Tribe of Leui was freed, by the zeal which
the showed in Gods cause against Idolatry at Moses his commandment, by which
they wiped away the curse which Jacob had laid upon them for their fury and
unjust revenge, and consecrated their hands to God, and deserved to have a
benediction given them as we see that Moses gave them, absoluing them from
their Father Jacobs malediction, but passing over Symeon Exodus 32.
in silence, and Deo iudicandum relinquens, and leaving him to Gods judgment,
as the elder Apollinarius writes, with whom agrees the assertion of the
Jews, that there was not a poor Scribe nor Schoolmaster among all the
Tribes, but he was of the Tribe of Symeon, many of them (as it seems) being
constrained by necessity to seek their living by that means, as others were
enforced to fly the country, and so Jacobs Prophesy was fulfilled in both these
Tribes, that they were divided and dispersed through Jacob and Israel, but with
this difference, that Leui lived with great authority and plenty, and Symeon in
great disgrace and poverty: which perhaps was also insinuated by the holy
Patriarch by those distinct words of dividing and dispersing in Jacob and
Israel. So that now we have the reason why Symeon was omitted Deuteronomy. 33. but
still we seek for this other, why Dan is omitted Apoc. 7. And M. Downam gives
us a general reason why some one was to be left out, viz. because Leui was Why
the Tribe of Dan is omitted Apoc. 7.
put in, and consequently if all the rest had been recyted, there should have been 13. Whereas he supposes that the Holy Ghost would neither number more nor
less then 12. But first this were strange, that the Holy Ghost should stand so
precisely upon any number. And if a Papist should do so, M. Downam would
exclaim against him for superstition. Secondly Moses Deuteronomy. 33. indeed
numbreth only 1^. Tribes, for he includes Ephraim and Manesses under the name
of Joseph, as he himself expresses in the end of his benediction, and M.
Downam well observes that the like is to be seen Deuteronomy. 27. and Ezech. 48.
Thirdly our difficulty is not now why any Tribe is omitted; but why rather the
Tribe of Dan then any other. And to this M. Downam answers, that the reason
is, because that was the first Tribe which fell from God unto Idolatry: and
that for the same cause (as some think) the Genealogy of that Tribe is omitted
in the first book of Chronicles. But this is not a good reason, for though it
were true, that the Tribe of Dan fell first from God to Idolatry, yet this is
no particular cause, why that The Tribe of Dan fell not first to Idolatry Exodus
32. Number. 25. Ios. 22.
Tribe should be omitted only in these two places and in no other, and besides
it is not true, that this Tribe fell first to Idolatry: for all the Tribes are
said to have fallen together, when they worshipped the calfe, and after again
Beelphegor, which seems to be particulerly objected to the Tribe of Ruben,
and God, and the half Tribe of Manasses, by Phinees and the 10. Princes of the
other 10. Tribes. And in the time of the Judges almost in every Chapter, there
is mention made of the peoples falling to Idolatry without any particular
mention of Dan, and even that particular Idolatry Iudic. 17. 18.
which M. Downam seems to aim at, was not begun by the Tribe of Dan, but by
Michas of the mountain of Ephraim from whom those of Dan took perforce his
idols and Priest: which indeed was a great sin in them, but not the first,
nor yet the greatest, and therefore not a sufficient reason why the Tribe of
Dan should be omitted only in these two places, as M. Downam will needs
affirm against the Fathers, but indeed proves nothing at all against them.
For suppose his reason were good, yet that is no hinderance, why the reason of
the Fathers should not be good also: for why might not this Tribe be omitted
for both these reasons, and the latter which these Fathers bring be a
punishment of the former, which M. Downam alleges? For since S. John
speaks of those which shall be saved of the Jews in the time of Antichrist,
and only omitteth the Tribe of Dan, of which he reckons none to be saved, is
it not more then probable that the cause of this is, because the Tribe of Dan
shall wholly give themselves to Antichrist Antichrist shall be of the Tribe of
Dan.
as to the head of their Tribe? And likewise since the chief reason why the
Genealogyes of the Tribes are rehearsed, is because Christ was to be borne of
one of them, may it not be very well thought that in hatred of Antichrist,
which was to be of the Tribe of Dan, the Genealogy of that Tribe was omitted?
though indeed this latter proves no more of the Tribe of Dan, then of diverse
other Tribes, whose Genealogyes were also omitted in that place; and therefore
no marvel, though the Fathers made no inference out of this, as M. Downam and
some of his friends not very wisely do.

3. M. Downam having thus agreed with Bellarmine in not admitting the Fathers
opinion in this point, though he differs in this, that Bellarmine thinks it
very probable for their authority, which he does not; he would by this
president prove, that they may lawfully reject the Downam impugneth the
Fathers authority.
Fathers authority in all other points concerning Antichrist, when it seems
to them the Fathers allege not the Scriptures in their true sense. But first
M. Downom must remember, that an universal is not to be inferred from a
particular. Secondly Bellarmine rejects not the authority of these Fathers,
but admits their opinion as probable, which is as much as they themselves for
the most part affirmed, and so indeed Bellarmine followed them so far as they
would have him. Thirdly Bellarmine had the authority of some Fathers for his
exposition of the two first places, and therefore he might well follow their
opinion, especially since most of the other did rather follow the mystical,
then the litterall sense. In the third place where he brought no authority for
himself, M. Downam did rightely correct him, showing his instance to be very
probable, though still there remains some question why Ephraim was not named
as well as Manasses, but comprehended under the name of Joseph. Fourthly
therefore M. Downam has no reason to reject all the Fathers, when they agree
without contradiction or doubt, nor to make himself wiser then he is, to take
upon him to understand the Scripture better then they all; yea though their
arguments out of the Scripture should be only from the mystical sense, yet he
may well assure himself, that they would never be so resolute, except they had
some other good ground of divine or Apostolical tradition, known by them to
have been taught by the Apostles, and from their time, from age to age conserved
in the Church: for which reason I also incline to think that it is in a manner
certain, that Antichrist shall be of the Tribe of Dan, since so many Fathers
affirm it without contradiction of any.

4. But let us pass over this argument as Bellarmine does, making it only
probable and not certain, and come M. Downam first obiecteth, that Antichrist
shall not be one singular man: which I have already showed to be both false and
impertine^. Secondly he says, that these opinions may be number. 1.
disproued by Scripture, because Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God,
that is, shall reign in the Church of Christ. But of this we shall See Cap. 13.
have occasion to treat afterward. Besides says he, Bellarmine confesses,
that Antichrist shall be the head of the Apostasy, that is, backesliding
Christians, Ergo, not of the Jews. But M. Downam might easily have considered,
that Antichrist may be the head of both, as Bellarmine affirms. After this he
notes that Antichrist shall be head of the Roman State, and have his Seat in
Rome, which how true it is we shall see afterward. Now I would See cap. 13.
feign know why a Jew may not have both these conditions. Lastly M. Downam
would know, when the Jews shall be called to Christ? To which I answer that
some shall be called in Antichrists reign, but the most after his fall, which
shall be not long before the end of the world, as we have already seen in part.

5. Thus has this wise man shot his bolt, and now he holds up his buckler to
bear off Bellarmines Artillery: S. John 5. 43. he says, that he has proved
before, that our Savior speaks not absolutely but conditionally, Io. 5.
not definitely, but indefinitely, and only of the Jews present which Cap. 2.
are dead long since: but all these shifts are confuted long since at large,
and therefore it were needeles to repeat them, or confute them here again.

6. The second testimony 2 Thessalonians. 2. troubles him somewhat more, and
therefore his tongue runs at random, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
explicating the place at large after his own fancy and railing against
Catholics, but obiecteth nothing worth the answering: the most that he has to
the purpose is, that the Apostles words may be applied to all others that
follow Antichrist as well as to the Jews. In which we will not stand with him;
but now our question is, whether the Jews be included in these words or no,
and Bellarmine says they are, and that chiefly: and this he proves out of the
Scripture it self. First because none ought more, and would less receive
Christ then the Jews.

7. To which M. Downam answers not a word, but that the Rhemists confess,
that others may be said not to receive the love of the Truth also. But what is
this to the purpose? Do the Rhemists, or can any other deny that none refused
more to receive the love of the Truth then the Jews? And yet this is all the
answer, that M. Downam gives, but falls into a rage, and railing again
like a man more then half beside himself; yet after a while, he comes to
himself again, and returns to Bellarmines second proof out of the
Scripture, where he notes, that the Apostle speak in the preter tense, of the
refusers to receive the Truth, and in the future tense of the coming and
receiving of Antichrist: out of which he infers, that he is to be understood
of the Jews, who were they that chiefly had refused to receive Christ in the
Apostles time. To which M. Downam answers, that this preter tense is not to
be referred to the time of the Apostles writing, but to the time of their
punishment. By which as you see, he makes the preter and future tense all one,
or at least joins them together, expounding the later part of the Apostles
words in English thus: That all may be condemned, that shall not have believed
the Truth, but shall have delighted in iniquity, and willing us to confer
this place with Mar. 16. 16. which he likewise expounds in the same manner:
He that shall have believed, and shall have been baptized, shall be saved; but he
that shall not have believed, shall be condenmed, though in both places, he is
enforced to confess that the greek is the preter tense, and he dares not
translate it otherwise, howsoever he expoundes it. So that unless we will
stand to M. Downam^ exposition rather then to the words of the Scripture, we
are to understand all this of the preter tense only, as the condemnation, and
the receiving of Antichrist in the future tense only, which is a plain sign,
that all this is not to be understood of the same time, as is also evident by
the thing it self, for men refuse to believe, and to be baptized in this life
when they are preached unto, but they are condemned in the other life, when all
Sermons are at an end for them. And this out Saviors words signify most
exactely, if M. Downams commentary be taken away. And yet the matter is more
clear in the words, which Bellarmine urges, in which there is no Participle
in the Greek, as in the places which M. Downam compares, but the Verb it
self; which cannot well be understood, but of things truly past, as neither
the Verb in the future tense, but of things truly to come; and since the
Apostle limitteth not that preter tense to any other time, as our Savior does:
it must be understood to signify that, which was past before the time of his
writing. But M. Downam obiecteth further, that if Bellarmine will needs urge
the preter tense, as though the Apostle meant that Antichrist should be
received only of those, who before that time had rejected the truth, he must
withal hold, that Antichrist shall be received in the end of the world of those
who dyed above 1500. years since. But this is both a false, and frivolous
objection: false, because it adds the word Downam falsifieth Bellarmines
words.
(only) which Bellarmine has nor, for he never went about to prove, that only
the Jews should receive Antichrist, but that they should receive him:
frivolous, because the Apostle and Bellarmine also speak of the Nation of the
Jews, and not of any particular men, as is manifest to any that is not
wilfully blinded with malice, of which number it grieueth me that M. Downam
will needs be one.

8. To the authority of the Fathers, M. Downam briefly answers, that there is
no probability in their assertion or exposition should be of the Tribe of Dan,
or in their expositions of the places of Scripture, which they brought to that
effect, which (says he) no man now, unless he will be too ridiculous can
understand of Antichrist. Where I desire the Reader to consider the little
account that M. Downam makes of all the Fathers, when they make against Downam
rejects the Fathers.
him: and as for his similitude, I have already showed how unlike it is, as well
because the Fathers speak not resolutly themselves in that point, as they do
in this, and also because all the Fathers do not agree in that assertion or
exposition. And yet M. Downam is very insolent in condemning all for
ridiculous, which follow the Fathers exposition of those places of Scripture:
for first there is no doubt, but that the two former may be mystically so
understood, and the last can have no other probable sense, as has sufficiently
appeared. Neither is that objection of his worth the answering, by which he
would prove, that the Fathers might as well prove, that Antichrist shall be of
the Tribe of Benjamin, because of him it is said in the same place, that he
shall reign as a wolf, for M. Downam might have added the other clause, which
is to be taken in good number. 2.
part, and therefore cannot be applied to Antichrist, but to some other who
shall change his condition, and of a ravening wolf become a glorious Preacher,
and Apostle of Christ, as S. Paul did, of whom some of the Fathers mistically
expound those words. Wherefore M. Downam must be content, though much against
his will, that both these assertions and expositions have that probability and
certainty, which the Fathers affirm that they have, as Bellarmine has
sufficiently declared.

9. Lastly to Bellarmines reason M. Downam answers, Antichrist shall join
himself, not to any whatsoever, but to those in the Church, that are ready to
receive him. For proof whereof he alleges S. Cyprian epist. 1. lib. 1. where
he affirms that the Devil troubles the servants of God, and Antichrist
impugneth Christians, and seeks not those whom he has already subdued, or
desires to overthrow those whom he has already made his own etc. Which in
truth is a strange proof (if you mark it well) for M. Downam ridiculously
impugneth himself*
Bellarmine speaks not a word of troubling, impugning, or overthrowing, but
only of joining with the Jews as with friends; and M. Downam to prove, that
Antichrist shall not join with them, so alleges S. Cyprian, who affirms
that he shall impugn Christians. Would any man take M. Downam for a Doctor or
Reader of Divinity, that should hear him dispute thus grossly, bringing quid,
pro quo, and impugning himself instead of his adversary? But let us pity his
folly, and affirm with S. Cyprian and Bellarmine, that Antichrist shall
impugn Christians, and to that effect, first join himself to the Jews. To
Bellarmines minor, that the Jews are ready to receive Antichrist, M. Downam
has nothing to answer directly, but only repeateth certain assertions of his
own, that Antichrist shall not be one particular man etc. which have, and
shall be confuted in their due places.

But now M. Downam should have impugned Bellarmines proof, which is, that the
Jews expect a temporal King, as Antichrist shall be, and not only affirm
upon his bare word, that Antichrist shall not b^ such a one, as the expected
Messiah of the Jews, and that there is no necessity, that there should such a
one come to the Jews as they expect: both which assertio^s are ouerthrown by
Bellarmines reasons and other proofs. And to the second part, that Christians
expect Antichrist with fear and terror, M. Downam only answers, that
unsound and backsliding Christians, are ready to receive Antichrist. By which,
if he means, The difference betwixt Christians and Jews in expecting
Antichrist.
that they are in great danger to be drawn to him by little and little, it is
very true, and that which Bellarmine affirms: but if he would say, that they
expect Antichrist with joy and desire, as the Jews do, he is far wide: for
the Jews will receive him the sooner because he is against Christ, which very
few Christians though never so unsound will yield to at the first, but rather
be terrified with the very mention thereof, as M. Downam may experience amongst
Protestants, whom we account unsound Christians, and the world will testify of
all Catholics, whom he takes to be such. Now for his supposition, that
Antichrist is come, and that the Pope is Antichrist, we know this to be the
question and maine controversy, and therefore cannot but acknowledge M. Downams
ordinary fault, which is petitio principij.

10. M. Downam having thus worthily answered Bellarmines Bellarmine proves out
of his former assertion, that the Jews shall receive Antichrist, which they
would never do, except he Antichrist shall be a Jew.
were a Jew. To which M. Downam answers, that he has overthrown that former
assertion: which how true it is, I remit to the Readers judgment. Secondly he
obiecteth, that the Herodians received Herod for their Messiah, but he does
well not The Herodians.
to stand upon this; for the solution is evident, for these Herodians were a
few flattering Courtiers, and now we speak of the whole Nation of the Jews,
and chiefly of those great Rabbynes who profess so great knowledge in
Scripture, which teaches most evidently, that the Messiah is to be of the
Jewish nation, and the Tribe of Judah, though for this second, they cannot now
much strive, because their Genealogies are so confounded: and so it will be no
hard matter for Antichrist to be taken for one of the Tribe of Judah, though
indeed he be of the Tribe of Dan.

To the authority of the Fathers, he answers according Downam rejects the
Fathers.
to his custom, that they are not to be believed in this point which has no
ground in the word of God, and still he insisteth upon Bellarmines rejecting
the twelve Fathers which affirmed, that Antichrist should be of the Tribe of
Dan for the same reasons. But he abuses both Bellarmine and the Fathers, as
the Reader may easily see. Bellarmine, for he rejects not the Fathers
authority, but imbraceth it as very probable, which was as much as the most of
them affirmed. The Fathers, because he rejects them all in a thing, wherein
they agree as certain, which they would never do without some certain ground
either of Apostolical tradition, or Scripture, and reason, which Bellarmine
has sufficiently explicated in his former assertion.

Finally M. Downam briefly passes over the opposition Bellarmine shows that
the Jews have against the Pope, because he was ashamed to see what Jews the
Protestants are in this behalf: but yet he is content to take hold of their
application, of the Prophesies of Daniel against the Pope, because they are no
parties, and therefore their authority The Jews opposite to the Pope.
may be some inducement, to think indeed that the Pope is Antichrist: where I
could wish the Reader to mark attentively, the great connection betwixt Jews
and Protestants in this point of impugning the Pope, though upon different
grounds. For if you examine a Jew, why he is so eager against the Pope, he will
tell you, that it is, because he hates Christ himself, and for his sake all
Christians, but chiefly the Pope, who is the chief of them. Again if you How
the Jews and the Protestants agree and differ in impugning the Pope.
pose M. Downam with the same question, why he cannot abide the Pope? He will
tell you another tale, that it is, because he loves Christ and all true
Christians, to whom he thinks the Pope and his adherents to be most
opposite. And is it not strange, that these men should join in the expositions
of Scripture? Yea that M. Downam should take the Jew to be no party against the
Pope, but an indifferent man, and therefore thinks his exposition fit to be
some inducement to make men believe his doctrine? Is it not too plain, that M.
Downam is in the high way to deny Christ, howsoever he protests the contrary,
since he hates the Pope, whom the Jews only detest out of their malice to
Christ himself? True it is, that the consequence is not so necessary from the
hatred of the Pope to the hatred of Christ, as contrariwise, but yet he that is
come so far, as to hate Christ's most principal servant in the highest degree,
and with unplacable hatred, may easily be carried a step further, except God
give him grace to turn back in time, which I most heartily wish for M. Downam
himself, and all others, that are in that most miserable and dangerous estate.

THE THIRTENTH CHAPTER. Of Antichrists Seat.
TOUCHING the sixth (says Bellarmine) our Adversaries bouldly affirm, that the
Rome, or the Apostolic Chair founded there: for they say, that Antichrist
shall invade the Sea of Peter, and raise it up to a certain sovereign height,
from the which it shall rule and tyranniclly govern the whole Church. And that
Rome is the Kingly City of Antichrist, they prove out of Apoc. 17. where S.
John speaking of the Seat of Antichrist says, that it is the great City
which is situated upon seven hills, and which has the Kingdom over the
Kings of the earth.

And that at Rome, not in the palace of Nero, but in the S. Paul, who 2 Thessalonians. 2. says: that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God: for since he
says absolutely in the Temple of God, he means the true Temple of the true
God, and there is none such, but the Church of God. For the Temples of the
Gentiles are true Temples, but of the Devils, not of God. And the Temple of the
Jews was indeed of God, but it ceased to be a Temple, when the Jewish
sacrifice and Priesthood ceased: for these three are so joined, that one cannot
be without the other. Besides the Temple of the Jews, within a while after,
was to be desolated, and never to be bult again, as Dan. cap. 9. says: and
the desolation shall persevere till the consummation, and the end. Wherefore the
Apostle cannot speak of it.

And this argument is confirmed out of the Fathers. S. Hierome quaest. 11. ad
Algasiam: He shall sit (says he) in the Temple of God, either at Jerusalem as
some think, or in the Church, as we think more truly: and Oecumenius, He
says not (says he) the Temple of Jerusalem, but the Churches of Christ.

Theodorus Bibliander adds the testmony of S. Greg. who l. ep. 38. ad Joan.
Constantinopolitanu^ says: The king of pride is nigh, and (which is impious to
be spoken) an army of Priests is prepared for him. Out of which words a double
argument is drawn, one thus: John of Constantinople is said to forerun
Antichrist, because he will be called the universal Bishop; therefore he shall
be Antichrist, who in very deed shall make himself the Universal Bishop, and
shall sit in the Church, as the head of all. The other thus: The army of
Antichrist shall be Priests, therefore Antichrist shall be the head of Priests.
By which arguments the heretics think, that they evidently show, that the
Bishop of Rome is Antichrist, since he rules at Rome, sitteh in the Temple of
God, and is called the universal Bishop, and is the Prince of Priests.

Notwithstanding the true opinion is, that Jerusalem Rome, shall be the seat
of Antichrist, and the Temple of Solomon, and Throne of David, not the Temple
of S. Peter, or the Sea Apostolic, which we can prove in two sorts: First with
an argument ad hominem. Secondly out of the Scripture and Fathers.

First then I make this argument: Antichrist shall sit in Philippus Melanctonin
apologia art. 6. confess. Augustanae, Caluinus lib. 4. Iustit. cap. 2.. 12. and
cap. 7.. 25. Illyricus cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. col. 435. and all other
Sectaries of this time do teach: but the Pope of Rome is Antichrist, as they
themselves also teach in the same places. Therefore the Pope of Rome sits in
the true Church of Christ, and is the Prince and head of his Church. But the
Church of Christ can only be one, as Christ is one, as Calvin also teaches
lib. 4. Instit. cap. 1.. 2. Therefore the Lutheram and Caluinists, and as many
as are out of the Church which is under the Pope, are out of the true Church.

Calvin saw this argument, and answered, that not so lib. 4. Instit. cap. 2..
11. As there remained in old time certain peculiar prerogatives of the Church
under the Jews; so neither at these days do we take from the Papists the
steps of the Church, which the Lord would have remaining among them of the
dissipation. And after: God has wrought with his providence, that there should
be also other remnants extant, least the Church should wholly perish. And as
buildings are often so thrown down, that the foundations and ruins remain,
so he has not suffered his Church to be either subverted from the foundation,
or quite thrown down by Antichrist, or else he would have the building half
saved from destruction. And again. 12. Wherefore hence it is manifest, that we
deny not, that the Churches remain even under his Tyranny.

But this solution affoardeth us two arguments. The first; if only the ruins
of Christ's Church remain: then Matthew. 16. and the Gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. The other, the Church is fallen, and the Papists hold the
ruins of it, and the foundation, yea the building it self half thrown
down: Then the Lutheram and Caluinists have no Church, for they have not the
whole and entire Church of Christ, for that is fallen, and the ruins yet
remain; neither have they it half thrown down, for that is among the
Papists under Antichrist. What have they the^? Perhaps a new building, but in
that it is new, it is not Christ's. And who that is not altogether blind sees
not, that it is more safe to remain in the true Church of Christ, although
half thrown down, then in none?

Now I come to the Scriptures, by which it is proved, Jerusalem, and not Rome
shall be the seat of Antichrist. The first is in Cap. 11. Apos. where S. John
says: That Enoch and Helias shall fight with Antichrist in Jerusalem, and be
slain thereby him, and their bodies (says he) shall lie in the streets of the
great City, which is spiritually called Sodom, and Aegipt, where also their
Lord was crucified: upon which place Arethas; Their bodies (says he) shall be
cast unburied in the streets of Jerusalem, for he shall reign in that City,
as King of the Jews. In like manner do all other Interpreters expound it, and
surely it can by no means be denied, that this is spoken of Jerusalem: for what
City is there where our Lord was crucified, but Jerusalem?

Wherefore Chytraeus who would have this City to be Rome, lets pass those
words (where also their Lord was crucified) as though they were not to the
purpose. Neither is it any hindrance, that S. Hierome in ep. 17. ad Marcellam,
endeavors to show that Jerusalem cannot be called Sodom, since that every
where in Scripture it is called the holy City; for in that Epistle, he
persuades Marcella to forsake Rome, and come into Palestins, and therefore he
heapeth up all that he can in the praise of Jerusalem, and in the reprehension
of Rome, and endeavors by all means to excuse Jerusalem Neither does he it
in his own name, but in the name of Paul's and Eusto. hium, whom he thought
ought to be pardoued, if they explicated any thing some what otherwise then it
was. For that earthly Jerusalem may be called Sodom, for last and offenses of
the Jews, is manifest out of Isaias, who in his first Chapter, when he had
prefixed the title: The vision of Isaias, which he saw upon Judah and
Jerusalem, adds forthwith: Hear the word of our Lord you Princes of Sodom,
harken with your ears the law of my God you people of Gomorrha.

Neither is that a good argument; Jerusalem is called holy, therefore it cannot
be called Sodom, for as S. Hierome Rome is called Babylon, and the purple
harlot by S. John, by reason of the Pagan Emperors, and yet that it is holy,
by reason of the Church of Christ, and the Sepulchers of S. Peter and S. Paul:
so also Jerusalem is an holy City, by reason of the Prophets and Apostles
which preached there of the Cross, and Sepulcher of Christ, and the like, and
yet it is Sodom and Aegipt, by reason of the offenses and blindness of the
unbelieving Jews.

The second place is Apoc. 17. where S. John says, that the 10. Kings who shall
divide the Roman Empire among themselves, and will hate the purple Harlot, that
is Rome, and will make her desolate, and will burn her with fire: How then shall
it be the seat of Antichrist, if it must be overthrown, and burnt at that
very time?

Besides, as we proved before, Antichrist shall be a Jew, and Messiah, and King
of the Jews. Wherefore without doubt, he shall place his seat in Jerusalem, and
will go about to restore the Temple of Salomo^, for the Jews dream of nothing
else, but of Jerusalem, and of the Temple: Neither does it seem, that they will
ever accept any for their Messiah who shall not sit in Jerusalem, and restore
the Temple in some sort. Wherefore Lactantius l. 7. c. 15. says: that in the
time of Antichrist the chiefest Kingdom shall be in Asia, and that the West
shall serve, and the East rule, and c. 17. he determines the part of Asia, in
which this Kingdom shall be, and says: that it is Syria, that is Iudaea, which
is part of Syria, and which is always called Syria by the Latins. Likewise S.
Hierom and Theodoret in c. 11. Dan. gather out of Dan. that Antichrist shall fix
his tents in the country of Jerusalem, and at length be slain in the Mount
Oliuet, and S. Irenaeus l. 5. said plainly, that Antichrist shall reign in
earthly Jerusalem.

The third place, is in those words of S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. So that he shall
sit in the Temple of God. For although there be many expositions given by the
Fathers, and some understand the minds of the faithful, in which Antichrist is
said to sit, when he has seduced them, as S. Anselme expounds it; and some
by the Temple understand Antichrist himself with all his people, for
Antichrist will desire to have himself and his seem the spiritual Temple of
God, that is, the true Church, as S. Augustine expounds it l. 20. Ciuit. Dei
c. 19. where he deduceth this exposition out of the manner of S. Paul's
speaking, who said not in Greek (...), in Templo, but (...), in Templum as if
he should say that Antichrist shall sit in Templu^ Dei, that is as though he and
his were the Temple of God, although this annotation of S. August. is not
necessary, for though in Latin we cannot well say sedere in Templu^, for in
Templo, yet in greek it is not evil said (...), or (...), yea it is commonly
so said.

Some also understand the Churches of Christians, which Antichrist shall
command to serve him, as S. Chrysostom Solomon is understood by the Temple of
God, in which after some sort repaired, Antichrist ^^all fit. For first, in the
Scripture of the new Testament, the Churches of Christians are never understood
by the Temple of God, but always the Temple of Jerusalem: and that which is
more, the ancient Fathers Latin and Greek, for some ages, never called the
Churches of Christians, Temples, which in greek are called (...), as in this
place of S. Paul, but they called them (...), that is, Oratoria, Ecclesias,
Domas orationis, Basilicas, Martyria.

Certainly, neither S. Iustine, nor S. Irenaeus, nor Tertullian, S. Cyprian do
use the name of Temple, when they treat of the Churches of Christians: and S.
Jerome ep. ad Riparium says, that Julian the Apostata commanded that the
Basilicae.
Churches of the Saints should either be destroyed, or turned into Temples.

And the reasons why the Apostles call not the Churches of Christians Temples,
are two: the one, because then Temple was fresh, least the Apostles might seem
to bring in some thing like to them, and that they might distinguish the Church
from the Synagogue, they abstained from the name of Temple. As also for the
same reason the Apostles in the Scripture, neues call Christian Priests
Sacerdotes, but only Episcopos, and Presbyteros. But after that Jerusalem was
overthrown, and the Temple burnt, and the memory of the old Temple and
Priesthood abolished, the holy Doctors began to use commonly the name of Temple
and Priesthood.

Since therefore the Apostle writing, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of
God, said something which he would Temple, any other but the Temple of
Jerusalem, it seems certain that the Apostle spoke of it, which is also
confirmed by the common exposition of the Fathers, S. Irenaeus lib. 5. When
Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of Jerusalem, then our Lord will come etc.
S. Hippolytus Mart. orat. de mundi consummat. He shall build the Temple at
Jerusalem. And S. Martin apud Sulpitium, lib. 2. dial. teaches the same. S.
Cyril. Hierosol. cateches. 15. What manner of Temple means the Apostle? In
the Temple of the Jews which is remaining: for God forbid that it should be
done in this, in which we are. And S. Hilary can. 25. in Matt. Antichrist being
received of the Jews, shall stay in the place of Sanctification. Where he
plainly speaks of the Temple of the Jews, for he calls the place of
Sanctification, that which Christ Matthew. 24. calls the holy Place, when he
says: When you see abomination standing in the holy place.

S. Ambrose in c. 21. Luc. says, that Antichrist according to Titus, and
according to the mystical sense, that he shall sit in the inward Temple of the
Jews, that is, in their perfidious minds.

Sedulius upon this place of the Apostle explicateth, that in the Temple of
God, He will endeavor to repair the temple of Jerusalem etc. S. Damascen
lib. 4. cap. 28. In the Temple (says he) not ours, but the old Jewish. S.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Theophilact, who say, that Antichrist shall sit in
the Churches of Christians, affirm also, that he shall sit in the Temple of
Solomon, for S. Chrysostom writes thus upon this place: He shall command
himself to be worshipped for God, and to be placed in the Temple, not only of
Jerusalem, but also in the Churches. The same say Theophilact and Theodoret.
S. Augustine also lib. 20. Ciuit. Dei cap. 19. and S. Hierome quaest. 11. ad
Algasiam, do not deny that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of Solomon.

Only Oecumenius denies, that Antichrist shall sit in (only) for it is not
credible that he would depart from S. Chrysostom Theodoret, and Theophilact,
whom in all other things he always follows.

Now let us answer to the arguments of our Adversaries, which we proposed
before. To the first I answer in S. Augustine in Psalm. 26. Arethas, Haymo,
Bid, and Rupert. in cap. 17. Apoc. that by the Harlot, which sits upon
seven hills, and has her Kingdom over the Kings of the earth, Rome is not
understood, but the whole City of the Devil, which in the Scripture is often
called Babylen, and is opposed to the City of God, that is, to the Church,
which is called Jerusalem, and that by the seven hills is understood the
universality of the proud, and chiefly of the Kings of the earth.

Secondly it may be said, and in my judgment better, Rome, as Tertull. l. cont.
Indaeos and lib. 3. cont. Martian. and S. Hierome ep. 17. ad Marcellam, and
quast. 11. ad Algasiam, but ^thnick Rome reigning, worshipping Idols, and
persecuting Christians, and not Rome Christian, for so those Authors expound.

And surely marvelous is the impudency of Heretics who to prove that the
Roman Church is the purple Harlot, Tertullian and S. Hierome; for since at that
time Heathen Rome was contrary to Christian Rome, which of them I pray you, do
those Fathers call the purple Harlot? If heathen Rome, why then do the
Heretics abuse their testimonies? If Christian Rome, it follows that the
Roman Church had degenerated then, and Antichrist did reign then, which they
themselves do not grant.

Furthermore if Christian Rome was Babylon then, why Tertullian de praescript.
say: Happy Church to which the Apostles powered out their whole doctrine with
their blood? And why does S. Hierome lib. 2. cont. Iouinianum in the end
speaking to Rome, say: Shall I speak to thee, who have wiped away the
blasphemy written in thy forehead, with the confession of Christ? Finally the
same is manifest out of S. John himself, who says, that he speaks of that
Rome, who held the Empire over the Kings of the earth, and which was drunk
with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, which
certainly have not place, but in that Rome, which in the reign of Nero and
Domitian slew the Martyrs.

Thirdly I say, although that Woman were Christian Rome, as the heretics would
have it, yet their argument has no force at all: for as we showed before,
Antichrist shall hate Rome, and fight with it, and consume and burn it, out of
which it manifestly follows, that Rome shall not be the seat of Antichrist.

To the second we have already said, that S. Paul in that place speaks of the
Temple of Solomon, and to the reason Luc. vltimo: They were always in the Temple
praising and blessing our Lord. Likewise Act. 3. Peter and John went up into
the Temple at the ninth hour of prayer: and Act. 5. the Angel says to the
Apostles: Speak in the Temple to the people all the words of this life.

To that of Daniel I answer, that either Daniel would Titus: for when it shall
be erected by Antichrist, the^ chiefly shall the abomination of desolation
remain in it, that is Antichrist himself, or his Image: or finally, that the
Temple should never be perfectly built again, but yet that the building should
be begun, and that Antichrist should sit in the Temple begun in some sort.

To the places of the Fathers we have already answered, that they affirm, or
at least deny not, that Antichrist shall sit, Solomon, and whereas many of the^
add, that Antichrist shall also sit in the Churches of Christians, it is true,
and not contrary to us, for the Fathers mean not that Antichrist shall sit in
the Church as a Bishop, as Heretics dream, but that he shall sit as God. For
Antichrist shall command that all the Temples of the whole world be converted
to his worship, and he will make himself to be adored in them. He will command
(says S. Chrysostom in this place) himself to be worshipped, and reverenced
for God, and to be placed in the Temple, not only of Jerusalem, but also in
the Churches: and the rest speak in the same manner.

To the arguments taken out of the words of S. Gregory I answer, that out of
his words the contrary of that is deduced Constantinople did forerun
Antichrist, because he made himself the Universal Bishop, therefore
Antichrist shall be some Universal Bishop, who shall usurp all to himself.
But the contrary is inferred, for the forerunner is not to be the same with him
whom he forerunneth, but far less, though like him in some thing, as
appears in S. John Baptist, and Christ. If therefore the forerunner of
Antichrist be he, who makes himself the universal Bishop, the true
Antichrist himself shall not make himself that, but some other thing greater,
viz. he shall extol himself above all that is called God: or if the true
Antichrist shall only make himself the Universal Bishop, that John of
Constantinople, who did this, was not the forerunner of Antichrist, but the
true Antichrist himself, which notwithstanding neither S. Gregory, nor our
Adversaries say. Wherefore the sense of S. Gregory's words is, that because
Antichrist shall be most proud, and the head of all the proud, so that he will
not suffer any equals, therefore whosoever usurps to himself any thing
otherwise then he ought, and will exceed and surpass others, is his
forerunner: and such were the Bishops of Constantinople, who being in the
beginning but Archbishops, first usurped to themselves to be Patriarchs, and
after the title of Universal.

In like manner when S. Gregory says, an army of Priests is prepared for him,
he means not, that Priests, as Priests, belong to the army of Antichrist, for
so he should have put himself in that army, but that Priests as they are
proud, prepare an army for Antichrist: for he speaks of the same John, and
of Priests like him, who were extolled above the rest unjustly. But hence it
follows not, that Antichrist shall be the Prince of Priests, but that he
shall be the Prince of the Proud.

Out of this sixth head we have a notable argument, that Jerusalem, nor in the
Temple of Solomon; yea it is credible since the year 600. no Bishop of Rome
was ever at Jerusalem.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downam denies that Antichrist shall fit at Hieresalem, and to
Bellarmines first proof out of Apoc. 11. he answers: first, that it may be
doubted, that S. Antichrist his Seat shall be in Jerusalem.
John speaks not of Antichrist, because he seems to speak of the former
beast Apoc. 13. which M. Downam supposes not to be Antichrist. But this is a
very good confirmation, that S. John speaks of Antichrist in this place also,
since it is certain, that he speaks of him in the 13. chapter, and
expresses Apoc. 11. Apoc. 13. See c. 5.. 5. etc.
him by the former beast, and in a manner all Interpreters agree, that
Antichrist is spoken of in both places, and of this latter we have said some
thing before. Secondly, M. Downam confirms this his doubt, that Antichrist is
not spoken of Apoc. 11. because the Papists teach, that Antichrist shall be the
King of the Jews, and counterfaite Christians, therefore by their own
Doctrine, this persecution of the Church by the Gentiles, should not be the
persecution under Antichrist. But the answer is easy, as Ribera, and others
upon this place learnedly declare, for S. John Why those that follow Antichrist
are called Gentiles.
speaks of the Church under the metaphor of the Temple, and consequently
calls her enemies Gentiles, because those that impugned the Temple were such:
and besides M. Downam cannot choose but know that the Papists think, that all
those which follow Antichrist, though they were before Jews, and Christians,
yet then they shall be Gentiles, and Idolaters, since they shall acknowledge no
other God, but Antichrist himself. Besides this doubt, whether S. John
speaks in this place of Antichrist, or no, M. Downam says, that he has
proved two other points more certainly: First, that Henoch and Elias be not
here spoken of, and that See c. ^.
the holy Ghost does not mean Jerusalem. But these proofs of his are all
confuted in their due places, to which I remit the Reader, for now I will only
examine that which he brings in this place, where he is content to suppose,
that S. John speaks both of Antichrist and of Jerusalem, and yet says, M.
Downams iugling.
that it follows not, that whersoeuer the witnesses of Christ are put to
death by him, or by his authority, that there should be his principal seat:
and then he puts Bellarmines argument in form for him, making the
proposition thus, Where the two witnesses are put to death, there is the seat
of Antichrist: to which he also answers with this distinction, that being
generally understood, it is false, if particulerly, then Bellarmines argument
is not a Syllogism, but a Paralogisme, where you see how he tosseth and
turns Bellarmines argument, to avoid the force of it, and yet it will not be:
for first he would make us believe, that Bellarmine spoke of witnesses without
determination of number, then having added the number, yet he says, that it
may be understood generally, which I cannot conceive how he means, except it
be that Bellarmine should speak of any two witnesses whatsoever, which
notwithstanding is very ridiculous, since it is manifest that he speaks of
those two only, which S. John speaks of. But, says M. Downam, if it be
understood particulerly of two determinate and particular witnesses, then
Bellarmines argument is a Paralogisme. And why so I pray you Sir? What deceit
is there here? Yea, were it not great deceit to speak universally, since the
Scripture speaks determinately, and particulerly of only two, which
Bellarmine has also evidently convinced to be Helias and Enoch? and
consequently M. Downam cannot deny, but that it is a perfect Syllogism and an
evident See part. ^. c. 2.. 17.
demonstration, except he can find some fault in the Assumption, for which he
remitteth us to his former proofs, by which he tells us, that he has made
good, that the City which is here spoken of, is Ciuitas Romana, the City and
Empire of Rome; which no doubt will prove a great City indeed, and
comprehends Jerusalem, and many great Cities besides, and consquently
Antichrist may very well sit in Jerusalem, M. Downam foolishly contradicts
himself.
and yet be said in this sense to sit in Ciuitate Romana, in the City and
Empire of Rome, as we see that M. Downam avouches, that our Lord was crucified
in this great City, and yet all men know that he was crucified at Jerusalem,
by which the Reader may take a scantling of M. Downams proofs till we examine
them in particular: for it is manifest, that they will only prove, that
Antichrists seat shall be some where within the Roman Empire, which never any
man doubted of yet: but this is no proof at all, that it shall not be in
Jerusalem, since that also is within M. Downams great City, and so I cannot
see, but that Bellarmine and M. Downam will agree well enough in this point,
since he grants that it is as true, that Antichrist shall sit at Jerusalem,
as that our Savior was crucified at Jerusalem, which all men know to be most
true.

2. To the second place Apoc. 17. M. Downam remitteth See part. 2. cap. 2.. 18.
also refer the Reader for the confutation. Likewise to Bellarmines proof from
his former argument, in which he proved that he has disproued this position in
his former Chapter: Wherefore I must also desire the Reader to take a view of
his disproofes, and my confutatio^ in the precedent argument. Thirdly M. Downam
obiecteth to himself the authority of 4. Fathers, and presently M. Downam
rejects the Fathers.
rejects them, because their assertions cannot be proved out of Scriptures,
and will needs father this his impudency upon Bellarmine himself: but I would
willingly know who shall be judge, whether the Fathers, or M. Downam understand
the Scriptures aright? Bellarmine sometimes when the Fathers are different
among themselves, may very well cleave to those that seem to him to bring
better proofs, for that they say: and likewise when they affirm a thing as
probable, he needs not avouch it for certain. Bu M. Downam has none of them
of his side, and flatly deny^th that which they affirm, without any doubt at
all. And his cauils against the authorities in particular, are impertinent and
ridiculous, for Lactantius plainly speaks of the chiefest kingdom in
Antichrists time, which neither he, nor any other doubts, but that it shall
belong to Antichrist himself, and consequently M. Downam is exceeding
ridiculous, if not worse, to tell us, that Lanctantius speaks not of
Antichrist, M. Downams folly.
since it is manifest that he speaks of his Kingdom. Now as for S. Hierome
and Theodoret, they affirm both the one and the other, viz. that Antichrist
shall sit in the Temple at Jerusalem, and in the Churches of Christ as
Bellarmine proves, and shows that there is no opposition at all betwixt
those two assertions, whatsoever M. Downam says to the contrary, but brings
no proofs at all for that he says: so that he should seem to think his
credit very good, and that he shall be believed upon his bare word, in which he
is mightily deceived. Lastly, in this place I must desire the Reader to note M.
Downams subtilty: for to discredit the Fathers M. Downams iugling.
which Bellarmine alleges, he tells us that they are four, and yet to
make some show of an answer to them, he confounds the sitting of Antichrist
as in his Kingdom, and his sitting in the Temple of God, whereof Bellarmin
speaks in his next proof, and for which he alleges not only four Fathers,
but almost fourteen, for if you add Lactantius and S. Hierome whom he
brings here, they are in all thirteen.

3. In the third place 2 Thessalonians. 2. M. Downam first endeauoreth 2 Thessalonians. 2.
whom he affirms only to sit as it were a God in the minds of men,
prescribing laws to bind the Conscience, and that with guilt of mortal
sin, as we speak. But in this, he is at least deceived, for we Both
spiritual and temporal Superiors may prescribe laws to bind the conscience
under mortal sin.
affirm that not only the Pope, but all other both spiritual and temporal
Superiors may prescribe laws to bind the conscience, and that with guilt of
mortal sin, and this we may gather evidently out of the Scripture: and many
of M. Downams brethren are ashamed to deny it, and by all probability he would
be at least afraid to affirm the contrary, if he were well examined by the
temporal Maiestrate. Secondly, says M. Downam, the Pope and Church of Rome
vaunt that they alone are the Catholic Church, and that all others professing
the name of Christ, which are not subject to the Pope, or acknowledge not
themselves members of the Church of Rome, are heretics or schismatikes. This
is very true indeed, for we think that there is but one faith, and one Church,
and whatsoever One faith and one Church.
Christians are out of it, must needs be schismatikes at least, if not
heretics, and I would have thought that M. Downam would not have been so
absurd, as to deny this common principle agreed of by all, which if he had
granted, he would not much have meruailed, that we hold our selves to be of
the true Church, and consequently that all, that are not united to us, are out
of the Church, for we do no more then all other Churches and Congregations do.
And finally M. Downam must of force put some limits to his Church also, which
if he make so capable, that it may comprehend us also, we shall in some sort be
beholding unto him, though we cannot requite him with the like. But when we
know all the conditions that are required to be of his Church, it will be an
easy matter to infer, that whosoever wants those conditions must of force
be out of it, and so this exposition will agree as well to M. Downams Church,
and any other, as to the Roman. How the third exposition may be applied to the
Pope, M. Downam explicateth not, but only affirms that this is the most true
exposition, and agrees properly to the Pope of Rome. Of the truth we shall see
in due place, but how properly it agrees to the Pope, is not so easy to
conceive. For first all the Churches of those which M. Downam takes to be the
only true, or at least the best Christians, acknowledge not the Pope at all, and
Catholics acknowledge him only to be Christ's Vicegerent upon earth, which is
far from that which Antichrist shall do, when he shall so sit in the Temple of
God, that he shall show himself, as if he were God himself.

Concerning the fourth opinion which pleases not M. Downam, first he denies
it to be the more common opinion, as Bellarmine affirmed it was, and yet whereas
Bellarmin brings an cleauen Authors for his opinion, M. Downam brings but
five for his, four of which affirm also as much as Bellarmine does, and are
by him alleged to that purpose, which M. Downam could not choose but see, and
therefore thought good to add, that the being more common does not prove it to
be the more true, for truth goes not by voices, neither is it See Part. 2.
cap. 4.. 15.
to be weighed by the multitude of suffrages, but by weight of reason. By which
you may imagine what a great deal of reason, and wit M. Downam thinks him
self to have, and how little he attributes to the Fathers. But all this is
but in his own proud and foolish conceit, for all but himself will be easily
persuaded, that there was more wit and true wisdom in the meanest of these
ancient Fathers, then there is in this insolent Minister, though he had many of
his fellow Ministers joined with him. Secondly he denies this exposition to be
more probable because the Temple shall never be reedified, which were his
wonted figure of petitio principij, but that he adds (as has been showed.)
Wherefore I will not censure him any further, till the Reader has seen how
learnedly he shows it, and whether the Fathers, or he have more reason and
probability in this point.

Thirdly he adds that it were not material, though this exposition were more
litterall, unless the litterall were usual. And to show that it is not usual,
he observes, that in all the Epistles, by the Temple of God is meant the
Church, where first the Reader must mark that the word Temple is not used in
any Epistle, but only in this place of the 2. to the Thessalonians, and in the
2. to the Corinthians, and only in 3. Chapters of them both, in the which the
faithful, and their bodies are called the Temple of God, because the Holy
Ghost is present, and Temple what it signifies in the new Testament.
remains with them. But how can this be applied to Antichrist sitting in the
Temple of God, and showing himself as if he were God? Can Antichrist dwell in
the souls and bodies of men, as in his Temple? Or if he could, were this
hidden and spiritual sitting any ostentation, or showing of himself as God?
And yet in this place S. Paul affirms that Antichrist shall do so, for which
no doubt he must sit visibly in a visible Temple, by which most properly is
signified the Temple of Jerusalem, yea when S. Paul wrote, and for many years
after, only that was so called, as Bellarmine proves, and is to be seen in
all the four Evangelists, and the Acts of the Apostles. Wherefore since this
place may, yea indeed must literally be understood of a material Temple,
as well as many other places of the new Testament, it is ridiculous folly in M.
Downam to tell us, that in some few places, the word Temple is to be taken
spiritually also, and contrariwise the word Church materially, for of this we
never made question. Yea but, says M. Downam, to sit in the Temple of God, as
God, is to rule, and reign in the Church of God, as if he were a God upon
earth. By which exposition he makes all Prelates and Magistrates, which rule and
reign in the Church of God, to sit in the Temple of God as God, in the manner
that S. Paul says, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, which is a
fit interpretation for a Puritanicall Minister, who seeks to pervert the
whole order and Hierarchy of Gods Church, and by with drawing the Christian
people from the obedience of their lawful Pastors, prepare the^ to receive
Antichrist himself when he comes, and in the mean time his forerunners the
Heretics, of which because Downam seems to have been a Puritan when he wrote
this.
M. Downam is one himself, no marvel though he pleads so hard for himself,
his fellows, and Master: but if he had meant to deal sincerly he should have
proved his exposition out of the Fathers, or answered the authority of those
which Bellarm. alleges for himself, neither of which he once attempteth,
but yet remitteth us to another place, See part. ^:. 13. 14. 15.
where God willing we will examine all that he obiecteth.

4. M. Downam having in this sort answered to Bellarmines proofs out of the
Scripture, returns to his argument ad hominem, where first he takes great
exception at Bellarmine for not putting the word (true) in the premises, and
yet expressing it in the conclusion, which is a mere cavil, for Bellarmine
would not add any word in the premises, which he found not in Melancthon,
Calvin, and Illyricus, whose opinion he alleged. In the conclusion which was
his own, he might very well express that which was necessarily to be
understood, as Bellarmin explicateth out of Calvin himself, for M. Downams
devise, that the Church of Christ The Church comprehends not all that profess
the name of Christ.
may be taken for the company of Christians, that is of those, that profess
the name of Christ, is too ridiculous, since by this means he includes all
heretics whatsouer, who are indeed the Synagogue of the Devil, and so
confounds the Church of God, and the Sinagogue of the Devil; and whereas S.
Paul says, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, he means
according to M. Downams interpretation the temple of the Devil. All which is
so obsurd, that the authors with whom Bellarmine disputes, would have been
ashamed of so ridiculous an assertion, and therefore they sought other cuasions,
as we shall see forthwith; but now let us go on with the other illation, that
the Protestants are out of the true Church: for how the Temple of Jerusalem is
by S. Paul called the Temple of God, we shall see afterward in the discussion
of Bellarmines answers to the arguments of the Protestants.

5. Wherefore M. Downam to save himself, and his brethren from being out of the
true Church of Christ, is driven to this exigent, to deny that there is any one
visible Catholic Church, but only one invisible Catholic Church, and many
particular visible Churches, which is a most extrauagant and absurd paradox,
contrary both to Scriptures, Fathers, and Counsels, as Bellarmine sufficiently
proves lib. 4. de There is one visible Catholic Church.
Ecclesia militant. cap. 10. But now I will only oppose to this insolent
madness, the authority of the Creed generally received of all, where the Church
is called One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic: and who sees not, that all
which belong truly to Christ, must agree in one faith, and not to be divided by
schisms and heresies, which in M. Downams conceit can only happen in
particular Churches, or at least in them only be acknowledged and rooted out?
So that if any particular Church will wholly fall to either, or rather if the
chief head and pastor of any such Church shall become either schismatic or
heretical, there is not means left for his reduction, since that he is not
bound to be at unity with other particular Churches, nor to subject himself to
any visible Catholic Church, or to any visible head thereof: which is as much
in effect, as to say, that Christ has left no means upon earth to decide
controversies concerning Faith, or to take away schisms and divisions, but
that every particular Church, or Pastor, yea indeed every particular man may
freely follow his own fancies without contradiction, or controlement of any,
so long as he can pretend any text of Scripture (though never so much wrested
and falsely understood) for that, which he is resolved to hold. And is it
meruarle, that heresies and schisms be so rife in our days since these absurd
paradoxes are so current? But what should heretics and schismatikes do, but
defend schisms and divisions: and im^ugne unity and concord, which if they
would admit, they must of force return to the Catholic Church, whereit is
only to be found? Since therefore the visible Church of Christ is one, and by
the adversaries confession it is the Roman, it follows manifestly that they
themselves are out of Christ's Church, since that they The Protestants are out
of the Church of Christ.
are out of the Roman. For the other cavil which M. Downam makes, that the
Roman Church is a particular Church, is not worth the answering, for every
child can tell him that the Roman Church is taken for all those which agree in
faith, and are united with the Bishop of Rome, who is not only Bishop of that
particular City, but also the head and Pastor of the whole Church, which of
him, her Head, is called the Roman Church, which continues the true Church of
Christ, as Bellarmine proves, and Melancthon, Calvin, and Illyricus dare not
deny, howsoever M. Downam is so impudent in his railing, consorting himself
with a vain Poet, whose meaning notwithstanding was far better then M.
Petrarcha
Downams is.

6. M. Downam having thus shufled up the matter Calvin, that the Church of Rome
under the Pope may be called the Church of God, in respect both of some notes
and signs of a visible Church, as the administration of the Sacrament of
Baptism, and the profession of the Name of Christ, as also of some relics
and remainder, as it were the gleanings of the invisible Church, for he
doubts not, but that, in the corruptest times of Popery, the Lord has
reserved some who have not received the mark of the beast. And for explication
he compares the Church of Rome to the state of Israel under Jeroboam and
Achab, because they then retained the Sacrament of Circumcision, and professed
Iehoua to be their God, although they worshipped him Idolatrously. And even
under Achab, the Lord had reserved 7000. who never bowed their knee to Baal. In
which comparison M. Downam insisteth wholly Downam his petitio principij.
upon his wonted figure of Petitio principij, and consequently, all that he
says is but mere railing. If he would have said any thing to the purpose, he
should have showed two points in that example: the first that the visible
Church among the Jews was altogether ceased, by that Idolatry of Israel. The
second, that Israel departed not from the Religion which was generally houlden
before, but that the ancient Religion was by little and little changed to
Idolatry, and that those which came after, separated themselves from the
former, and yet were the true Church. With these two points M. Downam might
have made some comparison, betwixt the people of Israel, and the Church of
Rome. But since The Protestants like to Israel and the Catholics to Judah.
neither of these are so, but the quite contrary, it will fall to M. Downam and
his fellows share to be like the people of Israel, since they have left the
visible Church, of which they once were, as the other did, and consequently the
Church of Rome is like to the people of Judah, and the rest which joined with
them, since it continues in the ancient faith generally holden throughout
Christendom, before there were any Protestants in the World. Neither do we
grant, that the Protestants have any part of Christ's Church, no more then the
Israelites had, since they have not any jot of true faith, howsoever they make
profession of some articles: for the reason why they hold them, is not the
authority of God proposed by the Scriptures, or the Church, but only their own
fancies, because so it seemed necessary for their reputation and credit, or
some other human and private respect, how much soever they pretend to be only
moved by Scripture, for of this they admit no more The Protestants have no
probable rule of faith, nor any true faith at al.
then they please, and for the interpretation, they have no other rule, then
their own pruate spirit, or fancy, which is far of from being any probable
rule of truth, and much less so certain as is necessary for the certainty of
divine and supernatural faith to be built upon. And this is the true reason why
the Church of God is but one, because there is but one rule of faith: from
which whosoever falls, cannot have any true faith at all, nor belong to the
true Church of God. The other comparison which M. Downam uses is much les to
the purpose, for it is not the Church, but the Bishop of Sardis (as he himself
says, that it is agreed by In his Sermon at La^beth page 2. Apoc. ^ 1.
Interpreters both new and old) who had a name, that he lived, but indeed was
dead, neither was this death for want of faith, but of charity and good works,
as is manifest, and though it were otherwise, yet M. Downam could prove nothing
by this comparison, except we would believe his bare word, that the Church of
Rome were in this case, which is our chief question, and M. Downams wonted
figure, to take it as granted. Wherefore since he can argue no better, let us
see how he can answer.

7. To Bellarmines first reply upon Caluins devise, that the Roman Church is
not the true Church, but that there VIII.
remain in it only the ruins and relics of a true Church, M. Downam
grants, that all visible Churches may fail, and fall away, but not the
invisible Church of Christ. which he calls the Catholic Church, nor any one
sound Christian, that is of this invisible Church. In which answer he
grants Bellarmine as much as he went about to prove, that the gates of hell
in his opinion have prevailed against Christ's visible Church, so that in a
whole thousand years Christ had not so much as one constant professor of his
truth, and though I might easily prove, that Christ spoke of his visible
Church, and that it The visible Church is to endure to the end of the world.
was to endure until the worlds end, yet now I will not trouble my Reader with
so needles a digression, since the matter is so plain and evident in it self,
that me thinks any man which makes account of Christ his passion and glory, or
of his desire to save souls, and to provide for their conversion and faith,
should stop his ears not to hear so great a blasphemy uttered, as M. Downam
is not ashamed to affirm: yet if any man have any doubt, or desire to be more
fully satisfied in this point, let him read Bellarmine him self lib. 3. de
Ecclesia militant. cap. 12. and 13.

To Bellarmines second reply M. Downam answers, that it proves nothing,
except he suppose that the Church of Rome is the only true Church: But he
should have answered it in form, and admitted only that which Calvin
avouches, that the Papists hold the ruins of the Church, and the foundations,
yea the buildings themselves half thrown down, for out of this only
Bellarmine argues and shows, that the Protestants can neither have the whole
and entire church, since in their opinion it is fallen, nor the part which
remains of it, since they grant The Protestants cannot have the Church of
Christ, but only some new building of their own.
it to be among the Papists, to which dele^ma M. Downa^ answers not a word,
but only braggeth, that the Church of Rome may fall, and yet the Catholic
Church of God may stand, yea shall stand etc. But he forgets himself, and
marketh not what his Master Calvin has granted, that not only the Church of
Rome, but even the very Church of Christ is fallen, and that the Papists have
as much as is left of it, and co^seque^tly the Protestants can only have some
new heretical building of their own, though M. Downam be never so loath to
acknowledge it. Neither will the example of the Church of Judah under Josias
serve his turn: for that was only a reformation of manners, and a destruction
of Idolatry without any departing from the ancient Church of God, in which
remained the true succession of Priests, and Gods true religion, after a
visible manner, no otherwise then if it should please his Majesty to put down
heresy, and advance Catholic Religion in his Kingdom, which were only to
embrace the true Church of Christ, and not to erect any new building as the
Protestants have done, as Bellarmine conuinceth.

8. M. Downam having thus impugned Bellarmines arguments, Bellarmine gave three
solutions to the first, See part. 2. cap. 2.
M. Downam passes two of them over in silence, telling us that he has taken
the^ away in another place, which how true it is the Reader shall be judge when
we come to that encounter. Now let us see how he refuteth the second solution
which Bellarmine gives, that the harlot of which S. John speaks, is Rome
Ethnic reigning, worshipping Idols, Rome Christian, the Apoc. 17.
contrary of which M. Downam never goes about to prove with any new argument,
as he should have done, it being his turn now to argue, but only contenteth
himself to answer Bellarmines proof, which he does also by halfes, for
Bellarmine proves his exposition evidently by the authority of Tertullian and
S. Hierome, and shows the impudency S. John speaks of Rome Christian. To
all which M. Downam gives him not a word, but is very well content to be thus
beaten, so that it may not be spoken of: but to the other proof, he thinks
himself able to say something, and therefore answers two ways, 1. that
though Popish Rome had not dominion over the Kings of the earth, and were not
Jesus, yet we might understand the Apostle thus, that, that City, which then
had dominion over the Kings of the earth, and then persecuted the Saints, is
called Babylon, because it was to be the seat, or sea of Antichrist. So that
as you see M. Downam will have Rome to be called Babylon, because it was to be
the seat or sea of Antichrist, which he supposes as manifest, though
Bellarmine in this third solution, and before also in one of his arguments
(both which M. Downam passes over in silence) shows manifestly, that
Antichrist shall hate this Babylon, and not make it the seat of his kingdom.
So that this first solution is nothing but M. Downams wonted figure of Petitio
principij, not only without any proof, as commonly he uses it, but against
evident proof, which also he is forced to do now and then. His second solution
is, that these notes agree also to Popish Rome, both in respect of dominion,
usurped more insolently over the Kings of the earth by the Pope, then by any
Emperor, and in regard of most cruel persecution of the Saints of Christ. To
which impudent assertion of his, I see not what The Pope has only a spiritual
power over Princes.
other answer can be given, but to refer the matter to the Readers judgment,
who will easily perceive, that the Pope has now only a spiritual power over
Kings, as well as over other Christians for the good of their souls, without
exacting or usurping any temporal dominion over their persons or estates, as
the old Roman Emperors did, to whom they were Tributary, if not altogether
subject: and whatsoever the Pope does in temporal affairs, it proceeds from
his spiritual authority, to which no doubt temporal things do so far
belong, as they may hinder or help the good of souls, and no further, as is
largely explicated by Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Catholic Deuines. And as
for M. Downams Saints which the Pope does persecute, I am content to refer
the decision of this question, whether Christian Rome may be called Babylon or
no, till he has showed us an authentical canonization of these his Saints,
and in the mean time it shall be also as certane, that Ethnic Rome is meant
by Babylon, as that those blessed Martyrs which died in those days, were truly
the Martyrs of Christ and glorious Saints.

9. Thus much M. Downam thought sufficient to reply Bellarmines answers of
their first argument, and coming to the second, where they contend, that
Antichrist shall sit in the Church of Christ, because S. Paul says: that he
shall sit in the temple of God, he is content to let pass Bellarmines solution
to the first proof, that the Apostle understood the Church of Christ by the
Temple of God which was, because when the Apostle wrote, there was no other
Temple of God, but the Church of Christ, since that the Temple of the Jews was
ceased to be a Temple, when the Jewish Sacrifice and Priesthood ceased. To
which Bellarmine answered that though it had ceased to be the Jewish Temple,
yet it ceased not forth with to be the Temple of God, but belonged to the
Christians so long as it remained, as he proves Downam omitteth Bellarmin his
answer.
out of the Scriptures. To which as I said, M. Downam has not one word, for
which cause I might also have passed it over in silence, but that I promised a
little before to show in this place, how the Temple of Jerusalem is by S. Paul
called the Temple of God, which as you see is no hard matter to do, since that
he speaks of it, as it was in his time, when it was most truly the Temple of
God, and besides since Antichrist shall build it again for the Jews, and
pretend not to withdraw them from the true God, but to profess himself to come
from him, at least before he discovers himself further, the temple erected
by him may be called the Temple of God, though when he shall sit in it, and
show himself as God, he will profess himself to be the true God, and so
either avouch that he is the God of the Jews, in whose Temple he shall sit, or
else extol himself above him, for so much the words of S. Paul do import, as
we shall see afterward.

Concerning the place of Daniel, M Downam has found Bellarmines answers and to
the first he urges our Translation, vsque ad consummationem and finem
perseuerabit desolatio, and S. Hierome who says, Dan. 9.
vsque ad finem mundi, and others whom he names not (because as it seems
they were not worth the naming) vsque The temple of Jerusalem shall be built
again in the end of the world.
ad consummationem, eamque praecisam, and then he alleges three places of
Scripture, out of which he infers that the word (until) signifies rather a
perpetuity, then cessation before the time, which seems thereby to be limited.
But first we must charge M. Downam with a manifest falsification of Bellarmines
words, for he alleges them in a different letter thus: Danyel would say,
that the Temple should not be reedified until a little before the end of the
world: whereas Bellarmines words are these, Adillud ex Daniele respondeo, vel
Daniclem voluisse dicere, non esse reedificandum Te^plum, Downam corrupts
Bellarmines words.
nisi in fine mundi. To that of Daniel I answer, that either Daniel would say,
that the Temple is not to built again but in the end of the world: and is not
this a great shame for a Doctor of Divinity, to be taken in so gross an
absurdity, that either he must confess that he cannot conster two words of
latin, or else that he is a wilful falsifier? Well now that we have Bellarmines
true words, let M. Downam urge our text, and S. Hierome, and see if he can pick
any more out of them, then that the Temple is not to be built again before the
end of the world, which Bellarmine affirms also, and only adds, that it may
be Daniel meant, that it was to be built in the end of the world, but not
before. But against this M. Downam urges the authority of others, who add the
word pracisam, by which we might conjecture that they were some Precisians, but
whatsoever they be, if by the precise consummation, they mean the indivisible
instant, which the Philosophers call vltimum quod non, they show themselves to
be more precise then wise, for the Scripture is not to be interpreted so
precisely, or metaphysically, but after the manner of common and ordinary
speech, as when we say, such a man made not his will till his death, we mean
that he made it then etc. And as for the three authorities of Scripture, it
were no hard matter to find 300. for M. Downams three, where it is otherwise
taken, but now one or two shall suffice, as Genesis 49. when Jacob foretold that
the Scepter should not be taken from Judah, until the coming of Genesis 46. 2.
Reg. 1. The word Until signifies neither continuance nor cessation, but is
indifferent to both.
the Messiah, the sense is plain, that it was to be taken from them then, yea
a little before also, if M. Downam will needs urge that point. Likewise 2.
Reg. 1. where David and those which were with him, are said to have mourned for
Saul and Ionathas etc. vsque ad vesperam, until the evening. I hope M. Downam
will give us leave to think that they left mourning then, wherefore it is a
fond illation of M. Downam to infer a perpetuity out of that word (until)
for it imports no such matter, but only signifies what is done till then:
but whether it continued at that time, or after that time, or no, must be
gathered by other conjectures or proofs: As to exemplify in one of M. Downams
authorities, there was never any so foolish yet, as to bring that place of
Matthew. 1. to prove our Blessed Ladies perpetual Virginity, but S. Hieroms and
other Fathers have been enforced to answer it, and to show that the word
(until) she weth only what has been done, or not done until then, but leaves
the rest of the time altogether uncertain, whether things continued in the
same state still, or no.

To Bellarmines second answer, M. Downam having corrupted his words, as the
Reader may see (if he please) Primitive Church believed that the Temple should
never be built again, and held this assertion of the Papists as a Jewish
fable. But he brings not any one authority to prove Downam belyeth the
Primitive Church against the testimony of the Fathers.
this withal, and therefore we must needs tell him that we do not believe him,
for if we did, we should do the Fathers great injury, which Bellarmine
alleges, to reject their authority without any ground, and to think that M.
Downam knew the belief of the Primitive Church better then all they who lived
so long before him. For the other part of his answer we will not contend, but
that our Savior might mean the Army of the Romans by the Abomination of
Desolation, but that he meant only that, M. Downam neither has proved The
temple of Jerusalem shall always be profane though it be built again.
nor ever will be able to prove, and therefore Bellarmines solution is very
good, that Daniel when he affirms, that the desolation shall persevere to the
consummation and end, might very well mean, that though the Temple were built
again in the end of the world, yet it should always be profaned after the
overthrow made by Titus, because the chiefest profanation and abomination of
desolation shall be in Antichrists time.

At Bellarmines third solution M. Downam is much offended, and tells us, that
in this place Daniel speaks not a word of Antichrist, nor yet of Antiochus
his Type. And for Antiochus we believe him, neither did Bellarmine ever dream
of any such matter: of Antichrist the matter is not clear, though now it
skilleth not, whether he did or no, for Bellarmine is only to show that
Antichrist sitting in the Temple of Jerusalem, is not against this place of
Daniel, and not to prove out of this place that he shall sit there. Wherefore
let M. Downam begin his reply anew, and so he does, arguing that it is not
probable that Antichrist being so great a Monarch will suffer the temple which
he chooses for his chief seat to be unbuilt, or that he will sit in a temple
without a roose or unfinished. To which it is easy to answer, that this is not
probable indeed, if he may have time enough, and there fall no other
hinderance. But now M. Downam may remember, that his reign is to endure in
that greatness, but only three years and a half, which is very little for the
finishing of so sumptuous a building, and yet we think he may have the roof
up also at least in some part, in which he shall sit, till he may get the rest
finished, as he will hope he shall, but yet he shall be hindered either The
temple of Jerusalem shall not be finished by Antichrist. Socrat. l. 3. cap. 20.
Theodoret. l. 3. c. 20. Sozom. l. 5. cap. vlt. Luc. 21.
by the shortness of time, or by some accidents, not unlike to those that fell
out in Iulians time, though it be very likely, that God will permit much more in
Antichrists days without working miracles, especially since it is certain,
that the Temple was not to be built again until the end of the world, as
Daniel foretold. Which M. Downam will needs have confirmed by that place of
Luc. 21. where our Savior foretells, that Jerusalem should be trodden under
the foot of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Which
words if they might have that sense, were a good explication of that which
Daniel called the consummation and end, for it is certain that the times of
the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, before the end of the world be fully
accomplished.

10. To Bellarmines answer to the Fathers, M. Downam replieth not a word, and
yet it contained matter of no small Bellarmine affirms and proves, that those
Antichrist shall sit in material Churches and not in the Church of Christ as a
Bishop.
Fathers which they alleadg, are no way against us, but manifestly against
them, since they speak of material Churches, in which Antichrist will
command himself to be placed and worshipped for God, and not that he shall
sit in the Church of Christ as a Bishop, which is only the fond conceit of M.
Downam, and his like, without any authority either of Scriptures, or Fathers,
or show of reason. Neither must the reader think, that M. Downam omitted this
reply because he makes little account of the Fathers when they seem to be on
his side, for of this we shall see the contrary in that he labors so
earnestly to make S. Gregory seem to say something in his favor. For to
Bellarmines answer concerning his authority he replieth, that the pride and
ambition of John of Constantinople, though very great and Antichristian, was
not to be compared with the incredible insolency and pride of the Antichrist of
Rome, because John of Constantinople challenged not that height of authority
and The Pope has not so much sovereignty as John of Constantinople challe^ged.
See part. ^. cap. 1.
sovereignty which Popes since have usurped, not only over Bishops and
Ecclesiastical persons, but also over the Kings and Monarchs of the Earth.
Where (to omit that Bibliander made his illation against the Pope precisely,
because he makes himself the universal Bishop, and sits in the Church as
head of all, and consequently all other charges are from the purpose) you see
the Pope charged first, with taking more sovereignty upon him, then John of
Constantinople did, which is a loud lie by M. Downams leave: for John of
Constantinople would have been the Universal Bishop in that sense, that there
should be no other properly Bishops besides himself, but al others should be
his Vicars and Vicegerents, which was more then ever the Pope challenged or
pretended. The second charge seems to be, that John of Constantinople sought
only a superiority over all Bishops, but the Pope has usurped the same over
all Kings and Monarchs also: But this is so ridiculous that M. Downam may well
be ashamed thereof, for what doubt can there be, but only in a flattering
parasites conceit, that he who has superiority over all Bishops, must needs
also have it over all Christian Kings and Monarchs, since that these are also
subject in spiritual causes to their particular Bishops and Pastors. But M.
Downam knew well enough, where he wrote this, in which respect he doubted not
that it would be pleasing, and then it made no matter Downam seems to have
been a Puritan when he wrote this. See part. 2. cap. 5.
for the truth, though it went against his own conscience, for he seems by
his writing to be of the Puritanicall sect, and consequently to think himself
a better man by his Ministry, then ever a King in the world; howsoever he is
content rather to dissemble and flatter, then to put his bennefice in icopardy.
Now for his bragges, that he has showed else where, that in some things the
Pope matcheth himself with Christ, in somethings he aduanceth himself above
him, and above all that is called God. I must desire the Reader to have
patience till we come to that place, and in the mean time to look wishly upon
M. Downams forehead, whether it be made of brass or no, for surely it is
exceeding hard. But now I would ask M. Downam in good earnest, why he left out
the chiefest part of Bellarmines answer, for this other was but to show that
the objection proved as much against the Protestants as for them, which is not
to solue an argument, but to make another. Wherefore Bellarmine answers
directly, that the sense of S. Gregory's words is, that because Antichrist
shall be most proud, and the head of all the proud, so that he will not suffer
any equals, therefore whosoever usurps to himself any thing otherwise then
he ought, Whosoever usurps more dignity the^ is due to him is Antichrist his
foreru^ner.
and will exceed and surpass others, is his forerunner: and such were the
Bishops of Constantinople, who being in the beginning but Archbishops, first
usurped to be Patriarchs, and after the title of Universal. How chance M.
Downam replieth not against this? nor does so much as go about to show, that
the Pope usurps any more then he ought according to his place and dignity?
which is to be Christ's Vicegerent in spiritual causes, as the Emperors and
temporal Princes are in temporal.

To the other part of Bellarmines answer, M. Downam Shameless, and yet
ridiculous. Does it not follow, that if he be the Prince of priests, as they
are proud, that he is the Prince of proud Priests, such as the whole Hierarchy
of Rome consists of? Where first I desire the Reader to consider whether M.
Downam be not exceeding shameless, to leave out that clause of Bellarmines
Downam corrupts Bellarmines words.
answer which is most to the purpose, which is his proof, that S. Gregory
means not that Priests as Priests, belong to the army of Antichrist, in these
words, for so he should have put himself in that army. Secondly, I must crave
the like judgment of his ridiculous sophistry, for Bellarmine answers to
Biblianders argument, who proves that Antichrist shall be the head of Priests,
because S. Gregory Antichrist the head of all the proud.
affirms that his army shall be Priests. That S. Gregory means not Priests,
as they are Priests, but as they are proud, and consequently it follows not,
that Antichrist shall be the head of Priests (is they be not proud) but of the
proud (whether they be Priests or others) M. Downam replieth that he shall be
the prince of proud Priests. Can there be any thing more ridiculous then this,
to infer the same which his Adversary grants? Yea but he adds, such as the
whole hierarchy of Rome consists of. This is the question, and this M. Downam
after his wonted manner would have granted, Downam his petitio principij.
which if it may not be, he has no more to say, but will put up his pipes and
make an end, as he does here, but yet with a crake, for otherwise he were no
Minister.

THE FOVRTENTH CHAPTER. Of Antichrists Doctrine.
OF Antichrists Doctrine (says Bellarmine) Joan. 2. Who is a liar, but he
that denies Jesus to be Christ? And this is Antichrist, who denteth the Father
and the Soane? Afterward when he has persuaded that our Savior is not the
true Christ, then he will affirm, that he himself is the true Christ,
promised in the Law, and the Prophets. Joan. 5. If any come in his own name*
him you will receive, viz. for the Messiah. Thirdly he will affi^me that he is
God, and will be worshipped for God. 2 Thessalonians. 2. so that he sit in the Temple
of God, showing himself as though he were God. Lastly he will not only say
that he is God, but also that he is the only God, and he will impugn all other
Gods, that is, as well the true God, as also the false Gods, and all Idols, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Who extelleth himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped as God. And Dan. 11. And he will not repute the God of his Fathers,
nor care for any of the Gods, because he will rise against all.

That all these things are in some sort true, and belong

But our Adversaries interpret all these things far Caluinus lib. 4. cap.
7.. 25. We gather (says he) that the Tyranny of Antichrist is such, that it
abolisheth not the name of Christ, or of the Church, but rather abuses it
under the color and pretext of Christ, and lies lurking under the title of
the Church, as under a vizard. Magdeburgenses Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. col. 435. So
that (say they) the Kingdom of Antichrist consists in doctrine which
professes Christ, but yet he denies his Merit and Office. And after: John
(say they) shows that Antichrist shall deny, that Christ is come in flesh;
that is, that Christ has entirely redeemed and saved us in his flesh, but that
our good works do also help us something to salvation. Secondly they say that
Antichrist shall not make himself Christ or God in word, but in work, because
he shall occupy the place of Christ, and God in the Church, making himself the
head of all the faithful, which belongs only to Christ. So the
Magdeburgenses loc. cit. He shall show himself (say they) for God, as that he
is Christ's vicar, and the head of the Church, and can fasten and loose the
articles of Faith.

Finally, they say that Antichrist shall not reject Idols, Daniel, who cap. 11.
after that he had said, that Antichrist should rise against all the Gods,
adds: But he shall reverence the God Maozim in his place, and he shall
worship the God whom their Fathers knew not, with gold and silver, and
precious stones etc. And by Maozim the heretics understand the ornaments of
the Churches, the Masses, Images, Relics, and other like. So Illyricus in
lib. cont. Primat. and all the rest.

And that which the Apostle says 2 Thessalonians. 2. that Antichrist Illyricus in
catalog. testium page 3. proves this (for I have not hitherto seen how they
prove the rest) because Christ Matthew. 24. declared, that it is nothing else to
show himself to be God, yea to extol himself above God and his worship, then
to come in the name of Christ: out of which it follows, that the Pope who
challenges himself to be Christ's Vicar, is most truly Antichrist. Likewise
Christ subjected himself to the Scripture saying, that he did and suffered
those things, which he did and suffered, that the Scripture might be
fullfilled: but the Pope says, that he can dispense against an Apostle or
Evangelist, and make those things which seem right to be wicked etc. This is
the sum of the chiefest part of our Adversaries doctrine of Antichrist, which
is wholly grounded upon only Scripture, falsely explicated by new glosses. In
sign whereof they allege not so much as one Interpreter or Doctor for
themselves.

Wherefore let us begin with the first, that Antichrist cap. 12. For if
Antichrist shall be by nation and religion ^ Jew, and received by the Jews for
their Messiah (as we have showed) certainly he shall not preach our Christ, but
shall openly impugn him, for otherwise the Jews should receive our Christ by
Antichrist, which is most absurd. Besides, since there cannot be two Christ's,
how can Antichrist obtrude himself for Christ to the Jews, unless he first
teach, that our Christ which went before, was not the true Christ?

Secondly, that it is proved out of that 1. John 2. Who is a liar, but he that
denies Jesus to be Christ? And this is Antichrist;

Besides, out of the Fathers, S. Hilaryl. 6. de Trinit. says that the devil
by the Arians endeauored to persuade men, S. Hippolyt. mart. orat. de consum.
mundi, says, that Antichrists Character shall be that men shall be compelled
to say: I deny Baptism, I deny the sign of the Cross, and the like. S.
August. lib. 20. Ciuit. Dei cap. 8. inquireth, whether in the time of
Antichrists persecution it be credible that any shall be baptized? and a^
length he answers: Truly (quoth he) both the parents shall be so courageous
for the baptizing of their children, and likewise those who shall then first
believe in Christ, that they will overcome the strong man, even unbound. Where
S. Augustine presupposed that Antichrist will not permit them to be baptized:
and yet that some godly parents will rather suffer any thing, then that their
children should not be baptized.

S Hierome in cap. 11. Dan. Antichrist (says he) is to rise of a mean nation
that is of the people of the Jews* and he shall be so vile and contemptible,
that Kingly honor shall not be given unto him, and by subtilties and deceit
he shall come to be a Prince, and this he shall do, because he shall frame
himself to be captain of the League, that is, of the Law and Testament of
God. Where S. Hierome teaches that Antichrist shall obtain the Kingdom among
the Jews, because he shall show himself zealous for the Jewish Law. Sedulius
in 2 Thessalonians. 2. says, that Antichrist shall restore all the Jewish Ceremonies,
that he may dissolve the Gospel of Christ. S. Gregory l. 11. ep. 3. Because
Christ (says he) shall compel the people to Iudaize, that he may recall the
right of the outward Law, and subdue to himself the perfidiousnesse of the
Jews, he will have the Sabbath observed.

Finally in the time of Antichrist by reason of the vehemence c. 7. By which it
is evident, that Antichrist will not deprave the Doctrine of Christ under the
name of Christianisme, as the heretics will, but that he will most openly
impugn the name and Sacraments of Christ, and bring in the Jewish ceremonies:
which since the Pope does not, it is evident that he is not Antichrist.

Now that Antichrist will plainly, and by name call John 5. If another come in
his own name, him you will receive. Where our Lord seems of purpose to have
added, in his own name, foreseeing that the Lutherans and Caluinists would
say, that Antichrist shall not come in his own name, but in the name of our
Christ, as his Vicar.

Besides, the Fathers in many places teach this: S. Iren. lib. 5. He will
endeavor (says he) to show himself Christ. S. Ambrose in cap. 21. Luc. He
will argue out of the Scriptures (says he) that he is Christ. Theodoret in 2 Thessalonians. 2. He will name himself Christ. S. Cyril cateches. 15. He will induce
(says he) a certain man falsely calling himself Christ: and by this
appellation deceauing the Jews, who expect him to come. Briefly, all the
Fathers as we have showed before, do say, that Antichrist shall be received of
the Jews for the Messiah: Wherefore he shall openly and by name make self the
Messiah, that is Christ. Wherefore the Pope, who does not this (as is known)
is not Antichrist. For in that he calls himself the Vicar of Christ, he
affirms himself not to be Christ, but his servant.

And that Antichrist shall openly name himself God, These. 2. So that he
sits in the Temple, showing as though he were God. Where S. Paul does not
only say, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple, for we also sit in Temples,
and yet are not Antichrists, but also he explicateth the manner in which he
shall sit, viz. that he shall fit as God, to whom alone properly a Temple is
erected. And this is more plain in the Greek text, for it is not (...),
tamquam Deus, but (...), that is, ostendens quod sit Deus, showing that he is
God. And so did all the ancient Fathers understand this place.

S. Irenaeus lib. 5. Being an Apostatae and Thief, he will be adored as God.
S. Chrysostom in hunc locum: He will command himself to be adored for God,
and placed in the Temple. And Homil. 40. in loan. expounding this place: He
will profess himself the God of all. And after: He will glory that he is the
greatest of Gods. S. Ambrose in 2 Thessalonians. 2. He will affirm himself to be God
himself, not the Son of God. In like sort do all expound it. By which we
understand, that the Pope who acknowledges himself to be the Servant of God,
and not God, is not Antichrist.

Finally, that Antichrist will not suffer any God, neither true nor false, nor
any Idols, it is proved first by those S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Who is extolled
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; where it is to be noted,
that in greek, for that is worshipped, it is (...), which the Magdeburgenses
will have to signify worship, that is, the act of worshipping, not that which
is worshipped, that from thence they may prove, that the Apostle means not
that Antichrist will not adore Idols, but that he will deprave the worship of
the true God, mayming the Sacraments, or adding unto them diverse Ceremonies.
But certainly (...) signifies most properly not the act, but the object, that
is, that which is worshipped, as the Altar, Temple, Idol etc. For the worship
is called (...), or (...), not (...). Wherefore the same S. Paul. Act. 17. (...)
etc. Praeteriens and considerans Simulachra vestra, inneni Aram etc. passing by
and considering your Idols, I found an Altar etc. Where S. Paul most manifestly
by (...), understands the things themselves which are worshipped, as the
Temples, Altars, Idols etc. And Sapient. 15. we read: (...): Melior est homo
idolis quae ipse secit: nam ipse vixit aliquando, illa autem numquam. Man is
better then the Idols which he has made: for he lived sometime, but they
never: which place I know not whether any dare so pervert, that he will deny by
the word (...), the idols or figures themselves, which are made with men's
hands, to be signified, and which seem to have life, and yet live not.

Wherefore all the Grecians, and Erasmus also himself Numen, Sovereignty, or
divine power and Majesty. Secondly the words of Daniel cap. 11. are most
manifest: Neither will he care for any of the Gods, but will rise against all.
Upon which place S. Hierome writing, says: that they cannot be understood of
Antiochus, as Porphiry would have the^, because it is manifest that Antiochus
adored the Gods of the Greeks, but they are to be understood of Antichrist,
who will worship no God.

Lastly, this is the consent of the ancient Fathers. S. Irenaeus lib. 5. He
shall lay aside Idols, to persuade that he is God, but he shall extol himself
the only Idol. S. Hippolyt. Sermon. de consumm^t. Antichrist will not admit
Idolatry. S. Cyril catech. 15. Antichrist will hate Idols. S. Chrysostom. upon
this place: He is extolled above all that is called God, or Majesty, for he
will not lead to Idolatry. The same teach upon this place Theophilact,
Oecumenius. Theodoretus, who also note very well, that the Devil does and will
wonderfully play with the children of perdition, for in old time he persuaded,
that there were many false Gods, and that diverse Idols were to be worshipped,
and by that means gained many: But in the time of Antichrist, because he shall
see, that by the Doctrine of Christ, Idols are cast in a manner out of the
world, and the multitude of false Gods, he will also accuse Idols, and the
multitudes of them, and by that means will deceive more yet. By which it
appears, that the Pope who in the opinion of the Catholics acknowledges God
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and in the opinion of Heretics
adoreth many Idols, can by no means be said to be Antichrist.

But say they, Daniel cap. 11. affirms that the God Maozim shall be
worshipped by Antichrist with gold and silver, and preti^^^ stones; it is
answered first by the God Marzint, which is interpreted of strengths, that is
most strong, Antichrist himself may be understood, for the word venerabitur,
will worship, is not in the hebrew jista^a^ch, adorabit, will adore, but
jecabbed, glorificabit, will glorify, as Psalm. 90. God says, Eripiam cum and
glorificabo cum, I will deliver him, and glorify him, in hebrew ^^abbedeh^:
and certainly God does not glorify men, by subiecting himself unto them, but
by exalting them. So therefore shall Antichrist glorify himself, when he shall
cause himself to be adored of all, for which cause the 70. translated it (...),
and in this sort does Theodoret expound it: He calls himself the strong and
mighty God, for this does Maozim signify, for he did put (in this place) for
himself. For he will erect Temples to himself, and will adorn them with
gold, silver, and precious stones. Thus Theodoret.

Secondly, it may be said, which I like better, that Antichrist shall be a
Sorcerer, and after the manner of other Maozim: yea I do not think that Maozim
is the name of a God, but of a ce^aine most fortified and secret place, in
which shall be the chiefest treasures of Antichrist, and in which, as we said,
he shall adore the Devil, for it follows in Daniel: And he shall cause Maozim
to be sortified with a stong God, whom he has known. And truly Maoz
signifies both strength, and a castle. In this sort does Lyranus expound it,
and that we must necessarily say, that Antichrist is himself the God Maozim,
or if it be any other, that he is not to be adored by Antichrist, but in a most
hidden place, and secretly from the knowledge of all, the very words of Daniel
compel us, which otherwise should be contrary to themselves: For if he shall
care for none of the Gods, how shall he openly worship Idols?

Now the two arguments of Illyricus are of no importance, for in the first, he
commits three faults. First in S. Paul; whereas rather S. Paul ought to
explicate the words of Christ. Secondly, in that he says, that Matthew. 24. To
come in the name of Christ, does signify the same, as to be the Vicar of
Christ: For the explication of Christ himself, is repugnant to this
explication of Illyricus, for when our Lord had said: Many will come in my
name, forth with he adds explicating, saying: I am Christ. Wherefore to come
in the name of Christ in that place, is to vsurp to themselves the name of
Christ, which in old time Simon Magus did, as witnesses S. Iren. lib. 1. cap.
20. and in our time David Georgius: and at length Antichrist himself shall do.
But the Pope even in that he names himself the Vicar of Christ, does make
himself not to be Christ.

Illyricus his third fault is, that he makes Christ an S. Paul, for he does
not rightly expound that place of S. Paul (He extolleth himself above all
Gods) by this (many will come in my name, that is, will make themselves my
Vicars) for the Vicar of God is not above all Gods, but under all Gods, as the
Vicar of a King, is under all Kings, for it cannot be imagined or devised how
he, that professes himself to be the Vicegerent of any King, should boast,
that he is above all Kings, by which the blindness and impudency of our
Adversaries is apparent, who sometime utter such things as are against common
sense.

And to that argument of Illyricus, by which he proved, things which he did,
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled* that vt, or this, signifies not the
cause, but the event, as S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine teach in cap. 12.
Joan. for Christ did not dye because Isay wrote so, but Isay wrote it, because
it was to be.

Secondly it is also false, that the Pope ever said in word or in dead, that he
can dispense against an Evangelist Evangelical, that is the divine percepts,
no Catholic ever said, that the Pope could any way dispense.

Finally the consequence is naught, for in the Mayor, Illyricus speaks of the
subjection of Christ under the Scriptures, not concerning the precepts, but
concerning the Prophesies, for Illyricus was not ignorant that Christ had taken
away the Sabboath, and abrogated the Ceremonial Law: and in the Minor or
Assumption, he speaks of precepts; and so his argument has four terms, and
can conclude nothing. This shall suffice for the doctrine of Antichrist in this
place.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downam begins his answer, telling there are more Doctrines of
Antichrist then four: which Bellarmine denies not, and therefore this is not
to the purpose. Secondly he says, that those two doctrines of devils. 1. Tim.
4. of forbidding marriage, and commanding abstinence from meats belong also to
Antichrist: which Bellarmine will not stick to grant, or at least to let pass,
as being nothing against him, or the Pope, as may easily be showed upon any
good occasion. But now we have other four Doctrines in hand, of which M.
Downam affirms two things. First, that they are not all the doctrines of
Antichrist. Secondly, that those which be his Doctrines, do not unfitly agree
to the Pope. Wherefore let us see how he can make either of these his assertions
good, or answer Bellarmines proofs to the contrary.

2. First, then concerning Antichrists denial of M. Downam denies that it
shall be openly, directly, and expressly, and tells us, that he has provided
else where that Antichrist was only to deny Christ covertly, indirectely, and by
Antichrist shall openly deny Jesus to be Christ.
consequent, and that he has likewise showed, that the Pope does so.
Concerning which assertions of his, I must crave thus much favor at the
Readers hands, that he will not believe M. Downam upon his word, until after
the discussion of those proofs, he find him to be an honest man, for now this
place requires that we examine how he answers Bellarmines arguments. To the
first of which, M. Downam has nothing See part. 2. cap. 4.. 6. 7. 8. See cap.
12.
at all to say, if Antichrist shall be by Nation and Religion a Jew. Which
point has been already discussed, and therefore now the reader is to give
judgment, whether he shall be so or no, and consequently, whether it be not
also manifest by this argument, that Antichrist shall deny Christ plainly and
openly.

3. For answer to the second argument, M. Downam S. John in that place
speaks either of the body of Antichrist 1. Joan. 2.
in general, or of the head of that body in particular, but of Cerinthus and
others, which denied the Divinity of Christ, as appears plainly by that which
follows in the text: This is that Antichrist that denies the Father and the
Son. But M. Downam might have remembered how Bellarmine in his second argument
observed, that in some places the article was put in, and in some left out, to
signify when Antichrist himself was spoken of, and when his foreru^ners or
members. Wherefore since the article is put here, it is evident, that the
chief Antichrist himself is spoken of. Neither is it to the purpose, that
Cerinthus and other denied the Divinity of Christ, for S. John denies not, but
that others may deny it as well as Antichrist, but only affirms, that he shall
deny Jesus to be Christ, and likewise the Divinity both of Christ and his
Father, which others did indirectly and by consequence, as M. Downam
confesses, which seems not sufficient for that which S. John says: for he
speaks absolutely, and affirms, that Antichrist shall deny as well the
Divinity of the Father, as of Christ. And by this M. Downam may see how he was
at least deceived,. 1.
when he affirmed, that Bellarmine understood this place of denying of Christ,
covertly, indirectly, and by consequence. Perhaps when Bellarmine added, that
all heretics are called Antichrists, Downam mistaketh Bellarmin
who in some sort deny Jesus to be Christ, M. Downam understood that they were
called so in this place. But this is a great mistaking, since in this place
Antichrist is with an article: by which Bellarmine gathers, that Antichrist
himself is spoken of, as before, where the Apostle says, that many were
become Antichrists, there is no article, and therefore the Apostle speaks of
heretics. Likewise M. Downam is much out of the way when he infers, that
because Antichrist shall come in all deceauablenesse of iniquity, as S. Paul
affirms 2 Thessalonians. 2. therefore he shall not deny Christ openly, for that
seduction or deceauablenesse is understood of his How Antichrist shall seduce.
subtle and cunning persuasions, and not for any moderation in his errors and
blasphemies, which the greater they shall be, the more craft he will use to bring
men to them, and not only craft, but also all power and lying signs, and
wonders, as the Apostle testifies in the same place: and finally See cap. 7.
most grievous persecution, as we have seen before. Wherefore no doubt, besides
the authority of S. John, Bellarmines inference is very good, from the
heretics to Antichrist himself, for he shall exceed them in opposition to
Christ Antichrist shall exceed al heretics.
by many degrees: so that since they have denied Christ covertly, yea some of
them openly also, Antichrist shall go as far and further, then any of them,
in this denial. And though those other comparisons which M. Downam makes of
the parts and points of Christan Doctrine, and likewise in respect of the
parties which shall join with him, and finally in the greatness of ambition,
be also true, if they be rightly understood: for no doubt Antichrist shall
surpass all heretics in these also, yet this is no proof, that he shall not
exceed them likewise in the greatness of his errors and blasphemies, which is
that, that Bellarmine now only affirms, without the denial of the rest, and
has proved both out of the plain words of S. John, and likewise a minori ad
maius, and thirdly confirms it, because the Devil is said to work the
mystery of iniquity by heretics, but the coming of Antichrist is called a
revelation. To which M. Downam replieth, that the mystery of iniquity 2 Thessalonians.
2. 7. is Antichristianisme, or that Antichristian Apostasy from Christ,
mentioned verse. 3. But first M. See cap. 2.
Downam might remember, that Bellarmine in his answer to his third objection
against his second principal argument, shows, that the departure or Apostasy
mentioned verse. 3, has diverse interpretations, and therefore he should not have
taken this as the only. Well we will not stand with him in this, since the
exposition is probable, as Bellarmine declares in that place: but we can by no
means grant, that the mystery of iniquity, and this Apostasy is all one, since
that (as we have showed before) S. Paul himself does evidently See cap. 2.. 6.
The mystery of iniquity, and the revelation of Antichrist and the Apostasy be
not alone.
distingish them, affirming, that the Apostasy was not come in his time, but
that the mystery of iniquity did the^ work. And in like manner also he
distinguishes the revelation of Antichrist, for of that he likewise says,
that it was to be afterward, wherefore I cannot see how M. Downam can affirm,
that the mystery of iniquity does most truly belong to Antichrist himself,
unless he would also grant, that Antichrist himself was come in S. Paul's
time, which I think he will be loath to do, because if will evidently follow,
that either the Pope is not Antichrist himself, or else that S. Peter and S.
Paul, or whosoever else he will make Bishop of Rome in S. Paul's time, was
Antichrist. Wherefore since Antichrist himself was not come at that time, it is
also evident, that S. Paul signified his coming by his revealing, because the
iniquity which was covered with a mystery before his coming, shall be plainly
revealed and avouched by him, which is all that Bellarmine needs for the
force of his argument, for now we talk not of the time, or manner of this
revelation, having done that sufficiently in other places. But M. Downam must
needs say something, though it be nothing at all to the purpose.

4. M. Downam will needs divide Bellarmines position into two parts, of the
former of which we have treated hitherto: the latter is, that Antichrist shall
impugn all the ordinances of Christ, and teach that Circumcision, the
Sabbath, and the other ceremonies of the law are not ceased. This is
Bellarmines assertion, and not as M. Downam sets it down, changing a word
or two which may seem to import nothing: but yet M. Downam had a meaning in
it, as we shall see afterward. Now the latter depends so upon the former
part, that Bellarmine brings no particular proofs for it, as indeed he need
not, since it was but an explication of the former; and yet M. Downam will
needs have him prove Downam his trifling
the latter by the former, and by the first argument with which he proved the
former, which is nothing but mere trifeling, and to give himself an occasion
to make an idle repetition of part of that, which he had said before. Wherefore
omitting this, let us see, how he answers the Fathers.

To which first in general he gives this censure, that in this question they
descrue no further credit, then they conspire with the Prophesies of Scripture,
and agree with the event. Both which latter you must give M. Downam liberty to
interpret and declare as he thinks good. And besides I would feign know, what
questions those be, in which M. Downam will give the Fathers credit, without
this, or the like limitations? Well the censure presupposed, M. Downam is
content for this time to vouchsafe every Father his particular answer, and
first to S. Hilary he says, that he calls those heretics, who deny Christ
to Antichrist shall deny Christ to be so much as the adopted Son of God.
be the natural Son of God, Antichrist. And is not this a trim answer trow
you? Because those heretics are called Antichrists, that is the forerunners of
Antichrist, therefore S. Hilary says not, that Antichrist himself shall deny
Christ to be the adoptiue Son of God, as though he could not say both the one
and the other. But this is M. Downams acumen, to find a difficulty where there
is none, and not to see nor understand the plain words which lie before his
eyes. S. Hilary.
For thus writes S. Hilary: Loquitur haec interim, loquitur plane per aduentus
sui Prophetas and prae^io^ ipse ille qui postea erit in Antichristo loquuturus,
salutarem fidei confessionem his tentamentis nouis inquieta^s, vt primum
conscientiae nostrae, quaita credimus, intelligentiam filij naturalis euellat:
deinde ipsu^ illud quod adoptiuus erit, reliquum nomen excludat. Nam cum quibus
creatura est Christus, necesse est, vt cum his Antichristus ipse sit Christus,
quia and filij proprietatem creatura non habeat, and Deise ille filium
mentiatur, and per hoc aquibus hic Dei filius iam negatur, ab his tunc Christus
ille credatur. He speaks these things in the mean time: he doubtless
himself speaks them by the prophets and forerunners of his coming, who will
hereafter speak in Antichrist, disquieting the wholesome confession of Faith
with these new tentations, that first he may pull out of our conscience the
understanding of the natural Son, with which we believe so, and after
exclude the very name of Adoptius, which shall remain. For those who think
Christ to be a creature, must needs also take Antichrist to be Christ, because
a creature has not the propriety of a son, and he does falsely affirm
himself to be the Son of God: and therefore they who deny this Son of God
now, will believe him to be Christ then. Where we see, that S. Hilary does not
only affirm, that Antichrist will deny, that Christ is so much as the Adopted
Son of God, but also that he shall affirm himself to be Christ, and the
Son of God, and be acknowledged to be so by his followers. To S. Hippolytus
he says plainly, that his authority is S. Hippolytus.
counterfaite, which is the least part of M. Downams impudency, to reject whom
he pleases without either reason, or any other authority then his own: yet he
is content to answer the place objected by Bellarmine, by telling him, that he
has rejected it himself before, which wants not impudency, but yet has
some subtilty mixed withal: For Bellarmine indeed did think it more probable,
that the mark of Antichrist, which is but one, shall be positive, then
privative: which is not altogether so much, as to reject the opinion of S.
Hippolytus, who thinks that it shall be privative, but only to think another
more probable: But the cosening trick consists not in this. Now there is no
question of the mark of Antichrist, but only of his Doctrine, and to this end
is S. Hippolytus alleged now, that he shall enforce men to renownce their
Baptism, and the sign of the Cross. This Bellarmine never rejected, but is
fully of S. Hippolytus his mind, thus far only they differ, whether
Antichrist shall have any other mark besides this, or no, for that he shall
teach this doctrine they both agree, by which M. Downams vizard is pulled of.
To the authority of S. Augustine M. Downam answers, that he speaks (...) of
Antichrist, but of the Devil, but he should have added, that he speaks of
the devil in S. Augustine.
Antichrists time, as he does most plainly, by which it is evident, that
Antichrist who shall be his chief instrument for all wickedness, shall join
with him in this also, which Bellarmine does not affirm, that S. Augustine
expressly says, but only that he presupposes it, which is most manifest. S.
Hierome he takes up more roundly telling him, that he is Prophet, nor true
expositor of this Prophesy of Daniel; S. Hierome
for both which he gives us his own honest word, and remitteth us also to
Polan on Daniel 11. But M. Downam must pardon us, if we take S. Hierome to be
the honester man of the two, and as for M. Polan, we have now no spare time to
loofe in perusing him, it being sufficient for Bellarmine, and us also, that S.
Hierome is clear for us. Sedulius must also be Sedulius. Antichrist shall
restore all the Jewish ceremonies.
content to be told, that his speech is incredible, because many of the Jewish
ceremonies cannot be observed, but in the Temple, which shall never be
reedified. But the best is, that Sedulius has al those of his side, against M.
Downams reason, which think, that the Temple shall be reedified, with whom he
may be very well content to take this repulse at M. Downams hands, yet he has
thus much favor showed him, that if he will change (all) into (many) his
opinion shall be admitted, because in M. Downams judgment, so it may be
verified of the Pope, and of some other heretics. But Sedulius is not a whit
moved with this fair offer, but still affirms that Antichrist shall restore
all the Jews Ceremonies, as one that will be taken for their Messiah, and he
may confirm his assertion, by that which M. Downam brings of some heretics
who are his forerunners, and therefore participate with him in some part of his
wickedness: but the Pope is his chiefest opposite, and therefore never admitted
any the least ceremony of the Jews, though he uses some, which are like to
the^, as that which is figured, ought to be to the figure and sign thereof. S.
Gregory Antichrist shall cause the Sabbath to be observed.
Lastly to S. Gregory, M. Downam affirms that he teaches, that Antichrist
shall not only admit the Sabbath, but also the Lords Day: which is indeed very
probable, for it will be hard for him to make so universal a change upon the
sudden, and therefore that he may please all, he will be content to wink at
something. But what is this against that which Bellarmine affirmed? Does not S.
Gregory affirm, that Antichrist will have the Sabbath observed? And this is
all that Bellarmine alleges him for, who never affirmed, that Antichrist
should abolish all the ordinances of Christ, as M. Downam alleges his words,
but only that he should impugn them, which may very well stand with his
commanding our Lords day to be observed, at least for a while, and at his first
coming, for other respects, but not for any love he shall bear to Christ, or
any liking he will have of his ordinances, which is also manifestly S.
Gregoryes mind, for he gives this reason, why Antichrist shall keep Dominicum
diem, quia morise, and resurgere simula^: because he faigneth himself to dye
and rise again. But for the Sabbath he gives another far different, viz.
because he shall ^ompell the people to Iudaize etc.

5. To Bellarmines last confirmation, from the vehemence M. Downam answers
with a distinction, that if he means the true public worship of God, it
has ceased already in the Papacy, by the vehemence of the Popes persecution,
who yet is no open enemy of Christ, where by the true worship of God, you may
easily conceive, that he means that of Protestants: though he cannot show us,
that ever it was before Luthers time, or name us one, who felt this vehement
persecution for that cause, well he may tell us of some of their brethren (for
all heretics will be brethren, because they agree at least in one point, that
is The Pope suppresseth heretics as Antichrist shall oppress Catholics.
in impugning Gods Church) whom the Pope has suppressed, for it is his office
to suppress them, as Antichrist shall endeavor to suppress him, and all that
adhere unto him for Christ's cause, whom he shall chiefly oppose himself unto.
Neither is the other part of M. Downams distinction necessary, for all false
worshippers shall join themselves to Antichrist, and help him in the
persecution of the others, and if M. Downam remembers, in the place which
Bellarmin alleged, he showed, that Antichrist shall make the daily sacrifice
of the Church to cease, which cannot be understood See cap. 7.
of the Protestants, but of the Catholic Roman Church: but since both
Bellarmine and M. Downam remit themselves to that which they have said before,
I will do so likewise, only I will require the Reader to note by the way, that
M. Downam Downam mistaketh Bellarmin
is at least mistaken in this place, if not worse, for he makes this of the
ceasing of the public offices, and the divine Sacrifices to be a new argument
to prove, that Antichrist shall openly deny Christ, and abolish all his
ordinances, whereas Bellarmine never meant any such matter, but only having
proved by the Fathers, that Antichrist shall deny Christ, impugn Baptism,
seek to dissolve the Gospel of Christ, teach that the Sabbath and other
ceremonies of the Jews are not ceased, because he would avoid prolixity, be
remitteth himself to his former proofs, that he shall likewise cause the
public offices and the divine sacrifices to cease: so that M. Downam might
as well have made a new argument of every one of the Fathers Authorities, as of
this. But I will not charge him with malice in this place, except it may be
attributed rather to malice then to simplicity, that he was so blind, of which
I am content he shall have his choice. But surely the one of the^ he cannot
avoid, as appears by that which I have said, and also by Bellarmines
conclusion which follows immediately, Ex quibus euidens est etc. By which it
is evident etc. For that (quibus) cannot be referred to the last clause only,
but to the whole induction out of the Fathers, as is manifest, and this is
always Bellarmines use, to make the authority of the Fathers one argument.

6. And thus we may come to the second doctrine, for that which M. Downam says
concerning Bellarmines assumption, Downam speaks from the purpose.
is neither to the purpose, but only so far, as it includes the denial of
the proposition; nor belongs to this place, but to another, to which he
remitteth himself, and so the Reader must have patience till we come thither.
See part. 2.. 6. 7. 8.


7. Now then concerning the second doctrine, M. Downam denies, that Antichrist
will openly, and in so many words expressly affirm, that he is the Christ or
Messiah of the world, for Antichrist will openly affirm himself to be Christ.
which he remitteth himself to his former proofs, touching only two. 1. That
his Religion is a mystery of iniquity, which as a little before we showed, it
is to be understood of the heretics, and cannot be applied to Antichrist
himself. 2. Because he could not seduce so many Christians, if he should
plainly profess himself Christ. But we see the contrary of this in the
Turks, The Turks inferior to Antichrist
who notwithstanding are nothing comparable to Antichrist, either in craft,
wonders, or violence, besides the ill disposition, which he shall find in most
Christians at that time. Having thus eased his stomach a little M. Downam
comes to answer Bellarmines proof out of the Scripture, referring Joan. 5.
himself to his former answer, to this place in Bellarmines second argument,
where he said, that Christ spoke conditionally, if another shall come, and
indefinitly of See cap. 2.
any false Prophet. But there also I showed the contrary of both, as also, that
Antichrist is to come in his own name, and to profess so much, which other
false prophets use not to do. For as our Savior did not only come indeed, but
also professed himself to come in the name of his Father: so likewise
Antichrist shall not only come indeed, but also profess himself to come in
his own name. And if our Savior were to be understood of all false prophets
indefinitely, Our Saviors words not true in M. Downam his opinion
his speech were not true (which me thinks M. Downa^ should be afraid to
affirm) for it is evident by experience, that many false prophets have come
since that time, few or none of which the Jews, or the greatest part of them
have received, whereas by his interpretation, they should have received them
all, and above all the Pope, whom M. Downam will needs have to be Antichrist
himself, whom notwithstanding they are so far from receiving, that they hate
him above all other men, and account him their greatest enemy, as we have
seen, and experience teaches.

To the Fathers in this place, he vouchsafes no answer they were no prophets,
and spoke without book. This is the impudency of this fellow, that al they
must of force speak without-book, that interpret Scripture against his fond
fancy: But we make no doubt, but that God has given the interpretation of
Scripture to his Church, and the Doctors thereof, which by all reason we are to
acknowleadg these holy Fathers to be, since they came not without calling and
commission, as M. Downam and his fellow Ministers, and all other heretics do.
Neither can he help himself by flying to Bellarmine for aid, for no man
reuerenceth the Fathers more then he, and it is false that he ever gave any
such rule, that we are not to Bellarmin reuerenceth the Fathers.
give credit to any such conjectures of the Fathers, as have no ground in the
word of God: For who shall be Judge of this? How far he admitted the opinion
of those twelve Fathers who affirmed that Antichrist as to be of the Tribe of
Dan. we show in that place, and it was, that he took it to be very probable,
See cap. 12.
though not altogether certain, because the most of them took it not to be
so; and besides they were divided in the exposition of those places of
Scripture, some of them following the litterall sense, and some the mystical.
But here is no such division, all agreeing both in the exposition of Scripture,
and also in the assertion it self.

8. And thus we are to pass to the third doctrine: For that which M. Downam
says concerning the assumption, is nothing but a little taste of his gift in
railing against the Pope, in which he is so expert, that he cannot hold his
babbling, though it be nothing at all to the purpose, as in this place he
himself confesses that it is not, for he goes only about to show, that the
Pope indirectly, and by consequent makes himself Christ. Which if it were
true, would only prove him to be an heretic, or a false prophet, but not
Antichrist himself, of whom only we speak in this place. But how false all
this impudent calumniation of our chief Pastor is, shall appear in due
place, to which See part. 2. cap. ^.
also M. Downam remitteth himself for his proofs.

9. Concerning the third doctrine, M. Downam denies, that it is necessary,
that Antichrist should in word, plainly and openly profess himself to be
God, and to the place of S. Paul he says, that the meaning is, that Antichrist
shall rule and reign in the Church 2 Thessalonians. 2.
of God, as if he were a God upon earth, showing himself, not so much by words
a^ by deeds, that he is a God, and to mantaine this his exposition, Antichrist
shall openly name himself God.
he is content to help himself with the translation of the Rhemish, and of the
Latin vulgar edition, who read tamquam fit Deus as though he were God: and
likewise with the exposition of S. Chrysostom, Theophilact, and Oecumenius,
whose words he puts down, first in Greek, and after in English thus: He
says showing himself, he said not saying, bu^ endeavoring to show for he
shall work great works, and shall show forth wonderful signs. Finally, he
brings the authority of Beza, who observes that the greek word (...),
showing, is answerable to the Hebrew Mozeh, faciensse apparere, praese ferens,
or as we say (says M. Downam) taking upon him as if he were God. All which
makes nothing at all against Bellarmine, but adds this more, that he shall
not only say that he is God, by which he would not be able to seduce many, but
shall likewise give great shows thereof, insomuch that if it were possible, the
very elect should be seduced by him. But M. Downams device is by telling us,
that he shall endeavor to show himself to be God by works and wonders, to
make us believe, that he shall not be so shameless as to say plainly that he is
God, which is a very strange conceit, if you mark it well, for he confesses,
that by his actions he shall come to be acknowledged, saluted, and called God,
that he shall cause, or at least, suffer himself to be worshipped as God, and
finally, that he shall challenge unto himself those titles, attributes, and
works which are proper, and peculier unto the Lord, and yet having done all
this M. Downam will by no means grant, that he shall name himself M. Downa^s
strange paradox.
God. Is not this a strange paradox? and yet M. Downam will de fend it, though
it be never so absurd, only for this cause, that he can make a flourish amongst
fools, as though the Pope did all this, but that the Pope calls himself
God, he can by no device make it carry any color. This is the cause why
Bellarmine is constrained to stand so much upon the name, so that he may leave
his adversaries no starting-hole at all. And this he manifestly proves out of
the text it self; for S. Paul expresses, that Antichrist shall sit in the Why
and how Antichrist shall sit in the Temple.
Temple, not as others do, but as God, for if he would not be accounted and
adored as God, he might as well sit in another place as in the Temple, but
because that is his end, he choseth to sit in the temple, as in a place proper
to his dignity, for as the Throne is proper to a King, so is a Temple proper to
God, and this is plain in the greek, which has showing himself that he is
God. Against this M. Downam takes many exceptions. 1. That the Temple
signifies not the material See cap. 13
Temple at Jerusalem, of which we have treated before. 2. That by fitting, is
not meant the corporal gesture of sitting in Apoc. 17.
that material Temple. But how chance he did not answer Bellarmines proofs
to the contrary? for he showed that all the Fathers without controversy
understood it so, and the words themselves are plain. 3. That the Temple is
not to be erected to Antichrists honor, since it is called the Temple of God.
This Bellarmine affirmed not, for the Temple shall be erected in the beginning,
when Antichrist shall only discover himself to be the Messiah, which when he
has obtained, then he shall affirm, that he is their God himself, and
consequently that it belongs to him to sit in that Temple, and to be adored
as God, wherefore the Temple may very well be called the Temple of God, because
it shall be erected to him, and yet afterward Antichrist may sit in it as God.
And besides S. Paul calls it the Temple of God, because it was so in Why the
Temple that Antichrist shall sit in is called the Temple of God.
his time. 4. That the greek text has not only (...), but also (...), by
which he hurts Bellarmine sorely, for it is manifest, that this makes his
assertion and proofs much more plain, since that the same thing is affirmed
here, and he speaks only of the last words, which by the latin might seem
to be (...), but is indeed (...), as Bellarmine affirms. Wherefore none of
those four devices will serve the turn, and Bellarmines argument is
invincible, that Antichrist shall plainly profess himself to be God.

10. The authorities of the Fathers are so plain, that M. Downam could not
devise what to say to them, for they Downam omitteth Bellarmines argument.
expound a place of Scripture, and therefore he could not reject them under
pretense of want of Scripture, wherefore ^e thought it his best never to make
mention of them, hoping perhaps that his reader would never miss them. And
thus he comes to the Assumption, which is, that the Pope acknowledges
himself to be the servant of God, and not God. To which he answers, that
Bellarmine might as well conclude, that the Pope never calls himself, Regem
Regum terrae* ac Dominum Dominorum, the King of the Kings of the earth, and
Lord of Lords, because he acknowledges himself Seruum seruorum Dei, the
Servant of Gods servants. As though Bellarmine went about to conclude any thing
now, and did not only set down his Assumption in plain words, which contain
two things. 1. That the Pope acknowledges himself to be the servant of God.
2. Nor God: either of which M. Downam should have proved to be otherwise, if he
would have said any See part. 2. cap. 5. Downam speaks from the purpose.
thing to the purpose, for whether the Pope may be called Rex Regum etc. or no,
we shall see in another place, where M. Downam will spit out all his venom at
once. Now it is sufficient, that the Pope does not plainly profess himself
God, as Antichrist shall do, and consequently he is not Antichrist, which is al
we go about to prove now. In that other place we will also show, how falsely and
slanderously M. Downam affirms, that the Pope takes any authority upon him,
that belongs to God, or that in practice, deed, or behavior, he uses
himself, as if he were a God. Now also his beast of the Apocalypse comes so
out of place, that I will not stand to prove, that by him not Antichrist, See
cap. 15.. 10.
but his false Prophet is described, which I have heretofore showed in part,
and will hereafter declare more at large.

11. M. Downam stormeth more at the fourth doctrine an absurd conceit of the
Papists, and affirming that it is not only repugnant unto the truth, but also
contradictory to their own Doctrine, in proof whereof he asks many
Antichrist will suffer no other God beside himself.
questions: If it be credible either that a mortal man shall affirm himself
alone to be the true God, and none but he? or if he shall so affirm of
himself, that Christians and Jews, and all the world almost will acknowledge
and worship him, as the only true God? To which I answer, that it is not only
credible, but also certain. And the difficulty which M. Downam puts, is
none at all, for there can be no doubt made, but that a mortal man may A
mortal man, may be truly God.
be true God, for so our Savior was while he lived upon earth, and now we see
the whole Christian world persuaded of this truth, though our Saviors
conversation upon earth was so contrary to flesh and blood, that it was a
sca^dall to the Jews, and folly in eyes of the Gentiles: whereas Antichrist
will follow the humors of both, seeming glorious in the eyes of world, and
wonderful in lying and deceiptfull signs, and miracles, and with all give
such liberty to his followers, that they will make no difficulty in believing
any thing he says. 2. He obiecteth, that the Antichristian seat is figured by
the whore of Babylon, Apoc. 17. which together with Apoc. 17.
her followers are given to Idolatry. But M. Downam knows that Bellarmine
denies, that Rome figured by that whore, is the seat of Antichrist, and
likewise, that those Idolatries are to be in Antichrists time, but are long
since post, when Rome was Ethnike, both which he proved before, and M. See,
cap. 12.
Downa^ either would not or could not answer to either then and now he only
affirms the contrary, which is no sufficient proof. 3. The Papists
themselves expound Deuteronomy. 11. 38. where Antiochus Epiphanes i^ discribed as an
Idolater, as properly spoken of Antichrist: where the Printer surely committed
an error, though it be not noted amongst the falts escaped, for in Deuteronomy. 11.
there is nothing that can be applied to Antiochus, and only 32. verses:
wherefore no doubt, M. Downam means Dan. 11. Dan. 11.
38. where he speaks of the God Maozim: but this place Bellarmine handles at
large a little after, wherefore I will entreat M. Downam, and the Reader also to
^^ay for a further answer, till we come to examine M. Downams reply to
Bellarmines answer concerning that place. 4. He asks this question, Do not
themselves teach that Antichrist shall profess himself to be the Messiah of
the Jews, and consequently that he is sent, and anointed of God? To which I
answer that we teach indeed, that he shall profess himself to be the Messiah
of the Jews, but the consequent we teach not, for he shall come in his own
name, and not sent or anointed by God, and this he will profess also, if not
in the beginning, yet at least after a while, and by this M. Downams next
question is also answered, for since he shall profess himself not sent by
God, he may say that there is no God besides himself. 5. Or if he being but a
mortal man, shall say that there is no God besides himself, may we not well
think (says M. Downam) that they will either hiss at him as a fool or stone
him to death as a blasphemer: for answer of which I will spur M. Downam
another question. Are you so simple Sir as to think, that Antichrist will only
say, that there is no God besides himself, or that he will discover himself
so far, till he see himself so applauded, that he may say what he lists
without any fear at all, of either being hissed or stoned? and for that
objection of mortality it is already answered; that it may stand with the
Godhead, and besides Antichrist will make a fair show of either raising
another, or himself from death to life, which will take away this objection
the^ at heast, if any stand upon it at that time, so much as M. Downam does at
this. 6. Nay, do not themselves teach, that he shall be in religion ^ Jew, an
obseruer of the Sabbath In Dan. ^^
and other Jewish Ceremonies? And do they not alleadg Hierome to prove, that
Antichrist shall faigne himself to be the chief of the Covenant, and a chief
mantainer of the Law and Testament of God? To all which I answer, that we do
so, for he shall not profess himself to be any other God, then the God of the
Jews, and consequently shall approve their law. 7. Lastly he poseth us thus:
Are not his two horns like the lamb expounded by some approved Authers among
them, of the two Testaments which he shall seem to profess? In Apoc. 13.
To which I answer, that M. Downam might have done well, to have named these
approved authors, for commonly Catholic authors think not, that this beast
with two horn like a lamb, is to be understood of Antichrist, but of his
precursor or false prophet, whom S. Irenaeus calls Armigeru^, by whose two
horns are signified his power in persuading, and in working prodigious and
strange things. If any expound them of the two testaments, they can have no
other true sense, but that he shall profess great knowledge in both, to
establish the old, and impugn the new, that so he may prevail with them the
better which are l^ath to forsake Christ, for the authority of the Scriptures.

12. Now that M. Downam has disgorged his own proofs, he is content to
answer those of Bellarmin. And first concerning 2 Thessalonians. 2. he leaves his
brethren the Magdeburgians 2 Thessalonians 2. Downam cannot defend the Magdeburge^ses.
in the plain field, never so much as opening his lips in their defense,
wherein he seems to acknowledge, that Bellarmine confuted them thoroughly:
wherefore admitting, that the place is well explicated, he denies the
consequence. For (says he) Antichrist may advance himself above all that is
called God or that is worshipped and yet suffer ^ea require them to be
worshipped. In proof whereof he brings three insta^ces. 1. Jupiter was
supposted amongst the Heathens to advance himself above all other Gods, and
yet suffered them to be worshipped as Gods. 2. The second beast, Apoc. 1^. does
the like with the Image of the former beast. Apoc 1^.
3. The Pope also aduanceth himself above Angels Kings* and Princes, who are
called Gods, above the Saints, the Host, the Cross and whatsoever (...) is in
the Church of Rome.

But M. Downam is much mistaken in the matter: for Antichrist shall not only
extol himself above all other Gods; but oppose himself against them all, for
so S. Paul Antichrist shall not extol him self above all other Gods, but also
oppose himself against them all.
says: Qui aduersatur and extollitur, who is opposed and extolled. Now how
this advancing and opposing himself can stand with suffering, yea requiring
them to be worshipped as God, will be very hard for M. Downam, or any other to
explicate. Jupiter was supposed by the Gentiles to be the Father and King of
the other Gods, but likewise he was supposed to love them, as his children and
servants, and not to oppose himself unto them. The other two instances are
both false and foolish, for that second beast is not Antichrist, as M. Downam
supposes, nor yet aduanceth himself above the former, Jupiter.
by which indeed Antichrist is signified, and not the renowned Empire. The Pope
aduanceth not himself above the Angels, Saints, the Host, the Cross etc. as
M. Downam Downam belyeth the Pope.
belieth him: He is indeed the Pastor and the Bishop of KIngs as well as of
others, and in that respect preferred before them by Christ himself. But what
hindrance is this that he may not command Princes to be honored and obeyed by
their subjects, as he does? Or what have any of these comparisons to do with
the odoration of God, as God, which he that is opposite and extolled above all
them, that take that name upon them, should suffer or require it to be given to
others? And besides it is plain, that this opposition and advancement of
Antichrist above all other Gods, shallbe for no other cause, but because they
are called Gods, for if the cause were particular, the quarrel would not be so
general. As if it should be true of any King, that he opposes and adua^ceth
himself above all that are called Kings, it were evident, that his quarrel
against the^ were no other, then for that they were Kings, and were to called,
and it were manifestly Why Antichrist aduanceth and opposes him self above all
other Gods.
against his will, that any other King should reign, or be acknowledged for a
King but himself, and he would be far enough from suffering, yea requiring,
that any of them should be worshipped, and further also from acknowledging, or
worshipping any of them himself for King. Secondly M. Downam confirms this
his answer by the example of Antiochus Epiphanes, who aduanceth himself
against every God, yea against the God of Gods, Dan. 11. 56. and yet he was
never Antioch' an Idolatour.
so mad, as to profess himself the only God. But to this the answer is easy,
that this place cannot be understood of Antiochus, but only of Antichrist, as
S. Hierome shows for this very reason, that Antiochus did not advance
himself against every God, for he was a great Idolater himself. Thirdly M.
Downam supposes, that he has proved Antichristianisme not to be open
Atheism, but a mystery of iniquity etc. But we proved before, that it cannot
be the mystery of iniquity, and yet it shall not Antichristianisme is not
Atheism.
properly be Atheism, since those which follow Antichrist shall take him for
their God, and he himself, though openly he will worship no God, because he
will profess himself to be God himsefe, yet secretly it is not improbable,
that he will adore the Devil as his God. Fourthly M. Downam argues out of the
text it self, which he says, does not ascribe to Antichrist so great an
extolling of himself, as the Jesuit imagines: first, because, he is called a
man of sin, and Son of perdition, and therefore we are to conceive of such
an advancement of himself, as is incident to a mortal and wretched man. But
to this of the mortality, I have answered sufficiently before, and the words of
the text rather give us occasion to increase, then any way to diminish
Antichrists sin, since that he is called Antonomastice (...), and, (...),
ille home peccati and filius ille perditionis: that man of sin, and that
son of perdition. Antichrist shall commit the greatest sins, when he cannot
all.
Which gives us just occasion to think, that there shall be no sin nor
perdition possible for any man to run into, from which Antichrist shall be
free, or rather because some sins be contrary one to the other, that he shall
fall into the depth of them all by embracing the greatest, when he cannot all.
Secondly, by all that is called God in this place, M. Downam will have us to
understand all to whom the name of God is communicated, as to Angels in
Heaven, to Kings and Princes on earth, and of this advancing above Kings he
would have this place understood, because afterward it is said, that the Roman
Empire hindered Antichrists advancing or revealing himself, and by (...), he
would have us to understand any thing that is worshipped as God, or wherein God
is worshipped: Such in the Church of Rome (says he) are the Host, the Cross,
the Saints, and their Images and relics. Above all which (he thinks) that a
man may advance himself (as the Pope does) and yet may acknowledge some other
God besides himself But to How the Pope may be called God.
answer briefly, though it be true, that Kings etc. and consequently the Pope
also may be called God in some sort, yet M. Downam will never be able to prove,
that God himself is also called God; and likewise the false Gods: wherefore S.
Paul must needs comprehend these also under all that ^^ called God. And M.
Downams proof is very weak, that, because the Roman Empire is said to hinder
Antichriste revealing, therefore he shall only advance himself above it, for
though it be true, that he cannot advance himself till he be revealed, yet
afterward he may and shall, not only above the Roman Empire (for that he did at
his revealing) but above all that is called God, as S. Paul affirms. His
interpretation of (...) we admit, but deny, that those things which he
recounteth, are adored in the Church of Rome as God, or that the Pope aduanceth
himself above them, neither of which he will be ever able to prove, as shall
appear, when Downam belyeth the Pope and church of Rome.
he goes about it. Lastly M. Downam affirms, that the greatest height of
pride, that is incident to any creature whatsoever, is not to seek to be above
God, for that cannot be imagined, but to be as God. And indeed (says he) the
height of Antichrist his pride and aduanc^^g of himself, is noted in the words
following, (...), insomuch, that be shall fit in the Temple of God, as God. In
which words, M. Downam affirms the quite contrary to that, which S. Paul
says, for his words are plain, that Antichrist shall oppose and extol
himself above all that is called God. And this may very easily be imagined if
we speak of one, that either belieueth not, that there is any true God, or else
i^ he belieueth it, and consequently in his heart cannot extol himsel^e above
him, yet he may desire to usurp the honor due to How Antichrist may extol
himself above God.
him, to himself, and to this end profess himself to be the only true God;
and to this intent sit in the Temple, as he, to whom it ought to be erected,
and so show that he is God, which is indeed the height of Antichrists pride,
since he cannot desire any more, then to be a compted and adored as if he were
the only true God, which cannot be, unless he be extolled above the true God,
and the false also. Dan. 11.


13. To the second testimony out of Dan. 11. M. Downam answers two things:
First, that Daniel speaks not of Antichrist, in proof whereof he alleges
Bellarmine himself, who in this very book cap. 21. affirms, that in part of
this very verse, Daniel speaks ad litteram, literally of Antiochus, who was
a figure of Antichrist. To which I answer, that he does so indeed, and yet
these words which he alleges here cannot be understood of Antiochus, as S.
Hierome affirms, and proves against wicked Porphyry, with whom M. Downam
will needs partake. And if M. Downam will know the reason of both, it is this:
Daniel in the same words prophesies both of Antiochus, and of Antichrist, but
with this distinction, that where the words will bear it, they are literally
first to be understood of Antiochus, and secondly of Antichrist, who in many
things is rather figured, then expressly prophesied of, but when we meet with
words, that can by no means be literally applied to Antiochus, then of forc^
we must understand the^ literally also of Antichrist: of this sort there be
many in this chapter of Daniel, and the next, amongst which, in the Fathers
judgment, these are to be numbered, as also they most evidently prove, and none
but Porphyry, and such Infidels, or heretics can deny. Those other When the
Scripture is literally to be understood of the figure and when of the thing
figured.
words which Bellarmine speaks of cap. 21. may be applied to Antiochus, and
consequently are literally to be understood of him. And this is no peculiar
thing to this place of Scripture, but ordinary in all prophesies of Christ,
which for the most part are still mingled with some other figure of him, to
which many sentences are to be applied ad litteram, but not all: and the sign
when they are, and when they are not to be applied to the figure, is, when they
contain something, which can, or cannot be verifyed but of Christ: and to give
M. Downam one example, he may at his leisure peruse the 71. Psalm, in which
Solomon, and our Savior are spoken of, and all that can be applied to Solomon,
is literally Psalm. 71.
to be understood of him, but somethings cannot, as that his Kingdom or name
shall remain cum sole and ante luna^, or that he should rule a flumine, vsque
ad termines orbi^ terrarum, that all Kings shall adore him, and all Nations
shall serve him: that all the Tribes of the earth should be blessed in him, and
the like, of which see S. Augustine lib. 17. de Ciuit. Dei cap. 8. sub med. The
second part of M. Downams answer consists in proving, that Antiochus was an
Idolater. But of this no man doubts, and because this is so certain,
therefore it is also out of question among all truly wise and learned men, that
the words alleged by Bellarmine, cannot be understood of Antiochus, but only
of Antichrist.

14. Wherefore M. Downam comes to the objection Bellarmine made out of the
next verse against himself, and instead of replying upon Bellarmines answer,
M. Downam will needs answer also. Wherefore let us see this answe^e of an
answer. I answer first (says M. Downam) that although either of his
interpretations of the God Maozim were true (as neither is) yet the one
hinders not, and the other proves, that he which ^^ here described, is an
Idolater: for let the word Maozim signify what it may, yet the words following
plainly convince the party here described of Idolatry, The God which his
Fathers knew not, he shall worship with gold. But let M. Downam apply either of
Bellarmins solutions to this place, and he shall see that it proves nothing at
all. For if by this God which his Fathers knew not, be meant Antichrist
himself, then he shall only honor, and not properly adore Antichrist shall
honor or worship but one God.
himself as God. If the Devil be understood (which is the second solution)
then he shall only adore him secretly and not publicly; by which the second
part of M. Downams objection is also taken away, for though the word Maozim did
signity a false God, yet in those which follow, the idolatry is not increased,
but further explicated, for then by the God Maozim, and by the God which his
Fathers knew not, is meant only the same false God: and the manner how he is to
be worshipped, is showed, viz. with gold etc. By which M. Downam may see, how
falsely he charge Bellarmine with omitting this second clause, for Bellarmine
before alleges. 13.
the whose place with both clauses, and now he alleges not the words of
Daniel verbatim, but only takes the sense, which M. Downams brethren objected
against us, who were not so shameless or foolish, as M. Downam is, to affirm,
that Daniel speaks of two Gods, which Antichrist shall adore, for they knew
well enough, that it is an ordinary thing in Scripture, to repeat the same
thing in diverse words, especially with a little addition in the later, and in
this place they also knew, that all interpreters agreed, that only one God was
spoken of, and that the Scripture could not be understood otherwise without too
apparent a contradiction. And finally, M. Downam may as well infer a third God
out of that which follows, as two out of this place. But M. Downam goes
forward and tells us, that Mahuzzim signifies the true God, which is most
absurd, Maozim signifies not the true God.
since it is certain that Antiochus, of whom he understands the place,
never adored the true God, and Kemnitius and his other brethren the Lutherans,
are far from this sense, since they object this place against the Mass,
which they take to be this God Mahuzzim, as Bellarmine shows here, and l. 1.
de Sacrif. Missae cap. 1. and his confirmation from the name Jehovah, or from
other places, where God is called, Our Strength, is most absurd, for who
doubts, but that a false God, or Antichrist will take a name as glorious as
he can, since he will extol himself above all that is called God, and yet in
none of those places this hebrew word is used, to signify the true God. And
his cavil against Bellarmines first answer is so ridiculous, that I am
ashamed to trouble the Reader with repeating it, for first he makes it seem a
great absurdity, that Antichrist should worship himself, whereas he knew that
there was no absurdity in it, if to worship were taken for to glorify, as
Bellarmine showed it might be, against which M. Downam has nothing to object,
but only that both the vulgar latin, and Bellarmine himself, read venerabitur,
Maozim may signify Antichrist.
and colet. But who knows not, that these words may signify glorifying also,
especially since the original does favor that sense. And this being all that
he can object against Bellarmines first interpretation, yet is not he ashamed
to call it sottish and absurd, by which I will leave the Reader to judge, if M.
Downam does not show himself to be an absurd Sot.

15. To Bellarmines second answer, M. Downam likewise answers, that it
seems he has forgotten the question which he took upon him to defend,
because he admits, that Antichrist shall worship the devil in secret. But
M. Downam is deceived, for Bellarmine remembers very well, that he is to show,
that Antichrist shall extol himself above all Gods, and care for none of
them, but rise against them all, as both S. Paul and Daniel affirm, and
withal, that he shall worship Antichrist shall adore the Devil secretly.
a strange God, as Daniel prophesies, Al which Bellarmin shows to be most
true, because S. Paul and Daniel in the former place, are to be understood of
that which Antichrist shall do in public, and Daniel in the later place
speaks of that, which he shall do in secret, and so there is no repugnance
nor contradiction in these two prophesies. Secondly M. Downam obiecteth, that
if Maozim were taken for a strong Tower, it should ruther be Maoz, which is a^
weak Maozim signifies a strong Tower.
an objection as this Tower shall be strong. For who knows not, that the
Hebrews use ordinarity one number for another: especially to signify that
superlatiue or highest degree? and besides, why may not one Tower have many
strengths or fortresses in it? And as see M. Downams friend Tremelius, who
reads De^^ su^^^^ (...), we oppose to him two, far more ancient and
indifferent, and consequently of greater authority then he, who translate it
praesidia and confugia, I mean Theodation, and Symachus.

After this impugnation of the word Maozim, M. Downam goes on to object more
of the text, for he says that those words, He ^^all fortify Maozim with a
strange God, whom he has known, are thus in the original text, word for
word. And he shall do to the munitions of Mahuzzim with a strange God. Which we
are content to let pass, though we might very well oppose S. Hieromes skill in
hebrew to M. Downams, but we can in no sort admit his gloss upon his new
translation, that is, he shall commit the munitions of Mahuzzim, that is
Jerusalem, and the Cities of Iewry to a strange God. For this were to reject
all other tra^slatours besides M. Downa^, and not to stick to M. Downams
original text neither: for what similitude has (to do to) with (to commit?)
or how can M. Downam make (to a strange God) and (with a strange God) all one?
Is not S. Hieromes translation much more agreeable, who instead of (doing to
munitious S. Hiero^s Translation defended.
) interprets (causing to be fortifyed) and keeps (with a strange God) as it
is in the original? giving to understand, that this place of Antichrist shall be
fortified both by nature and art. Lastly M. Downam will needs turn the cat in
the pan, and make Antichrist a public Idolatour, and a secret Atheist, which
he says agrees more to Machiauillian policy, and fitteth better the
disposition of Antichrist. But M. Downam must know, that Antichrist shall far
exceed Machianell in wicked policy. Wherefore at the first he shall dissemble
this point, that he would be accounted the only God, till he has gotten
sufficient strength and reputation; and then he will satisfy his pride as well,
as use his policy, and this indeed is Antichrists Antichrist his disposition.
disposition, as appears by the Scripture, and in this place it is also
evident, that he shall play the Idolatour only in secret, since that he shall
choose to himself only one fortified place for that purpose, whereas that of
his extolling himself above all Gods, and not caring for them, has no such
restriction or limitation.

16. Thus M. Downam desisteth from impugning or answering of Bellarmins, and
falls to his own explication of the text, in which I will only touch so much
as makes to the present purpose, omitting his railing against the Pope, and
such other impertinone stuff.

First then, M. Downam affirms, that the abrogation of all the Religious of
the Syrians, is called v. 36. the magnifying himself above, or against every
God, and the same, he says, is repeated v. 37. in those words, unto the Gods
of his Fathers he shall not attend, and in those, neither will he regard any of
the Gods; And finally in those also; because he will magnify himself against
all. Where first we see, how bold M. Downam is with the Scripture against
Downams bouldnes with the Scriptures.
the interpretation of the Fathers, to limit that universal assertion so often
repeated in different words, only to the Gods of the Syrians which
notwithstanding the Scripture expresses by themselves. Now, what may not any
man make good that will be so impudent, as to wrest the Scripture in this sort?
And besides, M. Downam cannot show us, that Antiochus impugned any one God of
Syria; for though it were true that the Syrians only worshipped Apollo and
Diana, Antiochus impugned not the Gods of Syria.
yet he cannot show us, that Antiochus neglected the worship of these. The most
that he can object, is the assault he gave to the City of Persepolis, or
Elymais, in hope to have obtained the treasure left there by Alexander the
great, which Appianus in Ciriaco, and Clemens Alexandrinus in protreptico seem
to think, to have been dedicated to Venus, though the more probable opinion is,
that it was the temple of Diana, but this is no proof at all, that he impugned
Diana for religion, or in Syria, for he might have pretended to have brought
that treasure from Persia, where that temple was, into his own country; for
certain it is that he sought after the treasure, not esteeming to whom it did
belong: wherefore we read of no such matter that he did in Syria it self,
though he had Daphne so near him; yea to omit the testimony of Polybius, which
M. Downam mentioned. 13. the Scripture speaks of him still as of one that
worshipped many Idols, but destroyed none, for there is in diverse places
mention of his Idols 1. Match. 1. 45. and 50. besides that abominable Idol
which was placed in the temple upon the Altar v. 57. which seems to be the
Idol of Jupiter Olympius mentioned 2. Match. Antiochus worshipped many Gods.
6. v. 2. where also the Scripture speaks of Jupiter Hospitalis placed in
Garizim, and v. 7. there is express mention made of the feasts of Bacchus,
which he caused the Jews to cel^brate, and 2. Machab. 4. of Sacrifices to
Hercules. Finally there were other Idols placed upon the hill Modin, as is
plain, out of 1. Match. 1. v. 23. which place M. Downams great friend Porphyry
would needs have had to be understood by Maozim, for which S. Hierome worthily
laughed him to scorn, as no doubt he would have done M. Downam for his new and
most absurd interpretation. In which notwithstanding he proceeds so far that
he is not afraid altogether to corrupt and alter the text to that end, for
thus he translateth the 38. v. And as touching the God Mahuzzim, that is the
God Almighty, and there he pauseth, in his place he will honor even a God,
whom his Fathers knew not will he honor with gold and with silver, with
precious stones, and with Jewels, and (ver. 39.) he shall commit the munitions
of Mahuzzim, that is of the Almighty, unto a strange God; where you see
altogether a new text quite contrary to that Downam corrupts the text.
of S. Hierome, for this is the pertinacy of heretics, that when they can by
no means interpret the text according to their fancy, they will rather alter
the text it self, then leave their own opinion or interpretations. But any
wise man will easily see, that S. Hierome was both more learned, and more
indifferent, then M. Downam: and besides, who knows not, that the hebrew text
may be altered by diverse pointings, which M. Downam will no doubt use to his
own advantage? And yet after all this, he cannot frame his new text to his new
interpretation, except he suppose that Antiochus was the first in Syria which
ever worshipped Jupiter Olympius; which will be very hard for him to do. Neither
is i^ to the purpose to tell us, that the Syrians worshipped Apollo and Diana,
for this is no proof that they worshipped not Jupiter, and others also: as we
may plainly see by that which has been said that they did Bacchus and Hercules
etc. And Strabo, whom he cites, does not only tell us of the temple and wood
of Apollo, and Diana in Daphne, but also in the same 16. book, he makes
mention of the temple of Minerua, and of the wood of Aesculapius, and
affirms, that Hercules was greatly adored by them of Tyrus, and all this long
after Antiochus his time. And for his confirmation out of Dan. 7. 25. and 8.
11. the former place is to be understood of Antichrist, and the later shows
only how Antiochus was to spoil the temple of Jerusalem, in which we grant,
that he was a plain figure of Antichrist, but deny that he is spoken of in
this other place.

17. The application which M. Downam makes of this prophesy interpreted by
himself, is ridiculous and without proof, and therefore not to be answered in
this See part. 2. c. 5. etc.
place, but to be remitted to the second part of this Treatise where we shall
examine not only these, but also all other calumniations, which he lays upon
the Pope. Now it is sufficient, that it is plain out of that which has been
said, that except M. Downam corrupts the text, either of Bellarmines
solutions takes away all objections out of this place of Daniel.

18. Wherefore now let us see, what M. Downam answers to the Fathers, to
which he says, that Bellarmine faith or want of better proofs; where I would
willingly know, what better proofs any man can bring after the Scripture then
the Fathers, especially in such a matter as this whereof there can no other
reason be yielded, but only Gods will in permitting, and man's wickedness in
attempting, except we will add the Devils m^lice also, whom every man knows
to be ready ino^gh to tempt to any evil whatsoever: well what answers M.
Downam to these Fathers? that they either speak of the Idols and Idolatry of
the Gentiles only, or else, if they speak of all Idols in general, they
deserve such an Antichrist, as in this behalf is better then the Pope. But who
sees not, that the Fathers assertion is general, and withal M. Downams
distinction foolish. For who can worship Idols, but that he Downam rejects
the Fathers with a scoff.
shall commit Idolatry, and conform himself to the Gentiles in that? wherefore
the Fathers are contrary to M. Downams in both points. 1. that Antichrist
shall be an Idolater. 2. that the images of Saints are Idols, and therefore no
marvel, though M. Downam is constrained to reject their authority with a
scosse, telling them that they deserved a better Antichrist then the Pope: by
which he confesses that they would not have taken the Pope to be Antichrist,
as he most impudently does. And as for M. Downams opposing the Scriptures to
the Fathers, it is his only refuge, accompting nothing for Scripture, but his
own fancyes and interpretations, which how fond and foolish they are, has
already sufficiently appeared.

19. Lastly M. Downam comes to Bellarmines answer Illyricus his two
arguments, and first he is very angry with Bellarmine for saying, that their
doctrine is only built upon the Scriptures falssy expounded by new glosses, in
token The Protestants doctrine built upon new glosses of the Scripture.
whereof they alleadg not one interpreter or Doctor for them; which (he says)
is a malicious slander, witness this place which Bellarmine mentions 2 Thessalonians. 2. where they prove by the consent of many of the Fathers, that by the
temple is mea^t the Church of God, and that in the Church of God Antichrist was
to be revealed after the Roman Empire, which hindered, was taken out of the way
etc. which you see is but a very poor answer, though it were all true, but
now it is also altogether false: for Bellarmine showed before, that those
Fathers, which interpret the Temple of God, to be the Churches of Christ, do
in no sort deny, that Antichrist shall also sit in the Temple of Jerusalem,
yea the greater part do expressly affirm it: and besides by the Churches of
God, they understand not the Christian, and Catholic See cap. 13.
people, but the material Churches erected in the honor of Christ, which
Bellarmine proved so plainly, that M. Downam thought it his best course to
pass it over in silence without giving him any answer at all, or taking any
notice of any such proof. And the second point, so far as it is different from
the former, is affirmed also by us, for we only differ from the Protestants, in
that they affirm, that Antichrist is to be revealed in the Church of God. And
we also affirm, that he is not to be revealed till after the Roman Empire be
taken out of the way by the 10. Kings, which shall rule together at
Antichrists coming.

Wherefore, secondly M. Downam acknowledges, that their assertions concerning
Antichrist, are grounded on the prophesies of Scriptures, expounded by the
event: and that, the opinion of the Fathers agree with them, where they are
consonant to the Scripture, and the event: and that, the assertions of the
Papists are wholly grounded either upon the uncertain (and many times mis
alleged) contectures of the Fathers, who were no Prophets, and therefore
being not able to foresee the event, did not many times understand the
Prophesies etc. And is Downam acknowledges the Fathers to be against him.
not this all one in effect with that which Bellarmine affirms? Does not M.
Downam give us the Fathers conjectures, and expositions, and take to himself
the Scripture expounded by the event, which the Fathers were not able to
foresee? and consequently these expositions, by the event, must needs be since
the Fathers days, and therefore rightly called by Bellarmine new Glosses, and
how false they are, appears sufficiently by their contrariety to the
expositions of the Fathers, and by the confutation of Bellarmine: for this
device of M. Downam to make his exposition good by the event, is no more in
effect but to say, that he will first suppose as certain out of his own head,
and without all Scripture, that the Pope is Antichrist, and then afterward he
will make the Scripture say so by one device or other, and to all arguments
against this interpretation he will answer, that the event is clear, and
consequently the objection nothing worth. And this indeed is the Protestants
proceeding in all controversies, by which they make their own idle and foolish
fancy the rule of Faith, and of Scripture, and Fathers, The Protestants
proceeding in all controversies.
and all other proofs. After this M. Downam comes more nigh to his reply for
Illyricus, but first he disgraceth him fowly, calling him one of the vnsoundest
writers of his side: which how his brethren the Lutherans, who make so great
account of Illyricus, will put up, I neither know, nor greatly care. But I must
needs tell M. Downam, that he does Bellarmine great injury, Illyricus one of
the vnsou^dest Protestant writers in Downams judgment.
to charge him, that he does use to cull out some straggling sentences out of
some one of the vnsoundest writers; for all men know, that Bellarmine flies
none of their arguments, but many times affoardeth them some of his own, when
they want. And M. Downam should have showed us, what author that Bellarmine had
seen, has any better arguments then those of Illyricus for this point: for
his telling us, that he has proved it Bellarmin unjustly charged.
himself better in another place, only argues, that M. Downam has a good
conceit of himself, and that he has gotten some new devise since Bellarmine
wrote, as well in this, as in other things, but this is nothing against
Bellarmine, how good soever his proofs be, which the Reader shall judge, See
part. 2. c. 5.
after they be examined, and perhaps find them not so good, as M. Downam
imagines. Now let us examine his second charg against Bellarmine, in defense
of Illyricus, which is, that he depraueth his first reason, which is not (says
he) because the Downam cannot defend Illyricus.
Pope makes himself to be the Vicar of Christ, but this, because he vaunting
himself to be the Vicar of Christ, does notwithstanding usurp greater
authority then the Son of God claymed unto himself, of which that which
Bellarmine alleges as a second reason, is by Illyricus added as a proof.
But why then does Illyricus allege our Savior XXII. XXIII. XXIV.
to expound S. Paul, Which Bellarmine shows to be a threefould absurdity, and
M. Downam answers not a word; nor yet to Bellarmines censure of the
blindness and impudency Gal. 4. 4. Christ is said to be under the law. Luc. 2.
51. to be subject to his parents, because he observed and obeyed both, not
being bound to either.
of our adversaries, who some times utter such things as are against common
sense, by which M. Downam seems to acknowledge, that he has his share in
both. But no doubt we shall find a sound reply upon Bellarmines answer to
Illyricus his second argument, which M. Downam acknowledges to be his, and
replieth by calling it an impudent and shameless denial, that Christ
subjected himself to the law and word of God, or, that the Pope takes upon
him to dispense with the Scriptures, or, that any Catholik^ writer has said.
that he may dispense with Divine precepts: both which notwithstanding, M.
Downam says, that he has else where proved by many instances, and most evident
allegations, where by (both) he seems only to mean the two later, and so we
must take the first upon his poor credit, which might perhaps have had some
sway, if he had answered Bellarmines evident proof to the contrary, or
impugned his solution taken out of S. Chrysostom, and S. Augustine. But See
part. 2. c. 5.. 10. 11. 12.
since he is altogether silent in both, the Reader has good cause to suspect,
that he is so impudent and shameless, that he will affirm that, which he can
neither prove nor defend. And consequently at least suspend his judgment of
those many instances and most evident allegations, for the other two points,
which he boasts of till we come to that place, where they are to be examined.
And now for conclusion of this whole argument and discourse I will entreat the
Reader to consider his substantial reply against Bellarmines answer
concerning Illyricus his consequence; for thus M. Downam writes: for that
which he (Bellarmine) adds of Christ his subiecting himself to the
Prophesyes, and not to the precepts, as though Illyricus had spoken of the one
in his proposition, and of the other in the assumption, it is partly false,
and partly ridiculous, and indeed not worth the answering. Thus M. Downam, as
it seems, in a great chafe at Bellarmines unlearned answer. But good Sir,
vouchsafe out of your high wisdom to show us in what this answer is either
false or ridiculous; for is it probable, that Illyricus would be so mad, as to
affirm, that Christ was subject to the precepts of the law of Moses,
contained in the Scripture, and abrogated by Christ as Bellarmine shows? and
consequently when Illyricus in his Mayor, or proposition affirms, that Christ
subjected himself to the Scriptures, must it not needs be understood only of
the Prophesies? of which notwithstanding it is also false, as Bellarmine
proves, and when in his minor, or assumption he says, that the Pope
affirms, that he can dispense against an Apostle or Evangelist, and make
those things, which are right to be wicked, is it not also evident, that he
speaks only of precepts? Wherefore to me it seems also evident that M.
Downam is ridiculous at least, if not a false fellow to answer in this sort,
and that he most impudently called that not worth the answerering, which in his
own conscience M Downam Impudency.
he knew to be unanswerable. But yet I am content that the Reader shall judge
how far he deserves this censure, and that he may mitigate it, if it seem too
sharp and rigorous.

THE FIFTENTH CHAPTER. Of Antichrists Miracles.
OF the Miracles of Antichrist (says Bellarmine) there are three things in the
Scriptures: first that he shall do many Miracles. Secondly what manner of
Miracles they shall be. Thirdly, there are three examples set down. That
Antichrist shall work miracles, the Apostle teaches 2 Thessalonians. 2. Whose
coming is according to the operation of Satan in signs and wonders, and our
Lord in the Gospel Matthew. 24. They shall give signs and great wonders so
that the very elect shall be led into error if it be possible. They shall give
(says he) not, he shall give, because not only Antichrist, but also his
Mynisters shall work signs. In so much that S. Gregory says lib. 32. moral.
cap. 12. that the very tortures of the holy Martyrs shall then work wonders
and signs. Finally Apoc. 13. And he did many signs in the sight of men: What
manner of signs they shall be, S. Paul explicateth 2 Thessalonians. 2. saying in one
word, that they shall be lying: In all power and lying signs and wonders.

Now they shall be lying signs in respect of all causes, the final, efficient,
matter, and form; for the end of those miracles shall be to show, that
Antichrist is God, and the Messiah, which will be a most pernicious lie. S.
Chrysostom upon this place teaches, that those miracles are called lying,
because they shall induce to a lie. And S. Ambrose also upon this place
teaches, that the end of Antichrists miracles shall be to prove himself God, as
our Christ demonstrated his Divinity with true miracles. Secondly, they are
called whose coming is according to the operation of Satan. And all the
Fathers affirm, that Antichrist shall be a notable Sorcerer; yea that the
Devil from his conceptio^, or at least from his Infancy, shall dwell in
Antichrist and work signs by him. S. Cyril cateches. 15. having said, that
Antichrist shall be a Sorcerer, and furnished with Witchcrafts, Inchauntments,
and evil Arts, shows, that his miracles are called lying, because they shall
proceed from the Father of lies.

Many of the^ shall be also lying in respect of the matter, S. Cyril in the place
alleged, and Theodoret upon this place do teach: for he shall seem to raise
the dead, and heal the sick, but they shall be the illusions of the Devil,
not true resurrections or recoueryes; for which cause Apoc. 13. Antichrist is
said to do miracles in the sight of Men, that is, apparent and deluding the
sight of Men, not solid and true; as Arethas noted upon that place.

Finally, some of them shall be lying, in respect of the

There are three examples of Antichrists miracles put Apoc. 13. one, that he
shall make fire come down from Heaven. The second, that he shall make the
Image of the Beast to speak. The third that he shall faigne himself to dye,
and rise again. For which miracle chiefly almost all the world shall have him
in admiration. Of which miracles the two former shall be true in respect of the
matter, not in respect of the form, but the third in no manner.

But it may be objected against this, that all these Miracles S. John in that
place brings in two beasts, one which has 7. heads, and one of whose heads
seemed to dye and to rise again. The other less, who made fire to come down
from Heaven, and the Image to speak. If therefore Antichrist shall be the former
Beast, the two miracles of the fire and Image are not attributed to him. If he
shall be the latter beast, the miracle of the Resurrection cannot be attributed
to him.

I answer that the former beast signifies either the Roman Empire, or the
multitude of the wicked, as we said before; and one, that is the chiefest of
his heads, which seemed to die and rise again is Antichrist; for Antichrist
shall be the supreme and last head of the wicked, and he is the last King who
shall hold the Roman Empire; yet without name of Roman Emperor. And that this
feigned miracle of the Resurrection is doubtless to be atributed to
Antichrist, Primasius, Beda, Haymo, Richardus, Rupertus and Anselmus upon this
place do teach; and S. Gregory lib. 11. ep. 3. which is to be noted against
Lyranus, who expounds this of a certain Son of Cosdroas, whom he faigneth
to have been wounded in a battle and not killed, for no approved history
reports any such thing of the Son of Cosdroas, neither can that agree to
the Son of Cosdroas which follows in the Apocalypse: and the whole earth
wondered after the Beast, saying, who is like the beast?

Now the latter Beast in the Apocalypse according to Rupertus Richardus,
Anselmus, and others, the latter beast signifies the preachers of Antichrist,
who shall endeavor to show by miracles, that Antichrist is the true Messiah,
wherefore all these miracles shall either be Antichrists, or his Ministers.
Hence it follows that the Pope is not Antichrist, for never any Pope feigned
himself to die and rise again, nor he himself, or any of his preachers made
fire come down from Heaven, or the Image to speak.

But the Magdeburgenses object cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. col. visions of souls
babbling of Purgatory, and craving Masses to be said for them, and recovery from
sicknesses which have happened to the worshippers of Statua's, and vowers to
Saints.

I answer first: These are not the miracles, which S. John writes that
Antichrist shall do, but to die and rise again, to send fire from Heaven, and
give the Image power to speak; wherefore let them show, that these have been
don by the Pope or his followers. Secondly those 3. kinds of miracles were
used in the Church before that time, in which our adversaries say, that
Antichrist appeared, for S. Gregory writes lib. 4. dial. cap. 40. that the
soul of Paschasius a Deacon, who lived in the time of Pope Symachus about the
year of our Lord 500. appeared to S. German Bishop of Capua, and desired him
to pray for him, that he might be delivered from the torments of purgatory.
Certainly this miracle happened an hundred years before Antichrist appeared,
by the opinion of all the heretics of this time. For none of them does put the
coming of Antichrist, but after the year 600. and S. Gregory's death. The
same S. Gregory tells of other apparitions of souls asking Masses, in the
same book cap. 55.

Of the miracles of healing diseases for the veneration of Images, there is an
example extant in Eusebius lib. 7. hist. cap. 14. where he reports that there
was a brazen Statua erected to our Savior, by that woman which our Savior
healed from the issue of blood, and that there was wont to grow an herb under
that Statua, which being grown to the hemmes or skirts of the Image, and
touching it, healed all kinds of diseases; by which miracle it is evident that
God would approve the worship of holy Images.

Of the Recoueryes granted to them who had vowed Theodoretus recyteth, lib. 8.
ad Graces, qui est de Martyribus, is notable, that in his time the Temples of
Martyrs were full of little Tablets, or Portraicts of hands, feet, eyes,
heads, and other parts of men, by which were signified the diverse gifts of
healings, which men that had vowed, had received of the holy Martyrs.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downam will not contend with Bellarmine, but that Antichrist and
his Adherents shall work many signs, and wonders, and that they shall be
lying signs and wonders, both in respect of the end which is to seduce, and
confirm lies: and in respect of the substance, which is counterfayt: In which
latter clause M. Downam is a little confused, or at least not so clear as
Bellarmine, who distinguishes the substance, into matter and form, Antichrist
shall work many signs.
and shows how Antichrists signs shall be lying in both. But it is very
likely, that M. Downam past this over so slightly, because he agreed with
Bellarmine fully in that point: wherefore he comes to the efficient, and
author of these miracles, in respect of which Bellarmine also affirms, that
they are lying signs and wonders, because this efficient cause shall be the
Father of lies, according to whose power Antichrist was to come, who as some of
the Fathers affirm was to be a Magicia^ or notable Sorcerer. And here M.
Downam is somewhat doubtful, saying that it seems to be somewhat far fetched,
unless we will take the word (...) to be masculine, as none does. But what
means M. Downam by this phrase of far fetched? Is it not an ordinary matter,
that the effect should be denominated How Antichrists signs are said to be
lying signs.
of the efficient cause? Why was Manna called the Bread of Angels, but because
it was given by the Ministry of Angels? Wherefore we shall not need M. Downams
masculine; for Bellarmine goes not about to prove that the word lying,
signifies, that they shall be such, by reason of the efficient cause. But that
since they are to be wrought by the Devil, as the Apostle affirms; and M.
Downam acknowledges, and likewise all the Fathers agree, and not some only (as
M. Downam alleges Bellarmines words corruptly) that Antichrist shall be a
Sorcerer; it is also manifest, that they shall be wrought by the Father of lies,
and consequently of him, as well as for other respects, be called lying. But we
shall not need to stand any longer upon this, since M. Downam is content to
yield, because he does not doubt, but that he can apply this note also to the
Pope and Church See part. ^, c. 6.
of Rome; which how well he can do, it is not now time to examine, but in
another place.

2. The 2. Arguments which M. Downam frames out of these two positions, that
Antichrist shall work signs, and that they shall be lying, were too
ridiculous for Bellarmine to have made; who only notes those two points for
explication of the whole matter; and that the third point, from which he
draws his argument may be the better understood; for who sees not that those
things, which are common Miracles in general belong both to good and bad.
both to good and bad, as miracles in general are, can be no note only to know
the bad by? For that which M. Downam adds, that miracles in these latter
times belong only to Antichrist, is spoken without all ground, either of
Scripture or reason, and only affirmed by Protestants, because they can neither
work true miracles, being the Devils Ministers, nor false, because their
Master is not let loose Why Heretics can work no miracles at all.
yet, as he shall be in Antichrists time, which is the reason, why no Heretics
can work any miracles at all; but only the true Church true miracles, so long
as the Devil is bound, because God is always powerful; and Antichrists false
miracles in that short space, that the Devil shall be loosed and permitted to
use this manner of seducing, as well as all the rest. Now to prove or disprove,
that any is Antichrist because his signs are true or false, is a harder matter
then M. Downam takes it to be, as we shall see when we examine his See part.
2. c. 7.
objections, against the miracles which have been wrought in the Catholic
Church, and the Devil will carry his matters so craftily in Antichrists time,
that it will not be easy to descry that his miracles are any way false, as that
of Calvin, and some other Ministers was, who were taken tardy by the punishment
and confession of those whom they used in their knavery, as M. Downam may see
of Calvin, if he please to turn to Bellarmine lib. 4. de Ecclesia Militante
cap. 14. where also he shall find that miracles are not always the signs of
Antichrist.

3. Concerning the 3. miracles from which Bellarmine Downam answers that the
two first do fitly agree to the Pope, as he has showed elsewhere, which See
part. 2. c. 7.
we leave to examine till we come to that place. The 3. says M. Downam
belongs not to Antichrist, and he takes it to be a very fond assertion, that
Antichrist shall faigne himself to dye, and by the help of the Devil shall
rise again: for, says M. Downam, if his death be but counterfaite, he shall
not need the Devils help to raise him; but I have showed before, that if the
death had not ben counterfaite, it had passed the Devils cunning to have
raised him again; and I hoped well that M. Downam had not been so resolute, as
he is, that the Devils help is not necessary to do counterfaite miracles; by
which he seems still to Downam seems to think that the Devil can do true
miracles.
insinuate, that the Devil may truly raise a man from death to life, but yet
he says it not plainly, and therefore I will not charge him with it, but only
tell him once more that the Devils help shall be necessary in the contryuing of
this counterfeit miracle, that it may be carried so cunningly that no man may
be able to perceive, but that he was truly dead, and truly raised again; so
that he will make the wound appear more dangerous, then indeed it shall be.
Likewise he will procure, that there shall be all signs of death, so that See
c. 5. n. 5.
none shall doubt, but that he is truly dead. Thirdly he will show his cunning
in the cure of this wound, which shall seem desperate and exceeding all
natural art, and yet he will heal it so suddenly and so perfectly, and so
secretly, that it will seem altogether impossible to be any other, then a
true resurrection from death. And by this time M. Downam I hope will acknowledge
what a fond man he was, to think this a fond asser^ion, and if he be so fond
of himself, that h^ cannot be brought to see his own folly, yet I nothing
doubt, but the Readers will be more indifferent; wherefore let us now see, what
M. Downam can say against the place of Scripture which is thus expounded by the
Fathers; Apoc. 13.
he answers first that those words are not to be understood of Antichrist,
because the former beast described in that Chapter, is not Antichrist, but the
Roman Empire, especially under the persecuting Emperors, as, says he, has
been showed, every part of that description fitting the same; but how well and
how fitly, he has showed this, we shall see afterward, till when, we rather
believe the consent of the ancient interpreters, then M. Downams new devise.
Secondly he affirms that the later beast signifies Antichrist, and this he
affirms to be in a manner confessed of all, for proof whereof he alleges
Bellarmine himself in the beginning of his tenth Chapter of this book, where
he affirms that the 3. last verses of this 13. Chapter of the Apoc. are
confessed by all wholly to apperteyne to Antichrist: where you must mark two
cunning shifts of M. Downam, first in translating (omnin^, wholly) whereas
Downam translateth not well.
Bellarmine could by no means use it in that sense, since it is manifest even
by M. Downams consent, that in those words, both the Beasts are spoken of; for
it is plainly said, that the latter beast shall cause all men to have the
Character, or the name, or the number of the name of the former beast; which
notwithstanding M. Downam seems wylling enough to dissemble in this place:
for which cause he alleges only the beginning of the words thus. And he shall
make all both small and great etc. which no doubt belong to the latter beast
indeed; and this is his second devise. But M. Downam takes Bellarmines words
in a contrary sense.
Downam knows well enough, that Bellarmine alleged not those words to show,
who should cause men to take the Character etc. but to prove, that Antichrist
was to have a particular name signified by that number, and a particular
Character spoken of in that place; both which evidently belong to the former
beast, and therefore it is also most manifest, that Bellarmine affirms the
quite contrary of that M. Downam would have him say, viz. that not the latter,
but the former beast is confessed by all to be Antichrist, which is most true
indeed, as he shows in this chapter. Neither is the proof which M. Downam
brings out of this chapter any better, for Bellarmine expressly explicateh
himself, that he calls the two latter miracles, the miracles of Antichrist,
because they shall be done by his Ministers, and those which they do, are to be
attributed to him, as is evident in there. v. Et potestatour prioris b^sti^
omnem faciebat in conspectu (...): and he (the latter beast) did the power of
the former beast in his fight: and consequently whatsoever he does by the
formers power, is to be attributed unto him. And thus we see, what poor
proofs M. Downam has to prove, that the latter beast is Antichrist; since
that he can produce no better authorityes, but only two places of Bellarmine
misunderstood at the least, if not corrupted.

Now then set us see, how he impugneth the opinion Rupertus in particular, who
affirms that Antichrist is sighted by both these beasts, as Bellarmine
afterward explicateth, This cannot be, says M. Downam, unless we may say that
the sornier and latter are one and the same, which cannot be, since that v. 11.
the latter is said to be (...), another beast. But to this Rupertus might
easily answer, that two distiuct beasts may signify one thing, as is manifest;
though indeed their descriptions are so diverse, that it is hard to apply all
the particulers of both to one man, and therefore we rather think with the
common opinion, that by the latter is understood either one, or many false
Prophets of Antichrist, whom S. Irenaeus deservedly calls armigerum, because
he, or they shall not only use persivasions, but also force, as is manifest by
the text, The 2. beast Apoc. 13. signifies. Antichrist his false Prophet.
which needs not to seem hard to any that considers how both these offices
are exercised by the Protestant false Bishops in our Country against
Catholics: and this common exposition is much consumed out of the 16. 19. and
20. Chapters, where this second beast is called a false Prophet, and joined
with the former beast, and the Devil also in doing mischief, and suffering
eternal torments for the same.

4. In Bellarmines answer to his own objection M. Downa^ takes great hold
of that he grateth, that the former beast may signify the Roman Empire, though
he speaks doubtfully, and joins another exposition with it, which indeed is
the more probable of the two, out of which he makes many illations, but
proves none, and therefore it is sufficient in this place to deny them all, and
remit the Reader for both our reasons, to the several places where they are
handled at large: only thus much we may note now, that since, as we have
already proved, the 7. head which is Antichrist, is not to come till the 6.
which is the Roman VII. VIII
Empire, be wholly taken away, it is most manifest that the Apoc. 13.
Pope can by no probability be the seventh head, since that the Emperor as
yet remains. And withal I would The Pope cannot be signified by the 7. he^d
of the beast. Apoc. 13. and 17.
desire the Reader to put all M. Downams arguments in form, that he may better
discover his folly, and make himself sport: for how does it follow, Antichrist
shall be head of the Roman Empire, ergo, not of the Jews? Antichrist shall be
head of the Roman Empire, ergo, his chiese Seat, or Sea shall be not Jerusalem,
but Rome, and he shall not be one particular Man? only one of his illations is
good against Bellarmine, viz. that if the beast signifies the Roman Empire,
the name of the beast may very well be said to be Roman or Latin. But this
agrees not with the number of 666, as Bellarmine proved, and besides it is
certain also, that the name of Antichrist himself is signified by that
number, and consequently that he is signified by the former beast, and not the
Roman Empire. Neither can M. Downam in any case admit that the seventh head of
The 7. heads of the beast Apoc 13. are not the same with those of Apoc. 17.
this former beast Apoc. 13. is Antichrist, since that he affirms that
Antichrist is signified by the latter beast, wherefore both Bellarmine and he
must of necessity grant, that this beast Apoc. 13. is different from the
other, cap. 17. and indeed it is very evident that Antichrist and the 7. Kings,
which shall acknowledge him, are spoken of in the 13. Chapter, and in the 17.
other 7. far different from these, as we shall presently see.

5. The objections which M. Downam makes against Bellarmines second
interpretation, prove as well against Downam impugneth himself.
the first, which is his own; for what world wondreth after the Roman Empire,
but such as are in some sort subject or belong to it? Who are all those
Inhabitants of the earth, that do worship it? What are all the Tongues,
Kindreds, Nations which are made subject unto it? For if this be absolutely
understood of all the wicked and reprobate, it is false, that they all do thus
wonder, or worship, or are subject to the Roman Empire; and if it be only
understood of some, viz. of those, which belong to the Roman Empire, then the
difficulty is as great, how the Roman Empire is said to wonder etc. after it
self: as how the multitude of the wicked may do the same; and besides, M.
Downam has one difficulty more to explicate, then those which follow this
second interpretation have: for he must show us, how all this wondering, and
worshipping, and subjection came upon the restoration of the Empire in the
West, which he will needs have to be the healing of the head, which was wounded
as it were to death: for experience has showed us the quite contrary, viz.
that the Roman Empire has ever since gone more and more to decay, and had a
far greater part of the world subject unto it before, then since. Wherefore
all this still conuinceth, that this beast Apoc. 13. is neither the Roman
Empire, nor Apoc. 13.
the multitude of the wicked, but Antichrist himself, of whom all those
sayings are to be verifyed, and the 7. heads are the 7. Kings, which shall
yield themselves to Antichrist, and join with him in persecuting the Church.
Neither does the beast mentioned cap. 17. signify Apoc. 17.
the Roman State or Empire, or the multitude of the wicked, but the Devil
himself; and the 7. heads which he has signify either the Kings which
reigned in the 7. ages of the World, as it is commonly held by Catholics, or
else the 7. diverse governments of the Roman State, as M. Downam will needs have
it, because otherwise his whole devise of proving the Pope Antichrist out of
this place is quite overthrown. But we will show in due place that this his
exposition is nothing so probable as the other. And though it were true in this
point, yet it cannot stand in the rest, in which he would ground his inference
against the Pope.

6. Wherefore M. Downams discourse of the 3. wounds, which the Roman Empire
received at the death of Julius Caesar, by civil wars, and of Nero, by
vncerteynty of succession, and in Augustulus by his overthrow, and of their
several healinges, is altogea^her impertinent and ridiculous, for now we seek
only for one and the last, which makes most to his purpose, Downam impugneth
him self.
is indeed flatly against him, since that in his opinion the Pope healed this
wound, whom he would have to be signified by the 2. beast; whereas the
Scripture witnesses that it was healed by the first Beast; and that before the
second appeared. Likewise if we will believe M. Downam, the healing of this
wound, and the erecting of the Image is all one, since that both are nothing
else, but the erecting of the West Empire, under Charles the Great, and the like
he must say of making the former beast to be worshipped; for M. Downam has no
other devise left for all these several actions, but only the bare erecting of
the Roman Empire by the Pope. And yet he will have this also to be so mean a
thing, that in substance it shall be nothing at all, and that indeed not this new
Emperor but the Pope himself shall be the head of the Roman Empire all this
while, and the Emperor shall only stand for a cipher to make up the number of
8. whereas notwithstanding the Scripture plainly says, that there are 8.
without him, not heads as M. Downam seems to imagine, but Kings, the beast
making one himself, as the Scripture expressly testifies, cap 7. v. 12. which
can by no means be understood of the Roman Empire, except M. Downam will make
the Empire it self an Emperor, which is too absurd; for of what should it be
Emperor? Wherefore it is manifest, that by the Beast is understood the Devil,
who indeed is distinct from the other 7. as is manifest, and therefore By the
beast Apoc. 17. the Devil is understood.
may well be accounted the 8. and yet b^longeth to all the 7. because he
concurred with them all in their wickedness, and in the persecution of the good;
and it is also manifest, that he was in the world before Christ's coming, much
more then he has been since, and shall be more again hereafter in Antichrists
time, then ever he was before: after which he shall go into eternal
destruction, as S. John affirms.

7. And by this we may see, that Bellarmines exposition conteyneth no absurdity
at all, nor can be impugned by any found ground, so far as concerns the
substance Apoc. ^3.
thereof, for all that can be objected against it, is, that it se^meth (...) to
explicate, how Antichrist should be signified (...) himself, and also by one
of his heads, (...) very probable, that it is not Antichri^^ (...) this deadly
wound, but one of the 7. Kings signified by those 7. heads, who shall concur
with Antichrist in his wickedness; for S. John speaks of particular Kings,
and not of several States, is manifest by that which has been said, and shall
hereafter be again confirmed. And thus we may conclude this Chapter, for M.
Downam replyeth not a word to Bellarmines answer to the objection of the
Magdeburgians.

THE SIXTENTH CHAPTER. Of the Kingdom, and Wars of Antichrist.
OF the Kingdom and Wars of Antichrist, Bellarmine) 4. things in the
Scriptures. First, that Antichrist rising from a most base place shall obtain
the Kingdom of the Jews by deceit and craft. Secondly, he shall fight with
3. Kings, riz. of Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia: and that he shall overcome them,
and postesse their Kingdoms. Thirdly, that he shall subdue other 7. Kings, and
by that means become the Monarch of the whole world. Fourthly, that he shall
persecute the Christians with an innumerable army through the whole world, and
that this is the battle of of Gog and Magog; of all which, since nothing
agrees to the Pope, it follows manifestly, that he can by no means be
called Antichrist.

Of the first thus speaks Dan. cap. 11. There shall stand in his place a
contemptible one, and Kingly honor shall not be given to him, and he shall
come secretly, and shall obtain a Kingdom in deceit. Upon which place S.
Hierome writes, that although these words be in some sort understood of
Antiochus Epiphanes, yet they are far more perfectly to be fulfilled in
Antichrist, as those things which are said of Solomon, are indeed understood
Psalm. 71.
of Solomon, but are more perfectly fulfilled of Christ: wherefore S, Hierome
in the same place after he had expounded this place of Antiochus, following
P^rphery writes thus: But our men better and more rightly interpret, that
Antichrist shall do these things in the end of the world; who is to rise of a
mean nation that is of the people of the Jews, and shall be so base and object,
that the Kingly honor shall not be given him, and he shall obtain the
Princedome by wiles and deceipts etc. Where Saint Hierome signifies, that this
is the common exposition of Christians, for which cause also Daniel cap. 7.
compares Antichrist with a little horn, viz. by reason of his base and
obscure beginning.

And certainly this first does in no sort agree to the S. Augustine epist. 162.
says: In the Roman Church always flourished the Princedome of the Apostolic
Chair* and S. Prosper lib. 2. de vocat. gentium cap. 6. Rome by the Princedome
of preisthood is made more ample by the sortresse of Religion then by the
throne of power; and the Council of Calcedon epist. ad Leonem, affirms, that
at Rome do shine the Apostolic beams, which from thence extend themselves to
all, and communicate their treasures with others. Finally even that Heathen
writer Amianus Marcellus l. 27. writing of the schism of Damasus, and
Vrsicinus says, that he does not marvel, if men strive so earnestly for the
Bishopric of Rome, since that the riches and amplitude of it are so great.

Of the second, the same Dan. cap. 7. speaks thus: I considered the horns,
and behold another little horn arose in the midst of them, and three of the
first horns were pulled up before his face; and after explicating: Moreover
(says he) the ten horns, are ten Kings, and another shall rise after them,
and he shall be more mighty then the former, and shall humiliate 3. Kings, And
cap. 11. explicating who these three Kings be, He shall send his hand (quoth
he) into lands, and the land of Egypt shall not escape: and he shall have
dominion of the treasures of gould and silver, and in all the precious things
of Egypt, and he shall pass also through Lybia, and Ethiopia. Upon which
places and especially upon cap. 7. S. Hierome writing, says: Let us say that
which all Ecclesiastical VVriters have delivered. In the consu^mation of the
world, when the Kingdom of the Romans is to be destroyed there shall be ten
Kings, who shall divide the Roman world amongst them, and there shall arise an
eleventh little King (Antichrist) who shall overcome three of the ten Kings,
that is of the Egyptians, and of Africa, and Ethiopia, who being slain, the
other 7. Kings, shall also submit themselves to the Conqueror. The same do
teach of the three Kings to be slain by Antichrist, S. Irenaeus lib. 5.
Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 16. and Theodoretus in cap. 7. and 11. Daniel.

And this most of all refuteth the madness of heretics, Egypt, of Lybia, and
Ethiopia, and usurped their Kingdom? Theodorus Bibliander in his Chronicle
says, that the Pope, as a little horn shaked the first horn of the ten, when
Gregory the second excommunicated Leo the Greek Emperor the Image breaker,
and prohibited the tributes of Italy to be rendered unto him, and by little, and
little obtained his Princedome, that is, the Exarchate of Rauenna. He says,
that he shaked off the second horn, when Pope Zachary deposed Childerichus
King of the French, and commanded Pepin to be created in his steed. Of the
third he speaks not plainly, but he seems to insinuate that the third
horn was then stricken of when Gregory the 7. excommunicated and deposed Henry
the 4. Emperor. There is also extant a certain Epistle of Fredericus the
second Emperor of that name, written against the Pope, in which he affirms,
that the three horns pulled up by Antichrist, are the Kingdom of Italy,
Germany, and Sicilie, which the Pope had chiefly made to serve him.

But these are most vain cauills, for first Daniel speaks France, or
Germany, but of the Kingdom of Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia. Besides, the Pope
has slain none of those Kings, but Antichrist shall kill those 3. Kings, as
S. Hierome says. Likewise Antichrist shall usurp those Kingdoms to himself,
and not give them to others, but the Pope kept not the Kingdom of France to
himself, but gave it to Pepin, and having deposed one Emperor, commanded
another to be created, and usurped not the Empire to himself. And in like
manner when he deprived the Emperor Leo of the Princedome of R^^e^na, he
challenged not that Princedome to himself, but permitted the Kings of the
Lombardes to have it, which notwithstanding afterward Pepin (having overcome
the Lombards) gave to the Pope. Finally, if to depose Princes, be to shake off
horns, there will not be only three, but many more pulled off by Antichrist.
For it is manifest, that besides Leo the 3. the Greek, and Childericke the
French King, there have been deposed by Popes, Henry the 4. by Gregory the 7.
Otho the 4. by Innocentius the 3. Frederike the 2. by Innocentius the 4. all
which lost their Empire in very deed.

Of the third we have most plain testimonies of the Lactantius lib. 7. cap.
16. and S. Irenaeus lib. 5. say, that after Antichrist has slain 3. of the
10. Kings the rest forth with shall be subdued by him, and then he shall be
Prince of all. S. Hierome in cap. 11. Dan. upon that place, And he shall do
those things, which his Fathers have not done. None of the Jews (says he)
besides Antichrist ever reigned in the whole world. S. Chrysostom in 2 Thessalonians.
2. affirms, that Antichrist shall be a Monarch, and succeed the Romans in the
Monarchy, as the Romans succeeded the Grecians, the Grecians the Persians, and
the Persians the Assyrians.

Finally, S. Cyril Cateches. 15. says, that Antichrist Apoc. 17. where we
read: And the ten horns which thou have seen, are ten Kings. These have one
Counsel, and will give their force and power to the beast. Now it is certain
that this no way agrees to the Bishop of Rome, for the Pope never was King of
the whole world.

Of the 4. S. John speaks Apoc. 20. And when the thousand years shall be
consummated, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go forth, and
seduce the Nations, which are upon the four corners of the earth, Gog, and
Magog, and shall gather them into battle, the number of whom, is as the sand
of the sea. And they ascended upon the breadth of the earth, and compossed the
Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City. And there came down fire from God
out of Heaven, and devoured them, and the Devil which seduced them was cast
into the poole of fire and brimstone, where both the beast and the false
Prophet shall be tormented day and night, for ever and ever. In these words is
described the last persecution, and the end of it. Of which S. Augustine
speaks thus, lib. 20. de ciuitate Dei, cap. 11. This shall be the last
persecution, the last judgment being at hand, which the Holy Church shall
suffer in the whole world, viz. the whole City of Christ, of the whole City
of the Devil, how great soever both of them are upon earth. The like are in
Ezechiel 38. 39. which are briefly to be expounded by reason of many errors,
which have been of this matter.

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. MASTER Downam answers first jointly to all these found in the
Scriptures, which you must understand according to his interpretation, who
affirms, that the Prophesies of Daniel cap. 11. and Dan. 7. ^^.
7. were to have their complement before the coming of the Messiah; which
notwithstanding he acknowledges to be against both Jews, and all ancient
Christians, who all agree against M. Downam, that by the two legs of the Image
cap. 2. and the fourth beast with 10. horns cap. 7. the Roman Monarchy, Dan.
2. 7.
and not the Kingdom of the Selcucidae and Lagidae is signified; which
difference as M. Downam well notes, is the occasion, why both the Jews, and
Christians constantly affirm, that all which is said of the two legs, and the
fourth beast could not be fulfilled before the coming of Christ, but only thus
far, that this fourth Kingdom of the Romans was to be in the world before his
coming. Neither does it follow hence, that whatsoever is spoken of the little
horn cap. 7. 8. Dan. 7. 8. 11. Dan. 8.
11. is by them expounded, at least literally of Antichrist: for first they
all agree, that all the 8. Chapter is plainly to be understood of Antiochus,
and in no sort of Antichrist but only by application, and accommodation.
Likewise in the 11. Dan. 11.
they admit so much to be understood of Antiochus, as can be applied to him,
but all cannot, and therefore part must of force be referred to Antichrist even
literally; and that which may be verified of Antiochus, must likewise be
understood of Antichrist, in whom it is more perfectly to be fulfilled. But in
the 7. chap. there is no mention at all of Dan. 7.
Antiochus, but only of Antichrist, neither is it the same little horn, which
is spoken of in that Chapter, and in the 8. as is most manifest: for the little
horn in the 7. Chapter belongs to the 4. beast, and that in the 8. to the
third, that is to the Monarchy of the Grecians, and the successors of King
Alexander, as is most manifest v. 8. and. 9. where the 4. heads, which that
Monarchy is said to have cap. 7. The little horn Dan. 7. is not the same with
the little horn Dan. 8.
because it was to be divided among four Kings, after Alexanders death, are
called 4. horns, out of one of which this little horn is said to proceed, as
indeed Antiochus did. But the little horn which is spoken of in the 7. chap.
arose in the midst of the 10. horns, which the 4. beast is said to have. Now
in the 11. Chap. there is not any mention of any horns at all, but of the
Kings of Egypt, and Syria, and chiefly of Antiochus, and by occasion of him of
Antichrist, as has been said.

2. But M. Downam tells us, that the learned of our times, have made the
contrary clear: but he omitteth their proofs, and only alleges out of S.
Hierome, that Porphyry that learned, Praefat. in Dan.
though malicius enemy of Christianity, perceived Daniels Prophesies in the 7.
8. 11. and 12. Chapters, so fully and perfectly to agree to Antiochus
Epiphanes, that he affirmed that they were written not before hand by Daniel,
but after the fulfilling of them by some one that lived in the times of
Antiochus Epiphanes. But M. Downam finds not in S. Hierome those 4. Chapters
specified, which he sets down, but only a general assertion, that Daniel
seemed rather to Hierome and three other ancient writers wrote expressly against
Downams exposition.
have written a story then a prophesy: yea S. Hierome plainly conuinceth both
Porphiry and all his followers, which are M. Downams learned men, and himself,
that neither the 7. nor the 11. and 12. Chapters can be wholly understood of
Antiochus, and in this agreed with him all writers, as well Christians as Jews,
and in particular Methodius, Eusebius, and Apollinaris wrote largely against
Porphyry answering his mad objections, among which no doubt this was one which
M. Downam and his learned men take upon them so stiffely to defend, and for
that cause will seem to some to partake with Porphyry in his malicious cauills.

3. Thus far M. Downam has been constrained to fly to Porphyry, that wicked
Gentile, against both Jews and Christians. Now he has gotten himself a Jew
to join Dan. 7. 11.
with him against the Pope, for so he says, that not only Protestants, but
also the Jews, and namely R. Leui Gerson expounds the 7. and 11. chap. of
Dan. as spoken of the Pope of Rome, whom he calls another Pharao: which
pleases this man very well, who thinks that he has gotten a great advantage
against the Pope, because not only Heretics, but also Jews themselves impugn
him. And yet fearing least this Rabbin be not able to make his party good, he
still sticks rather to Porphyry, affirming, that only Antiochus is literally
spoken of Antiochus a type of Antichrist only in some principal points.
in those places, and that consequently, there can no sound argument concerning
Antichrist be taken from them, because Antiochus was a tipe of Antichrist, not
in all and every particular, but in some principal matters. In which M. Downam
says true, and I think there was never yet any so mad, as to avouch the
contrary, and the like no doubt is to be said of the Types of Christ, which M.
Downam alleges, only the controversy may be, what those principal matters
are, in which Antiochus was the Type of Antichrist. But even in these also he
seems to affirm, that there can be no sound argument taken from the Tipe,
for he universally allows of that rule of Divinity, set down by the
Schoolmen, that, Theologia Symbolica non est argumentatiua, which
notwithstanding, he must understand praecise, and per se, as the Schoolmen do,
in which sense it only signifies, that it is no good argument in all points to
argue from the Type, to that which it signifies; which is all, that his other
argument of Allegories proves also. And consequently it will still be a good
argument from the allegorical, mystical, or spiritual How we may argue from
the mystical sense.
sense to infer such things as the type is a figure of. As for example, now
that we know by the Scripture, that the Paschall Lamb was a figure of Christ,
not only in other respects, but also in that the bones of it were not to be
broken, we may very well bring that place of Exodus 12. necos illius
confringetis, to prove, that Christ had not his thighs broken, as the two
thieves had. And the reason of this is, for that the mystical and spiritual
sense, is as well intended by the holy Ghost, as the Litteral or Hystorical, yea
for the most part in the old Testament much more, as is evident by the place
alleged; wherefore the only cause, why we cannot use it in our proofs, is,
because it is hidden and uncertain, so that when it is known certainly, it
conuinceth as much as the litteral does: for which cause the Apostles, to whom
Except the litteral sense be certain we cannot argue firmly from it.
it was revealed, used it so often. But we can prove nothing firmly either by
the mystical, or litterall sense, except we be sure, that we have the right of
each, which we can never se by our own wits and industry without the
assistance of that spirit, with which al Scriptures were written. Neither can
any man in particular without great presumption, and evident danger of error,
promise this assistance to himself, but no doubt the Church of Christ is never
without it, and therefore we may boldly build upon any exposition, which she
houldeth for certain, as she does all those, in which all the Fathers,
Doctors, and Pastors given unto her, by her spouse, do fully agree, as we see
they do in expounding this place of Antichrist: and therefore we are to be out
of doubt, that it is a true exposition, whether it be litteral or spiritual,
of which there may be some question; Neither does M. Downam seem much to
strive, but that in some things concerning Antichrist, the proof out of this
place is good enough. But he would have us give him leave to choose them out,
which we can do with no security, except he first show us an authentical
warrant, for so high and special a privilege: which because he can never be
able to do, we must of force neglect his babbling, and listen to the consent of
the Fathers, to whom it does belong to show The consent of the Fathers makes
either litterall or mystical sense certain.
us, in what points Antiochus, and Antichrist are to agree, and in what to
differ, as Bellarmine does in this place; though (as I noted before) there be
many things in the 11. chapter. which cannot be understood of Antiochus, and
therefore are literally to be referred to Antichrist, and much more all that,
which is spoken of the little horn in the seventh chapter, in which there is
no mention of Antiochus at all.

4. After this general answer, M. Downam comes II.
to examine the particular Instances, and to the first he answers in two
sorts: First, that Daniel speaks not of Antichrist, which he says, shall
appear out of Daniel himself, for Daniel speaks of Dan. 11.
him, that immediately in the Kingdom of Syria succe^ded Seleucus Philopater,
for so he says, in his place, who was descrybed verse. 20. shall Antichrist
shall arise from base estate.
stand up a vile person, meaning thereby Antiochus etc. Thus M. Downam, proving
very well that Antiochus is spoken of, which no man denied, and Bellarmine
expressly alleges S. Hieromes exposition in that sense; but withal adds,
that all Christians understood it also of Antichrist, and that more rightly in
S. Hieromes judgment. This M. Downam should have impugned: which he in no sort
does, by telling us, that Antiochus is spoken of, because both Antiochus and
Antichrist may be spoken of, if not literally, at least spiritually, which is
sufficient, so that it be certain, that those words are to be applied to him,
as S. Hierome and the other Christians thought that they were.

5. After this, M. Downam enters into a large discourse, telling us first,
that excepting one prophetical comfort of the Resurrection, cap. 12. Daniels
whole Prophecy is of those things which happened within less then 700.
years, that is to say, from the taking Daniels prophecy contains many
things concerning the end of the world.
of Jerusalem by the Chaldaeans, unto the final destruction thereof by the
Romans. Where first we are glad, that we have gotten M. Downams consent of that
Prophecy of the Resurrection; for surely it is very probable, that it is not
alone, but joined with many other concerning the consummation of the world, to
which the coming of Antichrist does belong. And this both the text it self,
and S. Hierome, and all other Ecclesiastical Writers persuade us, and therefore
we must needs think so, until M. Downam conuinceth evidently the contrary,
which I am afraid, he will very hardly do. But let us see, what he can say
for himself. Secondly therefore he faith, that Daniels Prophesies concern,
either such terrestrial Kingdoms, unto whose Tyranny the Jews were subject
before the coming of the Messiah, or else the spiritual Kingdom of Christ,
before Downam contradicts himself.
which, all the former Kingdoms were to have an end. But this seems somewhat
contrary to that he said before, when he confessed that Daniels Prophecy
reaches to the final destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, and consequently
there must needs in his opinion, be mention in Dan. of the terrestrial
Kingdom of the Romans, which without doubt, was not ended, before the coming
of Christ; well, we will not urge him too far with this, but rather consider
The King domes where of Daniel speaks were not to be ended before Christ.
how he proves, that all the terrestrial Kingdoms of which Daniel speaks
were to have an end before the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, for it seems
somewhat contrary to Daniel himself, who affirms, that the Kingdom of
Christ should be raised by God in the days of those Kingdoms, whereof he
spoke. In diebus autem Regnorum illorum suscitabit Deus Cali Regnum, quod in
aeternum etc. But yet M. Downam brings for the contrary Dan. 2. 4. 35. and 7.
11. and ver. Dan. 2.
26. 37. The first of which places is a little misprinted, for that 4. should
be 34. in which, and the following verse it is said, that the stone, which was
cut out of the Mountain without hands (that is our Savior borne of our
Blessed Lady by the holy Ghost without the seed of man) should strike the
Statua upon the iron feet, and break them, and by that means the whole should
be dissolved, and come to nothing. But I cannot see how this proves M. Downams
intent, but rather the quite contrary; for if our Savior shall destroy these
Kingdoms, surely they were not to be ended before his coming, and at least
the feet, and the ten toes must remain, and be stricken by this stone; as
indeed they shall at his second coming, when he shall overcome the ten Kings,
among whom the Roman Empire shall be divided; who shall fight against him as S.
John records Apoc. 17. both before the coming of Antichrist and after also,
so many, and so long as they shall continue. When our Savior is to destroy the
Kingdoms, signified by the Statua of Nabuchodonosor.
Neither may it seem hard, that Nabuchodonosor in his dream related by
Daniel, did see the stone first strike the Statua, and after become so great,
that it filled the whole world; for this is to be atributed to the obscurity of
Prophesies, and therefore Daniel in his explication stands not upon that
circumstance, but rather insinuates the contrary, explicating first the
stability and perpetuity of Christ's Kingdom in this world; and then how he
should destroy all the Kingdoms of this world, and finally reign for ever in
the next. The second place cap. 7. 11. is most plainly against M. Downam, for
in the two precedent verses is described Da^. 7.
the coming of God to judgment, before which no doubt, all these Kingdoms
and Kings, together with Antichrist himself shall have an end, and the same
is as plainly repeated v. 26. in which is declared both the coming of God to
Judgment, and the final overthrow, and destruction of the wicked, and v. 27.
the amplitude and perpetuity of the Kingdom of Christ and his Saints, which
is chiefly to be understood of the next world, and only When Christ began
spiritually to overthrow those Kingdoms.
spiritually in this; after which manner Christ began to overthrow all the
Kingdoms of the world from the beginning, by rooting out Idolatry, and
planting his Church through the whole world. Those other places, which M.
Downam quoteth concerning the coming of Christ into this world, and the
destruction of Jerusalem make nothing against us, though some of them are not
very fitly applied by him as the Reader will easily discern of those, which he
brings out of the new Testament. But I will let them pass, and only note
that which makes a little Matthew. 2. and 3. Mar. 1. and 10.
to our purpose, that M. Downam misinterpreteth Dan. 7. 13. of the ascension of
our Savior, whereas it is evident by the text, that it is to be understood of
his coming to Judgment, of which it is said v. 10. Iudicium sedit, and libri
aperti Dan. 7.
sunt, that God the Father did fit in Judgment and the books were opened, that
is, it was the time of Judgment, when Daniel did see our Savior come to him.
After this M. Downam only recites his exposition of the 4. beast cap. 7. and
the legs and feet of the Statua cap. 2. which he will needs have to be the
Kingdom of the Seleucidae, and Lagidae, but Dan. 2. and 7.
how foolishly, we shall see after, when he comes to his proofs, for now he
only affirms it upon his bare word, which with us has no credit at all, and
I think will not have much with any man else, at least, if he be any thing
indifferent, and will vouchsafe to read this discourse.

6. Well M. Downam goes forward with his exposition (such as it is) especially
of the 11. Chapter of Dan. in which he says many things called in question by
none, Dan. 11.
and others denied by all; of the first sort I need say nothing, and the other
are so apparently false and foolish, that it will be enough to touch them
briefly; as first, when he says, The 4. Kingdoms, into which that of
Alexander was divided belong to the 3. beast described Dan. 7. and not to the 4.
that in the 8. and 11. chap. the 3. latter, and especially the last Kingdom
spoken of cap. 2. and 7. is prophesied of; who sees not the absurdity of this
assertion? for what can be more plain, then that the four Kingdoms, into
which Alexanders Kingdom was divided after his death, belong to the same
Monarchy signified by the 3. beast cap. 7. which for this cause, is said to
have 4. heads in that place, and in the 8. chap. the same are signified by the
4. horns, and they all were Greeks as M. Downam confesses nu. 10. and is
evident out of the same 8. Chapter; and of the Seleucide the same appears 1.
Machab. 11. and besides all these 4. Kingdoms were ended before the coming of
our Savior, who notwithstanding is said to overthrow the 4. beast; and
consequently all the rest in him, since that he had succeeded in their places.
Porphiry did see this difficulty, which M. Downam dissembleth, and therefore
interpreted Judas Machabaeus to be that stone which Dan. speaks of cap. 2.
but most ridiculously, as is manifest out of the text; and therefore M. Downam
durst not go so far with him, though in this plate he affirms, that in
Antiochus his time the people of God were freed from the tyranny of the
Seleucidae by Indas Machabaeus; which is all the overthrow he can show us, that
the The Kingdoms of the Lagidae and Seleucidae cannot be signified by the 4.
beast Dan. 7.
stone gave to the Statua, or 4. beast. Finally how can two of these Kingdoms,
into which Alexanders Kingdom was divided, be taken for the Kingdom signified
by the 4. beast, which cap. 7. is affirmed to be greater then all Kingdoms,
and to devour the whole earth? whereas all those 4. Kingdoms together are
said cap. 8. to be inferior to that of Alexander, non in fortitudine eius, as
it is also manifest by experience, that they were, and much more to all
Kingdoms, or to that which was to be greater then they all, and to devour the
whole earth. Neither is it true, that these 4. Kingdoms were by mutual
conflictes reduced to two, under Seleucus Nicanor, and Prolomy Laegides; for
(to omit the controversy about the 4. Kingdom, whether it were of Asia minor,
or of Thracia, and Pontus) it is certain that there were 14. Kings of
Macedonia, which held that Kingdom about an hundred years, and 1. Machab. 1.
they are all four said to have reigned after Alexander, and their Children
after them many years.

But no part of M. Downams exposition is more absurd, then his applications of
the 10. Kings of the Seloucidae and Lagidae to the 10. horns of the beast
mentioned cap. 7. for (to omit that this was Porphyries devise, by which he
made himself ridiculous to all other expositours) M. Downams particular
application canteyneth so many absurdityes, as I am persuaded his freindes will
blush, and all others will pity the poor man; for first, whereas he puts
Seleucus Nicanor to be the 2. horn, taking one King of Egypt, and the next of
Syria, because Ptolomy Philadelphus who was the Downams exposition contrary to
all others, even his own fellows.
second King of Egypt was a great favorer of the Jews, he is constrained to
interpret the 5. verse of the 11. Chapter of this Seleucus Nicaner, against
all expositours, even his own Tremellius and Iunius, who by those words, and
de Principibus cius etc. or as they read it: alter ex Principibus cius,
understand Ptolomaus Philadelphus, whom M. Downam will by no means acknowledge
to be any of these 10. horns; and consequently the second horn is not to be
found in this 11. Chapter, as neither the 2. and another King, which is none of
these horns, is mentioned in their place, by which M. Downams Downam
contradicts himself.
assertion, that the 10. horns which successively tyrannized over lury are
mentioned in order in this 11. Chapter, is wholly ouerthrown. Likewise he
omitteth Seleucus Ceraunus elder brother to Antiochus Maguus, though he also be
mentioned in this Chapter. Finally of all these 10. which he names horns,
because they tyrannized over the people of the Jews, he cannot prove, that
above two of them persecured, or in a manner molested the Jews: indeed they
were so busied with their own affairs, that they were rather glad to procure
the Jews to be their friends, then to exasperate them. Ptolomy Lagides the
first King of Egypt did invade Jerusalem, as other histories report, but Daniel
omitted it, which is a sign, that his intent in numbering these Kings, was not
to declare the persecution, with which they were to afflict the Jews, as M.
Downam imagines. Besides him, it is only certain, that Antiochus Epiphanes,
the last horn in M. Downams account did the like, for that which he affirms
of Ptolomy Philopater out of the 12. verse, is a mere fable, since it is
manifest out of Polybius lib. 5. and other histories, that the thousands, which
there he is foretold to overthrow, were of the army of Antiochus Magnus, for
he slew and took prisoners above 10. thousand. And as for Antiochus Magnus
himself, true it is, that he came to Jerusalem, not against the Jews, but
against Antiochus magnus and Seleucus Philopater his elder son, were the
Jews benefactors.
Scopas one of Ptolomyes Captains, against whom the Jews themselves assisted
Antiochus, with which he was so well pleased, that he certified his Captains
of the Jews good usage toward him, and how he had decreed to reward them; for
which cause he is by Josephus accounted one of their benefactors. And the like
we may say of Seleucus Philopater his elder son in whose commendation the
Scripture it self speaks 2. Match. 3. and 4 testifying, that in his time the
City of Jerusalem was in all peace, and the Temple honored with many gifts,
as well by him, as it had been before by his predecessors, and that he in
particular allowed all things necessary to the Sacrifices; and that which M.
Downam obiecteth against him, that he sent to exhaust and empty the treasury
and Temple of Jerusalem, the Scripture relates the matter at large in the same
place, and shows, how that action of his proceeded from the false information
and instigation of Simon, who was appointed to keep and defend the Temple, and
of Apollonius Governor of Calosyria and Phaenices, whom Simon had moved to
that effect, and told, that the treasure was common, and not apperteyning to
the Sacrifices. But that this proceeded not from the King, is manifest by that
action of O^ias the High Priest, who to defend himself from the vexations of
Simon and Apollonius, took it to be his bestcourse, to go himself to the
King, and to put himself Only Antiochus Epiphanes is in the Scripture
accounted a persecutor of the Jews.
under his Kingly protection, which seems to have stood him in good steed,
since the Scripture makes no mention of any further trouble in that Kings
days. but presently adds these words, Sed post Seleu^i vitae excess^m cum
suscepisset regnum Antiochus etc. By which plainly appears the difference
betwixt those two Kings, and how those wicked courses which Seleucus hindered,
were set forward by Antiochus. And indeed, this is the only King, whom the
Scripture accompteth a persecutor of the Jews, and therefore Dan. 8. there is
no mention of any of the rest, but only of the 4. among which Alexanders
Monarchy was divided, and forthwith after them of this Antiochus, and in the
11. Chapter, as we have seen, though many of the others be specified, yet
there is no mention, that any of them persecuted the Jews, but only of the
wars, which they had among themselves. There remains yet the greatest
absurdity containing a flat corruption and contradiction of the Scripture, in
that M. Downam makes the little horn, which arose after the 10. to be one of
the 10. and the 10. But because I have had occasion to handle this point
heretofore, I will not weary the Reader with a needles repetion.

8. After this M. Downam comes again to prove, that the first place which
Bellarmine cites, is to be understood Downam speaks foolishly and from the
purpose.
of Antiochus, which no man denies, and therefore all that labor is lost,
unless he would infer out of that, that it is not to be understood of
Antichrist, but that also were foolish as we have seen. And it is little better
to infer, that if Antichrist be spoken of in this place, he was to be the
immediate successor of Seleucus Philopater: for who sees not, that this is a
personal propriety of Antiochus, which could not be fulfilled in any, but
himself; so that M. Downam might as well infer, that Antichrist cannot be
spoken of in this place, except he had bin Antiochus himself: which indeed is
his wonted figure of petitio principij. Wherefore we say, that Antiochus, who
was Seleucus his brother, and succeeded him in his kingdom, was in the manner
of getting it ^et down in the Scripture a figure of Antichrists coming to
his, and this is that which S. Hierome, and all Christian writers affirm
against Porphiry, and his like. But now M. Downa^ denies, that Antiochus did
arise from most base How Antiochus Epiphanes arose from base estate*
estate, because he was Son to Antiochus the great and Brother to Seleucus
Philopater. As though a Kings Son, and Brother, may not be obscure and abject
in a kingdom, out of which he has lived, and in which he had no right or
title, nor yet power to succeed; for it were too much simplicity in M. Downam
to imagine, that Hierome and Bellarmine spoke of baseness of birth, since that
it is evident, they only speak of him in that sort in respect of the obtaining
of the kingdom secretly, Dan. 11.
and by deceit, and not by force, whereas otherwise he was by all thought
unworthy to be King. And as for M. Downams exposition of the word vile, or
despised in Dan. no doubt sometime it may signify wicked; and now I will not
contend whether Seleucus Philopater. v. ^0. be called Vilissimus in the vulgar
translation, because of ^^ base poling of the people, though Why Seleucus
Philopater is called Vilissimus.
M. Downams friends transl^^e i^ otherwise, by which it appears, that the
Hebrew word is not all one in both places, and besides many of Seleucus
Philopaters predecessors were as wicked as he, and therefore it is (...)
probable, that he was called Vilissimus, rather because he lived obscurely
without doing any memorable act, for which cause he is also said to reign but
a few days, though he were King twelve years. But to omit all this, M. Downam
cannot deny, but that one may be called abject, vile, base, contemptible,
despised, or what it pleases him, by reason of his obscure life, and unfitness,
want of means, and unworthiness of the dignity which he pretends: and when
the word is to be taken in this sense, we must gather out of the text, and the
circumstances, which concur in the History, and Person, out of which no man
can deny but that S. Heromos sense is most clear; and if we speak of
Antiochus before he was King, it is more then M. Downam can prove, that he was
known to be so exceeding wicked, that he deserved to be called vile in that
respect, and after he was King for all his wickedness he came to be called
Noble, and is so named in all Histories, yea in the Scripture it self.

9. Now whereas M. Downam says, that though Antiochus be atype of Antichrist,
yet from hence we must infer not the self same particular, which is proper to
the person of Antiochus, but the like. It is very true in this, though sometime
this rule does not hold, as is manifest in the example of Exodus, where the
Pascall Lamb is a figure of our Savior in that particular of not having the
bones broken, but in this, it is true, and so nether S. Hierome and Bellarmine,
or any of the rest do infer that Antichrist shall use the same deceit that
Antiochus did, but the like, nor that he shall obtain the same Kingdom, as M.
Downam very ridiculously would bear his Reader in hand: ^or who knows not,
that Antiochus was not only King of the Jews, but of Syria and Asia which S.
Hierome infers Antichrist is not proved to be the King of the Jews because
Antiochus was so.
not of Antichrist, only he names the Kingdom of the Jews, because it is
manifest out of other places, as has been showed, that Antichrist shall make
himself their King and Messiah. But it was far from S. Hierome and Bellarmine
to prove it out of this place. And to this I might also ^d, that by the
Kingdom of the Jews, they mean not the country of Iewry, but rather the
dominion over that Nation, and their persons, wheresoever they be. For it is
uncertain, whether there shall be any Jews in that Country at Antichrists
coming or no, and it seems more probable, that they shall recover it in his
time, and by his means. Wherefore S. Hierome and Bellarmine only endeavor to
prove out of this place, that Antichrist shall have an obscure beginning, and
come to be King by deceit, which M. Downam might have perceived by Bellarmins
minor, or Assumption, in which he never goes about to prove, that the Pope is
not Antichrist, because he is not King of the Jews, which had been his best
and readyest way, if he had inferred out of this place, that Antichrist shall be
so: and whereas M Downam says, that to argue from an allegory, i^ but asleight
argument in Divinity, I have already showed, that when the allegorical sense
is certain, and known by the general consent of Fathers, as it is in this
place, the argument is not slight, but most Downam insolently rejects S.
Hiero^e.
firm and strong, and M. Downam is most ridiculous in affirming, that S.
Hierome ^^ ouerseene, and that it is a wonder, he being one of the most learned
Fathers, and the matter so easy: for who sees not the insolent vanity of this
heriticall Doctor, who persuades himself, that his bare word is able to
discredit S. Hieroms exposition, whose learning and exactnes in the Scripture,
the whole world admireth, and it is hard to find any place in the exposition,
whereof he is so earnest as in this, impugning ex professo, the exposition of
Porphiry who^ M. Downa^ ^aketh upon hi^ to defend, and that not only against S.
Hierome, but against all other Christian, and Ecclesiastical Downam abuses S.
Hierome.
expositours, either before or after S. Hieromes time. Finally M. Downam is too
impudent and absurd, to make a show, as if S. Hieroms meant to prove out of the
23. v. that Antichrist shall be of a small Nation, since he himself
acknowledges, that S. Hierome expounds those words otherwise, but this is
the fruit of Heresy, first to make men impugn the truth, and the Doctors of
Gods Church, who defend it, and then to seek by such seely shifts to make
their party seem good, and to deceive their Readers, by which indeed to any
indifferent and discreet Reader, they discover their own shame, as M. Downam
does in this place, as well by this, as also by his simple repetition of his
exposition of the fourth beast, and his 10. horns, which notwithstanding he
will now go about to prove, by impugning the exposition of all other but
Infidels and Heretics, concerning that place.

10. But first, he will have a saying to the Pope, and infer that according to
their exposition who think that the 4. beast, Cap. 7. signifies the Roman
Empire, it is very likely, that the Pope is Antichrist, seeing hitherto he is
the last that has ruled in Rome, and shall according to the Papists own
conceit continue to the end, The Pope succeeds not in the Roman Empire.
but it is no marvel, though M. Downam insisteth not much upon this proof,
for first it is manifest, that not the Pope, but the Emperor is he that
suceedeth in the Roman Empire, and it is likewise false, that the Papists
hold, that either the Pope, or the Emperor shall continue to the end in Rome:
since they plainly affirm, that the Empire shall be first divided among 10.
Kings, whereof none of them shall be Emperor, and after surprised by Antichrist
himself, who shall subdue The Seleucidae are not signified by the fourth beast.
Dan. 7.
those 10. Kings: and it is likewise more probable in their conceit, that Rome
it self shall be utterly overthrown by the same 10. Kings and Antichrist, as we
have seen before, and yet besides these two false assertions, M. Downam to
make his argument good, supposes two other (ifs) as false as these. First,
that the ten horns should be the successiue rulers of the Roman state: and 2.
that the 10. or last horn should be Antichrist; which are not only false, but
also foolish suppositions, and the latter expressly against the Scripture which
makes Antichrist not the 10. but the 11. horn, as has been proved. Now let us
see how he can prove, that by the 4. beast is signified, not the Roman, but the
Seleucidae, and first he infers it, out of that false ground, which we have
already overthrown, that the kingdom signified by the fourth beast, was to
have an end before the coming of the Messiah, but he beingeth no proofs for
this, but only quoteth cap. 7. 11. 26. 27. which we have already showed to make
against him.

Secondly, he supposes, that cap. 7. v. 25. 26. 27. is to be understood of
Antiochus his wars against the Jews, which is his common fault of petitio
principij, and against the consent of all good expositours, and the text it
self.

Thirdly, he obiecteth that of the Romans: After they Apoc. 17.
had obtained the dominion of Iewry, there were more then ten that ruled over
the Holy Land. But what is this to the purpose, since that these ten horns
signyfie 10. Kings, which shall reign together, as appears plainly by Apoc.
17. which M. Downam obiecteth to himself, and only answers, that these of
Dan. 7. are not the same, but other 10. which tyrannized over the Kingdom of
the Jews successively, as they are particulerly Dan. 11. cap. 5. nu. 2.
described cap. 11. but how false this is, has already appeared, as likewise
that which he adds, that he whom the Papists take to be Antichrist, in Daniel
is one of the 10. horns, it being manifest that both Daniel, and S. Io.
describe 10. besides him.

Fourthly, he says, that all that Dan. says of the 10. horn (so he calls
the 11.) do fuly and wholly agree to Antiochus Epiphanes, but not to the 10.
Prince of the Romans. But we shall see a little after, how well M. Downam can
apply the pulling up of 3. horns to Antiochus, which that little horn cap. 7.
is said to do, and I believe we shall find him as far to seek, as he that
would go about to show the same of the 10. Prince of the Romans, which no wise
man will do, and M. Downam knows well enough that Bellarmine never imagined
any such matter.

Fifthly, M. Downam argues from his conference of that, which is written of
the little horn, chapter 7. with those things which are more plainly
recorded of Antiochus, chap. 8. 23. etc. and chap. 11. 21. etc. But what
marvel is there, if the 7. and 11. Chapters agree, since they are both to be
understood of Antichrist, as has been proved, and likewise Antiochus was a
figure of Antichrist, and therefore no meruade, though that which is laid of him
cap. 8. be very like to those (...) which are related of Antichrist in thee:
there places, and yet M. Downam much mistaketh in making the Goat. buck cap. 8.
to comprehend the 2. last beasts cap. 7. for of this he neither brings proof
nor probability, only he shows very well, that the 4. heads of the third
beast cap. 7. signify the same, that the 4. horns of the goat cap. 8. and
consequently that the Seleucidae and Lagidae, which were The Seleucidae and
Lagidae belong to the third beast.
two of these horns, belong to the third beast, and in no sort to the fourth.
All the rest which he adds is an idle repetition of his former fooleries
already confuted. 6. He affirms without all proof, that the people (...),
and oppress^^ by these horns* are the people of the Jews, whereas Antichrist
in the Papist conceit, shall be the counterfeit (...) of the Jews: for he can
only prove that Antiochus persecuted the Jews, which is no argument to prove;
that Antichrist shall persecute them also; since it is manifest, that the Jews
in those times, were not a figure of the Jews in Antichrists time, out of the
Christians, whom I suppose M. Downam will not deny to be now Gods elected
people. 7. He argues from the agreement of the times, set down in D^n. to
that which happened in Antiochus. But of this we have treated sufficiently
before, showing, that he has no ground for that he says, and besides it Cap.
8.
is most true that the time mentioned cap. 8. agrees most fitly to Antiochus,
the other not, though if they did, it were only an argument, that in this
Antiochus was a most exact figure of Antichrist. And this is all he can say for
his new exposition of the Seleucida, or against that of S. Hierome, and all
other good Authors.

11. Now at length M. Downam comes to Bellarmines Minor, where first he
tells us, that the The Popes whom the Protestants account Antichrist arise
not from base estate.
Pope arises from base estate, whether we consider the mean estate of the
first Bishop of Rome, or the base birth and obscure parentage of diverse Popes;
and adds, that Bellarmines allegations are but a vain flourish nothing
appertayning to this purpose. But what impudency is this? Do not those
authorities plainly show, that the Popes of Rome were highly esteemed of, both
among Christians, and Gentiles, long before the times that the Protestants
assign for Antichrists coming? and consequently, that those Popes which they
most foolishly, and impiously assign, did not arise from base estate. But
(says he) the estate of the first Bishops of Rome was mean: Well suppose it
were so, what were this against those Popes which you make Antichrist, whose
estate was not mean as Bellarmine proves; as indeed the state of the first
cannot be said to be by any, that makes account of spiritual prehemmence and
authority, and prefers it before any temporal dignity whatsoever? But in
these worldly Ministers eyes, our Savior himself would seem mean, if he
were upon earth again in the manner that he was. And his other objection is as
foolish, of the base birth, and obscure parentage of diverse Popes. As though
this were the b^f^nes, that we speak of now, or the Protestants impugued any
particular Pope, and not the whole succession of them for these 1000. years?
But if he would have said any thing to the purpose, he should have showed, as
Bellarmine rightly says, that the Pope until the year 600. was most obscure,
and of no name, and that then suddenly, and by deceipts he usurped some high
place. This M. Downa^ never touches, but passes it over, as though he had been
blind, as no doubt he was with malice, which made him break out into such a fit
of railing without all modesty or measure, which See part. 2. cap. 5.
therefore I omit in this place, and reserve all such stuff to the 2. Part,
especially since M. Downam acknowledges that now it is not to the purpose;
only the Reader must not let pass his Downam charge Bellarmin unjustly.
charge against Bellarmine, for cunningly passing over in silence the other
part of fraud and deceit, which he may see by the words, which now I alleged
out of Bellarmine to be most false True it is, that he brings no distinct
proofs for this, but only by showing the Popes greatness before the year 600.
evidently conuinceth, that he came not to it then by any Fraud or deceit, but
succeeded into the lawful Inheritance of his Predecessors: for as I said
before, now the Downam omitteth Bellarmin his argument.
question is not of the election of any particular Pope, but whether the Popes
in general did at that time obtain by fraud any great dignity, being base
before. And thus M. Downam concludes his discourse concerning this first
argument, omitting, as the Reader may consider, the greatest part of it, which
is taken from the littleness of the home cap. 7. by which he will have
Antiochus to be signified; and yet contendeth, that he was not little, but
rather always great: which two assertions, how they hang together, I leave to
the Readers judgment.

12. To Bellarmines second argument, he has nothing beast is the Kingdom of
the Seleucidae and Lagidae; and that the 10. horn (he means the 11.) was
Antiochus Epiphanes. All which has been sufficiently Antichrist shall overthrow
3. Kings.
confuted already: wherefore we are now only to note how he contradicts
himself in explicating how Antiochus Epiphanes was little, before his coming
to the Crown: for now besides his vile and base conditions, he can tell us,
that he was called little, because of his vnl^kenes to be King. First, because
he was the 3. and youngest son of Antiochus Magnus, his elder brother Seleucus
also having a son called Demetrius. Secondly, because he was to be a
perpetual hostage a^ Rome; wherefore he must needs grant, that Antiochus may
be called despectus, cap. 11. v. 21. as well for these reasons and the like, as
for his base conditions, which a little before he denied so obstinatly. Now the
3. horns, which the Scripture says were to be pulled up before the little
horn, M. Downam will by no means have to be Dan. 7.
Kings of other Kingdoms then Syria, and much less of diverse, as of Egypt,
Lyhia, and Ethiopia, but the 3. immediate predecessors of Antiochus, and this
he proves, because they were expressly called the 3. former horns, viz. of
the ten. But he knows well Dan. 11.
enough, that these 3. Kings are named cap. 11. as we shall see forthwith. And
besides the absurd it yes, which this exposition conteyneth as we have already
showed, why does he not show us what these 3. immediate predecessors were, whom
Antiochus made away? According to the succession of the Kings of Syria, which
he himself allows they should be Seleucus Ceraunus his Uncle, Antiochus
Magnus his Father, and Seleucus Philopater his brother, and though Antiochus
Epiphanes were so wicked, that in that respect it might be though that he would
be ready enough to contriue any mischief, yet to affirm all this without
either History or other witness is a strange liberty, if not of lying, yet at
least of saygning. The death of his brother Seleucus Philopater is affirmed by
M. Downam to have been contrived by Heliodorus, whom he affirms to have been
suborned by Antiochus Epiphanes, and quoteth v. 20. as though all this were
Scriptures but there is no such matter, and Appianus in Cyri^co, who affirms
that Heliodorus slew him treacherously, likewise affirms, that he would have
made himself King, and that they who put him back, admitted Antiochus; by
which it appears, that Heliodorus was not so much devoted to Antiochus, as M.
Downam imagines. And it is easy to answer to that proof, that the 3.
horns, are called the 3. former: for it is plain, that Daniel calls them
so, because they appeared unto him before the little horn, and were likewise
to be in the world before it, yea if we would stand strictly upon that word,
and admit M. Downams interpretation, that those 10. horns were to reign
successively; we should rather say that the 3. former, or first were the 3.
first predecessors Why the 3. Kings which Antichrist shall slay, are called
the 3. first or former.
of Antiochus then the 3. last, which were rather to be called the 3. latter.
But since the truth is, that all the 10. were to be together, there can no
order of first or last be appointed us among them, and therefore we must of
force say that they were called 3. of the first, because the 10. appeared
before the little one; for indeed they are not called the 3. former horns, as
M. Downam auoncheth, but 3. of the former; betwixt which there is a great
difference, even as much as betwixt Gods truth and M. Downams lie. And all this
is made Downam corrupts the Scripture.
more plain in the exposition of this vision v. 24. where this little horn is
expounded to be another King, which shall arise after the 10. and be more
mighty then the former, and shall humiliate 3. Kings; where we see, that this
little horn is said to be after the 10. and the 10. before it; but the 3. are
set down without any particular order, because they were to be of the 10.
among which there is no order described. Now, that which he adds of Antiochus
being Downam belieth Pope Gregory the 7. and the Cardinals.
a Type etc. is a mere fabling, and already confuted; besides that Antiochus
can be no type in this place, where he is not spoken of at all, as has been
showed. Likewise that loud lie, which he tells of Gregory the 7. affirming,
that it is well known, that he made away 6. of his predecessors by poison,
argues so shameless an impudency, as nothing more. Like unto which, is that
c^lumniation of the Cardinals, among whom he affirms, that it is an
ordinary practice to minister ^^ Italian ^^gg^ to their Popes: In proof whereof
he alleges Vrbanus 7. Innocent. ^.
that there have been 9. Popes in the time of Queen Elizabeth's reign: and
that Vrbanus 7. Gregory 14. and Innocentius the 9. were so suddenly plucked
up, that he supposes their names have been heard of to few in England. And is
not this a great wonder, that 9. old men should die in more then 40. years? Or
that a young Woman living in all pleasure should outline them all? These are M.
Downams miracles, and as for the 3. Popes, whom he names, they were all most
virtuous and holy men, but extreme old; and therefore no marvel though their
being so close in the conclaue caused the one, if not two of them to die so
soon; Gregory lay sick or the stone above 3. weeks, and Gregory 14.
the other two had been Popes so little a time, and given so little offense to
any, that there could be no suspicion of any poison but this is the Ministers
charity.

13. To the place, which Bellarmine alleges out of Dan. 11. 19 this purpose,
M. Downam answers. 1. that Daniel speaks not of Antichrist, to which I need
not reply any more. 2. that though Antiochus were a type in this, yet the same
(...) were not to be applied to Antichrist. But M. Downam mistaketh them (...)
much; for this is one of the places, which cannot be applied to Antiochus; and
therefore is literally to be understood of Antichrist. 3. M. Downam boldly
affirme^h, that this place, is only to be expounded of Antiochus his spoiling
of Egypt, having in his company the Lybians, and the Aethyopians. And to this
purpose he proposes his new reading according to the Hebrew: the Lubine and
Cu^him, that is the Lybians and Ethiopiam, shall be in his passages or voyages,
and least we should with Bellarmine object the authority of S. Hierome, and the
other Fathers against him, he preuenteth us by writing ^h^s: Now if Hierome or
any of the Fathers have let fall any such thing (as Bellarmine faith) we are to
esteem it at an extremeur of theirs, which we are to pass by, rather then
with the Cacanorae, the Papists, to gather it up, as fit food for their souls;
Downam opprobriously rejects the Fathers.
and then he has this note in the margent, Cacanorae auis quaedam est apud
Indor, quae alterius auis assecla est, ^ui^s vescatur excrementis. S^^lig. de
subtle. What should a man say to this filthy Companion, that dares open his
foul mouth to such opprobrious words against the Fathers? Are not those fools
in a (...) taking, that follow such a fo^le? But his blasphemous (...) against
God and his Sai^^^^, in which he imitat^^ in his Master Antichrist, must (...)
from cleaving to the Fathers, given unto the Church by Christ for her Pastors,
Guides, and Doctors, and therefore we nothing doubt, but that S. Hieromes
interpretation, and exposition S. Hierso translation defended.
of this place, approved and embraced by all Ecclesiastical Writers, both
before and after him, is to be preferred before M. Downams new devise, and the
Hebrew text, which has ad gressus eius, if we believe Tremelius and Iunius, i^
as capable of S. Hieromes translation, ^^ of M. Dowmans; and the words
immediately going before plainly show, that S. Hieromes interpretation is the
right, which are, Et me^ti^ manum suam in terras, and after names only these
three, two of which M. Downam would cut off by his new translation, and
consequently must also change that terras, into terram; and yet even then also
the coherence would show, that the Prophet spoke rather of invasion, then
assisting, of enemies then friends. But besides this, we must put M. Downam to
a little more trouble, vrg^^g him to tell us, in what History he ^uer read,
that Antiochus invaded the land of Egypt any oftener Antiochus Epiphanes
invaded not Egypt oftener the^ twice.
then twice; or both which Daniel speaks from the 22. to the ^^. v. declaring
how he was put back the second time by the Romans; after which he never
returned into Egypt, and consequently this invasion of that Country, which
Daniel speaks o^ in this place, cannot in any sort be understood of
Antiochus, but must be wholly referred to Antichrist. Finally, it M. Downam will
stand to his own rule of conferring one place of Scripture with another, what
can be more p^aine^^ ^n this, that Daniel speaks now of the same 3. Kings;
which cap. 7. he said, should be plucked up, and humiliated by the little
borne? Wherefore, whether M. Downams excrements, for so he calls far better
men's expositions then his own, be worth the taking up or no, I leave to the
Readers judgment, but in my conceit they savor very strongly of heresy and
folly.

14. To Bellarmines Minor, M. Downam is dumb, as other make against it. And to
his third argument he only answers, that Lactantius, S. Irenaus, and S.
Hierome are ^^ Antichrist shall subdue the 7. Kings which remain after the ^.
and so he shall be Monarch of the whole world.
Scriptures, a^ though Bellarmine had affirmed, that they were, because in the
beginning he says that these 4. things are read of Antichrist in the
Scriptures. But M. Downam might easily have conceyned, that Bellarmine could
not prove better that this doctrine is contained in the Scripture, then by
alleging the authority of the Fathers, who gather it out of the Scripture:
and yet to satisfy M. Downam in all points, he alleges also a place of
Scripture, whereall the 10. Kings Apoc. 17. are said to give their power to
the Beast, that is the Devil, which the 7. cannot do without yielding
themselves to Antichrist after that the other three be slain. To which M.
Downam has nothing to reply, but only asks, whether S. John speaks of
Antichrist his either ki^^ing 3. ^^ Apoc. 17.
subduing 7? To which I answer, that S. John plainly foretells, that all
the 10. shall give their power to the beast, and consequently that the 7. which
remain after the death of the other 3. will concur with Antichrist, which
they cannot do, without yielding themselves unto him, since it is certain,
that he shall be the Mo^^^ch of the whole world, and because the Scripture is not
so express, Bellarmine only says, that it may be inferred out of that place,
as it may likewise out of the 12. and 13. Apoc. as in part has been touched.
And is it not evident enough of it self, that the little horn, which presumed
to encounter, if not all the 10. yet Apoc. 12. and 13.
at least three of them, while he was so little, will not stay there, when he
is grown great, but cause the other 7. to subject themselves unto him? The
other questions and assertions which M. Downam has, are already confuted, and
therefore not to be repeated now again. Wherefore let us S. Chrysostom and S.
Cyril. I answer (says he) that for substance these Fathers held the truth,
for what Monarch has there been in the West these 5. or 6. hundredth years
besides the Pope etc? where I beseech the Reader to Why M. Downam admits any
of the Fathers.
mark attentively M. Downams reason, why he allows the testimony of the
Fathers, which is no other, but because they are against the Pope in some sort,
according to his conceit, for otherwise we may see by that which he answeteth
to the 3. former, and that which he says of them all in general a little
before, how little he sets by their authority. Now for the Monarchy of the
West, it is evident The Pope no temporal Monarch.
that it remains in the Emperors, and that which he attributes to the Pope,
every child will see, how different it is, from the Monarchy of the Romans; and
how small a thing it is, if you take away his spiritual authority, which no
doubt is the greatest upon earth. But what is that to the temporal power, of
which these Fathers speak? Now how the Pope is Lord of the whole earth, and
how he disposes of the new found world, we shall examine at large in the
second part, and how the government of Rome belongs not to Antichrist, in
whose time it shall be destroyed, as neither the 2. beast Apoc. 13. nor the 7.
head Apoc. 17. to the Pope has bin already sufficiently declared.

15. To the 4. argument, M. Downam answers nothing, Antichrist shall
persecute the Christians through the whole world with an innumerable army.
which Bellarmine himself has not confuted at large in his discourse of Gog
and Magog, which M. Downam wholly omitteth, under pretext of not troubling his
Reader, but indeed, because he would not discover his own shame, for otherwise
at least he might have answered to so much of it, as made against himself. The
like deceit he uses in passing over Bellarmines answers, to the Protestants
objections, or arguments, whereby they endeavor to prove the Pope Antichrist;
because he saw that they contained in effect an answer to his former book.
But I may not omit either, that so the Reader may judge, how well M. Downam
has cleared them in his former book, of which he seems himself to make some
doubt, by telling us, that the controversy betwixt us, is not whether every
argument, that has bin produced by every one does necessarily conclude the
Pope to be Antichrist, and that, that discourse is rather personal, then
real, and therefore he lets it pass.

THE SEAVENTENTH CHAPTER. Of Gog, and Magog.
WHEREFORE the first opinion, or rather Bellarmine) is of the Jews, who teach
that Gog is Antichrist, and Magog innumerable Scythian Nations which lurk
within the Caspian Mountains, and that Antichrist shall come with Magog, that
is with an Army of Scythians at the same time, that the Messiah shall first
appear in Jerusalem, and that there shall be a battle fought in Palestine,
and such an overthrow in the Army of Gog, that for 7. years the Jews shall
not cut any wood from trees to make fire withal, but shall burn the spears,
bucklers, and other weapons which shall be found with the dead bodies, and that
afterward there shall be a golden world etc.

S. Hierome relates this opinion in cap. 38. Ezech. and Petrus Galatinus lib.
5. cap. 12. cont. Iudaeos, and Rabbi David Kimhi in his Co^mentary upon the
Psalms in many places; but the Jews err in two things. First, that they
think the battle of Gog and Magog, shall be in the first coming of Christ,
confou^ding the first with the second. Whereas notwithstanding the Scriptures
plainly teach, that Christ in his first coming, was to come in humility, and
as a meek sheep to be sacrificed, as it is manifest Isa. 53. and in other
places. Secondly, in that they think, that Antichrist shall come against them,
and fight with their Messiah, whereas indeed Antichrist shall be their Messiah,
and shall fight with the Jews against our Savior the true Christ.

The second opinion is of Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 24. 25. and 26. who thinks,
that the battle of Gog and Magog, shall be a thousand years after the death
of Antichrist, for he teaches that after 6000. years, from the beginning of
the world, Antichrist shall come and raygne three years and a half, and that
then Antichrist shall be slain, Christ shall appear, the Resurrection shall be,
and the Saints shall reign here with Christ upon earth for a thousand years
in great peace and tranquillity, the Infidels not being wholly rooted out, but
serving peaceably. Which ended, the Devil shall be loosed again, and a most
fierce war of all Nations be raised against the same Saints, which they
served for a thousand years; and this is the battle of Gog and Magog, of
which Ezechiel, and S. John do speak. But that a little after all the wicked
shall be slain by God, and that then the second Resurrection shall be, and the
world be wholly renewed.

This opinion was also of many of the ancient Fathers, Papias, S. Iustine, S.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Apollinaris and some others, as S. Hierome relates in
cap. 36. Ezech. and Eusebius lib. 3. hist. cap. vlt. But it is long since
exploded as a manifest error: for our Lord Matthew. 24 and ^5. plainly teaches,
that after the persecution of Antichrist, the last judgment shall follow
forthwith, and that all the good shall go into everlasting life, and all the
evil into everlasting fire, and therefore that afterward, there shall not be
another thousand years, nor ever after any more battles.

The third opinion is of Eusebius, who lib 9. demonst Euang. cap. 3. thinks,
that Gog is the Roman Emperor, and Magog his Empire. But he builds upon a
false Foundation, for he deduceth this opinion ou^ of Numb. 24. where according
to the translation of the 70. we read, the kingdom of Gog shall be extolled, and
his Kingdom shall be increased: God has brought him out of Egypt etc. where the
Scripture seems to say, tha^ when Christ shall return out o^ Egypt in his
infancy, the Kingdom of Gog shall be extolled. But it is manifest, that in the
infancy of Christ, no Kingdom was extolled, but that of the Romans.

But without doubt the edition of the 70. is corrupted in Gog, but Agag.
ve^arom meagag malcho: and tolletur propter Agag, vel prae Agag Rex etus. And
his King shall be taken away for Agag, or in respect of Agag, and the sense is
according to S. Hierome in cap. 38. Ezech. and Saul the first King of Israel,
shall be taken away for Agag, that is, because he shall sin not killing Agag,
or according to others, Saul shall be extolled before Agag, that is, he shall
prevail and overcome Agag. Both are true. And it is certain, that, that place
of Numer. is understood of the Kingdom of the Jews, and not of Christ, or the
Romans, for it begins: How fair are thy Tabernacles o Jacob, thy Tents o
Israel etc.

The fourth opinion is of others, who by Gog and Magog understand the battayles
of the Devil, and his Angels, long since past in Heaven with the good
Angels, which S. Hierome confuteth as destroying the letter in cap. 38.
Ezechiel.

The 5. opinion of Theodorus Bibliander, whom Chytraeus Apoc. 20. wherefore
Bibliander Tab. 14. suae Chronologia, where he treats exactly of Gog and
Magog, and at length teaches, that the Prophesy of Ezechiel and S. John
pertayneth not to the same time, but that the Prophesy of Ezechiel was
fulfilled in the time of the Machabees, and that Gog and Magog were Alexander
the Great, and his successors the Kings of Egypt and Syria, who fought many
battayles with the Jews, and were at length overcome by the Machabees, and
that the Prophesy of S. John was fulfilled in the time of Gregory the 7. and of
some ensuing Popes, and that the Popes were Gog and Magog, and the other
Princes and armies of Christians, who fought a long time against the Saracens,
for the recovery of the holy Land, and our Lords Sepulcher.

The first part of this opinion is also of Theodoretus in cap. Ezech. but it
cannot be defended: First because without doubt, the Prophesy of Ezechiel, and
S. John is one, and the same, and therefore both are to be fulfilled after the
coming of Christ: for first S. John says, that the army of Gog shall come
from the four corners of the earth, and the same says Ezechiel, namely
expressing that in the army of Gog there shall be Persians from the East,
Aethiopians from the South, Tubal that is Spanyardes from the West, and
^ogorma, that is Phrygians from the coasts of the North. Secondly S. John says
that this army shall be destroyed by fire sent from Heaven: and the same
affirms Ezechiel in the end of the 38. Chapter, I will rain (says he) fire
and brimstone upon him, and his Army. Finally S. John after this battle
presently adds the renewing of Jerusalem, that is the glorification of the
Church, and likewise Ezechiel from chap. 40. to the end of his book treats
of nothing else, but of the wonderful renewing of Jerusalem.

Besides, Secondly it is proved, that the Prophesy of Ezechiel was not
fulfilled in the time of the Machabees, for Ezech. 38. it is said to Gog, Thou
shall come in the last years, but Alexander the Great with his, came in the
middle years. Likewise Ezechiel expressly says, that in the army of Gog, there
shall be Aethiopians, Lybians, Spaniards, Cappadocians etc. which notwithstanding
never fought against Jerusalem, and chiefly in the time of the Machabees, for
only the Syrians, and the Egyptians fought against the Machabees.

Finally, Ezechiel describes such a victory against Gog Magog, that afterward
no enemies were to be feared, but all battayles should be ended, but the
victory of the Machabees was not such against the Kings of Syria and Egypt,
for nether the Jews did ever altogether overcome the Kings of Syria and
Egypt, and a little after the Jews were vexed and subdued again by the
Romans; neither did they ever deliver themselves out of their hands, as S.
Augustine deduceth, and proves lib. 18. de ciuitate Dei cap. 45. therefore the
Prophesy of Ezechiel was not fulfilled before Christ's time.

The other part of Biblianders opinion, which is his own, and peculiar to him,
is not only false, but also impious; for first S. John says, that the battle
of Gog and Magog shall be against the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City,
that is against Gods true Church. But the war of the Christians for the
recovery of the Holy Land was wholly against the Saracen Mahometans, unless
perhaps Bibliander would have the Mahometans to be the true Church, and camp of
the Saints. Secondly, S. John says, that there shall be in the army of Gog, men
out of the 4. corners of the earth. But in the Army of the Christians, there
were only out of the West, and North, that is French, Germans, Italians.
Besides S. John says, that the war of Gog, and Magog being ended, Jerusalem
shall forthwith be renewed, and glorified, and that the Devil, and Antichrist,
and the false Prophets shall be thrown into everlasting fire. But the war of
Christians for the Holy Land, is long since ended, and yet we see not any
Jerusalem renewed, nor the Devil, and the false Prophets cast into hell, for
now, as our Adversaries also confess, the Devil, and false Prophets most of
all flourish.

Furthermore, God himself by manifest signs, and Antioch of Syria, as in
other places manifestly showed, that, that war was acceptable unto him, of
which, see Gulielm. Tyri^s lib. 6. de bello sacro, and Paulus Aemilius lib. 4.
de rebus Francorum.

Finally S. Bernard, whom Bibliander calls a Saint, in Chronico, where he
treats of the times of Eugenius the 3. besides other holy men, was one of the
chiefest Authors of this war, for he, both by words and miracles persuaded
an infinite multitude of French, and Germans, to go to that war, as he himself
shows, initio lib. 2. de Consid. and the author of his life lib. 2. cap. 4.
writes, that S. Bernard after the battle was ended, restored a blind man to
his sight, in testimony that he had preached that war in the name of God.

The 6. opinion is of the Magdeburgenses, cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4. column. 435.
where they teach that Gog and Magog, is the Kingdom of the Saracens, or
Turks; which opinion is wholly opposite to the opinion of Bibliander; and
therefore it is better, or rather less evil. But yet absolutely it is fals^;
for Gog shall come in the last years, and shall not endure long, as it is
plainly gathered out of S. John, and Ezechiel. But the Kingdom of the Saracens
began long since, and has endured hitherto, almost a thousand years, which
doubtless cannot be called a little time.

The 7. is of S. Ambrose, lib. 2. de fide cap. vlt. that Gog are Goths, who
destroyed many Provinces of the people of Rome. S. Hierome makes mention of
this opinion in quaest. heb. cap. 10. and says, Whether it be true or no, the
end of the war will show. And now doubtless, the issue of the war has
taught us, that it was not true, for neither has there followed any renewing
of the Church after the war of the Goths; neither have all wars ceased.

The 8. is of S. Hierome himself in cap. 38. Ezech. who Gog, which in Hebrew
signifies the House top, to signify the Heresiarches, who like to the top of
an House are lifted up, and proud; and Magog which is interpreted, of the top
of an House, to signify them who believe these Arch-heretikes, and are subject
to them, as the House to the roof or top. This opinion taken for the
mystical sense, is most true, but not in the litterall; for Ezech. cap. 38.
says: that Gog shall come in the last years, and S. John Apoc. 20. says,
that the same Gog shall come after a thousand years, and by the name of a
thousand years, all Catholics understand all the time, which is from Christ's
coming to Antichrist. Since therefore Gog shall not come but about the end of
the world, and heresies began in the beginning of the Church, while the
Apostles lived, it is manifest, that properly, and literally, Gog does not
signify the Heretics.

We must also know, that S. Hierome, when he says, Gog is interpreted an house
roof, and Magog, of an house roof, means not, that Gog and Magog in Hebrew
are altogether the same, that an house roof, or of an house roof with us;
but he means that it is in a manner the same, for properly an house roof is
not Gog, but Gog, and of an house roof, is not Magog, but Miggag.

The 9. opinion is of S. Augustine lib. 20. de ciuitate Dei cap. 11. who by Gog
understands the Devil, who is like a great house roof, that is a great
house roof in which all the evil do dwell; and by Magog he understands the
army of Antichrist gathered of the Nations of the whole world: which opinion
doutbles is most true, and to be embraced, in that it refers Gog and Magog
to the times of Antichrist, as well, because all Catholic Authors, which write
upon the Apocalypse do follow it, as Arethas, Primasius, Beda, Haym^, Rupertus,
Richardus, Anselmus, and others; as also, because that all which is said by
Ezechiel, and S. John, of Gog and Magog do most rightly agree to Antichrist;
for then truly shall be the last and greatest persecution, and after it shall
Jerusalem be renewed, that is, the Church glorified: neither shall there any
battles be heard of after. But in that by Gog it understands the Devil, it
seems not true, for S. John says, that the Devil being let loose, shall
call Gog and Magog to wars, wherefore the Devil is one thing and Gog
another.

Wherefore our opinion, which is the 10. conteyneth Gog and Magog is the
battle of Antichrist against the Church, as S. Augustine rightly taught.
Secondly, we say, that it is very probable, that by Gog, Antichrist himself is
signified, by Magog his army. For Ezechiel always calls Gog a Prince, and
Magog a Land or Nation. Thirdly, we say that it is probable that Gog is so
called of Magog; and not contrariwise, so that Antichrist is called Gog because
he is Prince of that Nation which is called Magog, and that the army of
Antichrist is called Magog of the Scythian Nation, not that it consists of
those Scythians, which the Jews faygne to be beyond Cancasus and the Caspian
Sea, but either because a great part of Antichrists army shall consist of
Barbarous people, which came out of Scythta, as Turks, Tartars, and the rest,
or (which I rather think) because it shall be a very terrible and cruel army,
for we call them Scythians, which we would call bloody.

For that Magog signifies the Scythian Nation, it is Genes. 10. where we read
that the second son of Iaphet was called Magog, of whom the Country of Magog
was denominated, which his posterity inhabited, which was Scythia, as Iasephus
teaches lib. Amiq. cap. 11. and S. Hierome in quest. hebr. in Genesis cap. 10.
For as from the three son of Cham, that is Chus, Myrami, and Chanaham,
Aethiopia is called Chus, Aegipt Myrami, and Palestina Chanaham; so doubtless
Scythia is called Magog of Magog the son of Iaphet. And that Ezechiel naming
Magog, had relation to the Nation denominated of Magog the son of Iaphet, it
is manifest, because in the same place, he adds as companions to Gog, other
Nations denominated of other sons or nephews of Iaphet, as Gomer, Togorma,
Mosoch, Tubal etc. Wherefore let us conclude, that the battle of Gog and
Magog is the last persecution which Antichrist shall raise in the whole world
against the Church.

Neither is it against us, that Ezech. cap. 38. says, that Gog and Magog shall
be burnt for the space of 7. years, whereas notwithstanding it is manifest,
that after Antichrists death there shall not be past 45. days to the end of
the world, as is gathered out of Daniel 12. for Ezechiel speaks not properly
but figuratively after the manner of Prophets, neither means he, that indeed
those weapons are to be burned for the space of 7. years, but that it shall be
so notable an overthrow, that the Lances and Targets of the slain might
suffice a very long time to make fires, if need were.

One doubt remains, whether by reason of the most Dominicus Soto in lib. 4.
sent. did. 46. q. 1. art. 1. thought surely that it would be so. The departing
(says he) and defection from that Seae, shall be a sign of the co^summation of
the world. And after. Faith being extinguished by the departure from that Sea
Apostolic the whole world shall be vain, and should without cause continue any
longer. And after. Let therefore men be astonished, how pestilent self love is;
for thence flows pussing up and pride, which under the conduct of Antichrist
shall at length consume the City of God.

But this opinion in my judgment cannot be defended; S. Augustine, who lib. 20.
de ciuit. Dei cap 11. says: that the Church shall be ever invincible against
Antichrist. Neither shall she (says he) forsake her warfare, who is called by
the name of Tents. Secondly, it seems to me also, to be repugnant to the
Gospel; for Matthew. 16. we read: Upon this Book I will build my Church, and
the gates of Hell shall nor prevail against her. But how shall they not
prevail, if they shall wholly extinguish her? Likewise Matthew. 24. Our Lord
says of the Ministers of Antichrist: They shall give great signs, so that the
elect also shall be led into error, if it be possible. Where our Lord would
signify, that there shall be many elect at that time, who shall not suffer
themselves to be seduced by the miracles of Antichrist. Finally, all Writers,
who speak of Antichrists persecution, as Ezechiel, Daniel, S. Paul, S. John,
and all the Fathers alleged before, say, that the victory of that war or
persecution shall at length be the Churches. And surely, reason it self
teaches the same. For, who can believe, that in that Battle, in which with
their whole Camps, God and the Devil, Christ and Antichrist shall fight, God
shall be overcome by the Devil, and Christ by Antichrist?

M. Dovvnams Answer confuted.
1. THvs far Bellarmine. In which M. Downam is fully confuted. For the
reasons which Bellarmine uses against the first part of Biblianders opinion,
do evidently convince, that Ezechiel speaks not of the Seleucidae, nor of
their wars against the Jews; and that which M. Downam adds, that S. John
speaks of the enemies of the Church, which Satan incited after he was
loosed, is the same in effect, which Bellarmine affirms. For we have proved
before, that Antichrist shall be in the world, when Satan is loosed, and not
before. Wherefore it remains evident, that this Battle of Gog and Magog
belongs to Antichrist, and not to the Pope, and therefore that the Pope is not
Antichrist, as M. Downam, and his Mates most impudently and impiously dare to
affirm.

THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. The Dotages of the Heretics are refuted, with which
they do not so much prove, as impudently affirm, that the Pope is Antichrist.
ALTHOUGH (says Bellarmine) those Luther, Libellus Smalcaldicus, Calvin,
Illyricus, Tilemanus, and Chytraus bring to prove, that the Pope is Antichrist.

And first Luther, although every where he calls the Pope the chiefest
Antichrist, and chiefly in his book de captiuieate Babylonica lib. contra
execr abilem Bullam, Antichristi, in assert. articulorum, lib. cont. Ambros.
Cathar. notwithstanding I could only find one argument of his, with which he
endeavors to prove it, for in asser. art. 27. he speaks thus: Daniel
foretold cap. 8. that Antichrist shall be a King with an impudent face; that is,
as the Hebrew has, mighty in shows, pomps, and cerimonyes of outward works,
the spirit of says in the ^eare time being extinguished, as we have seen in
fulfilled, with so many Religions, Orders, Colleages, Rites, Garments, Habites,
Buildings, Constitutions, Rules, Obseruances, so that thou can hardly
rehearse the number of their names. And these same faces of Antichrist, as he
calls the^, he recounteth and explicateth at large, lib. cont. Ambros.
Cathar. de visione Danielis.

But this argument of Luther has three faults. The sabbagim verbatim signify
Rob^stus facie, and according to the Hebrew phrase, an unpudent fellow, who can
not blush: for first so the 70. translate it (...), Inuerecundus facie: so does
S. Hierome translate, so Theodoretus reads, so out of the rules of the
Rabbyns expounds it Franciseus Vatablus, Fortis facie (faith he) is he that
blusheth not, and who is no* ashamed.

Finally the same is gathered out of the like words Ezech. 3. the house of
Israel has a worn forehead, and an hard heart: behold I have given thy face
more forcible, then their faces, and thy forehead adwarder then their
foreheads. Where in the Hebrew it is: The house of Israel have a strong
forehead, and I have given thy face stronger then their faces, which have no
other sense, then this, ^s S. Hierome rightly explicateth, they are impudent
indeed, but thou shall not yield to their impudency, and if they do evil
bouldly, and without shame, thou shall reprehend them bouldly, and without
shame: which since it is so, let Luther look, least he has an impudent face,
if he will prefer his own interpretation, before the Rabbyus, Theodoretus,
S. Hierome, the 70. Interpreters, and Ezechiel himself.

The second fault of Luthers argument is, because it Logicians teach, nothing
is gathered out of particular affirmatiues: otherwise also Moses was
Antichrist, who instituted so many Cerimonyes in Exodus and Leuiticus, that
they can searsly be numbered. And when in the same place it is said of
Antiochus, and in his figure of Antichrist, that he shall understand Aenigma's
or dark speeches, if Luthers argument were good, it would follow, that all
they who can solue Aenigma's, were Antichrists, which certainly is false and
ridiculous.

The third fault is, that he attributes to the Pope the S. Basil, S. Paconius,
and other Greek Fathers, and not from the Bishop of Rome. See Cassianus his
book de Institutis renuntiantium, and S. Basilij Constitutiones. In the West
also, the Orders of S. Benedict, S. Romualdus, S. Bruno, S. Dominick, and S.
Francis were indeed approved by the Pope, but invented and instituted by those
holy men, whom the holy Ghost instructed. So that if these orders belong to
Antichrists face, rather those holy Fathers, are to be called Antichrists, then
the Pope.

Add lastly, that the words of Daniel agree more fitly Luther; for he above
all others had an impudent face; for being a Priest, and a Monk, he
marryedopenly a Nun, of which there can be no example given in all Antiquity.
Likewise he wrote lies without any number, which are noted and published in
writing by many. Ioannes Cochlaeus in act. Lutheri anno 1523. writes, that out
of one of Luthers books, there were noted by one 50. lies: and that by
another, Luther was convinced of 874. lies. Finally, what an impudency was
that, when in lib. cont. Bullam. Leonis X. the same Luther durst excommunicate
his Bishop, together with the whole Church, that adhereth to him? Who ever
heard, that a Bishop could be excommunicated by a Priest?

The Council of Chalcedon in times past, trembled at Dioscorus, who presiding
in the second Ephesine Council, presumed to excommunicate Pope Leo. But what
comparison can there be betwixt Dioscorus. Patriarch of the second Sea,
presiding in a general Council, and Luther a simple Monk writing in his
chamber? But now leaving Luther, let us come to Melancthon.

THE NINTEENTH CHAPTER. The trifles of the Smalchaldicall Synod: of the
Lutherans are confuted.
THERE is a book of the Power and Primacy Smalchaldicall Synod; which to me
seems to be Melancthons; but whosoeuers it be, it has nothing but words, and
vain bragging. It is well known (says the Author of the book) that the
Bishops of Rome with their members defend impious doctrine, and impious
worships, and plainly the notes of Antichrist agree to the kingdom of the Pope
and his members. Hitherto the Proposition. Now let us hear the proofs: for
Paul ad Thessal. describing Antichrist, calls him the adversary of Christ,
extolling himself above all that is said, or worshipped for God, suting in the
Temple as God, wherefore he speaks of some that reigns in the Church, not of
Heathen Kings; and him he calls the adversary of Christ; because he shall
invent doctrine repugnant to the Gospel; and he will usurp to himself
divine authority.

Although all this if it were true, would hurt us very S. Paul plainly says,
that Antichrist shall extol himself above every God, and that he shall sit in
the Temple, not as a King, not as a Bishop, but plainly as a God; and this
same expressly affirm S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and the rest of the ancient
Fathers interpreters of this place. With what right do you then without
witness and without reason affirm, that he is Antichist, who sits in the
Temple, not as a God, but as a Bishop? And is so far from extolling himself
above every God, that he does not only adore God the Father, and the Son, and
the holy Ghost, but also in the presence of all the people prostrateth himself
before the Sacrament of the Eucharist, before the Tombs of the Apostles, and
Martyrs, before the Cross and Images of Christ, and his Saints, which you
your selves, though impiously, are wont to call strange Gods and Idols? But
let us see how you apply this same to the Pope.

The Synod. And first it is manifest that the Pope reigns in the Church, and
under the pretext of Ecclesiastical authority and Ministry, has made himself
this Kingdom, for he pretended these words: I will give unto thee the Keys.


Bellarmine. You say indeed, that the Pope reigns in the Church, but you
prove it not. But we can easily show the contrary, for he, that reigns,
acknowledges not any superior in his Kingdom, but the Pope professes
himself to be the Vicar, and Servant of Christ his King. And although he uses
most ample power in the whole House of God, and in the vniuersail Kingdom of
Christ; notwithstanding that power exceeds not the condition of an
administrator, and servant: for Moses also (as S. Paul says Hebr. 3.) was
faithful in the whole house of God, but as a servant; and Christ, as a Son
in his own. But to go forward.


The Synod. Besides, the doctrine of the Pope is many ways repugnant to the
Gospel, and usurps to himself divine authority in three manners. First, in
that he takes to himself authority to change the doctrine of Christ, and the
worships instituted by God: and he will have his doctrine, and his worships
observed as if they were divine.


Bellarmine. This likewise you say, but prove it not, and it seems to us not
only false, but also a most impudent lie, for you are not ignorant, that in the
Catholic Church it is taught by all, that the doctrine of Christ and worships
cannot be changed by any man, no nor by any Angel neither. Was there ever any
question betwixt you and us, whether that, which Christ taught or commanded,
ought to be believed and done; but whether you or we interpret better the
doctrine and procepts of Christ? In which question you in a manner are wont to
bring nothing else, but your own interpretation; but we bring the consent of
the Fathers, and either the decrees or customs of the Catholic Church, for we
do not oppose (as you falsely brag) the consents of the Fathers, and the decres
and customs of the Church to the word of God, but to your judgment, and
interpretation. But let us here the second proof.


The Synod. Secondly, because he takes to himself not only power to loose
and bynd in this world: but also power over souls after this life.


Bellarmine. This also is said, but not proved: for the Pope does not take to
himself authority over the souls of the departed, since that he does not
absolve them from their sins and punishments by his authority, but only
communicate with them the prayers and the good works of the faithful which
live, by manner of suffrage. And all the ancient Fathers do teach, that the
prayers and alms of the living, and chiefly the Sacrifice of the Mass, do
profit the dead, of which since we have largely disputed else where, it shall be
sufficient to have noted one testimony of S. Augustine in this place: wherefore
sermon. 34. de verb. Apost. S. Augustine speaks thus: It is not to be doubted,
that the dead are helped by the prayers of the holy Church, and the wholesome
Sacrifice, and the alms which are given for their souls. But let us go on.


The Synod. Thirdly, because the Pope will not be judged by the Church, or any
other, and takes away their authority from the judgment of Counsels, and of
the whole Church. But this is to make himself God, to refuse to be judged by
the Church, or by any other.


Bellarmine. Here also two things are said, which are not proved: for first by
what Scriptures, by what Counsels, by what reason do you prove, that the Pope
ought to be judged by the Counsels or the Church? For we read (to omit other
things which are sufficiently disputed in the former book) that it was said to
S. Peter by Christ John 21. Feed my sheep, and we think, that there can be no
doubt, that the sheep are to be ruled, and judged by the Shepherd, and not
the Sheephard by the sheep. We also read Luc. 12. that it was said to the same
Peter: Who think thou is a faithful and prudent Dispenser, whom the Lord
appoints over his family? In which place we see a certain Steward put over
the whole family of Christ, certainly to govern it, and not to be governed by
it.


And least perhaps some should object, what if he And if that servant shall say
in his heart, my Lord delayeth to come, and shall begin to strike the Men and
Maid-seruants, and to eat and drink, and be drunk; the Lord of that servant
will come in the day which he hops not, and in the hour he knows not, and
will divide him, and put his part with Infidels. Do you hear who is the Judge
of the evil Steward whom our Lord has appointed over his Family? For Christ
says not, that he shall be judged by a Council, but the Lord will come in the
day, which he hops not, and that which follows. Wherefore our Lord reserueth
to himself the judgment of that Servant, whom he has appointed over all his
Family, and therefore the Pope takes not away their authority from the judgment
of the Counsels, and the whole Church, when he suffers not himself to be
judged by it, for that cannot be taken away which was never given. But never
did the Counsels rightly congregated ever take that to themselves, that
excepting the case of Heresy, they would give sentence against the Pope. But of
this we have said enough in due place.

The other thing, which you say, and prove not, is, (of any) without doubt you
mean of any man; for you are not ignorant, that the Pope belieueth and
professes, that he is to be judged by Christ. Now, how does he make himself
God, who belieueth, that he is to be judged by God?

Besides, certainly the Kings of the earth, do not acknowledge

The Synod. These so horrible errors, and this impiety he defends with
exceeding great cruelty, and kills them who dissent from him.


Bellarmine. Now, how impudently you lie in this place, you may know even by
this one instance, that I my self who write these things, do openly affirm,
and that in the City of Rome (not unknown to the Pope) that the Pope may not
change the doctrine, or worships of Christ, nor institute new worships which
should be held for divine, or should any way be repugnant to the Gospel; and
yet I am not only not killed by him, but neither receive any molestation.
Because the Pope knows very well, that I say true, and you lie. As also a
little after, when you add: The doctrine of penance is altogether depraved
by the Pope, and his members; for he teaches, that sins are remitted for the
worthiness of our works. Likewise they never teach, that sins are freely
remitted for Christ. Which surely are not our opinions, but your lies: for we
teach not that, but altogether the contrary, as the Council of Trent plainly
witnesses Sess. 6. cap. 5. 6. 7. and 8. But of this enough. I pass to Calvin.


THE TVVENTITH CHAPTER. Caluins lies are refuted.
WHEREFORE John Calvin expounding These. 2. Who extolleth himself above all
that is called God, says indeed many things, and with great pomp of words,
but he proves in a manner nothing. Paul (says he) signified in these words,
that Antichrist would usurp to himself those things, which are proper to God
alone, so that he will extol himself above all divine power and the whole
religion, and all the worship of God shall lie under his feet. And after: Now
whosoever shall be taught out of the Scripture what things are most proper to
God, and on the other side shall behold what the Pope usurps to himself,
although he be a child of ten years old, he will not much labor in the
discerning of Antichrist. Surely a magnificall promise.

But let us here with what reasons he proves at The Scripture pronounces,
that God is the only lawgiver, Isa. 33. v. 22. who can keep, and destroy,
Jacob. 4. v. 12. The only King, whose office is to govern souls with his
word: it makes him likewise the author of all holy things: it teaches that
justice and salvation is only to be sought for of Christ: it assigns also the
manner and means. There is none of these things which the Pope affirms not
to belong to his power: he glories, that it is his office to bind consciences
with what laws he thinks good, and to subject them to eternal punishements.
He either instituteth new Sacraments at his pleasure, or corrupts and
vitiateth, yea wholly abolisheth those which were instituted by Christ, that he
may substitute in their place the sacriledges which be has seygned. He forgeth
means of obtaining salvation altogether repugnant to the doctrine of the
Gospel. Finally he doubts not to change the whole Religion at his beck:
what I beseech you, is it to extol himself above all that is reputed God, if
the Pope does it not?

Did not I ^ay, well, that many things are said by Calvin, little or nothing
proved? For that the Pope glories, that it is his office to bind consciences
with what laws he thinks good, that he instituteth new Sacraments, that he
abolisheth the old, that he forgeth means to salvation repugnant to the
doctrine of the Gospel, that he changes all religion; Calvin says so
indeed, but he proves it not. And if to say with him, be to prove; by like
reason to deny, must be to refute.

Certaynely all we Catholics, which obey the Bishop Rome Christ's Vicar say
freely, and without any injury to him, that it is not lawful for him to bynd
men with any laws whatsoever, that is, with pernicious also and unjust, nor to
institute new Sacraments, nor to corrupt and abolish those which are instituted
by Christ, nor to invent means to Salvation repugnant to the doctrine of the
Gospel, nor to pervert or change Christian Religion: and this we say the more
willingly, because we know, that he also thinks and says so: for if he
thinks not so, if he thinks that he may make unjust laws, institute new
Sacraments, abolish the old, and do other things of that sort; how does he
suffer us to speak so, who notwithstanding are in his power, and not in I know
not what corner, but teach in the City of Rome it self, by his knowledge and
will?

But they will say, the Pope says not, that it is lawful for him to do these
things; but yet in very deed, and in fact he strives, that it is lawful for
him to do them. Let it be proved then, that he has done any of these things,
for otherwise to assume that which is to be proved, which indeed is common with
our Adversaries, is called by the Logicians, petiti^ princip^.

Now these two places, Isa. 33. and Iac. 4. which Calvin only produces, are
not any thing contrary to our opinion, for that which Isaias, and S. James say,
that our King, Judge, and Lawgiver is one; certainly is not repugnant to those
words, Prou. 8. By me Kings do reign, and the makers of Laws do discerneiust
things: and with those Psalm. 2. And now Kings understand, be instructed, you
who judge the earth, and with 600. other of the same kind. Wherefore Isayas, and
S. James do not make God the only King, Judge, and Lawgiver in whatsoever
manner; but only in that sort, that he only is so King, and Judge, and
Lawgiver, that he ought to give account to none other, that he depends of
none, that he reigns and judges, and makes Laws by his own authority,
that is not received from another, and finally, that he alone can also with
effect destroy and save, as S. James says. For we attribute none of these
things to the Pope, or other Princes.

THE XXI. CHAPTER. The lies of Illyricus are refuted.
Now Illyricus, in the book which he But among other arguments, that must we
hold most firmly which has been most truly and clearly proved by many in this
time, that the Pope teaches and desendeth impious Doctrine, and that he is the
very Antichrist himself; the reasons whereof I will here repeat. Joan. 1.
epist. 2. defines that Antichrist is he who denies Jesus to be Christ. That
the Pope plainly does, not in words, but in deed. For Meschias in Hebrew, in
Greek Christ, is a Person sent by God, to be the perpotuall Priest and King of
the people. It is the office of a Priest to teach, pray, and sacrifice; but it
is a Kings office to govern and defend. So he. Now let us hear, how he
proves, that the Pope has taken away these offices from Christ, and what
testimonies, what reasons he brings. But if I be not deceived, we shall only
hear vain words. Thus then he goes forward: Wherefore the Pope takes away
the Priesthood from Christ, for he will not only have the beloved Son heard,
but rather himself, and his false Apostles, who bring another Gospel.
Likewise because he substituteth to us many other Mediators in Heaven for
Christ who may make intercession for us before the Father, Christ the severe
Judge being neglected. Likewise because he has substituted infinite petty
Sacrificers for Christ, who may appease God to mankind, to whom he says, that
the Priesthood was translated from Christ by Peter. Finally because, he will
have us saved by the meritts of his spiritual men and Saints.

Behold with what clear testimonies of Scripture Illyricus conuinceth us:
what if we demonstrate, that all these are mere lies? For where I pray you
have you read, that the Pope had rather have himself heard then Christ? We
deny it: prove it, for we contrariwise see that the Scriptures are greatly
honored by the Pope, and that they are accounted heretics who have taught any
thing against the Scriptures. Besides, is it not a most manifest lie, that the
Pope has substituted Mediators for Christ, and that he would have them make
intercession to the Father, Christ being neglected? Do not our Litanies begin
thus, Kyrie Eleison, Christ Eleison? Are not all the prayers of our Church
which we read in the Mass and Ecclesiastcall office directed to God, and ended
by Christ our Lord? Do we not acknowledge the mediation and intercession of
Christ, since that whatsoever we ask of God, or we desire to be asked for us
by the Saints, we ask it all by the merits of Christ? For we have not the
Saints in the place of God or Christ, but we desire of them, that they will
join their prayers with ours, that in this sort we may obtain more easily of
God by Christ whatsoever we will have.

In like manner it is a lie, that we say, that the Pope S. Peter to petty
Sacrificers, for you neither prove, neither ever will be able to prove any of
these things. Neither can there be any doubt, but that if you had any thing,
you would produce it: but this is it, which we say, that Christ, who is a
Priest for ever, and always lives to make intercession for us, has offered
himself once to God an host of pacification by his death of the Cross: and
that now he offers himself by the hands of the Priests again, and again
in Mystery.

And as, though many baptize in this time, notwithstanding that is true, which
we read Joan 1. This is he who baptizeth in the Holy Ghost: for the office of
Christ is not translated from Christ to Priests, but it is he, who always
baptizeth by the Ministry of Priests; so also, though many Priests at this
day offer Christ in the venerable Mysteries, notwithstanding he is the
principal Priest, and truly the chiefest Bishop, who offers himself by the
Ministry of all Priests. The works, says S. Chrysostom hom. 83. in Matthew.
are not of humane virtue; He that did it then in that supper, he works now
also, he finisheth it, we hold the order of Ministeries.

But I would willingly learn or thee Illyricus, since Rome, that he has
transferred the Priesthood of Christ to petty Sacrificers? but let us go on to
the rest.

That which thou addest in the last place; he will have us saved by the merits
of his spiritual men and Saints, is only a notable lie; otherwise produce a
place where the Pope said so, for we believe to be saved by the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, as also our Fathers were saved, as S. Peter says Act. 15.
Neither do we acknowledge any other Savior, but Jesus, and him crucified, who
gave himself a redemption for all, 1. Tim. 2.

Now that the merits and prayers of the Saints do S. Aug. quaest. 149. in
Exodus says thus: That by that means we might be admonished, when our own
merits had oppressed us, so that we are not loved of God, that we may be
relieved by him, by the merits of them, whom God loves. And again lib. 21.
de ciuitate Dei cap. 17. he diverse times repeateth, that some obtain pardon by
the merits of Saints; and that this was signified by our Lord when he said:
Make you friends of Mammon of iniquity, that when they fail, they may receive
you into everlasting Tabermacles, Luc. 16. And as we have also experienced,
says S. Leaser. 1. (...). Apostol^^um, and our Ancestors have proved, (...)
believe and ^^^st, that we shall always be helped by the prayers of our special
(...), among all the labors of the life, to obtain the mercy of God, that by
h^w much we are depressed by our sins, so much we may be erected by
Apostolical merits. So he.

And although we are not wont to speak so, as Illyricus says, that we are
saved by the merits of spiritual men: S. Paul, who 1. Cor. 9. says, Iam made
all things to all men, that I might make all men saved, and the Apostle S.
Judas, who speaks in like manner, when he says; Do you reprehead, these
indeed being judged, and save those taking them from the fire. And thus much of
the Priesthood of Christ.

Illyricus goes forward: Now he takes away Christ's Kingdom from him, because
in earth he will be the head of the Church, and in Heaven he appoints us
other helpers and Saviors, to whom he commands us to fly in our miseries:
wherefore the Pope denies that Jesus is Christ.

Here first I ask, whether the Pope or any of the Catholics call the Saints
Saviors? Then I add, if to affirm, that he is the head of the Church under
Christ as his Vicar and Minister, which the Pope does, be to deny that Jesus is
Christ, why by the same reason whosoever affirms that he is Viceroy, or
Governor of some Prince, is not forthwith censured to deny the King to be his
Lord?

Finally if to fly to Saints as helpers in miseries, is to S. Paul deny Jesus
to be Christ, when he says Romans 15. I bes^ech you brethren by our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by the charity of the Holy Ghost, that you help me in prayers for
me to God, that I may be delivered from the infidalls which are in Judea? How
did not Basil the Great deny Jesus to be Christ, when in orat. de 40. Mart. he
spoke thus. He that is oppressed with any distress, let him fly to these.
Again, he that rejoices let him pray to these: he to be delivered from
miseries. this other, that he may continue in prosperity? I omit the rest of
the Fathers, for fear least if we examine them, we shall find none, who has
not denies Jesus to be Christ.

Illyricus goes on. Dan. 11. describes Antichrist by many notes. First says
he, he shall do what he will, surely the Pope does what he lists. But holy
Daniel, when he says of Antichrist he shall do what he will, signifies that
Antichrist shall acknowledge no superior at all, no not God himself, for so
it, follows: And he shall be extelled against every God: wherefore Antichrist
neglecting also the law and commandment of God, shall live at his own will,
which cetainely the Pope does not, who denies not, that he is bound by the law
of God, and acknowledges Christ his Judge and Superior.

He himself (says Illyricus) confesses it did 40. If the Pope should draw
with him infinite so^^es into hell, yet no man must say unto him, what do
thou? And the gloss says, the Popes will stands for reason.

The Canon which begins Si Papa, is not as Illyricus falsely says, of any
Bishop of Rome, but of S. Boniface Bishop of Me^tz Apostle of the Germans, and
a Martyr: who donieth not, that the chief Bishop if he lives ill is to be
rebuked and admonished by brotherly charity: but he denies, that he can be
reprehended by authority and judged, since that he is the judge of all men;
which Boniface also in those words, which go before that Canon (as is to be
seen in the new edition of the Decree) expressly calls the Church of Rome the
head of all Churches, and affirms that the prosperity of the whole Church
does depend of the safety of the Bishop of Rome after God.

Wherefore I demand of Illyricus, whether the sentence S. Bonifacius Apostle
of the Germans be true or no, for if it be not true, why is it objected unto
us? if it be true, why is it not received? I will say the same more plainly.
If that sentence be not true, then it is not true that it may not be said to
the Pope drawing many souls with himself into hell, What do thou? If it be
true, then is the Pope truly the head of all Churches, and being to judge all,
is to be judged by none. Wherefore let Illyricus lean alleging the Canons,
which can profit him nothing. As for the gloss, let Illyricus know, that it is
either taken away by the Pope himself, as false in the new edition of the
Decree, or cls was never in the decree; certainly I could not find it.

Illyricus goes forward. Secondly Daniel says that he will extol himself
above God: that the Pope did, as is manifest by that which has been said.
Likewise, because he will have himself heard more then God, and blaspheming he
cries out, that the Scripture is the Fountain of all heresies and schismas,
doubtefull and obscure etc. But thou should have rehearsed Daniels words
faithfully, for he says not, he will extell himself above God; but he shall be
extelled against every God; and after: Neither shall he care for any of the
Gods, because he shall rise against all. Which note most clearly shows that
the Pope has nothing common with Antichrist, for Antichrist will care for none
of the Gods; but the Pope worshippeth the only true God, the Father, the Son,
and holy Ghost. Neither does he that alone, but also (if we believe you) he
adoreth openly so many Gods, as there be Saints in Heaven, Images on earth,
and relics under the earth.

Now that which thou addest, that the Pope cries out, that the Scripture is
the fountain of heresy and schisms; Certainly I never read it in the
writings of any Pope, but I hear, that it is the word of thy friend Luther,
that the Scripture is the book of heretics, Luth. praefat. historia, qua
contigit in Strasfort. anno 36. which word if it be rightly taken, I see not
why it should be deservedly reprehended; for S. Hilarie lib. de Synod:
extre^^o, shows that most heresies arose out of the Scriptures ill
understood, and Tertullian in lib. de praescript more bouldly says thus:
Neither am I afraid to say, that the very Scriptures are so disposed by the
will of God, that they might minister matter to Heretics, since I read
Heresies must be, which cannot be without Scriptures.

And that the Scriptures are ambiguous and obscure Luther himself whether he
would or no was constreyned to confess it, when praefat. in Psalm. he wrote
thus: I would not have that presumed of me by any which none of the most holy
and most learned could yet perform, that is to understand and teach the
Psalter in all things with the true and lawful sense. It is sufficient to
have understood some, and those in part; the spirit has reserved many things
to himself, that he may always have us his scholars, many things be only
shows to entice, many things be delivers to move our affections. And
after: I know, that he is most impudently rath, who dares profess that one
book of the Scripture is understood by him in all parts. Also did not the same
Luther in lib. de Concilijs and Ecclesia page 52. openly confess, that he had
sought with great sweat the true and proper sense of the Scripture? Finally so
many Translations of the Scripture, so many expositions, so many most diverse
sects among our adversaries, what other do they proclay me, then that the
Scripture is ambiguous and obscure?

Illyricus. Thirdly Daniel says, that he (Antichrist) shall have prosporous
success until the anger of God be ended. The Pope has oppressed as he
desired by his tyranny and impiety both many common wealths, and also
innumerable Churches.


Bellarmine. And with what reason, or by what author do you prove this? Can you
tell, what Common Welthes, what Churches the Bishop of Rome has oppressed?
what if we co^trarywise demonstrate, that the note altogether opposite to this
third note of Antichrist, agrees to the Pope? for from that time, at which in
your opinion the Pope began to be Antichrist, his Kingdom has not only
increased, but has always more, and more decreased. In the time of S. Leo the
Great, that is 150. years before Antichrist was borne in your opinion, the
Pope of Rome had more Nations under him, then the bounds of the Roman Empire
extended to. For so writes the same S. Leo sermon. 1. de natal. Apost. Thou
being made, o Rome, the head of the world by the holy Seat of S. Peter, rulest
more largely by divine Religion, then by earthly domination: for although
increased with many victories thou have extended the right of the Empire by
Land and by Sea; yet that is less which warlike labor has subdued unto thee,
then that which Christian peace has subjected. And S. Prosper lib. de ingratis:

Seeds Roma Petri, quae Pastoralis honoris
Facta caput mundi, quidquid non possidet armi^,
-- Relligione tenet.
But afterward Antichrist reigning, as you affirm, by little and little the
Roman Sea has lost almost all Afric, the greatest part of Asia, all Greece,
and in our times in which you cry out that Antichrist rages most of all, all
things have succeeded so prosperously, that it has lost a great part of
Germany, S^^tia, G^thia, Nerutgia, all Denmark, a good part of England, France,
Heluetia, Pol^nia, Bohemia, and Pa^^^nia. Wherefore, if to have prosperous
success be a note of Antichrist, not the Pope, who has been deprived of so
many Provinces, but Luther, who by preaching carnal liberty* has seduced so
many people, and has proceeded with such prosperity, that of a private Monk
he is become the Prophet of all Germany, and as it were a certain Pope, may
deservedly be called Antichrist: but go forward.


Illyricus. Fourthly Daniel says, that he will not care for the God of his
Fathers, that this is truly said of the Pope, we clearly proved before in the
place of John.


Bellarmine. And we reproved the same more clearly in the same place:
wherefore go forward to other.


Illyricus. Fifthly he says, that he will not care for the love of women, which
the Pope has done, both by commanding his followers continency, as also by
his Sodomiticall lusts.


Bellarmine. Here I omit to speak of your rashness, with which you dare say
any thing, little weighing in the mean time, whether those things which you
say can be proved, or not. That I will not omit, that the words of Daniel,
although in the greek text, they signify so as you say, notwithstanding out
of the hebrew Fountain they are translated by S. Hierome into the quite
contrary sense, for thus he translateth: And he shall be in the concupiscence of
women. And although the Hebrew words Ve gal kemdath nasi^, only signify, In
the concupiscence of women, and have not any word a lioyned by which it may be
understood, whether Antichrist shall be or not in the concupiscences of women:
Notwithstanding there are two conjectures, which make the translation of S.
Hierome the more probable.

The one, because it is manifest that Antiochus of whom Daniel speaks, and
who bare the figure of Antichrist, was very much addicted to the love of women:
Antiochus (says S. Hierome in commentar. h^iu^ loci) i^ said to have been most
lecharous, and that he came into such ignominy by rauishements, and corruptions
of the Kingly Majesty, that he did also publicly accompany queanes, and
harlots, and satisfy his lust in the peoples presence. Which since it is so,
how is it credible that Daniel would say of such a King he shall not be in the
concupiscences of women?

The other conjecture is since that Antichrist shall be Messiah of the Jews, and
the Jews besides other benefits, expect of their Messiah multitude of wives,
it is in no sort probable, that Antichrist shall either command, or praise
continency.

Lastly I add, that if it be a note of Antichrist, to Carthage say can. 2. It
pleases us all, that Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or they that handle the
Sacraments, keeping chastity, abstein^ also from their wives, that we may also
observe that, which the Apostles taught, and Antiquity it self has kept. Go
on.


Illyricus. Sixthly, Daniel says, that he shall worship the God Maozim, and
that with gold and silver: which he has done while he places all piety in
this, that many and great Temples fairly built may shine with all kind of
ornaments, and sound with singing.


Bellarmine. Of the God Maozim there has been much said before, where we
showed, that the God Maozim is either Antichrist himself, or the Devil
himself, whom Antichrist shall worship secretly. But our friend Illyricus
seems to me, to make Jesus Christ the God Maozim, which surely is an
intolerable blasphemy: for that all the Temples, which are costly built, and
are adorned with gould and silver by the Bishops of Rome, are consecrated and
dedicated to Christ our God there is no man but knows. Therefore if he, that
is worshipped in these Temples, be the God Maozim. Neither did the building and
adorning of Temples begin from the year 666. in which year our adversaries
will have Antichrist to have appeated, but almost 300. years before this time.

Here Eusebius ex versione Russini lib. 9. Hist. Eccles. cap. By which there
was, as it were by Gods gift, joy infused to all, especially seeing those
places, which a little before had been destroyed by the impious devises of
Tyrants with a new building arise more costly and statly, and the huge Temples
were erected instead of mean meeting places. Here S. Cyril Hierosol. catech.
14. These Kings which now are, by their piety covering this holy Church of the
Resurrection in which now we are, with silver and gould, built it up, and made
it resplendens with silver ornaments.

See besides, if you list, of the magnificence of Christian Temples, and the
splendor of holy Vessels of the Eusebius lib. 3. and 4. de vita Constantini,
S. Greg. Nissen orat. de S. Mart. Theodoro. S. Greg. Nazianz. orat. in Julian.
S. Chrysostom. hom. 66. ad Pop. Antioch. S. Cyril. Alexand. lib. de rect. fide ad
Regin. S. Damas. in vit. S. Siluestri, S. Ambrose lib. 2. de offic. cap. 21. S.
Hierom. in commen. cap. 8. Zachar. S. August. in psalm. 113. S. Paul. in natal.
3. S. Felicis, Prudentius in hymno de S. Laurentio, and Procop. in lib. de
aedificijs Iustiniani. Certainly all these lived before the times of
Antichrist, and yet they witness, that there were such buildinges, and
ornaments of Christian Temples every one in their own age, that those which we
see now, can in no sort be compared to them.


Illyricus. Seauenthly, Daniel says that Antichrist shall enrich his fellows:
that the Pope has done.


Bellarmine. Doubteles he greatly enriched John Eckins, Io. Cochl^us, Io. B. of
Rochester, Latomus, Driedon, Tapper, Peter a Soto, and so many other most
learned men, who having labored night and day to suppress your furies, never
received one halfpenny of the Bishop of Rome; although neither did they desire
reward of man, who labored chiefly for the glory of God. And if the Bishop of
Rome gives rich benefices to Cardinals, and Bishops, he is not so much to be
thought to enrich them, as the piety of the faithful, who gave these rents to
the Church.

Illyricus goes on, Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. puts 5. notes of Antichrist besides
the aforesaid. The first, that he shall sit in the Temple of God. This the Pope
does, feigning himself the Vicar of Christ, and reigning in the consciences of
men. For if he should profess himself the enemy of Christ, as Mahomet does,
he should be out of the Church. But S. Paul (Illyricus) does not only say, that
Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God (for every Bishop sits in the
Temple of God) but he explicateth the manner, how he shall sit in the Temple of
God, saying: showing himself (...). But the Pope by thy own Testimony makes
himself the Vicar of God, and consequently not God: for the Vicar of God
cannot be God, unless thou feignest lesser, and greater Gods. Besides, I ask
of thee, if the Pope be not out of the Church, as thou say in this place, and
consequently is within the Church; where I pray thee, art thou and thine? art
thou not out of the Church? for the Church is one, and the Pope sits in it:
wherefore you who are not in that, are in none. But let us hear the rest.


Illyricus. The second, because he faith that the mystery was then doing: this
I think to signify that the Bishop of Rome began a little after to list his
head above others.


Bellarmine. This is that, which I briefly noted before, following Nicolas
Sanders, who before had seen and written the same, that in your opinion S.
Peter is Antichrist, and Simon Magus, or Nero Christ. For S. Paul says not the
mystery shall work a little after, but it works now; wherefore if this
Mystery belongs to the Bishop of Rome it must needs belong to S. Peter, and
if S. Peter (which my heart abhors to think, and my hand trembles to write)
was Antichrist, who sees not, that Simon, and Nero S. Peter's enemies were
Christ and God? But keep to thy self such Gods and Christ's, for we envy thee
not; but go forward.


Illyricus. The third, because he says, that Antichrist shall come with lying
signs: which the Pope has done, as experience witnesses,

The fourth, that God shall send the efficacy of illusion: which has
manifestly happened in the Papacy, for we believed in all things the Pope more
f^mely, then God.

We treated before of the miracles of Antichrist cap. 15. Illyricus says of
experience; for the Popes have done neither true, nor false miracles, either in
this age, or in the former, with which notwithstanding they say that Antichirst
does chiefly reign. And that which he adds of the efficacy of illusion,
every man sees, how easily it may be returned upon our adversaries; for what
greater efficacy of illusion can be imagined, then that there should some be
found in these times, who choose rather to believe two or three Apostataes,
then the whole Church, all Counsels, and all the Fathers, who besides their
admirable doctrine and excellent sanctity of life, were renowned also with many
signs and miracles?

Now that which Illyricus brings out of S. Ambrose to explicate the fifth
note, is before refuted in the second demonstration, with which we proved, that
Antichrist is not yet come.

Illyricus in the last place adds somewhat out of ep. 1. ad Tim. 4. In the
last times same shall depart from the says: The Pope denies that there is any
other says but hestoricall. They shall attend to deceauing spirits: The Pope
proves all things with visions of spirits and souls. They shall prohibit
marriage, and the use of meats: both these are most true and manifest of the
Pope.

But good Sir, the Pope has learned of S. Paul, that one God (says the
Apostle Ephesians. 4.) one faith, one baptism. Neither did S. Paul ever define
this one faith to be a confidence relying upon the promise and word of God, as
you define it cent. 1. lib. 2. col. 262. but he says Romans 10. This is the word
of faith which we preach, because if thou confessest in thy mouth one Lord
Jesus, and have believed in thy heart, that God has raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved. And Hebr. 11. he says, by Faith we believe that the
worlds were framed by the word of God.

And who knows not that it pertayneth to the sacred the worlds were framed
by the word of God? And yet we name not this one only, and true Faith, by which
we most certainly believe whatsoever God has vonchsafed to reveal by the
Apostles and Prophets, an historical faith; but the Catholic faith, for we
leave to you the novelties of words.

That which thou addest, that the Pope proves all things with the visions of
spirits and souls, I know not what spirit has revealed unto thee. For we
sometime bring something out of the apparitions of souls written by approved and
ancient authors to confirm those things which belong to the state of souls,
of which sort is that which Eusebius writes of the apparition of S. Potamiena
lib. 6. hist. Eccles. cap. 5. and that which S. Augustine relates of the
apparition of S. Felix Nolanus lib. de cura pro mortuis, cap. 16. But for the
confirmation of other doctrines, I know not what Catholic ever alleged the
visions of souls: but this is not your first lie.

That which thou bring in the last place, of the forbidding of meats and
marriages, is evidently enough confuted by S. Aug. lib. 30. cont. Faust. cap.
6. where he says thus: If you were exhorted to Virginity in such sort, as the
Apostles doctrine exhorts; He that gives to marriage does well, and he that
gives not to marriage does well: so that you did say, Marriage is good, but
Virginity better, as the Church does, which truly is the Church of Christ; the
holy Ghost would not foretell you thus saying, forbidding to marry; for he
forbids, who says that this is evil, not he who prefers another thing
better before this which is good. And after: You see therefore, that there is a
great difference betwixt those, which exhort to virginity, preferring a greater
good before a less, and those which forbid to marry, vehemently accusing the
act of propagation, which only properly belongs to marriage. And that there
is a great difference betwixt those who absteyne from meats, for the sacred
signification, or for the chastising of the flesh, and those which absteyne
from meats which God has created, saying; that God has not created them.
Wherefore that is the Prophets and Apostles doctrine, this is the doctrine of
lying Devils. Thus S. Augustine for himself and us. Neither is it necessary
to add any thing.

Illyricus concludes. Wherefore it is manifest out of these signs, that the
Pope is that very true Antichrist himself, of whom the Scriptures have
prophesied.

But perhaps he might have concluded more fitly in this manner: Wherefore it is
manifest by these lies, that Illyricus is one of his forerunners, whom holy
Daniel long before foretold, that he should have an impudent face.


THE XXII. CHAPTER. The fool^ries of Tilemanus are refuted.
TILEMANVS Heshusius in the Book de sexcentis erroribus Pontificiorum, whereas
he should have entitled it, de sexcentis mendacijs Luther anorum, made a
peculiar title of Antichrist, that is titul. 33. and it comprehends four
errors. Thus then he says.

Tilemanus. First the Papists say, that Antichrist shall come out of Babylon of
the Tribe of Dan. Compendium Theologia lib. 7. cap. 8.


Bellarmine. We thank Tilemanus who teaches, that so ancient, and so holy
Fathers are Papists, for if they be Papists who say, that Antichrist shall come
of the Tribe of Dan, surely S. Irgnaeus, S. Hippolrtur, S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, S. Prosper, Theodorctus, S. Gregory, Beda, Arethas, Rupertus,
Anselmus, and Richardus are Papists. For all these, as we showed before cap.
12. with common consent, do teach that Antichrist shall be borne of the Tribe of
Dan. But go on.


Tilemanus. Secondly, the Papists deny, that the Bishop of Rome with his
Company is the true Antichrist; whereas it is proved, and demonstrated with
most forcible, and most plain testimonies of Gods word.


Bellarmine. But we have not yet seen these testimonies, neither are they in
any place of our Hebrew, Greek, or Latin Bibles: for the testimonies which are
alleged by your brethren, do not so much as name the Bishop of Rome.


Tilemanus. Thirdly, they teach, that Antichrist shall reign only 3. years
and a half. Compend: Theologiae.


Bellarmine. Here we give thee immortal thanks, that thou confessest, that
not only all the ancient Fathers, but also the Prophet Daniel, and S. John
Evangelist are Papists; and surely I have compassion of thee, and thine, to
whom thou only reseruest the dregs of writers, having given all the learned
and approved Fathers to the Papists. See, if thou will, what we taught before
cap. 8. and thou shall find, that S. Irenaus, S. Hippolytus, S. Cyril, S.
Hierome, S. Aug. Theodoretus, Primasius, drethas, Bed^, Anselmus, Richardus,
Rupertus, and also Daniel and S. John did expressly teach that, which thou
affirmest the Papists to teach.


Tilemanus. Fourthly, they teach that Antichrist shall be slain in the Mount
Oliuet. Compend. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 4.


Bellarmine. But here also thou make great men Papists, for that Antichrist
was to be slain in the Mount of Oliuet S. Hierome in comment. cap. 11. Dan.
gathers out of Daniel himself, and Isayas. Theodoretus also writing upon the
same place, although he names not the mount Oliuet, yet he affirms, that
Antichrist is to be killed not far from Jerusalem. But let us see now with
what arguments thou confutest the foresaid errors, for thou addest a
preservative immediately in these words.


Tilemanus. The Papists trifles of Antichrist, because they are grounded upon
no testimony of the holy Scripture, are to be rejected and detested: for as S.
Hierome rightly speaks, that which has no authority in the Scripture is
contemned with the same facility, with which it is affirmed. And Paul
admonishes that we should take heed of the traditions of men. Coloss. 2. And
this I say, least any man deceive you with false reasons etc. Likewise see that
no man prey upon you by Philosophy: we must seek out of the word of God what
is to be thought of Antichrist as 1. Joan. 2. Who is a liar, but he that
denies Jesus to be Christ: This is Antichrist. Likewise 2 Thessalonians. 2. the man
of sin, and the son of perdition extolleth himself above every God etc.
Likewise Matthew. 24. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and
they shall give signs etc. Likewise Dan. 11. and he shall make the munition of
the God Maozim etc Likewise Apoc. 17. And I saw a woman drinken with the bold
of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Out of these testimonies
of the sacred Scripture, it appears manifestly, what the Christian says is
of Antichrist, whom Christ, and the Apostles foretold was to come. And since
it is cleerer then noonday, that every one do most exactly agree to the
Bishop of Rome, it ought not to be doubted, but that, that most naughty Roman
Tyrant is Antichrist. Thus he.


Bellarmine. It will not be offen five I trust, if we reduce these thy who
denies Jesus to be Christ, this is Antichrist, 1. Io. 2. Wherefore it is an
error to say, that Antichrist shall come of the Tribe of Dan.

The second error is thus confuted, as Hierome rightly Paul says the man of
sin and the son of perdition extolleth himself above every God, 2 Thessalonians.
2. Therefore the Papists err, when they deny, that the Pope is Antichrist.

The third thus, and more firmly, because out of two Paul says; And this I
say, least any man deceive you with false reasons etc. Coloss. 2. But there
shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and they shall give signs etc.
Matthew. 24. Therefore the error of the Papists is intolerable, who say, that
Antichrist shall reign three years and a half.

The last thus, and most firmly, because out of three Scriptures Paul
admonishes, See that no man prey upon you by Philosophy etc. Coloss. 2. But
Antichrist shall make the munition of the God Maozim, Dan. 11. and John saw a
woman drunk with the blood of the Saints, Apoc. 17. Wherefore the Papists
err exceedingly, when they say, that Antichrist shall be slain in Mount Oliuet.

The gentle Reader will pardon me, for using Tileman so ridiculously: for the
impudency of the man compelled me, who bringing nothing worth the confutation,
yet prateth and boasts in such sort, as if he had produced Demonstrations,
more certain, and more clear then those, which the Mathematicians use.


THE XXIII. CHAPTER. The lies of Chytraeus are refuted.
DAVID Chytraeus in Commont. cap. 9. Apoc. S. John, in which when the fifth
Angel sounded his trumpet, there was an huge star seen to fall from heaven
upon the earth, to which was given the key of the bottomeles pit. And after
there was seen amost thick smoke to ascend from the pit, which obscured the
Sun, and the air. Lastly there was seen out of the sinoke certain
wonderful locustes, to come forth, which a little after carried the shapes of
Horses, and Lions, and Scorpions, and armed men: Chytraeus (I say) explicating
this vision, thought himself, and would have other think, that it agreed so
fitly to the Bishop of Rome, that he said; there is no doubt, but that
Antichrist or the order of the Roman Papacy is described in this vision.

And further he teaches, that the beginning of this Gregory the Great, Bishop
of Rome, and his successors, who having cast away the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, received the keys of the bottomless pyt, and that the smoke coming
out of the pyt are the corruptions of doctrine, and the diverse traditions of
the Bishops of Rome. Finally he will have the swarm of Locusts, to be the
Bishops, Clergy, and Monks etc. and to dissolve this smoke in some sort, he
proposed the Antithesis of the Popes doctrine, and the Ghospells, or of
Antichristian, or Christian doctrine, which comprehends 12. articles like
another Creed.

But this his opinion may be confuted many ways; Arethas, Beda, Primasius,
Anselmus, Rupertus and others upon this place understand by that star, which
fell from heaven, the Devil himself, and not any Bishop; for of the Devil it
is said Isa. 14. How fellest thou from heaven Luciser, who ar^sest in the
morning? And because the Devil fell long before S. John wrote the Apocalypse,
therefore the Fathers note, that S. John said not, I saw a star falling from
heaven, but I saw a star fallen from heaven; for S. John saw that star now
creeping upon the earth, which in times past had shined most clearly in heaven.
Also, that which follows agrees most fitly to the Devil, And the key of the
bottomless pit^^^ given unto him; for as Christ has, and co^municateth to his
the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and reigns in the minds of the
faithful and pious: So the Devil has the keys of the bottomless pit, and
reigns in the children of diffidence, and is often called in the Scriptures,
the Prince of darkness, the Prince of this world, the God of this world, Joan.
12. and 14. 2. Cor. 4. Ephesians. 6. Colos. 1. and in other places. It is he also,
who by Gods permission raises the smoke of errors out of the pit, and
sends new swarms of Locusts, that is new Arch-heretikes with their armies,
into the lymits of the Church, almost in every age.

Secondly, because Chytraeus his opinion cannot stand with that, which S. John
says in this same Chapter of the S. John in 8. and 9. chap. Apoc. describes
by the trumpets of the 6. Angels, six persecutions of heretics, which were to
be from the time of the Apostles, until the consummation of the world. And
Chytraeus himself by the first trumpet, does not ill understand the heresy of
the Ebionits, which was raised in the time of the Apostles; by the second, he
understands the heresy of the Gnostics which followed; by the third, the
heresy of Samosatens, and Arians, which was after; by the fourth, the heresy
of Pelagius which was latter then they all.

Now, if by the fifth be understood the persecution Chytraeus answers, that
by the sixth trumpet is signified the persecution of Mahomet, and the Turks.
But this is not well said, both because the Mahometans are not heretics, but
Pagans; and also, because the persecution of Mahomet shall not follow, but go
before Antichrists persecution as we think, or they are both together, as
Chytraeus says. Wherefore Chytraeus is compelled to confound the fifth trumpet
with the sixth, whereas he referred the rest plainly enough to diverse times:
wherefore the Catholics understand better by the sixth trumpet, the persecution
of Antichrist, which shall truly be the last, and most grievous, and by the
fifth some very pernicious heresy, which shall go next before the times of
Antichrist, which surely many very probably conjecture to be the heresy of the
Lutherans.

Thirdly, because Chytraeus erreth most grossly, when he teaches, that S.
Gregory is the falling star; for S. Gregory, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen,
S. Chrysostom Grecians; S. Martin, S. Paulinus, and S. Augustine Latins of
secular, became Monks, and of Monks Bishops, neither did ever any say, that
they did therefore fall from heaven to earth. Besides, S. Gregory was second to
none in continency, sobriety, and love of heavenly things; and in humility, he
in a manner excelled all: and yet Chytraeus dares affirm, that he fell from
heaven, that is, from an heavenly life to earth, that is, to an earthly and
delicate life.

Finally, Luther himself in supput. temp. says, that S. Gregory was an holy
Bishop: and Theodorus Bibliander tab. 10. Chronol. following Luther, praises
S. Gregory exceedingly, and says, that it may be known by his books, how
much be profited in piety and learning. Which doubtless is most true, for his
writings breath out a wonderful holiness.

Neither is that less vain, which Chytraus adds of S. Gregory and his
Successors into the Church. For S. Gregory innouated nothing, which belonged to
doctrine, but concerning rites and discipline, he corrected many things, which
had crept in by abuse, many things he restored which by negligence of times
were forgotten, he instituted a new very few things, and those with mature
counsel, as may be known both by the 4. books of his life, written by
Ioannes Diaconus, as also by his 63. epist. lib. 7. where he gives account of
the rites which he renewed or ordained. But this will be most plain, if we
run over the antithesis or opposition, betwixt the doctrine of the Gospel,
and the Pope, which Chytraeus proposes, and to which he often afterward
remitteth his Readers.

. I. Of the true Knowledge, and Invocation of God.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches, that one only God is to be innocated and
worthipped, as he has commanded himself to be worshipped in his word, and
that all the confidence of our salvation, is to be placed in the only goodness
and mercy of God. The Papists command us not to call upon one only true God,
but also upon dead men or Saints. and to ask and expect their aid and help in
dangers etc. Besides also plainly, after an heathen manner, they tie the
invocation and worship of God to certain Statua's in such sort, as if God were
more favorable, and propitious to him that calls upon him, at this or that
Status, then in other places.


Bellarmine. Because we have else where at large treated of these we will only
most briefly demonstrate that the doctrine, which Chytraeus calls Popish, is
neither repugnant to Gods word, nor began in the time of S. Gregory. Therefore
the word of God teaches indeed, that one only God is to be Adore (says David
psalm. 98.) the footestoole of his feet. And Job. 5. Call (says he) if there
be any man, that may answer thee, and turn thy self to some of the Saints.
Wherefore Abdias a great and holy man adored Elias prostrate upon the earth 3.
Reg. 18. And the children of the Prophets, when they heard, that the spirit of
Elias had rested upon Flizaeus, coming to him they adored him prostrate upon
the earth 4. Reg. 2. And the Apostle S. Paul almost in every Epistle, craves
the prayers of Christians, that by them he may be delivered from many dangers.
Neither can there any reason be given, why the honor due to God is diminished,
if we ask of the spirits of Saints, that they will pray for us; and it is not
diminished, if we ask the very same of the living.

Finally S. Ambrose was 200. years elder then S. Gregory, lib. de riduis he
speaks thus: The Angels are to be beseeched, who are given us for our
defense. The Martyrs are to be beseeched, of whom we seem to challenge
acertayne patronage by the pledge of the body. And after: Let us not be ashamed
to take them for intercessours of our infirmity etc.

Moreover we do not tie the worship and invocation Solomon: for although God
hears us every where, and we may lift up our hands to God in every place, yet
not without cause the holy Ghost in Isaias cap. 56. and Christ in S. Matthew.
cap. 21. called the Temple of God, the House of prayer, nor without cause the
most pious Emperor Theodosius (to omit many other examples of antiquity) went
with the Priests and the people, about all the places of Prayer, lay prostrate
in hair-cloth before the shrines of the Martyrs, and the Apostles, and craved
assured help by the intercession of Saints. And certainly Theodosius, who did
this, and Russinus who wrote this lib. 2. hist. Eccles. cap. 33. were before S.
Gregory almost 200. years.


. II. Of the Office and Benefits of Christ.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches that remission of sins, and eternal
salvation is given to us for the only and alone Son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ crucified for us, dead, and risen again, freely, not for any works or
merits of ours: And that this is the proper honor of God alone, as it is said,
Isa. 43. I am, I am he, who takes away iniquities: likewise there is no
salvation in any other. The Papists contrariwise do teach, that we are
justified and saved, not for the merits of Christ alone, but partly for Christ,
partly for contrition, and obedience.


Bellarmine. The Catholic doctrine has not this: that sinners are justified,
partly for Christ, partly for their works, as S. Paul says of Abraham, Romans
4. wherefore of these works, there is no controversy betwixt us, although
every where with a most impudent lie, you attribute this to us, that we teach,
that works without the merits of Christ are meritorious.

Another kind of works there is, which proceeds from faith, and the Grace of
God, and disposes to reconciliation with God, and remission of sins; of
which sort are alms, prayers, fastings, sorrow for sins and other like;
which works we affirm not to be meritorious ex iustitia, of our
reconciliation, but rather contrariwise we hear the Council of Trent, saying:
Sess. 6. cap. 8. that men are freely justified, because neither faith, nor
works which go before justification deserve it, to wit, of Justice, as though
justification were due to works: we confess notwithstanding, that these
works, as they proceed from Faith, and Gods help, are divine works, and merit
in their manner, that is, obtain by way of request the remission of sins:
for although you grant not this, yet the word of God does grant it: for what
is that which Ezechiel says cap. 18. When the impious shall turn himself
from his impiety, he shall quicken his soul? What is that which Dan. says
cap. 4. Redeem thy sins with alms? What is that which Jonas says cap. 3.
God saw their works (fastings and hayrecloth) and took compassion of them?
What is that which Christ says, Luc. 7. Many sins are forgiven her, because
she loved much?

And not only S. Gregory, but many Fathers before him S. Ambrose lib. 10. in
Lucam. Tears (says he) do not ask, but merit pardon. S. Hierome lib. 2.
aduers. Pelagianos. They who simply confess their sins merit by humility the
clemency of our Savior. S. Augustine epist. 105. Neither is the remission of
sins it self without some merit, if faith obtain it: for the merit of faith
is not none, with which faith he said: God be propitious to me a sinner; and
the faithful humbled, descended justified deseruealy etc. And epist. 106. If
any shall say, that Faith meriteth grace to work well, we cannot deny it, yea
we most freely confess it.

Finally, the last kind of works is of those, which are done by a man already
justified, and proceed from the holy Ghost, inhabiting the heart of man, and
diffusing charity in it. To which works, whether you will or no, we attribute
merit; not with which they merit remission of sins which went before, and
which cannot properly fall under merit, but with which they truly and properly
merit glory and everlasting blessedness: for otherwise how would S. Paul say
2. Tim. 4. I have fought a good fight, I have consummate my course, I have kept
the faith: Concerning the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of Justice,
which the just Judge will render mein that day. For if everlasting life be not
truly the reward of good works, why calls he it a Crown of Justice, and not
rather a gift of clemency? Why, says he, is it to be rendered and not given?
why by a just judge, not by a liberal King? Wherefore rightly S. Augustine ep.
105. from whence (says he) life everlasting it self, which doubtless in the
end shall be had without faith, and therefore is rendered to precedent merits,
yet because those merits to which it is rendered are not gotten by us by our
sufficiency, but are done in us by grace, it also is called grace, and not
therefore, because it is not given to merits, but because the merits also of
themselves are given, to which it is given.

Neither do those two testimones of Scripture terrify us: I am he who take away
iniquities: and, there is not salvation in any other, for such testimonies
exclude another God, another Christ, another Savior, and Physician of souls,
who may promise salvation, the true God, and Christ Jesus being excluded,
notwithstanding they exclude not faith, hope, charity, penance, Sacraments,
with which as it were with certain means and instruments God himself chiefly
working the merit of Christ is applied unto us, for otherwise how do these
sentences: I am he, who take away iniquityes; and, there is not salvation in
any other, agree with those, Thy says has made thee safe. Luc. 7. He will
save those who have hoped in him. Psalm. 36. he shall quicken his soul. Ezech.
18. The sear of God expels sin. Ezech. 1. He that has believed, and has
been baptized, shall be saved. Marc. vlt. he that eats this bread shall live
for ever. Joan. 6. But thus much of this, Chytraeus. But go forward.


. III.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches that he who does penance, and hears the
promise, ought to believe the promise, and to determine that sins are
remitted, not only to others, to Peter, or to Paul, but also to himself for
Christ, that he himself pleases God, is received, and heard by God; and that
we must have access to God with this faith, and daily invocation. The Papists
contend, that we must always doubt, whether we have remission of sins, which
doubtfulnes is simply repugnant to faith, and plainly heathen. So he.


Bellarmine. One Gospel teaches plainly enough that we must There are just
and wise, and their works in the hand of God, and yet a man knows not
whether he be worthy of hatred or love? Likewise how manifest is that, which
Job says cap. 9. Although I shall be simple, this very same, my soul shall be
ignorant of? and after: I feared all my works knowing that thou would not
spare the offender?

Besides almost all Gods promises have a condition annexed, Matt. 19. If thou will enter into life keep the Comaundeme^ts. Luc. 14. If any man comes to me,
and hates not Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and
Sisters, yea and his own life besides, he cannot be my Disciple. Rom 8. The
spirit himself gives testimony to our spirits, that we are the sons of God,
and if sons, heirs also, heirs truly of God, and coheyres of Christ, yet if
we suffer with him, that we may also be glorised with him. Finally S. Ambrose
much more ancient (as we have said) then S. Gregory, inserm. 5. super Psalm.
118. He would (says he) have his shame taken away, which he suspected, either
because he had thought in his heart and not done it, and though it were
abolished by penance, yet be suspected least peradventure his shame remained
still, and therefore he prays to God to take it away, who only knows, that
which he himself that did it, may be ignorant of.


. IIII.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches, that there is one only propitiatory
Sacrifice in the world etc. Heb. 7. 10. Christ was once offered that he might
take away sin etc. The Papists teach that Christ is offered every day in the
Sacrifice of the Mass to God the Father by Priests etc.


Bellarmine. The Gospel teaches indeed, that there is only one viz. which
was once offered upon the Cross; neither do Catholics deny this; but the
Gospel no where teaches, that this only Sacrifice may not be every day
reiterated in mystery by the same chief B. Christ, by the hands of Priests;
and this Catholics affirm. Neither do they only affirm it, who have been
since S. Gregory's time, but all the Fathers together, even those who were
many ages before S. Gregory. Hear in the name of the rest, only S. Augustine
epist. 23. ad Bonifacium speaking thus: Was not Christ offered once in
himself? and yet in the Sacrament, not only all the solemnityes of Easter, but
every day he i^ sacrificed, and offered for the people.


. V.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches, that not only outward actions repugnant to
the law of God, are sin, but also doubts of God, carnal security, and
contumacy, and concupiscence which is borne in us, and remains in those which
are borne again, Romans 7. The Papists deny, that these evils remaining in
those, which are borne again, are sins repugnant to the law of God.


Bellarmine. The Papists, that is Catholics, teach in no place, that only
outward actions are sins: but it is lawful for if they be voluntary; but if
they be inuoluntary, as those desires of the flesh against the spirit were,
which S. Paul felt, though he did not consent unto them, we constantly deny
that they are sins. Neither do we strive with you about S. Paul's words, as
though they seemed true to you, and false to us, but about the interpretation
of those words. Neither must you take it ill, if we prefer S. Augustine and
all the Quyre of Saints, before you new Vpstarts. For thus speaks S.
Augustine lib. 1. cont. duas epistolas Pelagianorum. cap. 13. But concerning
this concupiscence of the flesh, I think they are deceived or deceive with
which it is necessary, that even the baptized, and this if he profits most
diligently, and be moved with the spirit of God, does strive with a pious mind.
But this although it be called sin, it is so called, not because it is sin,
but because it was made by sin, as a writing is called a man's hand, because
his hand made it.


. VI.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches, that man in his weakness of nature cannot
satisfy the law of God, and that he is not just and free from all sin by this
perfect fulfilling of the law, Romans 8. The sense of the flesh is enmity against
God, for it obeys not the law of God, neither indeed can it. The Papists
strive, that man may satisfy the law of God, and that he is just, and deserves
everlasting life with this fulfilling of the law.


Bellarmine. The Papists, that is the children of the Catholic S. John says
in the beginning of his first epistle, If we shall say, that we have no sin,
we seduce our selves. But because these daily sins neither take away justice,
nor are so much against, as besides the law, since that for the remission of
such offenses, every Saint prays in opportune time, Psalm. 31. and all the
children of God, doubtless just and holy, are taught daily to say, Forgive us
our debts, Matthew. 6. Therefore we are not afraid to say, that man being
justified by the grace of God, may by the help of the same grace both fulfill
the law of God, and by that fulfilling, merit everlasting life: for we know who
said, And his Commandments are not heavy, Io. 1. 5. and who likewise said:
Call the workmen and render them their reward, Matthew. 20. And again, Come you
blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you etc. for I was
hungry, and you gave me to eat.

Wherefore S. Augustine lib. de gratia and lib. arb. cap. 16. It is certain
(says he) that we keep the commandments, if we will, but because our will is
prepared by our Lord, we must ask of him, that we may will so much, as is
sufficient, that willing we may do. And de spirit. and lit. cap. 10. Grace is
therefore given, not because we have fulfilled the law, but that we may fulfill
the law. Neither does that word of the Apostle move us, The sense of the flesh
is enmity against God: for the same Apostle had said before Romans 7. Therefore I
my self with my mind serve the law of God, but with my flesh the law of sin.
But that which we do with our mind we truly do, and that which we do with our
flesh, if the mind repugneth, is not our deed, as the same Apostle says, If I
do that (says he) which I will not, now I work it not.


. VII.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches that those only are good works which are
commanded by God etc. according to the rule which I command thee, do only
these things for thy Lord, neither add nor diminish. The Papists contrariwise
have overwhelmed the whole Church with traditions etc.


Bellarmine. These things have been already a thousand times repeated S. Paul
say: But of Virgins I have not our Lords precept, 1. Cor. 7? And yet he says
in the same place, that it is a good work to remain a Virgin. Therefore
(says he) he that joins his virgin in Matrimony does well, and he that
joins her not does better.

Neither does that rule much help thee: Do only those things for the Lord,
which I command thee. For God forbids not any other thing in that place,
but that we corrupt not his precepts, but that we keep them entirely as he
has commanded, not declining to the right hand, nor to the left. Wherefore S.
Aug. lib. de sanct. virginit. cap. 30. distinguishing precepts from counsels,
for neither (says he) as it is said, Thou shall not commit adultery: Thou
shall not kill: can it be so, Thou shall not marry: those things are exacted,
these are offered. If these be done, they are praised, unless those be done
they are condemned. In those God commands us a debt, in these, if thou shall
supererogate; or bestow any more (Note) he will restore it you at his return.


. VIII.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches that both parts of the Sacrament of the
Lords supper are to be ministered to all Christians, and truly of the cup he
expressly says, Drink all of this. The Papists contrariewise determine and
define etc.


Bellarmine. Hitherto we have not seen that place of the Gospel, where we
are taught that both parts of the Sacrament of S. Mark explicated, when he
added: And they drank all of it: but all Christians drank not, but all the
Apostles, who only then did eat with our Lord.


. IX.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches that true repentance, or conversion to God is
an earnest sorrow of heart, of sins committed, and a faith determining that
sins are certaynely remitted to him for Christ etc. The Papists contrariewise
although they number contrition among the parts of repentance, yet they feign
that it meriteth this remiss^on of sins, and they add auricular confess^on
not commanded by God and satisfaction or works not due, with which they
feygne, that the eternal pains of sins may be satisfied, and that these
same works may be redeemed with money. all which doctrine is blasphemous
against the merit of the Son of God, who alone has satisfied for our sins.


Bellarmine. Here I see nothing proved; no testimonies of the The punishment
(says S. Augustine tract. 124. in Joan.) endures longer then the fault; least
the fault should be thought small, if the punishment were also ended with it.

Finally, that which thou addest, that auricular confession S. Cyprian ser. 5.
de lapsis, and thou shall find Confession and Satisfaction to be necessary, and
these very words often repeated. Now that Satisfaction is to be redeemed with
money (least peradventure thou should suspect some unlawful negotiation) is
nothing else among Catholics, then that one kind of satisfaction may be
changed into another, by the Priests judgment, as fasting into alms. Let us go
forward to the rest.


. X.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches, that marriage is granted, and free for all
men, Lay, and Priests, and expressly says, that the forbidding of marriage, and
meats is a devilish doctrine. Contrariwise the Papists forbid a great part of
men, Priests, and Monks marriage, and command abstinence from certain meats
upon certain days.


Bellarmine. But where I pray thee does the Gospel teach, that Hebr. 13.
where we read, Marriage is honorable in all. But if (in all) comprehends all
men whatsoever, marriage shall be honorable in the Father and the Daughter, in
the Mother and the Son, in Brother and Sister; or if this pleases you not,
let it not please you neither, that marriage ought to be called honorable
betwixt a Monk and a Nun, and other men for whom it it is not lawful to
marry, by reason of their vow, for the Apostles meaning only is, that we honor
Marriage in all who are duly and lawfully married, and it remains that you
prove, that those are duly and lawfully married, who have vowed to God
perpetual continency. Hear S. Chrysostom what epist. 6. to Theodore a Monk,
who meant to marry a wife, or perhaps had already married one: Marriage (says
he) is honorable, but it is not fitting for thee now to keep the privileges
of marriage: although thou often call this Marriage, yet I think it worse
then adultery. Concerning the place of the Apostle 1. Tim. 4. forbidding to
marry etc. see what we said before chap. 21. near the end of it.


. XI.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches that there is one true, and solid foundation
upon which the Church of God is built: viz. our Lord Jesus Christ 1. Cor. 3.
Act. 4. and Augustine so interprets the place of Matthew. 16. Upon this rock
which thou have known, saying: Thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
that is upon my self the Son of the living God, I will build my Church, I
will build thee upon me, not me upon thee. The Pope contrary wise cries out,
that upon the rock of the Roman Church, and the ordinary succession of Popes,
all the rest of the Church in the Christian world is built.


Bellarmine. But I believe S. Paul is not repugnant to himself when Ephesians. 2.
we that are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. Neither is
S. John Apoc. 21. where he says that the 12. Apostles are 12. foundations of
the Church, contrary to S. Paul 1. Cor. 3. affirming, that there is no other
Foundation of the Church, but Christ: for S. Paul 1. Cor. 3. speaks of the
principal foundation. But both he Ephesians. 2. and S. Io. Apoc. 21. speak of
secondary Foundations. Of which manner of foundation S. Augustine also speaks
in psalm. contra part. Donat. where he says: Number the Priests, even from the
very seat of S. Peter, that is the rock, which the proud gate of hell do not
overcome. But of this we have spoken sufficiently before, lib. x. de Pontifice
cap. 10.


. XII.
Chytraeus. THE Gospel teaches, that no Apostle or Bishop or other Minister
of the Gospel, has superior, and greater power and rule, then another, so
far as pertayneth to the Ministry, but that all Ministers have equal power
to teach the Gospel, administer Sacraments, bynd wicked, and absolve those
which do penance, as the Scriptures clearly teach, Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 3. v. 4.
Joan. 20. and Matthew. 18. the keys of the kingdom of Heaven are given to all
the Apostles together. On the contrary side the Bishop of Rome boasts, that
he has by Gods law supreme power over all other Bishops, and the whole Church,
and both swords, the spiritual and politic etc.


Bllarmine. I could not yet find, where the Gospel teaches, that one Bishop
or Minister has not greater power then Luc. 22. our Lord indeed exhorts his
disciples to humility, and forbids Kingly and tyrannical dominatio^ to
them, who ought to govern the Church. In the mean time notwithstanding he
affirms, that among the Apostles, one is greater then the rest, yea and the
guide or captain of the rest. For he says: let him that is greater among you:
become as the less, and the precessour (in Greek (...), that is Dux, the
guide or captain) as a servant or Mynister. And the Apostle 1. Cor. 3. where
he says, that he had planted, and Apollo watered: and again, that he as the
Architect had laid the Foundation, and that others do build upon it; does he
not plainly enough signify, that he was greater then Apollo, and his other
coadiutours?

Moreover Io. 20. it is said indeed to all the Apostles, Behold I send you:
and whose sins you remit etc. notwithstanding cap. 21. all the Apostles, and
the rest of the faithful are subjected to S. Peter as sheep to their Pastor,
when it is said by our Lord to S. Peter alone in the presence of other
Apostles; feed my sheep. Finally although Matthew. 18. it be said to all the
Apostles: Whatsoever you shall bind etc. notwithstanding Matthew. 16. it is said
to Peter alone, To thee I will give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven etc.
and without doubt our Lord would not promise him any thing singulerly, unless
also he would give him some singular thing: but of these we have said many
things before lib. 1. cap. 12. 13. 14.

To that which thou obiectest of both the Swords against Bonifacius 8. where
thou also laughest at the Popes arguments: I will only answer in this place,
that they are all taken out of S. Bernard, whom Calvin, Melancthon, and other
of your crew are wont to call an holy man, and to allege him oftener then
once: See lib. 2. and 4. de Consider: or if thou please, see what we have
treated of this very matter in our last Book de Pontifice. And this shall
suffice of thy Antithesis, or opposition in this place.

Now it remains, that we show, that this very vision S. John does best agree
to Luther, and Lutherans: for first it is plain, that Luther may be signified
by that star, which fell from heaven to earth, seeing that he became of a
religious man, a secular; of a continent, a married, and of poor, rich; and
changed his sober and slender fare, with plentiful and dainty cheer. For what
else is this, then to have fallen from heavenly to earthly conversation?

Now, he that feels not the smoke of the bottomless Luther fell from the
Catholic Church, almost all the West was of the same faith, and religion, and
whithersoeuer a man went, he presently acknowledged his brethren, for they were
all in light. But after Luthers fall, there arose such a smoke of Errors,
Sects, and Schisms, that now one cannot know another in the same Province,
ye^, not in the same City or house.

This smoke has also darkened the Sun, and the Apocalypse, for both we and
our Adversaries do understand by the Sun Christ, and by the Air the
Scriptures: by which we after a certain sort breath in this life. And truly
how vehemently this smoke has obscured Christ, Transiluania, and the Countries
therabout do testify, where Christ's Divinity is openly denied. Germany also
witnesses, where the Anabaptists plainly, and the Vbiquists more obscurely
deny Christ's Humanity. And though there were in times past many heretics,
which did likewise impugn Christ, yet none more impudently then the heretics
of our time; for many of them do not only deny Christ to be God, but they
add, that he cannot be inuocated, nor knows what we do. It is an horror to
hear or read, with what temerity the mysteries of Christ are disputed of at
this time.

Likewise it is incredible, how vehemently this smoke has obscured the
Scriptures, for now there are so S. Paul says, 1. Corinthians. 7. Of Virgius I
have not the precept of our Lord, but I give counsel: And yet all the
heretics of this time do constantly deny, that there is any counsel of
Virginity, and that S. Paul meant not to give any counsel to embrace
Virginity in that place, but rather to terrify men from it. What can be more
plainly spoken, then that word of our Lord, This is my Body: and yet there is
nothing more obscure at this time? What should I say of those of Transiluania,
who have so perverted with their Commentaries the Gospel of S. John, which is
well known to have been chiefly written against Cerinthus, and Ebion, who
denied Christ's Divinity, that they most of all prove out of it, that Christ is
not God?

Let us come to the Locusts, which went out of the Chytraeus by the Locusts
understands the Bishops, Clerks, and Monks in the Church before S.
Gregoryes time, and yet these wonderful Locusts were not yet risen. But all
which S. John says of the Locusts do most aptly agree to the Lutherans, and
the other heretics of this time. For first the Locusts are wont always to come
in great multitude, and to go in flocks Prou. 30. the Locust has no King, and
they all go out by their swarms: so the Lutherans properly have not one Head,
because they deny, that there ought to be one Head of the whole Church.
Notwithstanding in a very short time they have increased to a huge multitude;
neither is it any marvel, for they have opened the gate to all vicious men:
the gluttons run to them because the Lutherans have no certain fasts: the
incontinent, because among them all vows of continency are disliked, and
Monks, Priests, and Nu^nes are permitted to marry. Likewise all Apostataes,
because among them all Cloisters are opened, and converted into Palaces;
covetous, and ambitious Princes, because both Ecclesiastical goods and
persons, are subjected to their power; the idle, and the enemies of good
works, because among them, only Faith is sufficient, good works are not
necessary. Finally, all sinful and wicked people, because all necessity of
confessing their sins, and giving account to their own Pastor, which is
wont to be a very great bridle to sinners, is taken away among them. Hence
therefore are the Locusts so multiplied.

Now these Locusts are strangely described by S. John, plate. Finally, they
seemed to be as horses prepared to the war: and the sound of their wings was
heard, as the noise of chariots running to war, and they had for King over
them an Angel or the bottomless pytte; who is called an Exterminatour. Their
smoth face signifies the beginning of their preaching, which always begins
from the Gospel, for they promise to say nothing, but the most pure word of
God, so they most easily allure the simple. The scorpions tail signifies the
poisoned and deadly event, for after they have proposed the word of God, they
deprave it with their perverse interpretation, and in that sort as it were
writhing their tail, they strike in their sting, and infuse their deadly
poison. The Locusts body which is in a manner nothing but belly (for the locust
has a great belly and therefore it can neither go nor fly well, but skippeth a
little up, and presently falls down to the ground again) signifies that
the heretics of this time are men addicted to their bellies, enemies of
fasting and continency, and therefore they can neither go by the way of the
commandments, nor fly to the contemplation of heavenly things.

They endeavor indeed sometime to erect themselves, Saxonicall Visitation may
serve for an example. For when Luther considered that by reason of the
Evangelical liberty, which he preached, and the abrogation of all
Ecclesiastical laws, the people did run into all vices without a bridle, he
ordained a Visitation, and admonished the Pastors, that they should preach
penance, the fear of God, obedience, good works etc. but it profited
nothing. See Cochlaeus in vita and actis Lutheri, anno 1527.

In like manner they endeavor to fly by contemplation, Trinity, of the
Incarnation, and of such other mysteries; but they fall into most grievous
errors, yea most pernicious heresies, as is manifest of the Vbiquists, who
destroy the whole mystery of the Incarnation, and Trinity.

The Crowns upon the heads of the Locusts, signify the arrogance and pride*
with which they extol themselves above all men. There is a book of Luthers,
extant to Duke George. In it he says thus: From the time of the Apostles no
Doctor or VViter, no Divine or Lawyer has so notably and clearly confirmed,
instructed, and comforted the consciences of secular states as I have done. By
the singular grace of God I know this certainly, that neither Augustine, nor
Ambrose, which notwithstanding are the best in this assayre, are equal to me
in this. What, that not only Luther and Calvin do set nothing by a 1000.
Cyprians, and Augustines, but also every paltry Minister account all Papists
asses, and blocks? Now these Crowns were, as it were of gould, that is, they
seemed of gould, but they were not, because they faigne that they are moved to
that which they say, with the zeal of Gods honor and charity: whereas
notwithstanding, they know nothing less then the zeal of God.

The Lions teeth signify the detractions, with which Smalchaldicall Synod,
Illyricus, Tilemanus, Calvin, and Chytraeus.

The breast armed with an iron plate, signifies their

The likeness of horses, which seemed prepartd to war Luther in assertione
art. 25. Come hither (says he) all you Papists together, join all your
studies, if perhaps you can undo this knot. In which manner do almost all the
rest speak. Now the similitude of the flying chariots signifies the swiftnes,
which this new heresy uses in taking possession of diverse Countries; for in
short time it has not only invaded many Kingdoms in the North parts, but
also durst run out to the Indians, although God permitted not, that is could
stay there; for that new and tender Church of Christ, did not deserve so great
a scourge.

Finally, the Angel of the bottomless pit, is said to Job. 41. Now, the King
of the Locusts is called an Exterminatour, because the Devil never so
destroyed, and wasted the Church by any heresy or persecution, as he has done
by the Lutherans; for other heresies for the most part destroyed one or two
articles, but did not wholly ouerthow the whole order and discipline of the
Church. But the Lutheran Heresy partly by herself, and partly by her offspring
the Anabaptists, Caluinists, Trinitarians, Libertines, has destroyed all the
good things, which the Church had, in the places where it could prevail, for
it has taken from God the Trinity by the new Samosatenes, the Deity from
Christ by the same men, and his Humanity by the Anabaptists, from all the
Angels and Saints all worship and invocation, from Purgatory the suffrages of
the living, yea it has exterminated Purgatory it self.

From the Church which is in earth, it has taken

But perhaps she has spared hell, least she should Lutherans do also deny the
true and local hell, and feygne I know not what imaginary hell, as we showed
before in the disputation of Christ's descending into hell. Truly therefore,
this may be called an exterminating heresy, and worthy of that Captain, who
is called in Hebrew anaddoch, in Greek (...), in Latin Exterminator. And
surely it were a wonder, if the Lutherans themselves did not admire this
extermination, unless they were altogether blinded with the smoke of which we
spoke before.

But amidst so many evils, there is one consolation, S. John says, these
Locusts hurt not the green herbs and trees, but only those men that have not
the sign of the living God: for since that this heresy is wholly carnal, it
cannot easily deceive good men, and those in whose minds religion and piety is
green, and does flourish. So we see, that it has seldom, or never happened,
that any has fallen from the Church to the Lutherans, who began not first to
be of a corrupt and loose life among Catholics. But thus much of this.


THE XXIIII. CHAPTER. The arguments of Calvin, and Illyricus are confuted, who
go about to prove that the Pope is no longer a Bishop; where also the fable of
Pope Ioane the Woman is confuted.
THERE remains that which we propounded viz. that we show, that the Bishop of
Rome is not only not Antichrist, but that he has not lost his Bishopric by
any other means: for Calvin and Illyricus, the one with a reason, the other
with a certain conjecture, go about to prove that he is not a true Bishop at
this time.

And to begin with Calvin, thus he speaks lib. 4. Instit. cap. 7.. 23. and
24. I would know what Episcopal thing the Pope has? First the chiefest thing
in a Bishop is to teach the people with the word of God. Another, and next to
this, to administer Sacraments: the third, to admonish and exhort, and to
correct those who offend, and to conteyne the people in holy discipline: what
of these does he? Yea, what does he seigne himself to do? Let them say
therefore, how they will have him to be accounted a Bishop, who touches not
with his least finger, no not so much, as in show, any part of that office. It
is not the same of a Bishop and a King: For a King although he does not that
which is proper to a King, notwithstanding he retayneth his honor and title.
But in discerning a Bishop Christ's commandment is regarded, which ought always
to be of force in the Church. Wherefore let the Romanists vnty me this knot: I
deny that their Pope is Prince of Bishops, since he is no Bishop. So he.

If I be not decaued, all this discourse may be reduced to Rome does not
perform his office, so much as in show, since that he neither ministers the
word of God, nor the Sacraments to the people: wherefore the Pope of Rome has
lost his name, and dignity and consequently cannot be called a Bishop.

Now the Madgeburgenses centur. 9. cap. 20. col. 500. go Roman Church into the
whore of Babylon: that God would, that above those times, in which this change
was made, a certain true Woman and harlot should sit in the Popish seat, who
was called John 8.

This they prove first, out of the authors Platina, Martinus Polonus,
Sigebertus, and Marianus Scotus. Secondly out of the stepps or sign thereof,
which have remained to our times: viz. by a certain seat of Prophyry hollow
within, which remained in the palace of S. Io. Lateran, the use of which they
say was appointed, after the discovery of this crime, to wit to discern,
whether the new Pope were a man or no. Likewise by a certain Statua of a woman
with child, which has remained to our times in that place, where John 8. is
said to have been delivered. Finally, for that the Popes when they go from the
Vatican to S. Io. Laterans, are wont to decline that place, where this woman is
said to have been delivered in detestatio^ of that fact. For otherwise that is
the right way: but it is no hard matter to vnty these knots:

And first to answer to Calvin, either he speaks of Episcopus is deryued of
(...), that is, of considering, or looking upon, and signifies the office of
looking to, so also Rex is derived of governing, in latin a regendo, and
signifies the office of governing, and as Rex is the name of a Magistrate, so
(...) also among the Heathens was the name of a Magistrate, viz. of the Praetor,
as is manifest out of Aristophan in auibus; and that which is more, the same
name of Pastor in the Scripture, is attributed to a Bishop, and a King, as is
manifest Ephesians. 4. and Isa. 44.

And if he speaks of the thing it self, he is no less S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.
says: I will dispose the rest when I come. and 2. Cor. 13. that I deal not
more severely according to the power which our Lord has given me. and Heb. 13.
obey your Superiors, and be subject unto them. and 1. Tim. 5. Receive not
aceusatio^ against a Priest, but under 2. or 3. VVItnesses.

Add to this also, that it is false, the Popes perform not the Episcopal
function; for they are not bound to preach, he satisfies, if in all places he
preaches by another, when he cannot do it himself in any. Neither want there
examples of antiquity: for Possidius writes in the life of S. Augustine, that
S. Valerius Bishop of H^ppe committed the office of preaching to S. Augustine
his Priest, because he being a Grecian could not preach himself to a Latin
people: and in the same place Possidius relates, that in the East Church, many
Bishops were wont to commit the office of Preaching to their Priests, which
they could not exercise themselves. And yet we cannot say, that either S.
Valerius or others, who preached not the word of God themselves, were not
Bishops.

To the argument of the Magdeburgians, I say, that their John the Woman is a
fable, which Onuphrius refuteth sufficiently in his addition to Platina. And
first it is convinced to be a fable by the testimony of Greek and Latin
Writers. The first of all, who could write of this thing, and who best knew it,
was Athanasius Bibliothec. who lived in that very time, in which this John ^.
is feigned to have been Pope, viz. about the year 850. and was present at the
creation of many Popes, who either were before or followed this John. He
therefore writes that after Leo 4. the Sea was vaca^t 15. days, and presently
by common consent Benedictus 3. was created: by which words he shows, that
there was no John a woman, for all that admit this John, do say, that he ^ate
after Leo the 4. and before Benedictus 3. and that he lived in the Popedom two
years, and 15. months.

They will say perhaps, that Anastasius omitteth this Ioln 8. in favor of the
Popes. But against this, at the leastwise, he should have said, that the Sea
was vacant after Leo 4. two years and a half, least he should admit a
manifest error in his Chronology, and an error which might be refuted by eye
witnesses who lived then. They answer, that there is no error in the
Chronology, because these two years of John are added to Leo 4. for Leo 4. is
said by Anastasius to have sitten 8. years, which are so to be taken, that 6.
years are of Leo himself, and other two are added out of the years of John
the woman.

But against this, is, that not only Anastasius but also Martinus Polonus, and
Platina, and the Magdeburgians, and Bibliander, and others, who will have Io.
8. to have sitten two years, give 8. years to Leo. Wherefore there will be
perforce an error in the Chronology of Anastasius, if this John be put Pope
after Leo. Besides not only Anastasius, but also A^o Bishop of V^en^a, who
lived at the same time, and of whom there is no suspicion that he would lie in
favor of the Popes, teaches, that there was no John betwixt Leo 4. and
Benedictus 3. for thus he speaks in the Cronicle of the year 865. Gregory
the Bishop of Rome dies, and Sergius is ordained in his place: he being dead
Leo succeeds, who dying Benedictus is substituted in the Apostolical Sea.
And in the like sort speak Rhegino, Lambertus, Hermanus Contractus, Abb^s
V^spergensis, Otho Fri^^gensis, and all other Historiographers, which are very
many, until Martinus Polonus who was 400. years after this feygned Io. 8. and
he first mentioned this John 8. against the testimony of all the ancient, and
from him did Platina and the other later take it.

And not only the Latins, but also the Greeks, who Martinus Polonus, as
Z^naras, Cedren^s, Ioannes Curopalates, and others make no mention of this
prodigious history among the things of that time, whereas notwithstanding they
favor not the Bishop of Rome, and would willingly have taken an occasion to
scoff at the Latins in this respect, if they might. Now how is it credible,
that Martinus Polonus who lived in the year 1250. knew better, what passed
about the year 850. then all other Historiographers who lived in the year
800. or 900. or 1000?

And that, which the Magdeburgians say, that Sigebert, Marianus Scotus, who are
more ancient then Martinus Polonus, did put John the Woman in their Chronicles,
is false. Although in the printed Sigebert, and Marianus Scotus, John the Woman
is found; yet in the most ancient manuscripts she is not found, and it is
sufficiently known, that those authors are corrupted. There is yet extant in
the Monastery of Gemblacum, where Sigebert was monk, a most ancient manuscript
copy, which is thought to be Sigeberts own, and in it there is no mention of
John the Woman, which manuscript copy John Molanus a Doctor of Louayne, who is
yet alive, witnesses, that he has seen. Likewise that in the most ancient
copyes of Marianus Scotus, John the Woman is not to be found, he witnesses who
put forth the Metropolis of Albertus Krantzius, at Colen, in the year 1574.

Secondly that this narration of Martinus concerning John the Woman is a
fable, is proved out of the narration it self: for first he says, that this
John was an English Woman of Mentz: but Mentz is not in England, but in
Germany. And others to amend this error are strangly repugnant one to the
other: for Platina says, that she was an English Woman, but come out of Mentz.
The Magdeburgians contrary wise say, that she was of Mentz, but come out of
England. But Theodorus Bibliander in his chronicle says that she was neither
borne, nor come out of England, but brought up and instructed in England.

Secondly Martin, and those which follow him say, Athens. But it is manifest,
that in that time, there were no Schools, neither at Athens, nor in any other
place of Greece, for Synesius writes in epist. vlt. ad Fratre^ suum, that in
his time there was nothing but the name of an Academie at Athens. And Synesius
was a little after the times of S. Basil, and S. Nazianzen. Cedrenu^ also, and
Zonaras do write in vita Michaelis, and Theodorae Impp. that about the end of
Michaels reign, viz. when he reigned alone, his mother Theodora being removed,
the Schools of learning and Philosophy were restored by Bardas Caesar; whereas
until that time, for many years, all studies of wisdom were so extinguished
in Greece, that there was not so much as any step or sign of them extant. Now
it is manifest, that the Empire of Michael alone, Theodora being removed, fell
in the time of Nicolas the 1. who succeeded Benedictus 3. who had succeeded as
these men seigne John 8. the Woman: yea all Chronologies, and Billiander
himself put the beginning of the Empire of Michael alone in the year 856. and
the Popedom of John the Woman in the year 854. By which it follows, that
the studies of wisdom, began to be revived in Greece after the death of this
John,

Thirdly the Magdeburgians say, that this Io. 8. was delivered in his journey
when he would have visited the Lateran Church, from the Vatican. But it is most
certain, as Onuphrius demonstrateth lib. de 7. Eccl. that the B. of Rome did
not dwell in the Vatican, but in the Lateran Palace, until the time of
Bonifacius the 9. that is, until the year 1309. how then if she dwelt in the
Lateran, would she go from the Vatican to visit the Lateran? Certainly if one
should write now, that the Pope came from the Lateran to visit the Vatican
Church, he would be ridiculous, since all know that the Pope dwells in the
Vatican.

Fourthly Martin, and all the rest say, that this John was

Thirdly this is proved out of the epist. of Leo 9. a most Michael Bishop of
Constantinople cap. 23. where Pope Leo writes, that it is a constant fame,
that many Eunuchs had sitten in the Patriarchate of Constantinople, and that
among them there had crept in, and been Patriarch a Woman; which certainly Leo
would never have objected to the Grecians, if any such thing had happened a
little before to the Roman Sea: yea perhaps from hence arose this fable of John
the Woman: for whereas there was a rumor, that a certain woman had been Bishop
of Constantinople, and after by little and little, the name of Constantinople
being omitted, there remained the fame and opinion of a woman Bishop, and
Universal Bishop; some began in hatred of the Roman Church to say, that that
woman had been Bishop of Rome. And it is very like, that this fame arose about
the time of Martin himself. Certainly Martinus Polonus, who first wrote it,
brings no Author, but only said: It is reported: wherefore he only had it by
an uncertain rumor.

Neither ought it to seem strange, if some feigned Rome, that ground of a
woman being Bishop supposed, and there being so many contentions at that time
betwixt those which favored the Emperors, and others which favored the
Popes; for now also we see, that the Magdeburgians do feign more incredible
things; for whereas Martin only wrote, that this was an English woman of Mentz,
and added nothing of the Parents and proper name of the woman, and other
things; the Magdeburgians have added, that the Father of this woman was an
English Priest, and that she in the beginning was called Gilbert, and that she
was brought up in the habit of a man, in the Monastery of Fulda, and that she
wrote books of witchcraft; which are all mere fancies invented without
witness or reason. Add, that this Martinue Polonus seems to have been a
most simple man, for he writes many other fables, as though they were most
authentical hystories.

Now, that which they object of the hollow seat, of Sect. 2. there were three
seats of stone in the Lateran Church, in which the new Pope did sit at the
time of his Coronation. The first seat was before the entrance into the
Temple, which was vile and abject, to which seat, the new Pope was first
brought, and did sit upon it for a little space, that it might be signified by
that cerimony, that he ascended from a most low place, to the highest place
that is, for lifting him from thence, they sung that 1. Reg. 2. Suscitat de
puluere egenum, and de stercore erigit pa^perem; vt sedeat cum Principibus, and
solium gloria teneat: and this is the cause, why that seat is called
Stercoraria. Another seat was of Porphiry in the Palace it self, and there
he sat the second time, in token of Possession: and sitting there he received
the Keys of the Church of the Lateran Palace. The third seat was like the
second, and not far from it, and after sitting a little in it, he delivered
the same keys to him, of whom he had received them before. Perhaps, that by
that cerimomony he might be admonished of death, by which ere long he was to
resign that power to another. Of any seat to discover the sex, there is no
mention any where.

And that Statua of the woman with child, without John: for if our Adversaries
say, that the ancient Historiographers would not make mention of this woman in
their books, in the Popes favor: how is it probable, that the Popes
themselves would have memory of it extant in a Statua? Besides, if it were the
Statua of this John, it should have represented a Woman with an infant newly
borne, but that Image did neither represent a woman, nor did carry an infant in
her arms, but did express a good big boy, and many years old, as a servant
going before. Wherefore some do conjecture, that it was a Status of some
heathen Priest prepared to Sacrifice, before whom his Minister went.

Finally it is not in destestation of that crime, why Lateran, but because the
way is narrow and steepy, and therefore incommodious for the Popes train, or
compaine, which always uses to be very great. Add, that as Onuphrius
witnesses, there want not Popes, who have oftener then once gone that very way.

FINIS.
Omnia Ecclesiae Catholicae Romanae subiecta sunto.
A TABLE OF THE PARTICVLER MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK.
ADORATION of Images, and the Eucharist used before the year 606. c. 11. n.
11. (...), what it signifies in composition cap. 1. nu. 3.

Antichrist how taken in the Scriptures, and other Authors. c. 1. n. 4. His
members sometime open enemies to Christ. cap. 2. n. 11. How he shall be an
Apostata, c. 2. n. 15. How he shall draw men to follow him, c. 2. n. 17. His
coming and revelation all one, cap. n. 18. He shall be one particular man cap.
2. per totum. He is signified by the former beast (Apoc. 13) cap. 5 n. 5. His
false Prophet is signified by the latter, ibid. Whether he be the wounded head
Apoc. 13. ibi. His persecution most grievous, cap 7. n. 1. Greater then the
calamities of the Jews, cap. 7: n 2. It shall be most manifest: c, 7: n: ^: In
Antichrists time all the Churches enemies shall join to impugn her, c. 7. n.
6. The public and daily sacrifice shall cease. cap. 7. n. 7. The last month
of Antichrists life is not accounted in his reign, cap 8. n. ^. He shall
reign; years and a half, cap. 8. per totum. He shall be Prince of all the
wicked in general, c. 8. n. 3. The time of his reign very short. cap. 8. n.
5. He may raise an universal persecution at one time. cap. 8. n. 6. Two
degrees of his destruction, c. 9. n. 2.

Antichrists coming shall not be long before the end of the world, c. 9. per
totum. He cannot be said to come at all, but in the last hour cap. 9. n. 3.
His name shall be known when he is come, cap. 9. n. 1. and 2. It is yet
unknown, c. 10. n. 4. He shall be a most potent King c, 10. n. 7. His Mark or
Character but one, cap. 11. n. 4. He shall be received of the Jews for their
Messiah, cap 12. n. 4. and seq: He shall be Jew, cap 12. n. 10. His seat shall be
at Jerusalem. c. 13. n. 1. and seq. Why those that follow him are called
Gentills, cap 13. 1. He shall sit in material Churches, and not in the Church
of Christ as a Bishop cap. 13. n. 10. Whosoever usurps more dignity then is
due to him, is his forerunner, ib. He is the head of all the proud, ib. He
shall openly deny Jesus to be Christ c. 14. n. 2. and seq. How he shall seduce,
cap. 14. n 3. He shall exceed all heretics, ibid. He shall deny Christ to be
so much as the adopted son of God, c. 14. n. 4. he shall prohibit the sign
of the Cross in Baptism, ib. he shall be the Jews Captain, ibid. he shall
restore all their ceremonies, ibid. he shall cause the Sabbath to be observed,
ibid. he will openly affirm himself to be Christ, c. 14. n. 7. he will openly
name himself God, cap. 14. n. 9. Why and how he shall sit in the Temple, ibid.
He will permit no other Gods besides himself, cap. 14. 11. and 12. He shall
commit the greatest sins when he cannot all cap 14. n. 12. How he may extol
himself above God, ibid. he shall not worship or honor many Gods, c 14 n. 14.
He shall adore the devil secretly, c. 14. n. 14. his disposition, ibid. He
shall work many signs, c 15. n. 1. he is not proved to be King of the Jews
because Antiochus was so, c. 16. n. 9. he shall arise from base estate, cap.
16. n. 14. and sequ. He shall overcome ^ Kings, cap. 16. n 12. he shall subdue
the 7 Kings which remain after the three, and so he shall be monarch of the
whole world, cap. 16. n 14. he shall persecute the Christians through the whole
world with an innumerable army; cap. 16. n. 1^ etc. 17. per totum.

Antichristianisme is not Atheism c. 4. n. 12.

Antiochus Epiphanes is not spoken of at all in the 7. and 11. chap of Daniel,
cap 7 n. 7. he was an Idolater, c. 14. n. 12. he impugned not the Gods of
Syria, c. 14. n. 16. he worshipped many Gods, ibid. he was a type of Antichrist
only in some principal points, cap. 16. n. 3. Only he among the Kings of
Syria, is in the Scripture accounted a persecutour of the Jews, c 16. n. 7.
how he arose from base estate, cap. 16. n. 14. and seq. he invaded not Egypt
oftener then twice, c. 16. n. 13.

Antiochus Magnus and Seleucus Philopater his elder son were the Jews
benefactors, c. 16. n. 7.

Arias Montanus, cap. 6, n. 3.

S. Augustine answers Downams objection, c. 6 n 5. and 8. he makes no more
doubt that Elias shall come, then that S. John Baptist is come, ibid. The
Apostasy is not the mystery of iniquity, c. 2. n. 16. c. 14. n. 3.

B
BELL ARMINES advantage in this controversy. cap. 1. n. 1. He agrees with
former Catholics, c. 1. n. 2. he is unjustly charged by Downam, cap. 7. n. 5.
c. 8. n. 5. c. 10 n. 7. c 14 n 10. c 16. n. 11. he urges Downams objection
further then he does himself, c. 11. n. 9. his sincere dealing, cap. 12. n. 1.
He reuerenceth the Fathers, c. 14. n 7.

C
CALVIN thinks that only Christ is in heaven, and that others stay without,
cap. 6. n. 6.

The Canons of the general Counsel, c ^. n. 4. Catholic doctrine stands
not so much upon denyalls, as the Protestants does, c. 12. and 13.

The Character of Antichrist shall be common to all in his Kingdom, c. 11. n.
4. It shall be carried not only by Christians, but also by Jews, ibid. It may be
carried in the right hand, or in the forhead, ib. It is not profession or
practice, ibid. It shall be visible, c. 11. n. 12.

Christ's first coming was not terrible as his second shallbe. c. 6. n. 3. His
power and knowledge are not to be limited by that which he did, cap. 2. n. 17
He and Antichrist cannot have both one mark, c. 11. n. 7.

The Church of Christ cannot have the mark of Antichrist, c. 11 n. 5.

The Church was always subject to the Pope, ibid.

The Church co^prehendeth not all, that profess the name of Christ, cap. 13.
n. 4. There is one visible Catholic Church, cap. 13. n. 5. It is to endure to
the end of the world, cap. 13. n. 7.

Chrisme used in the Church before the year 607, c 11. n 6. how it makes us
Christians, ib. how it is more to be reverenced then Baptism, ibid.

The Converting of one argues more power, then the perverting of many, cap 6.
n. 6

The Council of Chalcedon, cap. 3. n. 4.

D
THE Tribe of Dan fell not first to Idolatry, c. 12. n. 2.

Why it is omitted Apoc 7. ib. Days are not taken for years, cap. 8. n. 7.

The Devil is signified by the beast (Apoc 17.) c. 15. n 5 and 6.

M. Downam seems not to have read so much of Bellarmine as he impugneth, cap.
3. n. 4. he omiteth Bellarmines proofs, and answers his own, cap 4 n. 4. 5.
6. 7. he changes Bellarmines argument, c. 5. n ^ and 3. c. 8 n. 7. c 13. n. 9.
he takes the objection, and omitteth the answer, c. 6 n. 4. c. 13 n 9. and
10. He cannot defend his fellows, c. 2. n. 14. c. 6 n. 6. c 8. n. 7. c. 14. n.
12. and 19. c. 16. n. 14. he impugneth his fellows, cap. 8 n* 7. c. 10. n. 7.
He impugneth himself, cap. 12. n. 2. and 9. c. 15. n. 5. and ^. he
contradicts himself, cap. 5. n* 5. c. 10. n. 3. 4. and 6. c 11. n. 4. and
12. c. 13. n. 1. c. 16. n. 5. 7. 12. he speaks from the purpose, c. 2. n 12.
and 15. c 14. n. 6. 8. and 10. c. 16. n. 4. and 8. his petitio principij, c. 2.
n. 17. and 20. c. 5. n. 3. c. 6. n. 4. c 7. n. 3. and 7. c. 10 n. 4. 5. and 7.
c. 11. n. 4. and 7. c. 13. n. 6. 8. and 10. he dissembleth the difficulty, c.
2. n. 20. c. 4. n. 7. c. 7. n. 4. c. 16. n. 11. his poor shifts, c. 3. n. 1.
and 5. c. 6. n 4. his iuggling, c. 10. n. 2. c. 12. n. 2. c. 13 n. 1. and 2. he
translateth not well, c 3. n. 1 c. 5. n. 4. c. 15. n. 3. he expounds the
Scripture childishly, c. 4. n. 8, He mangleth the scripture, c. 5: n. 5. c. 6.
n. 5. he admits what translation and interpretation he lists, c. 6. n. 3.
he condemns Ecclesiasticus, and the Jews of his time, c: 6. n: 4. he
condemns the Apostles, and in some sort our Savior himself c. 6. n. 5. he
joins with Porphiry an Apostata against all ecclesiastical writers, and
Jews also. c. 5. n. ^. 6. 7. n. 7. c. 16. n. 5. Our Saviors words in his
opinion are not true, c. 14. n. 7. his boldness with the Scripture, c. 14. n.
16. he joins with the Jews in impugning the Pope, c. 16. n. 3. his
exposition contrary to all others, even his own fellows, c, 16. n. 7. he
belyeth the Primitive Church against the testimonies of the Fathers, c: 13 n.
9. he scoffeth at S. Gregory, cap. 6 n. 7. c: 8. n. 6. he corrupts S.
Ireraeus his words and meaning, c: 10. n. 7. he impugneth the fathers
authority, c. 12. n. 2. he acknowledges the Fathers to be against him, c. 14.
n. 19. he abuses S. Hierome, c. 16, n. 9: he makes much account of one
Father, if he favors his fancy, c. 4. n. 1^. he forgets what he
impugneth, c 5. n. 2 c. 7. n. 6. he confirms one absurdity with another far
greater, c 5. n. 2. he cutteth of those words which make most to the purpose,
c: 6. n. 3 he proves an universal by a particular, c: 10, n, 3. he runs to
generalities, when he cannot answer the particular argument, c. 1^. n. 4. his
strange paradexe, cap. 14. n. 9. he belyeth the Pope and Church of Rome, c. 14.
n. 17 he weakneth his fellows arguments, c. ^ n. 9. his absurd folly, c. 2, n.
10. He censureth the Fathers, c: 2. n: 13. His vain bragging, c: 2: n. 19: c.
6. n. 8. he adds an head of his own to the 7. of the beast (Apoc. 17.) c. 2.
n: 21. he is nothing scrupulous in his account, c. 3. n. 3. his fond
imagination, c. 4. n. 10. his immodesty, c. 4. n. 14. he is not moderate in his
censure, c. 5. n. 3. his impudency, c 5. n. 3. c. 6. n. 3. c. 14. n. 4. He
seems to think, that the Devil can do true miracles, c. ^: n. 5. c. ^5. n.
3. he attributes more to merits then ever any Catholic did, c. 6 n. 3. In his
opinion Enochs translation makes as much for any other virtue, as for
penance, contrary to the Scripture, c. 6 n: 4. and 8. his Martyrs, heretics
and rebels, c. 7. n. 3. he maintayneth open rebellion and treason, c. 7. n. 4.
his shamlesselye. c. 7. n. 3. his and Porphiryes pertinacy, c. 7. n. 7. his
conferrence of Scripture, ibid. his and Foxes exposition of Scripture. c. 8. n.
3. his, and his fellows manner of disputing, c. 7. n. 7. his childish cavil,
c: 8 n: 1. he makes the ancient Church to be very corrupt, c: 11: n: 5. his
blasphemy, ibid. He seems to have been a Puritan when he wrote of Antichrist,
c. 13. nu. 3. and 10. his trifling, c. 14. n. 4. he belyeth Gregory the 7. cap.
16. n. 12. He belyeth the Cardinals, ibid. Why he admits any of the
Fathers, c. 16. n. 14.

E
THE Book of Ecclesiasticus Canoricall Scripture, cap 6. n 4. Elias and Enoch
shall preach in a manner, as long as Antichrist shall reign, cap. 6. n. 7.

Elias shall come in person, cap. 2. n: 13: and cap: 6: per totum.

How Elias shall restore all things ibid.

The necessity of the coming of Enoch and Elias, cap, 6: n: 5:

Enoch and Elias are not in heaven, cap, 6. n: 6

Enoch and Elias shall begin to preach in the beginning of Antichrists reign,
cap. 8: n: 4.

The End of the world is not only the last instant c, 9: n: 4. Whether they
which live at Antichrists death may gather how long it is to the end of the
world, c. 8. n. 4. Only the just and learned shall make this collection, ibid.

The Trybe of Ephraim not omitted Apoc. 7. cap. 12. n: 2.

When the proper Exposition is to be preferred, cap. 4: n: 12.

How far diverse Expositions are to be admitted, cap. 2. n: 16.

F
THE necessity of the Fathers expositions, c. 10. n. 3. Their authority, ibid:
how Catholics esteem of them, cap. 12. n. 1.

The Foolish dream of the feel Fox, c. 8. n. 3.

G
How the Gospel was in the whole world in the Apostles time, cap 4 n 14.

The Gospel shall be preached to all Nations before Antichrists coming, cap.
4. per ^o^^m.

Greek article, when it signifies a particular thing c. 2 n 4

S. Gregory answers Downams objection, cap, c. n 8.

Gregory the 14. c. 16. n. 12.

Gog and Magog, c. 17. per totum.

H
A Great Happiness to be put to death by Antichrist, cap. 6. n: 8.

The Herodians, c. 12. n: 10.

Why Heretics can work no miracles, cap. 15. n. 2.

The 7. Heads of the beast Apoc. 13. are not the same with Apoc. 17. cap. 15.
n. 4.

The little Horn Dan. 7. is not the same with that of Dan. 8. c. 16. n. 1.

S. Hippolytus, cap. 11. n. 12.

I
IANSENIVS, cap. 6. n. 4.

S. Jerome confuteth Porphiry and Downam, c: 7. n: 7.

The Importance of the controversy, c: 1: n. 1.

The Interruption of the Jews sacrifice was only 3. years, c. 7. n. 7.

Josephus corrupted, c. 8. n: 2:

Jupiter, cap: 14: n: 12:

K
THE Kingdoms whereof Daniel speaks, were not to be ended before Christ, cap.
16. nu. 5. When our Savior is to destroy the^, ibid. When he began spiritually
to overthrow them, ibid.

The ^. Kingdoms into which that of Alexander was divided, belong to the;
beast described Dan. 7. and not to the 4. c. 16. n 6. and 18.

The Kingdoms of the Lagidae, and Seleu^idae cannot be signified by the 4
beast, Dan. 7. c. 16. n. 6.

Why the^ Kings, which Antichrist shall slay, are called the 3. first ^^
former, c. ^^. n. 1^.

L
THE Latin Interpreter is nor to be rejected, cap. 6. n. 4.

The name of Latin cannot be given to the Pope, c. 10. n. 4. It contains not
the number 666. ib. n. 7.

How Latria is given to the Cross by Catholics, c. 11. n. 1^.

Why the Tribe of Leui is often omitted, c. 1^. n. 2.

M
MARTINUS 5. his Bull against the Huffites, cap 11. n. 4.

A Mortal man may be truly called God, cap 14. n. 1^.

Maozim signifies not the true God, c. 14. n 14. It may signify Antichrist,
ibid. It signifies a strong tower, cap 14. n. 15

Miracles in general belong both to good and bad, c. 15. n 2. Why the devils
help is necessary to work counterfeit Miracles, c. 5. n. 5. etc. 15. n. 3.

N
THE Name which contains the number 666. shall be the proper and usual name of
Antichrist c. 10. n. 7.

Many Names contain that number, ibid.

Nilas cap. 15 n. 2.

O
THE Oath of Obedience made to the B. of Rome before the year 606. cap. 11. n.
8.

If the Oath be lawful, the often exacting of it is not culpable, ibid.

One faith, and one Church, c. 13. n 3.

P
PROTESTANTS put Catholics to death for Religio^n, c 7. n. 4.

An invisible Persecution of an invisible congregation, cap. 7. n. 6.

Pho^as gave not the title of universal to the Pope, c. n. 4. And that which
he gave, the Pope had before, ibid.

The Pope has power to depose Princes for the spiritual good of Christ's
Church, cap. 3. n. 5.

The Popes whom the Protestants account Antichrist, arise not from base estate,
cap. 16. n. 11.

The Pope no temporal Monarch, cap. 16. n. 14.

The Protestants exposition of Scripture not much worth, cap. ^. n. 16. How
much they agree with the Samosatens, and all other heretics, c. 3. n 2. Their
disagreement about Antichrists coming, c 3 n. 3.

The Prophesies concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and the end of the
world intermingled, c 4. n. 9.

The Persecution of Catholics in England, c. 7 n. 4.

R
THE reason of Romes pre-eminence, is not because it is the chief City, c. 3.
n. 4.

X. Kings shall divide the Roman Empire among them, so that there shall be no
Roman Emperor in their time, cap 5. n. 2.

The Roman Empire signified by the 2. iro^ Legs of Nabuchodonosors Statua, and
the 4. beast (Dan 7.) cap. 5. n. 2. By the 10. toes of Nabuchodonosors Statua,
and the 10. horns of the 4. beast Dan. 7. are signified the 10. Kings, which
shall divide the Roman Empire among them, cap. 5. n. 2.

The Roman Empire shall be utterly destroyed by the 10. Kings, c. 5. n. 3. and
per totum. How many ways the Fathers affirm the utter destruction of the
Roman Empire, and why they speak sparingly of this point, c. 5. n. 3.

There is now a Roman Emp. indeed, and not in name or title only, cap. 5. n. 3.

The name Romanus contains not the number 666 c. 10. n. 7.

To cleave to the Roman Church was the sign of a true Catholic before the
year 696. c. 11. n. 7.

How the Church of Rome is united and stands with other Churches, ibid. Those
which belong not to the Church of Rome, belong not to Christ, but to
Antichrist, ibid.

Not Christian, but Heathen Rome is called Babylon and an Harlot (Apoc. 17.
etc.) cap. 13. n. 8.

S
SACRIFICE for the dead used before the year 606. c 11. n. 10.

The difficulty of Scripture, and why many err in the interpretation thereof,
cap 7. n. 7.

When the Scripture is literally to be understood of the figure, and when of
the thing figured, c. 14. n. 13.

How we may argue from the mystical sense of Scripture, c. 10. n. 3.

The mystical S^nse intended by the holy Ghost, ibid.

Except the litterall Sense be certain, we cannot argue from it, ibid.

The consent of the Fathers, makes both Senses certain, ibid.

Why Seleucus Philopater is called Vilissimus, c. 16. n. 8.

The Seauenty two Interpreters not to be rejected, c. 6. n. 7.

The Sybils verses of Adrian are expounded, c. 10. n. 2.

Why Symeon is omitted in Moses his blessing, cap. 12. n. 2.

How the Signs of Antichrist shall be lying, c. 15 n. 1.

T
TEMPLE what it signifies in the new Testament, c. 13. n. 3.

How the Temple of Jerusalem is by S. Paul called the Temple of God c. 13. n 9.
And it shall be built again in the end of the world, ibid. But it shall be always
profane ibid. It shall not be finished, ibid. The thousand years, Apoc. 2.
are to be taken indefinitely, cap. 7. n. 2.

By the great Tribulation, Matthew. 24. is meant the persecution of Antichrist a
little before the end of the world, cap. 4. n. 5. and 13.

The Turks inferior to Antichrist, c. 14. n. 7.

V
UNCTION of Priests used before the year 606 cap. 11. n. 9.

The word (until) signifies neither continuance nor cessation, but is
indifferent to both, cap. 13. n. 9.

Vrbanus 7. cap. 16. n. 12.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page, Line, Fault, Correction. ^8. 29. is forerunner is forerunne 41. 39. in
the Apostasy in the Apostles time 133. 33. beginning neither beginning neither:
ibid. 8. hatred of hatred out of 172. 15. deemeth denies 180. 34. grants
groundeth 192. 12. 19. and last chapter 19. last chapters 229. 34. former
grounds founder grounds 237. 38. them, so them so, 266. 39. Antichrist sitting
Antichrist his sitting 272. 20. all Idols. also Idols. 275. 2. frame himself
feign himself 276. 7. showing as showing himself as 281. 7. provided proved
298. 5. prove, that prove, but that 310. 18. tortures torturers 315. 29.
Antichrists Antichrist 320. 36. one and one. And 335. 23. as neither the 2. as
neither the 3. 339. 34. exposition, whereof exposition whereof 380. 1. Maozim.
Neither Maozim, who sees not that Christ is the God Maozim? Neither etc. 387:
13. bold of blood of 413. 24. above those about those

Other faults of less moment by reason of the obscure copy, and absence of
the Author, have likewise escaped, which the Reader may easily find, and
correct of himself.


