THE OPTIC GLASS of HVMORS.

OR The touchstone of a golden temperature, or the Philosophers stone to make a
golden temper, Wherein the four complections Sanguine, Choleric,
Phlegmatic, Melancholicke are succinctly painted forth, and their external
intimates laid open to the purblindeye of ignorance it self, by which every
one may judge of what complexion he is, and answerably learn what is most
suitable to his nature.

Lately pend by T. W. Master of Arts.

Inueniat quod quisque lubet, non omnibus vnum est Quod placet, hic spinas
colligit ille Rosas. LONDON. Imprinted by JOHN WINDET for MARTIN CLERK, and
are to be sold at his shop without Aldersgate. 1607.

To the right worshipful wise and learned Knight, Sir JUSTINIAN LEVVIN, T. W.
wishes event of all FELICITY.
Private study we may not unfitly say replenisheth the vessel, wise parley and
communication gives the vent and easy flow, and secretariship the sale: the
one loads the memory, the other lends the smooth delivery; the last perfects
the judgment and wins chiefest glory; so that studious diligence without
writing and conference is the dull picture of Harpocrates the God of silence,
who is fained to wear a Wolves skin, full of ears and eyes, but sealing up
his lips with his forefinger, as mute as a marble Niobe: and so writing without
both, is the picture of jangling Thersites, whose words (as the Poet says)
were without measure and wit without weight, as lavish in tongue as Battus. The
Hieroglyphicke of a true Scholar is the Hare, that sleeps Pi^rius.
waking with her eyes open, and wakes sleeping with her eyes shut; that is who
seems to meditate when he is in action, and to practice when he is in
meditation: or as other Emblemists have limd forth a right student, ever to
have one eye shut and an other open, having in his right hand Phospohr^s with
his motto in one word -- vigilo, and Hes perus in the other hand with this word
-- Dormio; to intimate that he should divide the day and night for practice and
speculation, to equalize the ^mes of both at his fitter opportunity; neither to
act Democritus (who so might worthily have laughed at his own folly) that pulled
out his own eyes to become a continual contemplatour; nor to be like Nicias,
who as AElian records, forgot AElianus lib. 3. cap. 31.
his meat by being too intent on his painting; as swift torrents often run
themselves dry by too much motion, so standing pooles do putrify by no mo
tion. There is a fair tract between Scilla and Charybdis for wisdom to
trauers in; a happy orb betwixt Saturn and Luna for Phaeton to guide his
choach in, so between all action and altogether contemplation for a student to
converse in. For conferring I do pass it over, as that whereto I seldom have
been beholden, yet much affecting it, and knowing that it brings a great
accrument unto wisdom and learning: as concerning my study and reading it
has bin but mean I must needs confess, and my writing very penurious in
regard of theirs, who have enriched whole reames of paper with the Indian
mine, and golden chaffai^e of their invention: yet for that module of these
habiliments i^ me I have ever bent my judgment so far as in it lay to limit al
these unto their peculiar times, objects, and places, and have tenderd my
endeavor to have especicially two, the one correspondent unto the other,
neither to act Democritus nor Nicias, but by intercourse to mix my sweeter
meditation, with bitter, yet profitable and better action. And as in other
things of greater or less moment, so in this also the abortiue issue of my wit
begot of that abundance of love I owe unto your good self, whose manifold
kindnesses, if I should bury in oblivion, I might worthily seem ungrateful, if
remembering I should not in some sort requite, I might seem odious and
respectlesse, both of mine own good name, and your better desert, the latter
whereof is much, yet the first much more, a delicious fruit that grows from
the tree of gratitude. The Eleans, therefore says Pausanias Pausanias in
Eliria.
did paint forth the three Graces, holding these three things in their hand --
Rosam, Myrrhum, Talum: to intimate that from thankfulness proceed three
fruits. First the sweetness of a good name, shadowed out by the
sweetesmelling Rose: 2. the profit redounding from it insinnuated by the Mirhe
branch, and lastly chief comfort and hilarity vnclowded by the coccal bone
which especially is competent to young age, which three comprise all Aristotle's
three goods. Howsoever I may seem to aim at the first, as may be inferd by
precedent speech, always highly prizing a good name as of a precious ointment,
vapring forth a fragrant smell and dilicious odure in all men's nostrils; and at
the last as desirous of mine own delight some contentme^t and comfort issuing
from my thankfulness, yet for the other more, agreeing to Sycophants and
crum-catching parasites, it moves not once within the Zodiac of my
expectation, I only satis^ying my self with the former. Nether did I in the
waine of my judgment attempt this as desirous to draw in the per^uming breath
of vain glory, to puff up my self with self conceit like the Camaeleo^ which
is -- nil praeter pulmones, nothing but lungs: but only thinking to break the
ice, happily to wade farther, and to employ my self in greater taskes, as
fitter opor tunity shall object her self unto me, if the prefinit tear me and
limit of my life permit, and withal in lue of gratitude, to present your self*
with this little which seems much in regard of my wants, and labor, as much
seems little in respect of of your ever kind favor. For this as also your
other endowments, my pen might worthily fill whole pages: but your splendent
virtues can easily b^e their own Herauldes to l^mme forth their own armory,
and to extol in presence, is more glauering and poetical, then true-louing
and patheticall. This only my affection cannot conceal, your gracious
demeanor, generous carriage, curtuous nature, studious endeavor, and wisdom
for managing your self each where, (when you happily were a flourishing
branch, engrafted in the fruitful Olive tree of this our Athenes, that
thrice famous university of Cambridge) were first the sympathizing adamants of
my affection: your continuance after in all studious actions, constancy in your
favors and kind disposition (for I must needs say as he of Augustus -- Rarus
tu quidem Sextus Aureliu^ Victor*
ad recipiendas amicitias, ad retinendas vero constantissimus) these incited
me to cause that which as a spark lay shrouded in embers in my breast, to
exhibit it self more apparently in this little flame. Take this my endeavor I
pray you in worth, cheerish and foster this deformed brood of my brain, in the
lap (if I may so term it) of your good li^ king, and in love esteem it fair
though badly penzeld over, to wish as Daphnis said to Dam.

-- (...) Qu^ minime sunt pulchra, en pulchra videntur ama^t^. Theocrit.
Eidyll. 6.
If the happy Demon of Ulysses direct not the wandering planet of my wit
within the decent orb of wisdom, my stammering pen seeming far ouergon with
superfluity of phrase, yet wanting matter I answer with the poet one only word
inuerted:

Qui non est hodie, cras magis aptus erit. He that is Homers Irus for faculty
to day, may be a rich Craesus for iuention to morrow, as it is with
cogitations so with actions, the second relish more of wisdom: perfection
requires tract of time; Romes Capitol was not built the first day; nor was
Zeuxis his Helena sudddenly lim'd forth with one pencill. Look not on these
rapsodized lines, I pray you with a pitying ^ie: I had rather far be envied
then pitied.

-- (...). Pindar. Pyth. od. 1.
Melior est inuidentia commiseratione better by much is a case hateful then
woeful. Now will I humbly take my leave committing you to the tuition of that
heavenly Tutour, whose pupils we are all: from my study in Saint John's X.
Calend. March.

Ever most devoted unto you in all faithfulness. T. W.

To the Reader,
KNnowledge conceald and not broached for a public use, is like to a
pearelesse gemme interred in the center of the earth, whereof no man knows but
he that hid it: yet is there a due regard to be had, lest at any time it prove
ab^rtiue, for the golden tongue of wisdom, that relisheth all not by
imagination but true judgment (whose taste never can be sophisticated) says
it is better not to be diuulg'd at all, then preproperously before the time. Thou
may say peradventure, that in this I have imitated the Amygdala, or Almon
tree in Pliny: Plini. not. hist. lib. 16. cap. 25.
that so hastily buds and bringes forth her fruit: or like the Lapwing being
lately hatched, I do run as it were with the shell on my head, that I have
soared also above my pitch, attempting an Eagles flight with the wings of a
Wrenne, in the hie springtide of an ouerweening opinion, showed unto the
Critic eye the dead low ebb of my shallow judgment, thou may term me, an
Homeres Thersites, (...) or as it was said of Traiane the Emperor Julian. in
his Caesares
when he vaunted of his Parthian trophee before the Gods to be (...) more
respecting a sound of words then sound matter it self: thou may condemn me
for many an error and escape in these my ruder lines: I know right well thou
use not to gape after gougins --

^raeda canum lepus est, vastos non implet h^atus. Marti^lis.
The Ha^es repast for Hunds, the vaster jaws
It does not satiat^ --
Gentle Reader call this to mind -- (...), it is far easier not to like then
to do the like. But howsoever thou do either uncivilly preiudicate my labor
with a sinister conceit, misconstruing my meaning, or discourteously censure of
my inhabillitie, impeaching my good name for some things that do distaste thy
delicater palate, Iacta nobis est alea, I have set all at six and seven, and
I entend by the Muses favor happily to go on, though unhappily I have begu^.
Notwithstanding I will assoile my self, and make answer unto thy former,
either ^cred surmises^r open cauils. For the first, if I have imitated the
Almon tree, it is to keep in stoore a bitter almon for the prating Parrat that
licentiously thus speaks of me, who is always like the fool, a Consonant
when he should be a Mute: and a Mute when he should be a Consonant. In that I
seem to soar aloft too hie, give me liberty to use Ausonius his words unto
Pauline, yet a little inuerted -- Dicis Ausonius. Paulino epist. 19.
me Icarum esse haud belle, nam summa sic appeta^ (spero) vt no^ decida^, I
hope I shall not prove an aspiring Icarus, nor another Thales in Diogenes
Laertius, who whiles he looked hie and was contemplating on the stars, ^ell
groueling into a deep ditch, For the third, much appertaining to every
brainsicke Na^cissus, I do altogether disclaim that, since it never so much as
insinuated it self into the bosom of my imagination, my Genius not desiring
to be perfumed with smoky praise, or soone-vanishing and vulgar glory, chiefly
vshered by self conceit. For my taint with Theisites and Traianes fault, I
will only use for my defense, that speech of locaste to Eteocles.

-- (...), Euripides in his Phoe^issa.
(...) Old age (in whose breast long experience has treasured up great store
of wisdom) can speak far more wisely and exactly then younger years. For the
last of all, any error committed: I answer, it may be an error of ignorance
seen to thee, yet it is an ignorance of the error unseen to me, whereof if
privately thou demandest a reason, I can; doubt not, and will make it good for
thy full satisfaction, if reason can satisfy thee. Yet if not, give leave unto
my harsh and torn invention, if for naught else but this, in that I derogate
from no man's due desert, nor seek to traduce any unto their least
disparagement.

Blast not with pining
critic breath my tender bud.
My vulgar Muse respects a common good:
For thee my pen strouts on this paper stage,
Though it do act withouten aequipage:
To quench thy learned thirst I meant to draine
The Hippocren^an Fountain of my brain.
My wish is good, my act I know is ill,
The first's a mountain; this, a lowly hill.
With carping fingers let me not be scand,
Po^ze not the gift, but wa^gh the giuers hand.
I am well sure thou will here expect with Ang. Pol. (...): that is, vulgar
things uttered after a new sort, and nouelty after a vulgar sort; without
affectation: that I should be a rich eloquent merchant of exoticke and new
found phrases: that I should intrauerse and inter^ larde my speeches with
lively conceits: enrich thy learned ears with right Athenian jewels,
illuminate the eye of thy understanding with the luster of Rhetorical colors,
that the whole work should be mixed with an -- omne tulit punctu^: And sure
so far as each thing i^ consonant and harmonicall with judgment, I will
tender my deuo^re, to be suitable unto thy scholar like expectation: for if so
be wisdom do not manage and temper all, the Muses which are pure, chaste and
unspotted virgins, will turn to mere Curtesans.

If judgment tread not on the he^les of wit
And curb invention with his golden bit,
It Will never look back unto his proper want,
But still his steps will be exorbitant.
I dare not presume, nor will I rashly engage my credit to thee (courteous
censurer) to promise thee* Amphoram, ne viceus exeat, a mountain, lest it
bring forth that ridiculous issue in the fable, to promise thee Aristaenetus
his Lais, whom he terms (...).
(...) all face, for her supereminent beauty and portraitour, admirable
simmetree of parts, most decent and eye pleasing lineaments of her whole body,
lest that I beget an Ethiopian or a Labulla who was termed all nose, like
Martials Tongilian of whom he thus speaks

Tongilianus habet nasum, scio non nego, sed iam
Nil prater nasum Tongilianus habet.
Tongilian has a goodly nose, I wis^e
But naught besides a nose Tongilian Tongiliani^.
And no doubts it will be liker the latter then the former. Venus had her mole,
Helena her stain, Cynthia her spots, the Swan her ieaty feet, the clearest
day some clowd: nay there is nothing but if we once eye it over, so absolutely
perfect not the smoothest writer of all, which, (at lest a Critic perusing of
him) for some blemish and imperfection, merits not either Aristarchus his
black pile, or Momus his sponge: If in the fairest things be such deformity,
how many more stains may then be found in this offspring of my brain, which
dare not scarcely make compare with the fowlest? Look for better and more
generous wine of the old vinetree, for as Pliny says -- vetustioribus semper
vitibus vinum melius, nouellis copiosius; would I could either arrogate the
former, or challenge the latter unto my self, but howsoever I could not
possibly please all, for as the Poet speaks to one Ledotus

Qui possis rogo te placere cunctis Io: Vulteius he^decasilla. lib. 4.

Cum iam displiceas tibi velvns?
It Is sure that at least I should not please my self. I might better fit a
many humors in sif ting out some more pleased poetical subject, more
correspondent to their fancy and my faculty; as entreating merrily of some new
discovered Isle with Lucian, to invent with Lucia^. Ver. historiatum lib. 1.
him some such hyperbolicall lies, as that of Hercules and (...) whose
footsteps were found to be the bigness of an aker of ground: to tell with him of
flies and pismires as big as twelve Elephants, to freight some pamphlet de
lapsu vulcani, who as Homer ^omer. ^ad. x.
writes, was falling out of heaven into the Isle Lemnos (...) a whole day: to
make some merry prognostication of strange wonders that are to ensue, as them of
Ioachimus Fortius Ringelbergius, capitulated in that chapter whose title is --
Ridicula quaedam and iucunda: not to plunge my self in these grand physical
matters: I know these are appertinent to the Muses also --

Ovid his Nux, the Culex Maro writ,
Erasmus did in folly dye his wit
The Frog fight Homer made, and of da^e Mouse,
And Ianus Dousa praisd Pediculus
Hubaldus on baldmen did ver^ifie
Each of whose numbers words began with C. In lib. de Antiquitate Cantab. et
Oxon. In epig. Aul. Gell. 17. 12.

Beza praisd (...), Apuleius the Ass
Plutarch Grillus who by Circe changed was
A quarta^e ague Fauorine did commend,
His darlings sparrow so Catullus pend
To which the Poet
Sunt etiam Musissua ludicra, mista Camanis Ausonius.

Ot^a etc.
Tragical Melpomene her self will now and then put on the comicall start up:
Sage Apollo laughes once yearly at his own beard less naked face: the modest
Muses have their maddest reuils: the darkesomst water has his gildy streams:
wise men will sometimes play with childrens rattles.

But I have already employed some imbeziled howrs taken from the treasury of
the Muses golden time; to the gilding over of the like rotten subjects, as they
that have bin intimate with m^ are not igmorant, as in my Tetligomurmomachia, a
centurie of latin Epigrams, an Echo, and some other trifles which I durst not
let come abroad in the chill Critical air lest hap they might have been
frettisht for want of learninges true clothing. Now have I chosen to mingle my
delight with more utility, aiming not only at wit but wisdom. I know the
Paracelsian will utterly condemn my endeavor for bringing the four Humors
on the stage again, they ha uing hist them off so long ago, and the rather be
cause I once treat not of their three minerals -- Sal, Surphur, and Mercurius,
the Tria omnia of their quicksiluer wits, which they say have chief dominion
in the body, (it consisting of them) and are the causes of each disease, and
cure all again by their Arcana extracted out of them: but I weigh it not,
since the tongue of an adversary cannot detract from verity. If any the like
Carpfish whatsoever chance to nibble at my credit, he may perchance swallow
down the sharp hook of reproach and infamy ere he be aware which he cannot
like the Mathiolus in Dioscor. so Plin. 9. 43
Scolaopendra cast up again at his pleasure, I doubt not but to have him in a
string. Reader, thine eyes are to take their turns in a gardin, wherein are
growing many weeds, yet some flowers, pass by the former with kind silence,
cull out and gather the latter for thine own science: and perhaps thou may
distill the sweetest wa ter from the bitterest wormwood, as Maro built his
walls by Ennius his rubbish: If thou thy self have better --

Candidus imperti, si non, his vtere mecum. Idem qui pridem. Thine if mine. T.
W.

THE Titles and Contents of the several Chapters as they are handled in in
this present book.
1 OF Self knowledge. cap. 1. 2 That the soul sympathizeth with the body and
follows her cr^sis and temperature. cap. 2. 3 Whether the internal faculty
may be known by the external phisiognomy and visage. cap. 3. 4 That a diet
is to be observed of every one. cap. 4. 5 How man derogates from his
excellency by surfeit and of his untimely death. C. 5 6 Of Temperaments Cap. 6.
7 Of diversity of wits according to the diverse temperature of the body. cap.
7. 8 Of the spirits. cap. 8. 9 Of a choleric complexion. cap. 9. 10 Of a
sanguine temperature. cap. 10. 11 Of the phlegmati^ humor cap. 11 12 Of a
melanche ^ick complexion C. 12. 13 Of the co^ceits of melancholy cap 13. 14 Of
the dreams which accompany each complexion cap 14. 15 Of the exactest
temperature of all whereof Lemnius speaks cap, 15. The close to the whole
work in verse.
FINIS.
Of Self knoweledge. Chap. 1.
AS Hesiod in his Theogonie says that the ^gly night -- (...), begat two foul
monsters Somnum and somnium: So we may not unfitly say that the inueloped and
deformed night of ignorance (for the want of that celestial Nosce teipsum,)
begettes two misshapen monsters, (which as the Sepia's inkie humor do make
turbulent the cristallinest fountain in man,) Somatalgia and Psychalgia, the
one the dyscrafie of the body, the other the malady and distemperature of the
soul: For he that is incanoped and entrenched in this darkesome misty cloud of
ignorance, Munste^ (...).
(being like the one-footed Indian people Sciopodes whose foot is so big that
it shades them from the rays of the Sun, or rather like the Cyclops when
Ulysses had be rest him of his one eye) he has no true lamp of discretion, as
a polestar to direct the ship of his life by, in respect either of his
mortal or immortal part, from being hurried upon the shelues and mas^y rocks
of infelicity. Of what hie esteem and prizelesse value this rare
selfeknowledge is and ever was it is very conspicuous and appare^t unto the
dimmest apprehension of all, if it do but justly balance in the scoale of com
mon reason, wisdom, who has ever affectionately embraced it, and to whom it
is still indeared; the heavenly source or springhe^d from whence it was derived,
as also the happier effects it always has engendered.

Divine Pithagoras, whom worthily the flood Nessus saluted and called by his
name, Elian.
as one admired of it for his flood of eloquence and torrent of wisdom, his
mind being the enriched exche^quer and treasury of rairest qualities, not
only had this golden posie ever on his tongues end, as the daintiest delicy he
could present unto a listening ear; but also had it emblemd forth by Minerua
giving breath unto the (...) flute, (by which is intimated Philautia) which
because with blasting it sweld her cheeks she cast away from her; Yea he
(...) scendit (...) Horat.
had this celestial sentence, (...) which descended from the heavens,
engraven on the frontispice of his heart, evermore in an applicatiue practice,
especially for himself: which he termed the wise Physicions medicinary
praescript for the double health and welfare of man. Yet sententious Menander.
in his Thrasy. leon.
Menander that rich-vainde Poet seems at least to contradict this heavenly
saw for pondering with him self the depraved demeanor of worldly me^, the
troth less inconstancy and perfidiousnes of our hairebraind Iasons: the
inueigling and adamantizing societies of some who being polluted and infected
with the rank leprosy of il would entangle others; the viperous and vatinian
deadly hate, which is v^ual ly masked, and lies lurking under the specious and
fair habit of entire amity; waighing with him self a many things fashioned
out of the like mould, he thus spoke (...) me thinks says he, that is not so
well spoken, knowthy self, as this, know others.

Howsoever he meant: we must not imagine that he did it to impeach any wise, this
sage and grave sentence which (as that also of his) is an oracle in it proper
object, and hiely concerns the good both of the active Plato in Alcibiade.
and passive part of man: though Socrates, in Plato would have it only to be
referd unto the soul to have no relation at al unto the body, though falsely.
For if the soul by reason of sympathizing with the body is either made an
(...) or a (...) either a nimble swift-footed Achilles, or a limping slow*
(...) (...), as hereafter we intend to declare, good reason the body (as the
edifice or (...) of the soul) should be known as a part of Tei^sum for the
good of the soul Therefore Julian the Apostata who had flood of invention,
although that whole flood could not wash or rinch away that onespot of his
atheism, he (though not knowing him a right) could say the body was the
chariot of the soul, which while it was well managed by discretion the cunning
coachman, the drawing steeds, that is our headstrong and untamed appetites,
being checked in by the golden bit of temperance, so long the soul should not
be tossed in craggy ways by unequal and tottring motion, much less be in
danger to be hurled down the steepy hills of perdition. If we do but try the
words at the Lidyan or touchstone of true wisdom which d^iudicates not (...)
to external semblances, but inter (...) ces they will sure go for (...),
whether you respect the soul as principal, or the body as secundary. For
(...) first (...) single out that speech of Ag^petus: But we, Climax Agapeti
ad ^nianum Imperat, atque ^e Clemens Alexand. Paed. lib. 3 cap. 1.
O men, (says he) let us so disciple our selves that each one may thoroughly
know himself: for he that perfectly knows him, self, knows God, and he that
knows him, shall be made like unto him, and he (...) this shall be made worthy
of him, more over he that is made worthy of him, shall do nothing ^worthy of
God, (...). etc. But shall meditate upon things pleasant unto him, speaking what
he meditateth and practicing what he speaks. For the last, that only of
Tullie: valetud^ sustentatur notuta Cic. Offic. 2
suicorp. etc. the perfect and sound estate of the body (as we may consequently
asseuer of the soul) is maintaind by the knowledge of a man's own body and
that chiefly, by a due observation of such thing^s at may either be (...) or a^
(...) to nature, may be (...) the (...), (...) precious balsame thereof, or else
it baleful and deadly aconitu^: For he that in the infancy of his knoweledge
thinks that Hyosciamus and Cicuta hemlocke and henbane are fit aliment for his
body, because they be nutriment to birds, may happily at length curse the
dog-starre of his own indiscretion, for inflaming his less distempered brain
with his unhappy dysastrous influence. For it is vulgarly said that Hyosciamus
Scal, Exercit. Cx lii.
et cicuta hemines perimunt, (...) alimentum praebent: them two are poison to
men though foison to birds: as Scaliger relates also.

I grant that the most direct aim of wisdom in this Nosce teipsum, looks
chiefly on the mind as the fairest mark; Yet often eyes and aims at this
other necessary object, which cunningly to hit, is counted equal skill, though
the one far surmount the other, especial care is to be had as well of the
crystal glass to save it from cracking, as of the Aqua caelestis infused
from putrefying.

But primarily it concerns the soul, as for them who are tainted with the
Protoplasts self love and love of glory, who being (...) up with the hand of
fortune to the top of natures pre-eminence, as pety gods do direct their
imaginations far beyond the le ^ill of humility being swollen with timpanizing
pride too much, admiring themselves with Narcissus who was inamoured with his
own beauty, of whom the poet thus speaks. Ovid.


Dumque sitim sedare cupit sitis altera creuit, Whiles at the fountain he his
thirst began slaks.
An ocean of self-love did him ^retake.
Proud Arachnes who will needs contend with more cunning Minerua for spinning
like Marsyas and Tham^ras who strove the one with Apollo for music skill, the
other with the Muses for melodious singing: too common an use among all
self-forgetters: Julian. in (...). (...). Pa. 73.
for as Julian says, each man is wont to admire his own actions, but to abate
the value, and derogate from the esteem of others. For those again who with
Gla^cus pra^fer (...), the regard of the body before the well fare of the
super^lementary soul, which chiefly should be in request for as the Stoic
says, it is a sign of an abject Epictetus cap. lxiii.
mind to beat our brains about necessaries for our vile corpse, a special
care should rather be had over the soul, as Mistress over her hand-maide, these
want that (...).

Now for the body, as well it leuils at it: for those who distemper and misdiet
them selves with untimely and unwonted surfeting, who make their bodies the
noisome sepulchers of their souls, not considering the estate of their
enfeebled body what will be accordant to it, not waighing their complexion
contrary perchance far to the dish they feed upon, not foreseing by true
knoweledge of themselves what will endamage and impair their healths, infect
the conduit pipes of their limpid spirits, what will dull and stupefie their
quicker intelligence, nay, disable all the faculties both of soul and body, as
instance might be given of many, to them that have had but a mere glympse
into the histories, and ancient records of many dish moungers who running into
excess of riot, have like fatal Parcas cut in two the lines of their own
Match on. po. De^p. Athen. 8.
lives, as Philoxenus the Dythirambiok poet, (of whom Athenaeus speaks
Deipnos. 8) who devoured at Syracusa a whole Polypus of two cubits long, save
only the head of the fish, at one meal, whom (being deadly sick of the
crudity) the Phisicio^ told that he could not possibly live above seven hours,
whose wouluish appetite not with standing would not stint it self even in that
extremety, but he uttered these words (the more to intimate his vultur-like
and insaciate paunch). Since that Charon and Atropos are comd to call me away
from my delicies, I think it best to leave nothing behind me, wherefore let me
eat the residue of the Polypus, who having eaten it, expired: who had the name
of (...) by Chrys^ppus, as Athenaeus records and of others he was called (...)
and (...) of Aristotle. And what of others? who although they did not so
speedily by ignorance of their estate, curtaile their own days by untimely
death, yet notwithstanding they have lived as dead unto the world, and their
souls dead unto them selves. Dyonisyus Heracleota that ravenous gourmandyzing
Harpy, and insatiable draine of all pleasant liquors, was grown so pursie that
his farnes would not suffer him to set his breath, being in continual fear
to be stifeled, although others affirm that he easily could with the strong
blast of his breath have turned about the sails of a winde-mill: Whose soul
by his self ignorance (not knowing what repast was most convenient for hi^
body) was pent up and as it were fettred i^ these his corpse as in her dungeon.
So Alexander King of Egypt was so gross and fat that he was feign to be
vpheld by two Athen.
men: And a many more by their (...) (...) and (...) by excessive eating and
drinking, more upon mere ignorance, the^ rebellion against nature, physical
diet, and discretion, did make their souls like the fatned sheep whereof
Johannes Leo relates, which he see in Egypt some of whose tails weighed 80.
pound, and some 150 pound, by which weight their bodies were immovable,
unless their tails like trains were carried up in wheel-barrowes: Or like the
fatned hogs Scalliger mentions, that Seal. (...): 199.
could not move for fat, and were so senseless that mise made nests in their
buttocks, they not once feeling them.

But those which I whilome named and millions besides, never come to the full
period of their days, dying soon because as Seneca says they know not that
they live (...): ^ controu:
by deaths, and are ignorant what receipt of food into the body, (whose
constitution they are as ignorant of also,) will bring endammagement both to it
and to the heavenly infused soul.

For the body; this (...) is requisite; that as the meager one is to be fed with
spare diet, so the massier and more gyantly body must be maintained with more
large and lavish diet. For it is not consonant to reason that Alexander Macedo,
and Ex Petrarch
Augustus Caesar, who were but littlemen as Petrarch says and so low-staur'd
Vl^sses should have equal diet in quantity with, Milo, Hercules, Ajax, and
such as Atheneus makes mention of: as Ast^damas, and Herodorus, the first of
them being so capacious stomacht Athenaeut: lib. 10.
that he eat as much alone as was prepared forix. men: and the latter
Herodorus, (...)
a strong-sided Trum peter, who was 3. else and a half long, and could blow in
two trumpets at once, of whom Atheneus speaks. These might well farce and
cram their mawes with far more alimente because their ventricles, cells, veins,
and other organons of their bodies were far more ample and spacious.

And a^ aine it is sovereign in this regard, because in the full stream of
appetite or bravery many will take upon ignorance, rather Suetonius.
the sumtuous dish prepared for vitellius, by his brother, which one dish
amounted to above seven thousand, eight hundred and xii pounds, perchance a
rank poison to Plini. lib. 22 not. hist, cap. 22.
their natures, then Estur and (...) (2. sauoury and wholesome herbs, which
poor^ Hecale set on the table as a sallet before hun gry Theseus, the best dish
of meat she could present unto him,) a great deal peradventure more conducible
unto their healthe^, But they are as ignorant what they take as Cambles was,
who being given to Gastrimargisme as Athenaeus relates in the forementioned
book, in the night did eat up his own wise, and in the morning finding her
hand in his devouring jaws, slew him self, the fact being so heinous and not
worthy: as also they are pilgrims and strangers in the knowledge of their
bodily estate, which ever or often is an occasion of ouercloying their
ventricles with such meats as are an utter ruin and downfall to their
healthes, as ill or worse then Toxicum, for although they do not ef^soones
enforce the fatal end, yet in a short progress of time, they are as sure
pullies to draw on their inexpected destenies.

Without this knowledge of our bodily nature, we are like to crasie barks, yet
ballist with prizelesse merchandise, which are tossed too and froo upon the
maine of ignorance so long, till at length we be shattered against the huge
rock of Intemperance, and so loose our richest fraught, which is our soul.
This ought ever to control and curbbe in, our unruly appetites: it ought to
be like the Poets Automedon, Seneca lib. 2. de beneficiis cap. 12
to rain our fond desires in, which reign in (...) for as Seneca says sunt
quaedam no^itura impotran^ibus, etc. so we may say, sunt quae^ appetentibus;
as there be many things which are obnoxious to the asker, if it chance he
obtain them, so are there many nutriments as dangerous to man that babishly
couets the^, for if he square not his diet according to the temper of his body,
in choice of such fare, as may banish and expel contagion and violency from
nature, or be a special preservative in her spotless and untainted
perfection; meats are so far from holding on the race of his life, as that
will rather hasten it down far sooner unto the hemispheare of death, the^ he
expected. A choleric man therefore (by this (...)) knowing himself to be
ouerpoizd with it predominancy, na, but even foreseeing his corporal nature to
have a propension or inclination to this humor, he must wisely defeat, and
waine his appetite of all such dainty morsels (though the more delicious and
toothsome) and delude his longing thirst, of al such honey flowing meats and
hot wines as are foison to his distemperature, and which in tract of time will
aggrauate this humor so much, til it generate and breed either a hecticke
fever mortal consumption, yellow Iaundice, or any the like disease incident to
this complexion; and so concerning all the rest. For a bare ( Nosce) it is not
sufficiently competent for the auoidance of death, and to maintain a happy
crasis, but the living answerably according to knowledge, for we see many
exquisite Physicions, and learned men of special note (whose exhibitories to
themselves do not parallel their prescripts and advice to others who, are good
physicions, but no pliable patients) to make a diligent search and scrutinie
into their own natures, yet not fitting them with corespo^dency of diet like
Lucia^es apothecary, who gave Physic unto others for coughing, and yet he
him self did never lin coughing Cunctis qui cauit noncauet ille sibi.

While he cured others he neglected him self: We may rightly say, (...) is
their (...) and (...) their (...)

1 Crapula fit esca, deliciae eorum damna: that is their diet is luxury, and
each delicy made their malady. And yet none do more inveigh against surfeit and
misdiet then they, but they are like the Musipula of Orus Apollo in
hietoglyphich.
whom it said in the Hieroglyphichs that she uses to bring forth her issue
out of her mouth, and swimming with them about her when she is hungry, she
swallows them up again, so they in external show spit out the name of
surfeit, banishing ^t far from the^, but by their accustomable deadly luxury,
again they embrace it, and hug it in their arms so long, till some incroching
disease or other, having had long dominion and resiance in them be past cure of
Physic: For we know.

Non est in medico semper releuetur vt aeger,
Interdum docta plus valet art malum.
No earthly art can ever cure deep (...) ill.
Not (...) with his heavenly skill.
So then the most exact selfe-knower of ^ll, if he do not contain himself
within the territories and praecincts of reasonable appetite, the Cynosura of
the wiser dietest, if consorting with misdieters, he bath him self in the
muddy stream of their luxury and riot, he is in the very next suburbs of death
it self: Yet for this, I confess that the silver breast of Ni^us is not
vitiated and polluted by others ke^nel muddy thought* and turbulent actions or
affections, no more then the river Alpheus, that runs hard by the salt sea, is
tainted with the brackish quality of the sea, no more then the Salamander is
schorcht, though daily conuersing in the fire; or chaste Zenocrates lying with
Lair is defiled, since he may well do it without impeachment to his chastity:
so may the heroical and generous spirits converse with vnstaide appetites and
yet not have the least tang of their excess, but by their diuiner [ N^sce
teipsum] may be their own gardians, both for there Celestial and also
earthly part* Yet we know Aliquid mali propter vicinum malum, the taint of ill
comes by consorting with ill, and the best natures and wisest selfe-knowers of
al may be tild on or constraind to captiuate and in thral their freedom of
happy spirit, and to rebel against their own knowledge.

I wish therefore in conclusion the meanest, if possible, to have an insight
into their bodily estate (as chiefly they ought of the soul) whereby they may
shun such things as any ways may be offensive to the good of that estate, and
may so consequently (being vexed with none, no not the least malady) be more
fit not only to live, but to live well: For as the Poet said of death --
(...), to die is not ill, but to die ill: so contrar^wise of life we may say,
it is no such excellent thing to live, as well to live; which no doubt may
easily be effected, if they do abridge them selves of all vain alluring
lusts, and teather their appetites within the narrow-round plot of diet, lest
they run at randon, and break into the spacious fields of deadly luxury.

Cap. 2. That the soul simpathizeth with the body and follows her crasis and
temperature.
INficitur terrae sordibus vnda flue^s says the Poet: If a water current have
any vicinity with a putrefied and infected soil, it is tainted with his
corrupt quality: The heavenly soul of man as the Artists usually auerre,
se^blablewise, does feel, as it were, by a certain deficiency the ill
affected crasis of the body, so that if this be annoyed or infected with any
faecule^t humors, it faires not well with the soul, the soul her self as
maladious feels some want of her excellency, and yet impatible in regard of
her substance, though the bad disposition of the organons, the malignancy of
receites, the vnrefinednes of the spirits do seem to affect the soul: for
the second, which causes the third, mark what Horace speaks.

-- -- -- -- -- quin corpus onustum Horat.

Hesternis (...) an^mum quoque pragrauat (...)
Atque affligit humo diuinaparticulam aura,
The man surcharged with former crudities,
Waighes down our spirits nimble faculties;
Our ladened soul as plunged in the mire,
Lies nie extinct, though part of he auens fire.
To this effect is that speech of Democritus (...) de Natura him. ad finem
Hippocratis.
who says that the bodily habit being out of temper, theminde has no lively
willingness to the conte^plation of virtue: that being enfeebled and
ouershadowed the light of the soul is altogether darkened, heavenly wisdom as
it were sympathizing with this earthly mass as in any surfeit of the best and
choicest delicates, and also of wines, is easily apparent. Uinum, of it own
nature is (if we may so term it) Diuinum, because it recreats the tired
spirits, makes the mind far more nimble and actual, and aspiring to a higher
strain of wit (...), (...), says Xenophon, it stirs up mirth and
cheerfulness, as oil makes the blasing flame yet by accident, the vnmanag'd
appetite desiring more then reason, it does dull the quicker spirits, stop the
pores of the brain with too many vapors and gross fumes, makes the head
totty, ^ullabees the senses, yea, intoxicates the very soul, with a pleasing
poison: as the same Xenophon says, it happens unto Xenophon in hi^ conuiuium
which also Athenae us recor ^s in his 11. book Deipnol. out of Xenoph.
men as to tender plants, and lately ingraffed impe^, which have their grouth
from the earth, (...) etc. when God does water and drench them with an
immoderate shower, they neither shot out right, nor hardly have any blown
blossoms, but when the earth does drink in so much as is competent for their
increase, the^ they spring upright, and flourishing do yield their fruit in
their accustomed time, so fares it with the bodies and by sequel with the
souls of men, if we pour in with the indiscreet hand of appetite, they both
will reele too and fro, and scarce can we breath, at least, we cannot utter the
least thing that relisheth of wisdom, our minds must needs follow the
tempers or rather the distemperatures of our earthly bodies.

Plato, in whose mouth the Bees as in their hiues did make their hunny combs,
as foreintimating his sweet, flowing eloquence, he weighing with himself that
thraldom the soul was in being in the body, and how it was affected, and (as
it were) infected with the contagion thereof, in his Phaedrus, as I remember,
disputing of the Idaeaes of the mind, said, that our bodies were the prisons So
Julian in an epistle to ^ugenius 190. has such a saying (...) etc. Gorgia^
and bridewels of our souls, wherein they lay as manicled and fettered in
Gives. Yea further he could avouch in his Cratylus, and also in his Georgias:
Socrates having brought forth a speech to Callides, out of Euripides (...) to
live is to die; and to dye is to live: he says there, that our body is the
very grave of the soul, (...) (says he) (...). And sure it is that whiles
this mind of ours has his abode in this darkesome dungeo^, this vile mansion
of our body, it can never act his part well, till it step upon the heavenly
stage, it will be like ^o in Ovid, who being turned into a hee^er, when she
could not express her mind to Ovid: Metamorph.
Inacus her father in words,

Littera-pro verbis, quampes in puluere duxit,
Corporis indicium mutati triste peregit.
Her foot did speak, as on the sand she ranged,
How she poor soul was from her self estra^ged.
Our soul in the body, though it be not so blind as a Batt, yet is it like an
Owl, or Batt before the rays of Phoebus al dimmed and dazeled: it sees as
through a lattissewindow. Being freed from this prison, and once having flitted
from this ruinous ^ennament, this mud-wald cottage, it is a Linceus, within a
Molewarpe, without it is an all^eyde Argus, within an one-^y de Cyclops:
without a beautiful Nireus: within an Ethiopian Thersites: without a hie
soaring Egle, within a heavy Struthio Camelus, an Aestridge, who has wings as
he in the Hieroglyphics witnesses, non propter volatu^, sed cursum, not for
flying, but to help her running: yea as sparkles hid in embers, do not cast
forth their radiant light, and the sun invelloped in a thick mistie cloud,
does not illuminate the center with his goulden Tresses, so this celestial
fire our soul, whiles it remains in the lap of our earthly Prometheus, this
mass of ours, it must needs be curtained and ouer-shadowed with a palpable
darkness, which does ouer-cast a sable night over our understanding,
especially when in the body there is a current of infectious humors, which
do flow over the veins, and ingrosse the limpid spirits in their arteries,
the mind must needs be as it were oreflowne with a Deucalions floode, and
be quirkened as a silly toyling Leander in the Hellespout. What made the
mind of Orestes so out of temper that he killed his own mother, but the bodily
Crasis? what made Heracleitus die of a dropsy having rowlde himself in
beasts ordure? what made Socrates having drunk the Cicuta at Athens to give
his vltimum vale to the world, but that? what caused that redoubted famous
captain Themistocles having drunk Bulls blood, to take (as we say) his long
journey to the Elysian feilds? and many others to have com'd unto their long
home (as may be seen in the ancient registers of time) and many to have been
distraught, and frantic, the distemperature no doubt, and the evil habit of
the body wherewith the soul has copulatio^. Plotin the great platonist, he
blushed often that his soul did harbor in so base an ^nne as his body was, so
Porphyry affirms in his life: because (as he said in an other place) his soul
must needs be affected with the contagious qualities incident unto his bodi^.
The cunningst swimmer that ever was, Delius himself could not show his art,
nor his equal stroke in the mud: a ca^dle in the lantern can yield but a
glimmering light through an impure and darksome horn: the warelike Steed
cannot fet his friskes, take his carreers, and show his curuets being pent up
in a narrow room, so it is with the princely soul, while the body is her
mansion said he; but this belongs to an other Thesis and some thing before,
concerning the souls excellency, having taken her flight from this darksome
cage; more near unto the scope at which we must aim. Hear what the Poet
says in his xv. of the Metamorphos.

Quolque magis (...), sunt qui non corpora tantum
Verum an^mos etiam valiant mutare liquo^es:
-- (u^ (...) est (...) Salmacis vnd^
A Ethi^pesque (...)? quos (...) fa^cibus hausit
(...) furis, aut patitur mirum grauitate soporem.
"It is a wonderment that waters (...) Salm^c i^ where the ^vinph and Hermoph^a
ditus. we^e ^ovnd together

"Transsorme the members and the mind of man:
"Who kenneth not th'vncleane Salmacian well,
"The (...) where sunburned Mauritanians dwell?
"Which cause a frenzy, being gulped down,
"Or strike the senses with a sleeping swoone.
We must not imagine the mind to be passible, being altogether immateriall,
that it self is affected with any of these, corporal things, but only in
respect of the instruments which are the ha^d-maids of the soul: as if the
spirits be inflamed, the passages of the humors da^med up, the brain stuffed
with smoakie fumes, or any phlegmatic matter, the blood too hot and too
thick, as is usual in the Seythians and those in the septe^trionall parts,
who are of all men endowed with the least portion of wit and policy: and
because these kind of people, do as it were cross the hie way of my
invention, I will treat a little of them, neither beeside that which we have in
hand: because it will confirm the fore-writen words of Xenophon concerning
wine. Whom do we ever read of more to quaffe and carouse, more to use strong
drinks then the Scythians, and who more blockish, and deuoide of wit and
reason? nay there was never any learned man, but only Anacharsis, was an
inbred there: which want no doubt is caused by their great intemperance. For
all writers well nie agree in this, that they will as the Poet says, ad
diurnam stellam, or strenue pro (...) potare: drink till their eyes stare like
two blazing stars as we say in A thenae^s lib. (...). Deipnosophist. pa 427.
our proverb. Athenae^s that singular scholar of so manifold reading: after
he had rehearsed Herod: his history of Cleome^ns says (...) etc. the
Lac^demonia^s when they would drink in lavish cups extraordinarily, they did use
this word (...), to imitate the Scythians, which also he notes out of
Chaemeleon Heracleotes in his book (...): when also they should have said to
the Pincerna (...), power in, they used this word (...).

Howsoever we read of some particulars, it is manifest if we peruse the
histories that the most of them are the greatest bouzers, and bussards in the
world: they had rather drink out their eyes then that Fusc. speaks thus
Perdere dulcius est potando qua^ vt mea seruem Erodenda pigris lumina vermicu.
lis.
the worms should eat them out after their death, as Sir Thomas More i^asts
upon Fuscus in his Epigrames: and of all men they have most leade^ conceits and
drossy wits: caused especially by their excessive intemperance, which thickneth
their blood, and corrupts their spirits, and other organons wherein the
soul should cheefely show her operation. Give me leave to speak a little of
the air: how it received into the body does either greatly advantage or
little avail the mind. It is certain that the excellency of the soul
follows the purity of the heavens, the temperature of the air: therefore
because Boeot^a had a^ery * rennish soil, a gross and unrefined air, the
ancient writers to decypher and yet it may be gathered by the much eating (...)
Athen. lib. x.
and shadow out a dull wit in any one, were wont to say Boeoticum hic habit
inge^ium, this man is as wise as a woodcock, his wits in a consumption, his
conceit is as lancke as a shotten Herrin. I do not concord with the Poet in
that triuial verse, but I do carry the comma a little further and say.

C^lum non, (...) mutant qui (...). At least if I must needs take coelum for
air, I will say.

The air to vary is not only found,
But wit's a forreiner in f^rreine ground.
The air has his etymology from the greek word (...) to breath, it
consistes of (...) and (...), because the learned say, that it is the
beeginning and ending of man's life: for when we begin to live, we are said to
inspire, when we die, to expire: as the privation of the air deprives us of
our being, and the air being purged and cleansed from his pestilent qualities
causes our well-beeing, so the infection of the air, as in the extinguishing
of some blazing comet, the eructation of noisome vapors from the bosom of the
earth, the disastrous constellation or bad aspect of some maleuolent planet,
the vamping fumes that the Sun eleuates from boggs and fennish grounds, the
inflammation of the air by the intense heat of the sun, (as when in Homers
Iliad, Phoebus is fained to send forth his direful arrows among the Grecians,
and ^o bring in the pestilence upon them) this infection causes our bodies
first to be badly qualified, and tainted with a spice of corruption, and so by
consequent our very souls to be ill affected. AEneas Syluius in his
Cosmography Aneas Syluius cap. 92 de Asia minore.
writing of the lesser Asia records a strange thing concerning the air being
putrified, he says that hard by the city Hierapolis there is a place
termed Os PLVTONIVM, in the valley of a certain mountain, where Strabo
witnesses that he sent sparrowes in, which forth with as soon as they drew in
the venomous noisome air they fell down dead: no doubt, but the corrupted air
would have had his operation upon other more excellent creatures the^ were
those little birds, if they durst have attempted the entrance in. But to a
question: what reason can be alleag'd that those who won under the pole, near
the frozen zone, and in the septentrionall climate, should have such gyantly
bodies and yet dwarfish wits, as many authors do report os them, and we fee
by experience in travail, the rudenes and simplicity of the people, that are
seated far north, which no doubt is intimated by a vulgar speech, when we say
such a man has a borrell wit, as if we said boreale ingenium: Whereof, that
old-english prophet of famous memory (whom one fondly ^earm'd Albion^ ballade
maker, the cunnicatcher of time, and the second dish for fools to feed their
splenes upon) G. Chaucer took notice when in his prolog to the Frankleines
tail he says.

But Sir^, because I am a ^orrell man Borel.

At my beginning first I you beseach,
Have me excusd of my rude speech.
The Philosophers to this question have excogitated this reason: to wit the
exceeding chilnes of the air, which does possess the animal spirits, (the
chief attendants of the soul to exequute the function of the agent
understanding) with contrary qualities the first being cold and dry, the last
hot and moiste: though this reason most avail for our purpose speaking how
the mind can be affected with the air, yet I must needs say I think they
are beside the cushian: others affirm and with more reason that they are
dul-witted especially by the vehement heat which is included in their bodies,
which does inflame their spirits, thick^n their blood, and thereby is a cause of
a new gross, more then ayry substance, conioynd with the spirits: for extreme
heat does generate a gross adust choler which comes to be mixed with the blood
in the veins, and that brings a condensation and a coagulation to the blood:
for their extraordinary heat it is apparent by their speedy concoction, and by
the external frigidity of the air that dams up the pores of their bodies so
greatly, that hardly any heat can euaporate: this also, by deep wels which in
winter time be luk^ warm, and in summer season exceeding cold, now to prove
that where the blood is thickened, and the spirits inflamed there usually is a
want of wit, the great peripate^ him self affirms it to be a truth, where
he says that bulls, and such creatures as have this humor thick, are commonly
deuoid of wit, yet have great strength, and such living things as have an
attenuated blood and very fluid do excel in wit and policy as instance is
given in Aristotle of bees. We must note here, that this is spoke of the
remoter parts near unto the pole, lest we derogate any thing from the praise
of this our happy Ileland (another blisfull Eden for pleasure) all which by a
true division of the climes is situated in the septentrional part of the world,
wherein there are and ever have been as praegnant wits, as surpassing
politicians, as judicious understandings, as any clime ever yet afforded under
the cope of heaven.

But I do here pass the limits of laconisme, where as I should in wisdom
imitate the Egyptian dogs in this whole tractate, who do drink at the river
Nilus (...), in haste and by stealth, lest the Crocodile should pray on them,
and who does fitly carry the name and conditions of the Crocodile, no writer is
ignorant of. I will therefore end with the iteration of the Thesis, that the
soul follows the temper of the body, and that whiles it is inherent in the
body, it can n^uer partake so pure a light of understanding as when it is
segregated, and made a free denizen in the heavenly city, and free hold of
the saints

Corporis in gremi^ d^m spiritus etc. when our imprisoned soul once more being
free,
Gins scale the turret of eternity,
From whence it once was raught and captive (...)
By this usurping tyrant corpse, he^ bane,
Which subiugates her unto s^ttish will
And schools her under passions want of skill.
Then shall our soul^ now chock't with fenny care
With Angel^ frollicke in ap^rer air:
This low NADIR of darkness must it she^de
Till is aloft toth'radiant ZENITH wend.
Cap. 3. Whether the internal faculty may be known by the external
physiognomie.
SOcrates that was termed the Athenian Eagle, because he could look
steadfastly upon the Sun, or the rather for his quick insight of understanding,
when a certain youth being hielie commended unto him for his rare parts, and
admirable endowments, though he had the pearcing eyes of Lynceus, and could
have more then coniectured his qualities being presented unto him, he did not
look unto his outward feature, and external hew, so demurring to have
rendered his approbation of him, but he accosted him with these words,
loquerepuer vt te videam lets hear the reason youth, that I may see what is in
thee (to which Lipsius alluded in a certain epistle of his; videre et non
alloqui nec videre est: to see one and not confer with him, is not to see).
Socrates in sinuated thus much unto us, that a man may be a Nireus in outward
semblance, and yet a Thersites in his inward essence: like the Em perours table
whose curtain was drawn over with Lions and Eagles, but on the table, were
pourtrayed, Apes, Owls, and Wrens: or like the golden box that kept Neroes
beard, perchance the eye of his understanding was dazeled, as when Euripides
Pe^on. Ar. bit. 5.
gave him Heracleitus his works called (...), demanding of him his censure
Diog. La^rtius.
who answered that which I conceive is rare, and so I think of that which I
do not conceive, having that deep insight and singular wisdom which Apollos
Oracle did manifest to be in him, he mo^e eath have perceived the former and
conceived the latter, but was not cunning Zophyrus his judgment also tainted
concerning Socrates himself? Who seeing his deformed countenance called him an
idiot and a dissard and an effeminate person and was laughed to scorn of them
that stood by for his pains, but Socrates said, laugh not, Zophyrus is not in
a wrong box, for such a natural was I framed by nature, though I have by the
study of wisdom and philosophy corrected that which was a defect in nature;
the philosopher says vultus est index animi, the eye is the caseme^t of the
soul, through which we may plainly see it, better then he that saw
Antisthenes his pride through the chinks of his cloak: but our usual saying
is, that the tongue is the hearauld of the mind, the touchstone of the heart,
could a man discern wise Ulysses, only by his Homer in his 3. book of the
Iliad.
countenance? Hear what Homer says of him: Illiad 3.

-- (...)
When that discrete Ulisses up did stand,
And swaide the golden scepter in his hand
I^oueable both it and he were found
Fixing a bas^full visage on the ground:
Most like an Idiot rose he from his stool,
The ^'st have deemd him angry or a fool:
But when he spoke, his ple^teous words did flow
Like to thick-falling flakes of winter snow*
N^ any c^uth his wit so hiely strain,
As wise Ulysses in his flowing vain.
Which also Tryphiod^rus the AEgiptian poet that writ of the sacking of Troy
sets down elegantly to the same effect of Ulisses. Triphiodo. rus the
AEgiptian poet.


-- (...)
By him impetuous Miner^a stood
And dre^cht his throat with hunny nectar flud:
A mopeide fool he rising, first was deemd,
Because with Tellus to consult he seemd
A rattling murmur eft his voice affordes
Opening the ore*flowing springhead of his words:
Like torrents of mellifluous snow inf^re th'Sun,
His sacred Hippocrene gins to ru^e.
So AEsope the witty fabulist, as we may read in his life, what deformity
wanted he externally? and what beauty had he not internally? likewise Galba
on whom Tullie, (seeing his ill-shap't lims and his excellent wit,) had this
conceit: ingenium Galbae male habitat: Galbaes wit lodges in a base Inn: and
Sappho that learned poetresse had the same natural default for her outward
lineaments, yet had most rare gifts of mind, she thus spoke of her self:

Ing^nioformae damna rependo ^eae. The Will favor, and deformity of face,
With virtues inward beauty I do grace.
Again, all is not gold that glistereth; I^ pario tumulo p^tridu^ cadauer:
marmoreu^ carcer impius fur. Iul. Scalliger, E^idorpidu^ lib. 40. Look
Hippolitus de consi^ et co^fiharibus page 101.
every persian nose argues not a valiant Cyrus: we often see plumbeam macheram
in aurea vagina, as the Cynick said in D. Laertius concerning a young man, that
was well proportioned and spoke ill, a leaden rapier in a golden sheath:
wrinckled faces and rugged brows lurk under smooth paint: the faire-bra^cht
Cypres tree fruitles and bar ren: a putrified nutmeg gilden over: Diomedes his
brazen armor shine like gold: Aesopes larua, ( O quale caput, at cerebrum non
habet) a rare head but no brains: many a gaudy outside and a baudy deformed
inside; a wooden leg in a silken stocking: so a fair and beautiful corpse, but
a foul ugly mind. We see a beautiful Paris, of whom Coluthus the Thebane
says, when Helena carried Coluthus the Theban poet in his book called Helens
rape.
him to her chamber.

-- -- (...) Her eyes could never be glutted with gazing on him: and yet his
judgment was in the waine, in giving the golden ball to fading beauty, which
is but a pleasant poison, only a letter of commendation, as Seneca calls it a
dumb praise, yea a very something of nothing. But howsoever it come to pass
that in some particulars it holdteh thus, it is not true in general: for as a
Fox is known by his bush, a Lion by his paw, an Asle by his ears, a Goat by
his beard, so easily may a man be discerned, I mean the excellency of his
soul by the beauty of his body, the endowments of the former by the
complements of the latter. When I do gaze with a longing look the comeliness
of the feature without, I am more then half persuaded of the admirable decency
within: as when I see the splendent rays of the Sun, it bewraies the Sun
has a complete light within: the clearer and fairer the fountain is to the
eye the sweeter it will prove unto the taste: the purest waters are distilled
from the choysest flowers: foul vices are not the offpring offaire faces; a
vulgar weed ishues not from the silkewormes smother thread: the Hyblaean Be
sucks no sweet hunny out of the poisonous hemlocke: when we see a body as
framed, and wrought out of the purest virgins wax, as tempered with the
cunning hands of beauty and favor, enriched with the very prodigality of
nature, which nature and beauty it self would be abashed and even blush to
behold, shall we say this golden mine, affords leaden metal? Raram facit
misturam cum sapientia forma, says Petronius Arbit: and the other, gratior est
pulchro veniens e corpore virtus: do they speak as though it were a wonder, a
rare thing to see wit, wisdom and virtue iump in one with beauty? let him
speak that daily sees not the contrary. I think (though ^ou ever) wise me^
williudge according to the proportion of members not laugh fondly Sir Thom.
More in his 2. of the Eutopia.
as they did at the ambassadors that were decked and adorned with precious
pearls, foolishly adoring their pages for them selves, whom they deemd to
have been the ambassadors for their plainness. There Is none so blind but
Apollos spectacles will make him see: if a man be endowed with wisdom and have
Tir^sias his bright lamp of understanding, the true candle of Epictetus which
is to be held at a far greater prize, but he may easily see by the^ what a
man is at the first glaunce, his inward virtues by his outward gifts. And
Socrates no doubt could eath have yielded welnie as sincere a judgment
concerning him, of whom we whilome spoke, by nerely beholding of his beautiful
lineamentes, as by hearing of his speeches ornaments. But he did it perchance
to be a pattern of true knoweldge to ignorance, who has not a judicious eye,
and which is prone to censure too far by the outward rese^blance: or else to
instruct knowledge itself, in this that always to see is not to know.

Who can not see also the deformity of the soul by the blemishes of the
body? though it be not a truth in every particular, as not in the former.
Hear what the poet affirms in an epigram upon a slowpac'd lurdame.

Tardus es ingenio vt pedibus, natura etenim dat
Exterius specimen quod latet interius.
Thy lea^en heels no golden wit does show,
For in-b^ed gifts by outward li^s we know.
Who could not have cast Thersites his water with but once looking upon the
Vrinall as we say; seeing in his body so great deformity, he sure would have
auerred that in his soul there was no great conformity: he had one note,
especially which is a badde sign in phisiognomy which Homer reckons as one of
his mishapes.

(...) -- Acuminato erat eapite, his head was made like a broch steeple, sharp
and hi^ crowned, which among all physiognomers imports an ill affected mind.
Who is ignorant, that men of greater size are seldom in the right cue, in the
witty vain; who knows not that little eyes denotate a large cheuerill
conscience? a great head a little portion of wit? goggle eyes a starke-staring
fool? great ears to be a kin to Midas, to be metamorphyzde Apuleies?
spatious*breasted, long-lif't, a plain brow without furrows to be liberal? a
beautiful face most commonly to note the best complexion? who knows not that
(...) etc. they that be soft-flesht are more wise, and more apt to conceive?
and Albertus says that these are the signs of a wit, as dull as a pig of lead
to wit thick nails, harsh hair, and a gross hard skin: the last whereof,
was verified in Polidorus a fool, of whom AElian makes mention, who had such
a hard thick skin, that it could not be pierced through with pricking. Who is
not acquainted with this of the philosopher that (...), a fat belly has a lean
ingenie: because much meat affects the subtle spirits with gross, and
turbulent fumes which do darken the understanding: and this is set down by a
modern english poet of good note pithyly in two verses.

Fat paunches make lean pates, and grosser bitts
Enrich the ribs but bankrout quite the wits.
Wherefore the Ephory among the Lacedaemonians were wont (not as Artaxerxes did
lash the coats of his captains when they had offended) to whip their fat
fools naked, that they mo^e become lean: saying unto them that they were
neither fit for action nor contemplation, until they were disburdened of
their fogg.

Cap. 4. That a diet is to be observed of eueryone.
THe ancient aphorism is: Quimedice viuit, misere viuit, he that observes a
strict diet is seldom at ease: which sinister exposition is not to be
approved: rather thus, he that lives under the hand of the unskillful empirick,
is ever in fear and peril of death: for unless the physician wisely observe
the disease of the patient, how he is affected, the time when, the climate
where, the quantity how much, his age and strength, his complexion with every
circumstance, he may prescribe a potion of poison for an antidotum or
preservative. Therefore as Dionisius the tirant would never have his beard
shaued, because he feared the ray sour mo^e cut his throat, so using hot
burning coals, wherewith he often singed his hairs: so were it good for every
patient not to be too ventrous, but fear to fall into the hands of the in
expert physician, I mean Empyricall, as also the methodist or dogmatist if
they be chiefly noted to give usual probatums to try conclusions, that will
in a trice be as AEsculapius his drugges either ad sanitatem or mortem to
health or death: (such as Hermocrates was in the poet, of whom Andragoras
Martial. lib. 6. Epig. Liii
but dreaming in his sleep, dyed ere morning, he stood in such fear of him:)
whereas in true physic there is a time with diet for preparation, a time for
operation, another for euacuation, and a time for restoration, these cannot on
a sudden be all performed without great hazard of the patients life, and the
agents credit. But as it is a point of wisdom not to approve of some, so it is
a fondlings part to disallow all: chiefly so to stand in fear of all, as he
did in Agrippa, who never saw the physician but he purged: and it is meare
folly at an exigent, either not to crave the help of the artist, or not to use
a physical diet, if it be prescribed by wisdom; we must not imagine that any
man in an extremity if he live medice, that he lives misere. For physic in
time of need and a golden diet, is the only means under heaven to prolong the
days of man which otherwise would be abbreuiated: I do not speak again the
divine limitation. What says the school of diet.

Pone gulae met as, vt sit tibilongior ^tas,
Esse cupi^ sanus? sit tibi parca manus.
Let meager appetite be reasons page,
Let hunger acton d^ets golden stage:
Let sparing bits go down with meriment,
Long live thou then in the Eden of content.
Thus the verses are to be understood, though the covetous Incubo^s of the
world who live like Tantalus, inter vndas siticul^si, have appropriated the
sense to their own use, after a jesting manner, saying it should not be gulae
but aur^, referring also p^rca manus to auaritia.

P^e aur^ metas vt sit etc. The allufio^ to Martial, where he ^ayes, cuius
(...) area flag^ilat opes.
With iron lashes scourge thy gadding gold,
The sight of it reuiues thee being old:
And will thou live in health and merry cheer,
Then live in wealth, and give not a denee^e.
So they will understand parca m^nus; but this by the way. Temperance and a
diet should be used in all things, lest that we leaving the golden mean, and
with corrupted judgments embracing the leaden extremity (kissing with Ixion a
shadow for the substance, a mere cloud for Juno) swimming as it were with the
eddy and current of our base humors, we do perish on the sea of
voluptuousnes, long before we come to our wished port. But as Julian the Apost.
says in his Misop. (...). We all are such dullards that we only hear of the
name of tempera^ce, but what value it is of, what happy effect it has we are
altogether ignorant: at least we never use it. We be like to the Athenians of
whom Anaximander said that they had good laws but used ill, we nusle serpents
in our own bosoms, our vile affections, following their swinge so long till
they sting us to death.

A diet consists properly in a tempera^vse of meats and drinks, secondarily o^
sleep, Venus, vesture, mirth, and exercise. First we must observe a diet in
ou^ feeding, to eat no more then will suffice nature, though at one time more
then another: as the proverb runs: A little in the morning's inoughe, inoughe
at dinner's but little, a little at night is too much: we must not at any time
or occasion cram our mawes with Persian delicats, and glut our selves like
Epicures with dilicious viande, not eat, like the Agrigentines, of whom Plato
says (...). So AElian also testifies of them: Agrigentini aedificant quidem
quasi semper victuri, convinantur quasi semper morituri: they build as if they
might ever live, and banquet as if they were always about to dye. We must
call to mind Epictetus his saying (...) etc. we must use such things as serve
our bodies unto the use of our souls as meat, drink, array and the like: not
to satisfy our bestiall appetite. Herein is our default in this when we make
our (...), (...), that is diet our surfeit, as we spoke of some before. For
drinks, we must not like bowzers carouse bowl after bowl to Bacchus his
dyety, like the Graecians, not use smaller cups in the beginning of our
banquet, more large and capacious bowls at the latter end: we must not like
Lapithes drink our selves horn mad: we must not so highly account wine as
Br^to did, who made his stomach the caske or wine vessel, of whom Vulteius
thus speaks. 10. Vulteius in his 1. hendecas.


Brito tam pretiosa vina credit,
Vt ventrem faciat cadum (...).
So in the Comoedie, Quasi tulag^am dicas, vbivinum solet esse Chium. Palinurus
calls the old wife a flagon o^ stone bottle for wine. Curcul. act. 1, ^aen. 1.
We will having so good occasion to speak of so good a subject, incidently
tr^ata little of Wine, of the virtues thereof, whether it be also good, and
diet drink sor all complections: suffer me a little tam toco, quam serio.
(...), Wine, says Plato in his Cratylus, it comes of (...) because, it fills
the mind with variety of opinion and conceit, etc. foecundi calices quem, etc.
or it is derived, (...) of help which Homer proves -- (...), It will help if
thou drinkest it. That Cypria^ poetsaith:

(...)
The Gods O Mencla^s have given strong wines unto mortal men to dispell cloudy
cares, Henry Stephane, in the imitation of that old verse in the poet thus
speaks.

Nulla salus lymphit, vinum te poscimus omnes Henricus Stephanus in parodiis
suis.
Afigge for Thales waterie element,
Lyaeus wine we crave, wits adiument.
And for wine, especially for larger draughts, Clemens says a young man in the
Clemens. paedag. cap. 2.
hot meridian of his age, ought to be abstemious: and he wills such a one to
dine sometimes with only dry things and noe moisture, much less
distemperatly hot, that so the superfluous humidity of his stomach may be
euacuated. He shows also that it is better (if a man do drink) to take wine
at supper then at dinner* yet a little modicum (...) non ad contumeli^
crateras. And for old men they may use it more lauishly, by reason of their
discreet reason and age, wherewith as he speaks, with a double anchor castinto
the quiet haven, they can more easily abide the brunt of the tempest of
desires, whch is raised by the floods of their ebriety.

Of all complections, the mean of wine is sovereign for the Phlegmatic, and
helps the Melancholicke; for the other two hoter, it little rather serves for
inflammation then conservation, in both the first, it helps concoction, infuses
a lively heat into the benumbed faculties, cheares up the dull and drowping
spirits, puts to flight the sable night of fond fancies, purges out the
feculent lees of melancholy, refines and purifies the inward parts, opens the
obstructions of the veins, like Medeas drugges, makes one young again. It
will make of a puling Heraclitus, a laughing Democritus, and it will make of
Democritus an Heraclitus.

On weeping Heraclite, thou ever do frown,
Thou say thy pattern's laughing Democrite:
But whiles thou laughst, the tears sal trickling
You Are the^ beholden unto Heraclite.
God Bacchus sais, tears he has le^t tothee, down.
More to set o^t thy mirth and iollity.
(...) etc. says Zenophon, in the place above Papauer, vinum mandragoras
fomnum prouocant. Aristot: de somn, et vigilia.
mentioned, Wine luls a sleep the minds of men, and like Mandragoras
mitigates sorrow and anguish, and calmes the roughest tempest of whatsoever
more vehement imagination, scourges in any man; making him void of all
perturbation, as Creta is free from infecting poison: It is like the Lapis
Alchymichus, the Philosophers stone, which can convert a leade^ passion, into
any golden sweet content, which passion chiefly goes hand in hand with
melancholy, they being combined and linckt together, like the Gemelli of
Hippocrates, who never but by violence were disioyned the one from the other.
Wine is diversely termed of the Poets, The wits pure Hippocrene, the very
Heliconian stream, or Muses fount, wherein they bathe their beauteous lims, as
in the trans-parent and limpid streams of Paradise, or the Galaxie or milky
way it self, of them celestial swimmers: It is an extracted- Elix^r, a
balsame, a quintescence, the R^s-solis to recall the duller spirits that are
fallen as it were, into a swowne: Invention and smooth utterance do follow
Bacchus, as the (...) or Caltha is wont to move with the Sun: for, if the wit
be manicled in the brain, as pent up in closer prison, or the tongue have a
snayle-like delivery, her speech seeming as afraid to encounter with the
hoarers apprehension, wine will make the one as nimble-footed as Heraclitus
was, who could run upon the tops of ears of corn without bending their
blades, and the other as swift as winged Pegasus, words flowing with so
extemporary a stream, that they will even astonde the hearer. Wine is another
Mercuries Caduceus, to cause a sweet consent and harmony in the actions of the
soul, if*t chance there be a mutiny, to charm (being of the nature of the
Torpedo) and cast all molestation and disunion into a dead sleep; as Cornel.
Agrip.
the Fif^ is wont to physic the vipers sting; or as Orpheus his hymn did
once allay the Argonautickes storm: It is called of the Hebrews, (...) laiin
says one, quasi (...), Iaadsnephesh, the hand of the ioule, or (...), Iamin,
the right hand of the mind, because it makes any conceit dexterical, one of
the two things, for which a pregnant Poet (as imagine of Homer, Naso, or any
other) especially is to be admired: as Aristo: says, who brings in Aeschilus,
asking Aristophan. Ranae. Act. 4. Scoe. 2.
of Eur^pides, why a Poet ought to be had in so high esteem, who answered; --
(...) [(...)] (...), That is, for his dexterity of wit, and his taxing and
displing the world, with his aldaring Satyricall pen: it makes him right
eloquent, and speak with aliuely grace, Frideric^ Mille^manus.


O quantum debes dulci facundia Baccho?
Ipse vel epoto Nectare Nestor ero.
How much does wit to Dithyrambus owe,
Since after wine the ebbingst wit does flow?
It makes a Poet have a high strain of invention in his works, fa^ beyond the
vulgar vain of Aquapotores-waterdrinkers: ^orat. epist. lib. 1.
This invested Ho^er with a -- laudibus arguitur, etc. The Muses are commended
for a -- vina oluerunt, etc. Cato had his -- S^pe mero incaluit virtus: This
made the Car. 3. lib. od. 21. Of a poets praise look AEnaeas Syluius.
Castalianist or Poet of yore, to be esteemed and termed -- the A perse A* of
all Artistes; the Summa totalis of wit: the second dish, the marmalade and
sucket of the Muses: the Gods Nepenth^ of a soul halfe-deade with melancholy:
the seven mouthed Nilus, or seauen-flowing Euripus, offacultie: the
loade-stone of lively con* ceite: the paragon, darling, and one eye of Minerua,
as Lipsius terms him: yet moderation is presupposed, for there is no thing,
whose eminence may not have an inconvenience, as the Linx has a quick eye,
but a dull memory, so the Polypus is suauis ad gustum, but difficilis adsomnum;
and much more in things is there inconvenience, whose eminence is made
inconvenience: so much wine rauisheth the taste, but bewitches and stupefies
all the other senses, and the soul it self. Take it sparingly, and it rapts
one up into an Elysium of diviner contemplation, not inthralling the mind (as
excess is wont) but endenizing it into a happy freedom, and ample liberty.

An Apostroph. to the Poet translated.

Then quench thy thirst in Heliconian spring,
Unloose the fetters of thy prisoned brain:
To let invention caper once aloft.
In a leuoltoes imitation,
With Ariost^es nimble geni^,
Beyond a vulgar expectation;
Then mount to the highest region of conceit,
And there appear to th'gazing multitude,
A fiery meteor, or a blazing star,
Which hap may cause a penury of wit,
To those that happily do gaze on it.
Nothing elaborates our concoction more then sleep, exercise and wine say the
Philosophers: but the wine must be generosum, not vappa, it must not have lost
his head. Three things note the goodness of Wine.

Color, Odor, Sapor,
Si haectria habe at tum [Cos] dicitur, ex prioribus Heidelfeldus in his Sphi^x
philosophica. Vel ^ebraic (...) reapse calix. non. adulterat.
literis harum praecedentium vocum; then is it pure, and the whetstone of a
man's wit, when it has a fresh color, a sweet fuming odor, and a good
relishing taste. That there is a great help in it against melancholy it may
appear by Zeno the crabbetree-fac'd Stoicke, who was (...), moved with no
affection almost, but as soon as he had tasted a cup of Canarye, he became
of a powting Stoicke, a merry Greek, merum moerorem adimit: Bacchus is a wise
Collegian, who admits meriment, and expels dreriment: sorrow carries too pale a
visage, to consort with his claret deity: but howsoever I have spoken largely
of the praise of it, and somewhat more merrily then perhaps gravity requires, I
wish all, as in all drinks, so in wine especially, to observe a diet, for the
age, the complexion, time of the year, quantity, and every circumstance.

There is also a diet in sleep, we must not reake our selus upon our beds of
down, and snortso long:

Indomitum quod despumare falernum, Perfiu^.

Sufficit, and quinta aum lin^a (...) vmbra,
as would suffice us to sleep out our surfeit, till hie nowne. We must not
imitate Cornelius Agrippaes dormouse, of whom De glire. Tota mihi dormitur
byems et pinguior illo Tempore sum quo nil me ni^i somnus a^t.
he reports that she should not beawoke, till being boylde in a lead, the
heat caused her to wake out of her sleep, having slept a whole winter. We must
not sleep with Salomons fool, who will never have enough, till he come to
his long sleep: rather must we take the Delphin to be our pattern, who does
in sleeping always move from the upper brim of the waters, to the bottom:
like the Lion, which always moves his tail in sleeping. Aristotle, as Marsus
affirms, as others both Alexander the great and also Julian the Apostata, were
wont to sleep with a brazen ball in their fistes, their arms ^tretcht out of
bed, under which there was placed a brazen vessel, to the end that when
through drowsines, they began to fall a sleep, the ball of brasle falling out of
their hands on the same metal the noise might keep them from sleep
immoderately taken, which men of renown and fame do so greatly detest, as
being an utter enemy to all good exploites, and to the soul it self. The
Poet* Iul. Scalliger thus speaks of sleep, in the dispraise of it.

Promptas hebetat somniculosa vita mentes Iul. Scal. lib prini^ Epidorpidum.

Vivum sepelit namque hominem haec mortis imago.
Sleep duls the sharpest conceit, this image of death buries a man quick.
How we ought to demean our selves for sleep, what beds are most fit to
repose our lims upon, what quantity of repast we must receive, as also the
inconvenience that redoundes unto our bodies by immoderate sleep; excellent is
that Chapter of Clemens in the 2. of his Pedagog: First, he Clemens. 2.
paedag. cap. 9
advises us to shun (...), beds softer then sleep it self, affirming, that
it is dangerous and hurtful to lie on beds of down, our bodies for the
softnes thereof (...), as falling and sinking down into them, as into a vaste,
gaping and hollow pit; these beds are so far from helping concoction, that
they inflame the native heat, and putrify the nourishment. Again for sleep
it must not be a resolution of the body but a remission, and as he says --
(...) we must so sleep that we may easily be awaked, which may easily be
effected if we do not ouerballise our * stomachs with superfluity, and too
delitious viands.

The manner also of sleep must be duly regarded, to sleep rather open mouthed
the^ shut, which is a great help against inter nall obstructions, which more
ensweeteneth the breath, recreateth the spirits, com forteth the brain, and
more cools the vehement heat of the heart. Sleeping on our back, is very
dangerous and unwholesome as all Physicions affirm, because it begets a
superaboundance of bad humors, generates the stone, is the cause of a Lethargy
in the back part of the head, procures the running of the reins especially
if a man lie hot, as upon feathers, which greatly impaires man's strength, and
affect him with a vicious kind of soaking heat; it is also the means to
bring the Ephialtes, which the vulgar sort tearme^ Of the Ephialtes or the
night* mare.
the nightmare, or the riding of the witch* which is nothing else but a
disease proceeding of gross phleume in the orifice of the stomach, by long
surfeit, which sends up could vapors to the hinder cells of the moistened brain,
and there by his grosenesse hinders the passage of the spirits descending,
which also causes him that is affected, to imagine he sees something oppress
him and lie heavily upon him, when indeed the fault is in his brain in the
hinder part only, for if it were and had possession of the middle part, the
fancy should be hindered from imagining: which also seems to be tainted
with darkesome fumes, because it forms and ^aignes to it self diverse visions
of things which have no existence in verity, yet it is not altogether obscured:
and it may be proved specially to lodge in that part, I mean in the head,
because of the want of motion in that part chiefly. This disease never takes
any, but while they lie upon their back: There is an other diet for Venus: we
must not spend our selves upon common curtizans: we must not be like
Sparrowes, which as the Philosopher says, go to it eight times in an hour,
nor like Pigeons, which twain are fained of the Poets to draw the chariot of
Cyth^raea, for their salacitie: but rather like the stockdoue who is called
palumbes quoniam p^rcit lumbis, as contrariwise columba quippe colit lumbos,
because she is a venerous bird, it were good to tread in Carn^ades his steps
for chastity, and follow X^ ^crates example, who, as Frid. Milleman^ reports
was caused to lie with a curtezan Vale^. Max. and Frid. Mille-man nus.
all a night, for the trial of his chastity, whom the curtezan affirmed in the
morning, non vt hominem sed vt stipitem propt^r dormisse, not to have laid by
her as a man but as a stock.

For our exercise wherein a diet also is to be respected, it must neither be
too vehement nor too remiss, adrubore^ non adsudorem, to he at not sweat:
There be two other, the one of nutriment, the other of attire, which are in
physic to be had in account, which for breuity I pass over, malle^ eni^ as he
says in minim^ peccare, quam non peccare in maxi^.

But note here, that the first diet is not only in avoiding superfluity of
meats and surfeit of drincks, but also in eschewing such as are not obnoxious,
and least agreeable with our happy te^perate state: as for a choleric man to
abstain from all salt, scorched dry meats, from mustard and such like
things as will aggrauate his malignant humor, al hot drincks and enflaming
wines: for a sanguine to refrain from all wines, because they engender
superfluous blood, which without euacuation, will breed either the frenzy, the
hemoroihds sputam sangui^s, dulnes of the brain, or any such disease: for
Phlegmatic men to avoid all thin rhumaticke liquors, cold meat and slimy
as fish and the like which may beget crudities in the ventricle, the Lethargy,
Dropsies, Cathars, rhumes, and such like: for a melancholicke man in like
manner, to abandon from himself all dry and heavy meats, which may bring an
accrument unto his sad humor, so a man may in time change and alter his bad
complexion into a better. We will therefore conclude that it is excellent for
every complexion to observe a diet, that thereby the soul, this heavenly
created form, seeing it has a sympathy with the body, may execute her
functions freely, being not molested by this terrestrial mas^e, which
otherwise will be a burden ready to surpresse the soul.

Cap. 5. How man derogates from his excellency by surfeit and of his untimely
death.
AS natures workmanship is not little in the greatest, so it may be great in
the least things: there is not the abiectest nor smallest creature under the
firmament, but would astonish and amaze the beholder, if he duly consider in it
the divine finger of the universal nature: admirable are the works of art even
in le^er things: (...), little works shew^ forth great Artificers. The image
of Alexander mounted upon his courser, was so wonderfully portrayed out, that
being no bigger the^ mote well be covered with the nail Mart. Ilias et ^riami
regnis inimicus Ulysses. Multiplci paruter co^dita pel le ^acent
of a finger, he seemed both to iercke the steed and to strike a terror and
an amazeme^t into the beholder. The whole (...) ades of Homer were comprised
into a compendious nutshell, as the Oratorme^tions, and Martial in the second
of his distichs* The Rhodes did c^rue out a ship, in every point absolute, and
yet so little that the wings of a fly might easily hide the whole ship Phydias
merited great praise for his Scarabee, his Grashop, his Be, of which, says
Julian, every one though it were framed Julian in an epistle to Georgius the
bishop of Alexa^. dria*
of brass by nature, yet his art did add a life and soul unto it. None of all
these works, though admirable in the eye of cunning it self, may enter into
the lists of compare with the least living thing, much less with that heavenly
work of works, natures surquedry and pride, that little world, the true
pattern of the divine image man, who if he could hold himself in that
perfection of soul and temprature of body, in which he was framed and should
by right preserve himself, excels all creatures of the inferior orbs, from
the highest unto the lowest, yet by distempering his soul, and misdietting his
body inordinatly by surfeit and luxury, he far comes behind many of the
greatest, which are more abstinent, and some of the less creatures, that are
less continent. Who does more excel in wisdom then he? who is more beau
tified with the ornaments of nature? more adorned with the adiuments of art?
endowed with a greater sum of wit? who can better presage of things to come
by natural causes? who has a more filed judgment? a soul more active, so
furnished with all the gifts of contemplation? who has a deper infight of
knowledge both for the creator and creature? who has a body more sound and
perfect? who can use so special means to prolong his days in this our
earthly Paradise? and yet we see that for all this excellency, and
supereminence, through a distemperate life want of good advice and
circumspection by embracing such things as prove his bane (yea sometimes in a
bravery) he abridges his own days, pulling down untimely death upon his
own head: he never bends his study and endeavor to keep his body in the same
model and temper that it should be in. Man's life says Aristotle, is vpheld by
two staffs: the one is (...) native heat, the other is, (...) radical
moisture: now if a man do not with all care seek to observe an equal portion
and mixture of them both, so to manage them that the one overcome not the other:
the body is like an instrument of music, that, when Aristotle in his book de
lo^gitudine et breui^ate vitae.
it has a discordancy in the strings, is wont to jar, and yields no
melodious and sweet harmony, to go unto the Philosophers own simile: our
heat is like the flame of a burning lamp; the moisture like the fo^eson or
O^le of the lamp, wherewith it continew^s burning. As in the lamp, if there
be not a symmetrie and a just measure of the one with the other, they will in
a short time, the one of them destroy the other. For if the heat be too
vehement, and the oil too little, the latter is speedily exhausted, and if the
oil be too abounda^t, and the heat too re miss, the fire is quickly
suffocated: Even so it fares with these two in the body of man, man must strive
against his appetite with reason, to shun such things as do not stand with
reason, whatsoever will not keep these in their equality of dominion must be
avoided, unless we will basely subject our selves to fond desire, which is (as
we say) ever with child. To what end is reason placed in the head as in her
tower, but that she may rule over the affections, which are situated far
under her: like Eolus, whom Virgil faineth to sit in a hie turret, holding the
scepter, and appeasing the turbulent winds, which are subject unto him: thus
Maro discribes him.

-- celsa sedet Aeol^s arce,
cept^ a tenens, mollitqu^ animos, and te^perat iras.
We must especially bridle our untamed appetite in all luxury and surfeit,
which will sudde^ly extinguish our natural flame and suck up the native oil of
our lively lamp ere we be a ware and die long before the complet age of man,
as many most excellent men we read of have brought a violent death upon them
selves long before the lease of their life were expired, though not by that
means: for death is of two sorts, either natural, or violent. Violent as when
by surfeit, by (...), by sword, by any sudden accident a man either dies by his
own hand or by the hand of an other, this is that death where of Homer speaks.

(...).
C^pit illum purpurea mors and violent a parca.
He dyed suddenly by one forceable stroke: so purple death is to be
understood, of Purpurea or Murex, the purple fish, who yeldes her purple-dying
humor, being but once struck, as they that be learned know, for this
accidentary death instance mote be given of many.

A^acreon died, being choc't with a kornell of a ray sin: Empedocles threw
himself into Aetnaes flakes to ae^ernise his memory: Euripides was deuourde
by Thracian curres: Aeschilus was killed with a Tortisse shell, or as some write
with a deske that fell upon his head whiles he was writing: A^aximander was
famisht to death by the Athenians: Heracl^us died of a dropsy being wrapped in
oxen dung before the Sun: Diogenes d^ed by eating raw Polypus: Lucretia
^heathed her knife in her own bowels, to renown her chastity: Regulus that
worthy Roman mirror, rather then he would ranso^e his own life by the death
of many, suffered himself to be rould to death in a hogshed full of sharp
nails: Mena^der was drowned in the Pyraean haven, as Ovid in his Ibis
witnesses: Socrates was poisoned with chill cicuta: Homer starved himself for
anger that he could not expound the riddle which the fishers did propound unto
him, when he demanded what they had got they answered. Plutarch.


(...) What we have taken we have left behind,
What Is not taken, about us thou may find.
Eupolis the poet was drowned: etc. For a natural death, every man knows: it
is when by the course of nature a man is co^'d to the full periode of his age,
so that with almost a miracle, a man can possibly live no longer: as al those
decrepits, whom Plautus calls silicernia, capularii, senes Acheruntic^, all old
men that dying are ^ikned to apples that being mellow fall of their own
accord from the trees. Such a one as Numa Dionisius Halicarnassaeus lib. ^.
Antiq. Roma. So ^braha^ expirauit in canitie bona senio sa. tur. Genes. 25. 8.
Pompilius was, the praedecessour of Tullius Hostilius in the king ^ome, w^om
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus hiely praising for his virtues, at length coming to
speak of his death, says: but first, he lived long with perfect sense, never
unfortunate, and he ended his days with an easy death, being withered away
with eld: which end happens more late unto the sanguine, then to any other
complexion: and the soonest comes upon a melancholicke constitution. Fe^ die
naturally, but wise men which know their tempers well, many dye violently by
them selves like fools which have no insight into themselves: especially by
this great fault of surfeite, partly by the ignorance of their own state of
complexion, and partly these of their reason being blindfold by their
lascivious wantonness, and luxury, amid their greatest iollity.

For variety of meats, and dainty dishes are the nourses of great surfeite and
many dangerous diseases: to the which, that speech of Lucian is suitable: where
he says that Goutes, Tislickes, Exulcerations of the Lungs, Dropsies, and such
like which in rich men usually are resident, are (...) Lucian in his Somniu^ or
Gallus. Clemens. paedag. 2. cap. 1.
the ofsprings of su^ptuous bancquets: so also did Antiphanes the physician,
say as we read in Clemens.

Surfeite is an over cloying of the stomach with meats or drinks properly,
which hinder the second concoction, and there fester and putrify, corrupting
the spirits, infecting the blood and other internal parts, to the great
weakening and enfeebling of the body, and often to the separation of the soul:
improperly of anger, Venus and the like: all which in a parode, imitating
Virgil we may set down, but chiefly touching surfeite.

-- -- a sedibus imis.
Vna ardor, luxusque fl^nt, et crebra procellis
Dira Venus, moestos generant in corpore luctus:
Corporis insequitur tabes funesta, vaporum I^on. allu* sum est ad verba
Aristophan. (...). Clemens paedago. 2. Cap. 2.

Nubes obienebrant subito sensu^que (...)
Fumantis crapul^ cerebro nox incubat atra:
* Intonuere exta, and crebris angoribus algent,
^nfaustamque guloso intentant ilia mortem.
Of all sins this gluttony and gourman dizing putrifieth and rotteth the
body, and greatly disableth the soul: it is termed crapula of (...) and (...)
of shaking the head, because it begets a resolution of the sinnewes by cold,
bringing a palsy. Or for this, when nature is ouercharged and the stomach too
full (as he says in his Theater du monde) all the brains are troubled in such
sort that they cannot execute their functio^s as they ought. For as Isocra^es
writes, the Isocrat to Demonicus
mind of man being corrupted with excess and surfeit of wine, he is like unto a
chariot running without a coachman. This fault of luxury was in Sardanapalus
whose belly was his God, and God his enemy: in Vitellius who had served unto
him at one feast 2000. fishes and 7000. birds: in Heliogabalus that center of
al dainties, who at one supper was served with 600. ostriches in Maximianus who
did eat every day 40. pound of flesh, and drink 5. gallons of wine.
Concerning ravenous eaters, learned Athenaeus is abundant and copious: this no
doubt was in the priests of Babylon, who worshipped God Bell only for God
belly. Great was the abstinence, of Aurelianus the Emperor, who when he was
sick of any malady (as Fl. Vopiscus records) never called for any physicion,
but always cured and recovered himself by a sparing thin diet: such
temperance is to be used of all them that have judgment to expel and put to
flight all discrasies and diseases whatsoever, least by not preventing that in
time which will ensue, we be so far spent that it is too late to seek for
help. Chaucer v. of Troilus.


But all too late comesth' electuary
When men the corse unto the grave y carry.
Ecquid opas Cratero magnos promitter^ mo^^es, if thou would give whole
mountains for the physicions help, all is too late sithe^ce thou ar^ past cure.
Let judgment and discretion therefore stay thy fond affections and lusts, let
them be like the little fish Echi^eis or Remora, which will cause the mightiest
Atala^tado or highest ship to stad still upon the surging waves: so thou must
Echin^look Oppian Pliny: Fracastor: A^ li an: etc. it has his name. (...)
stay the great ship of thy desire, in the Oceane of wordly pleasures, lest
it going on thou make shipwreck of thy life and good name:

Whosoever prophesies thus, foretells truth, yet he is accounted vain and
too sharp unto the Epicures of our age, as whosoever in any prophecy. So
Euripides, or rather Tiresias in Euripid. his Phaenissae says

(...)
The poet Persius is this prophet, that foretells of death and a sudden end to
them that are given to luxury and surfeit.

Turgidus hic epulis atque albo ventre lauatur,
Gutture sulphureas lent exhalente mephites:
Sed tremo^ inter vina subit, calidumque trie^tal
Excut^t e manibus, dentes crep^ere retecti,
Vncta cadunt laxis tunc pulm e^taria labris:
Hinc tuba, candelae, tandemque beatulus al^o
Compostus lecto, crassisque litatus amomis, etc.
With surfets tympany he ginning swell
All wan eft lauers in Saint Buxtons well:
He breathing belketh out such sulphur aires,
As Sun exhales from those Egyptian mares.
Death's shuddring fit while quaffing he does sto^d
With chilnes smites the boule out of his hond:
Grinning with all*discouered teeth he dies,
And vomits up his oily crudities.
Hence is it the solemn doleful cornet calls,
And dimmer tapers burn at funerals:
At length his vehement malady being calmed,
In's hollow tomb with spice he ^ies e^balmed.
But Cassandra may prophecy of the sacking of the city and bid the Troianes
be warned of the wodde^ horse, as Tryphiodorus speaks (...), and some will
step out as Priame did too fond in that, yea not a few, and will cry with him
frustra nobis vatic^aris, tut, thou art a false prophet.

(...). Wilst never be tired, or cured of this phrenetical disease, but was
not (thou Epicure) the Cyclops, his eye put out as Telemus Eurimid: prophesied
unto him, yet the Cyclops, as the poet witnesses, laughed him to scorn.

Risit, and O vatum stolidissime, falleris, inquit. He laught' in's slee^e and
said to Telemus,
Fondling thou errest, thus in telling us.
Thou that art wise, Telemus speaks to thee that being fore-warnd, thou may
be fore*arind: by physicking thy self thou may live with the fewest, and
outliue the most. Be not addicted to this foul vice of Gastrimargisme and
belly cheer, like Smyn derides who when he rid a suitor to Clysthenes his
daughter carried with him a thousand cooks, as many fowlers, and so many
fishers, says AElian. although Athen^us say Athenaeus vi Deipnosop^ist.
he carried with him but a hundred of all. This Smy^derida was so given to
meat; wine and sleep, that he bragd he had not seen the Sun either
rising or setting in twenty years: (the same author reports) whom it is to
be meruailed how he in that distemper could live out twenty. We must not like
the Parasite, make our stomachs, caemeterium ciborum, lest we make our bodies
sepulchr^ animarum. Dum os delectatur co^dimentis, anima ne^atur comedentis*
Gregory out of Ludolphus.

Too much does blunt the edge of the sharpest wit, dazell, yea, clear
extinguish the bright and clear beams of the understanding, as Theopompus in
the fifth of his Phil. reports, yea it does so fetter and captiuat Athenaeus* in
the 4. of his Deipno. (...).
the soul in the darkesom prison of discontentednes^e, that it never can enjoy
any pure air to refresh itself, till it by constraint be enforced to break
out of this ruinous jayle, the diste^pered and ill affected body: which will
in a moment come to pass, if a man be inclined to luxury the sudden shortner
of the days. I would wish that every one that has wisdom could use
abstinence as well as they know it: but it is to be feared that they that
never have attained to that pitch of wisdom, use abstinence more, though they
know it less.

Cap. 6. Of Temperaments.
We must know that all natural bodies have their composition of the mixture of
the elemntes, fire, air, water, earth: now are they either equally poisd
according to their weight, in their combinatio^, as just so much of one
element, as there is of another, throughout the quaternio or whole number: as
imagine a duplu^, quadruplu^ or decuplu^ of earth, so much just of fire, as much
of air, and the like quantity of water and no more the they be truly
balanced one again another in our understanding: when there are as many
degrees of heat as of could, of dryness as of moisture, or they be
distemperate or unequal, yet measured by worthiness, where one has dominion
over another: as in beasts that live upon the center, earth and water do
domineere: in fowls commonly air and fire are predominant, Or thus, where the
true qualities are inherent and rightly given unto their proper subjects: as in
the heart well tempered heat consists: moisture rules in the brain having his
true temper: cold in the fat: drines in the bones. The first is termed (...)
or Temperame^tum ad pondus, which is found in none, though they have never so
excellent and surpassing a temperature: only imaginary: yet in some sort held
to be exta^t by Fernelius. The other is called Temperamentum ad iustitiam,
which distributes every thing it own, according to the equity of parts. Of the
predominion of any element, or rather the qualities of the element, the
complexion has his peculiar denomination: as if the element of fire be
chieftaine, the body is said to be choleric: if air bear rule; to be
sanguine: if water be in his vigor, the body is said to be phlegmatic: if
earth have his dominion, to be melancholicke. For choler is hot and dry; blood
hot and moist; water cold and moist: earth could and dry. These four
complections, are compared to the 4. elements: secondly to the four planets
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Luna. the^ to the four winds: then to the four seasons
of the year: fifthly unto the twelve Zodiacall signs, in the^ four
triplicities: lastly to the four ages of man: all which are here deciphered
and limmed out in their proper orbs.



But to square my words according to the vulgar eye, there be nine
temperatures are blazond out among the phisicions: 4. simple according to the
four first qualities heat, drines, moi^ture, coldness; the other 4. be
compound, as hot and dry, hot and moist cold and moist etc. the contrarieties
be in no body according to their eminency and valor, but only
comparatively: as hot and cold is agreeable to no nature, according to their
predominancies, dry and moist competent to none, not in the height of their
degrees: for as in political affairs, one kingdom or seat cannot brook 2.
Monarchs or compeers, as Lucan says Omnisque potestas Impatiens consortis erit
etc.

No Pote^rate admits an equal: yea through civil garboils and mutinies, their
eger contention ruinates and often dissolues the sinews of the common weal.
So happens it in the natural body, where the qualities are equaliz'd in
strength, there must needs be action and reaction, a bustling and strug ling
together so long till there be a conquest of the one, which no doubts will soon
di^euer the parts and rend a sunder the whole compound: yet these twain may,
(I mean drines and moisture, or cold and hot) be competent to the same
subject by comparing them with others in other subjects, as man is both hot and
cold, hot in re guard of such bodies as are of a cold constitution, as in
regard of the femall sex which abounds with moisture: hot in compare with an
Ass, which is reported among the Philosophers to be of an exceeding cold
constitution, which may evidently appear by his slow pace, by shoes made of his
skin by that chill water of the Arcadian M^acris which for the extreme coldness
cannot be contained in any vessel, save the hoof of an Ass. Man is hot, in
comparing him with the Salamander, the Torpedo, and the Pirausta. Could in
respect of the Lion, the Struthio-camell or O Estridge, which will con
coctiron, or Leather, the Sparrow, Cock, Pig^on, and Dog: and these are rather
to be termed distemperaments.

The ninth and the last is called temperamentum ad pondus, of which we spoke
erst, not in any but only in conceit. But how every temperature is good or
bad, and how their mixtures implye an excellent and healthful or a diseased
estate: as if in man's body the chief valor of fire concur with the tenuity of
water: or the grossest substance of water with the purest tenuity of fire be
conioind: or the strength and quintescence of sire, with the thickest part of
humor ruling in one: or the purest and ra rest parts of fire, with the
thinnest and clea rest substance of water: what temperature all these import,
look Hippoc. in his book de victus ratione. lib. 1. sect: 4. A temper also as
it is usually taken, may be referred to the equal proportion of radical heat
to inbred moisture, when they are like aegeo powerful, to the excellency and
purity of the blood, to the subtilty of the spirits, to asupple, soft and
tender skin, to mollified and smooth hairs, to the amiable and beautiful
feature, to affability and gracious delivery of speech, to a buxome, pliable
and refined wit, to a wise moderation of anger, to the vassalizing of the
rebellious affections: all which when we see to iumpe together in one, or the
most of them, we say that man, or that body has a most happy te^per a rare
composition, a sweet complexion.

Cap. 7. Of diversities of wit: and most according to tempers.
Pliny makes mention of king Pirrhus, that he had a little precious So Ru^us
reports. lib. 2. xvi. so Petrarch and Cardane.
pearl of diverse resple^dent coulors, commonly termed the Achates of our
skillful Lapidaries. Wherein were admirably coadunated the nine Helicanian
Ladies, and Apollo holding his golden harp. Our soul^ that princely ' Pirrhus
or (...), that ign^us vigor, quintessence or virtue of heavens fire, as the
poet calls it, has this rate gemme as an Achates daily to consort with it:
wherein is not only a boure for the Muses to disport themselves in, but also a
harbor for wise Apollo to lodge in to wit ou^ acute, pleasant and active wit,
which can apparel it self with more variable colors, and suit it self
with more resemblances then either the Camelion or Polypus: and like an
industrious Be, taking her flight in to the fragrant fields of Minerua, can
gather such honnisuckle from the sweete^ flowers, as may feast with delicious
dainties the hungry ears of the attentive auditors: if they deigne but to let
their ears (as once divine Platoes mouth was) be the hiues or celles wherein
to store up their honny combs: if they will suffer them to be as vessels ready
to receive and intertaine the Nectar-flowing words of wit. It is caled among
the Grecians (...), and hethat's ^ossessed of it, is termed (...), excelling
^n active nature, acute, having a quick in^ight into a thing, a lively conceit
of a thing: that can invent with ease such witty pol^cies, quirks and
stratagems, as he that is ^ot of so sharp a wit, would eue^ admire, ne ever
can compass. It has his sat in intel^ctu agente, in the active
understanding, which does offer the species and idaeas of ob ^ects to the
passive, there to be discerned and judged of according to their real essence.
As diverse and the most are endowed with wits; so most wits are diverse in
nature. There ^s a Simian or apish wit, an Arcad^an wit, a Nine kind^ of wits V^
all at this day.
(...) wit: a Scurril wit: an Aenigmatical wit, ^n Obscene wit, an Autolican or
embezel'd wit: a Chance medlay wit, and lastly there is ^smirke, quick and
dextericall wit. They that ^aue the first, do only imitate, and do apishly
counterfeit and resemble a poet, or an orator, or any man of excellence in any
thing, yet can they never climb up to the top of poetry whither his wit
saspired who^ they do imitate, and as it was once said, that it is impossible
to get to the top of Pythagras his letter, without Craesus golden ladder,
intimating that, Haud facile em ergunt

quorum virtutibus obstat, res angusta domi:
No Eagle proves he but a silly Wren,
That soars without an Angels golden pen.
that learnnig cannot climb without golden steps: so they can never attain to
his hie strain with their base leaden inventions, but are constrained either
foolishly to go on unto the Catastrophe or with disgrace and infamy (being
tired in the race of their own fancies) to make a full period, long before the
Catastrophe: Thus Accius Labeo was an apish imitatou: (...) Homer. An Arcadi^
an wit is meant of hi^: cum sono intempesti^o rudit a sellus, when a man
imagins he singes harmoniously, o^ the nightingales sugared notes, or like ^e
of Camus swans, when in deed he prou^ no swan but rather a silly swain.

Ledaos st^epit anser vt inter olores.

He is li^e aloud sack but intermedled with still music: he brayes like an
Arcadian ass, he is conceited without reason, as he was who among the devout
offringes to Plutarch de solertia a^imalium.
the Aegiptia^ Ox, Apis or Serapis, offered up a great bottell of hay. Or when
a man is witty like Plutarchs Ass, not considering the unfortunate eue^t his
wit will have. Plutarch tells of a pretty jest: An ass chanced to pass through
a fresh river ladened with salt, which being deep, the water melted much of the
salt in the sacks, which the ass perceiving that he was much lightened of his
burden, the next time he came that way the water not b^eing so hie the Ass
wittily couebt down to ease himself of his weight whose policy the master
espying afterward revenged on this manner, ladening the Ass with wool and
sponges, who according to his wont did dip the sacks as before in the water,
but when he came out, he felt his load far more aggrauated, in so much it made
him groan again wherefore ever after he was wary lest his pack mote touch the
water never so little. This is also called mother wit, or foolish wit, or no
wit, like that which was in a certain cuntry ge^tleman, whom the Queen of
Arabia meeting, and knowing him to be a man of no great wisdom, demanded of
him when his wife should be brought in bed: who answered, even when your
highness shall com mand. Such a wit was in the rustic of who^ we read in the
courtier, that he meeting a heard of goats by the way, and espying Cler. de
Aulico.
one of them among the rest to have a longer beard then any of the rest, he
wondering at the gravity of the goat, as presently amazd he stood stock still,
and cried, lo sirs me thinks this goat is as wonderful like S. Christopher as
ever I saw. A Roscian wit is 3
only in gesture, when one can far more wittily express a thing by dumb
external action, then by a lively internal invention more by gestures then
ieasts. This was in that pantomimicall Roscius who could vary a thing more by
gesture, then either Tully could by phrase, or he by his witty speeches.

The fourth wit belongs to Pantal^bus: 4 Streps^ades in Aristophan. his Nube^.
a Scur^ile wit, that ieasts upon any, howsoever, when and wheresoever,
contrary to al vrbanitie: as he that iested illiberally upon the Chorus of
goddesses in Aristophan. It was in Sextus Naeuius, whom Tully mentions it was
also in Philippus the iester who said in Zenophon, because laughter is out of
request my art goes a begging (...): Xenoph. i^ his conuiuium.
I can be as soon immortal as speak in earnest. An Aenigmaticall wit is
when one 5
strives to speak obscurely, and yet all the light of his own reason, or
others cannot illuminate the dark sense: yet oftentimes by a witty
apprehension it may relish a filed and smooth wit. This was in Tectius C^
ballus who coming into Ciceroes school, Seneca being then also present, he on
a sudden brake out into those speeches. Si thrax ego esse^ Fusius essem, Si
Pantomimus Bathillus si equus Menason: to which Seneca answered the fool
according to his folly in these 6.
words: Si cloaca esses, magnus esses. The Obscene wit is when a man uses too
broad a jest, when his conceit rellishes not in a chaste ear: as oftentimes
Martial who said nolo castrars meos libellos: as Ausonius, Petronius, Catullus
and Persius in one place especially, though wisely interpreted of the learned,
in them who think their wit and poetry never sounds well till this, cum
carmiua lumbum intrant etc. which is to be ac counted the canker-worme of true
wit, and altogether reprooueable in any poet, though his jest be never so
witty.

Yet Catullus speaks in the apology of this fault.

Nam castum esse decet
Pium poetam ipsum,
Versiculos eius nil necesse est qui tun^ etc.
For it behooues a poet himself to be virtuous and chaste, for his verses it
is not so greatly material. So in another place.

Lasciua est nobis pagina, vita proba.

What if my page be lascivious, so that my life be not scandalous? Yet
Scalliger wisely replies against this fonder speech, saying.

Audens in honestis numeris fundere versus,
Musisque pudicis quasi maculas dare impudicas Julius Scall. lib. quinto
Epidorpidum.

Lasciua quasi pagina sit, vita probata:
Impurus, erit. quod habet vas, fundere sueuit.
Which is, he that presumes with his alldaring quill to put forth lewd
pamphlets, amorous love songs, and wanton elegies, to set up a venerious
school: bluring and staining the pure unspotted name of the muses with his
impure blemishes of art: let him sing a fool a mass, and tell me that his
life is untainted, though his lines be lecherous: he is a mere pandar, a
baud to all villainy: the vessel beein vented and broch't, tells the taste what
liquor islueth from it. But not withstanding I con^esse a pure, chaste, and
undefiled mind is not allured to sin, by these pleasing Poetical baits*
they are no incentiues unto him, any wise to make him be entangled in the nets
of inueigling venery, a stable mind can not be moved or shaken with these
blasts of v^nity it may say with Lipsius concerning Petronius Arbiter. Ioci
e^us me delectant, vrbanitas capit, caetera nec in a^mo nec in moribus meis
maiorem relinquun: labem, quam solet in flumine vestigium cymba. His live ly
conceit reuiues my droup^ng heart, his pleasant fair speech rauishes and
inchaunts me, for his ribaldry it leaves no more impression in my memory, then
a floating barge is wont to leave behind in the stream. These are the words
so near as I can call them to mind, but for most natures they are prone to
vice, and like the Camaeleo^ ready to take a color of every subject they are
resident on. An autolican wit is in our threadbare humorous eauialeroes, who
like chap fallen hackneies ^eed at others rack and manger: never over glutting
their minds with the heavenly Ambrosia of speculation whose brains are the
very broakers shoppes of al ragged inventions: or rather their heads be the
blockhouses of all cast and outcast pieces of poetry: these be your pickhatch
courtesan wits, that merit (as one ieasts upon them) after their decease to be
carted in Charles waine: they be termed not laureat but poets loreat that are
worthy to be ijrkt with the lashes of the wittiest Epigrammatists. These are
they that like r^ing dunkirkes or robbing pirates sally up and down in the
printers ocean, wa^ted too and fro with the inconstant wind of an idle light
brain: who, (i^ any new work that is lately come out of press, as a bark
under sail fraughted with any rich merchandise appear unto them) do^ play
upon it e^t with their silver pieces, board it incontinently, ransacke it of
every rich sentence, cull out all the witty speeches they can find
appropriating them to their own use: to whom for their wit we will give such
an applause, as once Homer did unto Autolycus who praised him hilie. Homer in
his viii.


-- (...). For cunning the every, and for setting a jolly acute accent upon an
oath. The next is a Chance-medlay wit, which is in him that vtters a conceit
now and then vt Elephantes pariunt, and when he is delivered of it, as of a
fair youngling or rather a foul fondling, that broke out of the meaninges of
his brain, and snarled in pieces his pia matter like a viperous brood, he
laughes and kincks like Chrysippus when he saw an ass eat figs: and sits upon
hot cockles till it bec blazed abroad, and withal entreats his neighbors to
make bonefires for his good hap, and causes all the bells of the parish to ring
forth the peale of his own fame, while their ears doc chime and tingle, for
very anger that hear him, and the^. The last kind of wit is in the purest
tempered body of all that rich vein that is mixed with true learning, whereof
Horace speaks.

-- Ego nec studium sine diuite vena
Nec rude quid prosit video ingenium, alterius sic
Altera poscit ^pem et coniurat amice.
It is that will wherein the nine sisters of Parnassus do inhabit the pure
quintessence of wit indeed, that keeps a comely decorum in observing the
time, the place, the matter subject, the object, and every singular
circumstance, it is like Aristotle's (...) which he defines to be (...): sudden
as a flash of lightning to dazel the eyes of a wished object, and yet
premeditating in matters of moment, wherein gravity and sagenesis to be
respected: this is a true wit ever pistol proof having a privy coat of policy
and subtilty to shend it from all the intended stabadoes of any a cute
obiactionist, it never wants variety in canuasing any subject: yea the more it
vtters the more by far is suppeditated unto it, it is like the vine which the
oftener it is pruned, the more clusters of sweet grapes it will ever affoorde:
it is like the seven mouthed Nilus, which, the faster it flows in the
channel, the faster still it springes from the head. I confess this wit may
be glutted too much with too much of any object, and sooner with an irksome
object, as the Philosopher says, any surpassing object depraues the sense so
it may be spoken of wit: the nose may be ouercloyd with the fragranst flow ers
in Alcinous his garden, though it smell never so exactly: and more with smells
hard by port Aesquiline: the sight may surfeit on fair Nireus, and quicklier
with foul Thersites: the appetite may be cloyed with beautiful Lais who was
all face, and more with Mopsa who was all lips, this pure wit may surfeit on
Ambrosia it self and sooner on catsmeat and dogsmeat, and though it be like
unto Nilus, as the mouths of Nilus so it also may be damd up, especial ly with
some gross terrestrial matter: and though it do much resemble the vine, as the
vine may be pruned too often, so it also may be dulled with too much
contemplation, this wit disdaines being so great that any the greatest things
should empire ouerit, flowing Nasoes wit, no doubt, was more then coosen
germans to this: who said,

Ingenio namqueipse meo valeo vigeoque
Caesar in hoc potuit iuris habere nihil.
A Demigod's my heauens-aspiring wit:
Caeser being humane, but could not bannish it.
The like hie strain of wit was in Luciane, and Iuliane, whose very image are
to be had in hie repute, for their ingeniosity, but to be spurnd at for their
grand impiety: and in many more, whose works are without compare, and who do
worthily merit for this if for nothing else, to be canonized in the registers
of succeeding times, yea to be uncharacterized and engraven in the golden tablets
of our memories. Pericles who was called the spring head of wit, the torrent
eloquence, the Siren of Greece was endowed with this special gift: he had a
copious and an abundant faculty by reason of this, in his delivery. Of whom
Julian, (whom I cannot too often mention,) in a certain epistle to
Proaeresius, speaking to him thus, says I do salute thee O Proaeresius, ^ man
I must needs confess so plentiful in speech (...), like to the ouerflowing
floods of Nylus watering the Egyptian fields; Pericli omnino similem
eloquentia, nisi quod Graeciam non permisceas; altogether to be compared unto
Pericles for thy admirable eloquence, only this excepted, that thou can not
with thy flowing tongue set all Greece on an uproar. So Angelus Poli tianus in
his Miscella: has an excellent speech of Pericles, in his praise, out of
Eupolis his Comoedie which is entitled (...) or Tribus.

(...)
(...) etc: Angelus Politianus in his first century Miscellan. cap. xci

The Goddess of eloquence and persuasion was the portresse of his mouth, or
fat in all pomp upon his lips as on her royal throne: he among all the rout of
cunning Rhetoricians, did let the auditors blood in the right vein, his words
did move an after passion, says he, in them. Many besides had these excellent
surpassing veins, of whom we may read, if we peruse the histories, and other
writings of famous men. This wit is ever a consort with judgment; yet often I
confess the judgment is depraved in wit: for we must know, though verum and
falsum, be the obiectes of understanding, every thing is not discerned or
understood according to these two, as they are properly either verum or falsum:
for the agent understanding, conueighing the species of any thing, (as imagine
of any subtle stratageme) unto the passive, the passive does not always judge
of it accordingly: for if they seem good and true at first view; yet after we
have demurd upon them any space of time, they are found neither true nor good,
but altogether crude and imperfect For my censure of wit without judgment, it
is like a flowing eddy, or hie spring tide without banckes to limitte the
water. These wits are such as Lipsius says in his politics, (as I remember)
are the downfall and communion of a well ordered common weal, He says that
these who are, (...) slow and of a dull wit, do administer a com mon wealth far
more wisely, then they which are of a sharper conceit: his reason is in a
gradation: These great wits are ignea of a fiery nature, fiery things are ever
active in motion: motion brings in innovation, and innovation is the ruin of a
kingdom. This is his sense, though I cannot exactly remember the very words:
but that which I first aimed at, will I now speak: by the excellency of the
wit is commonly shadowed out the pureness of the temperature, for where there is
a good wit there is usually, (...) the sense of feeling most exact, a soft
temperate flesh, which indicate also an abundance of spirits not turbulent and
drossy, but pure and refined, which also do ever insinuate no leaden, but a
golden temperature, these two are ordinarily inseparable complections: And
because the spirits, both in regard of their copiousnesse and subtilty do make
a sweet harmony of the soul and body, and are the notes of a rare wit and a
good crasis, we mean now to treat of the^ succinctly.

Cap. 8. Of the Spirits.
THe poets Arachne does never weaue her entangling web near the Cypress
tree: the Em bleame is well known of the Scarabee, that lives in noisome
excrements, but dies in the middle of Venus rose: so the Owl shuns the
splendent rays of Phoebu^, delighting more in the dark some night: the worst
we see do ever affect the worst: our groueling base affections, our dull
conceits, blind-folded ignorance, our aguish judgments timorous cowardice:
slownesse and dulnes in contemplation, our inhability of invention, and
whatsoever grand capital fomen to reason there be, do never take up their
lodgings in any beauteous Inn, I mean in a body happily attempered, where the
spirits are subtle and of a pure constitution; but have their mansion in a
smoky tenament, or some baser cottage, that is, in a polluted, sickely and
corrupted body which is both plethoricu^, pneumapht hiricum, and ca^ochymicum,
where there is a fullness and repletion of infected and malignant humors, where
the subtle spirits be not only tainted but even corrupted with puddle humors,
with grosser fuming vapors, whose pitchy company, the clear chrystalline and
rarefied spirits can in no wise brook, as being disturbers of their noblest
actions. These spirits the more attenuated and purified they be, the more that
celestial particle of heavens flame, our reason, that immovable pole star by
the which we ought to direct the wandering course of all our affections, yea
far more it does bear dominion, and show forth her noble and surmounting
excellency in this mass of ours. The more abundant they are, all our
internal gifts are more inhaunced and flourish the more: where the spirits are
appareled with their own nature, and not attired or rather tired by any
extraordinary ill means, which will never be accordant to their seemly
decency, the soul of man is, as it were, in a ^hessali'n Tempe of delight,
which grove for fair flourishing meades, for the pleasant shade of bushy P^nes,
for pirhling brooks and gliding streams of ^olsom water, for a sweet
odoriferous air, for the melodious harmony and chi^ping of vocal birds, for
the fragrancy of medicinable flowers and herbs, for all pleasures that mo^e
feast and delight the senses and draw the very soul into an admiration of the
place, of all other did surpass AE^ian.
as the Topographer makes mention. But now we mean to relate of the diversity
of spirits both in a general and special acceptance, ^. A spirit is taken
for our breath in respiration as Galen says, first prognostic. if says he far
from treatable, Ludouicus oe^ius 2. li^* 3 cap. 3. An^q. lect^.
it implies a pain and an inflammation about the disaphragma. It Is often among
the poets taken for wind, among the philosophers for an abstract form, pro
Damone vel bono vel malo: it is used for a savor, and for lofty courage: in
none of these senses we are to take it in this place. But for a subtle pure
aerie substance in the body of man, and thus it may be defined.

Spiritus est subtilessima, aeria, dilucidaque substantia ex tenuissima part
sanguims producta, cuiu^ adminiculo proprios valeat anima producere actus. A
spirit is a most subtle, aerie and lightsome substance, generated of the purest
part of blood, whereby the soul can easily perform her functions in the
natural body. They have their original and offspring from the heart, not from
the brain as some hold. For they being so pure, and elaborate into the nature
of air, cannot be generated in the brain, being by nature cold, where
nothing is product but that which is very vaporous. Again cerebrum est
exang^e: the brain is bloodless, as it is evident by Anatomy, neither has it
any veins to make a conueiance for that humor: therefore it is most probable
that where their is the intensest heat to extract these spirits from the
blood, and to rarifie them, converting them into an aerie substance that from
thence they should have their efficient cause: for the spirits in special,
they be of three sorts, vital, natural and animal: vital in the heart,
natural in the liver, animal in the brain. Vital, because they 1
give power of motion and pulsion unto the arteries: which motion any living
creature has, so long as it has a being, and that being extinct, the life is
also extinct. 2. Natural in the liver, in that they yield 2.
hability of executing such actions as chiefly concern, not (...) but (...),
as nutricio^ and the generation of the like. 3. Animal 3
in the brain, and though the spirits proceed from the heart, yet are they
diffused through the whole body in the arteries and veins, and there in the
brain they are termed animale, because they impart a faculty to the nerves of
sense, and real motion, which are pec^liar to every living creature. The
conduits of the spirits are the arteries and veins: the arteries carry much
spirits and little blood* and the veins much blood and little spirit, yet are
each of them the receptacle of both. For the cherishing and stirring up of
the spirits these things ensewing are greatly auailable. First an illuminated
pure air, purged from all grosser qualities, secondly a choice of fragrant
smells, thirdly musical harmony and meriment, as Ludouicus Cael. Rodig* does
write: a necessary fourth may be annexed, that is nutriment, for it rouses up
and lightens the spirits, therefore the philosopher in his problems says that
homo pransus multo leuior est and agili^r jeiuno: after meat a man is far
more light, and nimble then whiles he is fasting: so a merry pleasant man is
more light the^ one that is sad, and a man that is dead it far heavier then
one alive. There be^ other thing; also very commodious as inte^ mission of
meditation, a due regard of motion that it be neither too vehement, and so
consume, or too slack, and so corrupt the spirits: now mean we to speak in
order of the complections.

Cap. IX, Of a choleric complexion.
CHoler is termed of the greek word (...) of the Latins bilis, it is not
only taken for the humor but sometimes for anger, as i^ Th^ocritus

(...) Bitter anger appeard in his face, or in his nostrilles. So the latin
word is as much as anger. Plaut* fames and mora bil^m in nasum co^ciunt: for
anger first appears in the face or nose therefore the Hebrews have the same
word for ira and nasus, that is aph (...) which is agreeable to that of Theocr.
before mentioned, and that of Persius. Persius. sat. 5.


Ira cadit naso, rugosaque sanna. So we say in our english proverb when a man
is teasty and anger wrinckles his nose such a man takes pepper in the nose, but
yel low choler is an humor, contained in the hollow inferior part of the
liver which place is called (...) of Galen whose form is long and somewhat
round ending with a co^us, hard by the stem of the venaca ua which strikes
through the liver from whence all the veins are derived through the whole
body: it takes two slender veins from that stem, which makes this probable that
the choler may infect the blood and cause the morbus ictericus or iaundise to
disperse it self over all the parts of the body* there is a double procession
or way of choler into the duodenum and intrals downward, or into the ventricle
upward, the euacuation is easy in the former, but difficult, in the latter. If
the lower passage be damind up with the thick sedimentes of gross choler, as
oftentimes it comes to pass, then it as cendes into the ventricle and there
procures excretion, hinders the concoctio^, ever corrupts some part of the
nutriment* (without a long fast) and takes away the stomach, yet others think
that choler is generated in the ventricle also, that it is also a vessel apt
to receive it. This humor infectes the veins, stirs up sudden anger,
generates a consumption with his heat, shortens the life by drying up the
radical moisture. Aristotle and after him Pliny with many mo do af firm that
those me^ which want the vesicle of choler are both strong and courageous and
live long. Yet Vesalius says (although he imagins that there may be some
conueiance Vesalius. lib. 5. cap 8. de corporis humani fabrica.
of choler from the liver into the duodenum, so that it do not before gather
into a vesicle) he could find by experience none such hitherto. Many things
there be which cause this maladious humor to accrue to such a measure that it
will be (...) an incurable thing, among which we will note some. All fa^ of
meats says Galen, and such Gal. in lib. Hippoc. de vict. tat. in morb^*
^cutis. com. 4. sect. 102.
as are burnt are both hard to concoct having no sweet in y^e, and do greatly
increase the choleric humor for the acrimony which is in them. All kind of
Olerae or salt meats, are not only ill for this complexion but almost for
all* as all the phisa^ions do affirm: and Athenaeus to this purpose says
(...) etc. al kind of potherbs Athenaeus. lib. 3. Deipnos.
and brinish-natur'd meats are obnoxious to the stomach, being of a gnawing,
nipping and purching quality. Again dulce vini^ non est (...) picrocholis,
sweet wine is not wholesome ^or choleric complections, as Hippocrates
^itnesses. They are called picrocholi, who ^aue a redundance of yellow bitter
choler: Antinous no doubt did partly for this dis^wade Ulysses from drinking
sweet wine: -- (...): Odyss 3.


^t howsoever, this sweet wine does not only (...) and (...) as the same H^mer
speaks Iliad. ^ as also Athen^s notes lib. 1. Deipno, but also is a great
generator of choler: (yea all sweet meats are nurses of this humor, honny
especially is choleric:) for sweet wines this is Galens reason: first in that
much calidity does make bitter these sweet humors, and again because such
wines be usually thick, neither can they speedily pass by the Oureteres into
the bladder: whereby it coms to pass that they do not cleanse choler in their
passage, but rather Galen in the book before mentioned. co^. 3. sect. 2 Gal.
lib. 1. de sanitate tuenda. Gal lib. 7. 6 therapeut. method.
increase the power of it, such wines be Theraeum, Scybelites: much sweet,
thick, and black, as Galen calls them. Again too violent and much motion is
not good for this complexion: as Galen also says, much eating is also
dangerfull for this humor. Then all things that do dry up the moisture in
the body, as watching and care etc. vigilantia maxim exiccat corpus says
Galen. So does care even consume and burn the body: cura therefore it is
called quasi cor us rens

To these I may associate and ioyn our adulte^ rate Nic^tian or Tobacco, so
called of the K^. sir Nicot that first brought it over, which is the spirits
Incubus that begets many ugly and deformed fantasies in the brain, which
being also hot and dry in the second extenuates and makes meager the body
extraordinarily, whereof it may be expected that I at this instant so well
occasioned should write something, and sure not impertinent to the subject we
have now in hand. This then in brief I will relate concerning it. Of it own
nature not sophisticate, it cannot be but a sovereign leaf as Monardis
says, especially for external maladious ulcers: and so in his simple it is
for cacochymicall bodies and for the consumption of the lungs, and T^ssick if
it be mixed with Coltes foot dried, as it has been often experienced: But as
it is intoxicated and tainted with bad admixture, I must answer as our Paracel.
learned Paracelsian did, of whom my self did demand whether a man might take
it without impeachme^t to his health, who re plied as it is used it must needs
be very pernicious in regard of the immoderate and too ordinary whiffe,
especially in respect of the taint it receives by composition: for says he, I
grant it will euacuate the stomach and purge the head for the present of many
feculent and noisome humors, but after by his attractiue virtue it proves
Caecias humorum leaving two ponds of water (as he termed them) behind it
which are conuer ted into choler, one in the ventricle, another in the brain
which accords with that of Gerard their herbalist in his 2. book of plants,
cap. 63 of Tobacco or He^bane, of Peru and Trinidada, for he affirms that it
does indeed Gerard in his 2. book of Plants. cap. 63.
euacuate and ease one day, but the next it does generate a greater flow of
humors; even as a well (says he) yeeldes not such store of water as when it
is most drawn and emptyed. Again it is very obnoxious of al to a spare and
extenuated body, by reason of setting open the pores into which cold does enter
and we know as Tully says lib. xvi. epist. 403. citing the Poet cuius singuli
versus sunt illi singula testimonia, every of whose particular verses is to him
axiomatical as he says. (...). that is, cold is a bane and deadly enemy to a
thin and spare body. And since that physic is not to be used as a continual
alime^t, but as an adiument of drooping nature at an extremity, and beside that
seeing every nasty and base Tygellus uses the pipe, as infants their red
coralls, ever in their mouths and many besides of more note and esteem take it
more for wantonness then want, as Gerard speaks, I could with that our generous
spirits would pretermit the too usual, not omit the phisic all drinking of it.
I would entreat more copiously of it, but that many others, chiefly Gerard and
Monardis in his book entitled the joyful news out of the new found world
or west Indies which Frampton translated, have eased me of that labor, so that
I may abridge my speech.

Choler is twofold either natural or not natural, the natural choler is
twofolde, either that which is apt for nutrition, as of these parts which be
proportionable unto it in qualities hot and dry, and this is disper sed into
the veins, and flows throughout the whole body mixed with blood, the other is
excreme^tall unfit to nourish, which purged as a superfluous humor from the
blood is received into the vesicle or vessel and bladder that is the receptacle
of choler entearmed the gall. And this usually when the vessel is surcharged
distills from thence into the duodenum first, the^ into the other intrals etc.
that which is not natural is of four sorts. (...), (...). The first is
vitelli^ bilis of the color of an egg yolke generated of palew choler,
ouerheated with the acrimony Pers. calls it vi^ea bilis.
of unnatural caliditie. The second is porr^ cea of a leeky nature or green
color* The third c^rulea of a bluish or azure color. The last aeruginosa of
a rusty col^r. And all these be generated in the ventricle, b^ sharp, tart, and
sweet nutriments, as leeks mullard, burnt meats* honny, so fat meat^ and all
such as engender noysomnes upon the stomach. Whereupon coms our common disease
called (...): for sorro^ and vehement exercise cause the yello^ choler to flow
in the ventricle, by which men being griped and pinched with pain^ within do
labor of this evil, which indeed has a wrong name given it: for it is only
an affection or passion of the orifice of the ventricle, the mouth of the
stomach, not of the heart, as Galen witnesses. Now to discern Ga. de Hyp. et
Plat. decretis lib. 2. cap. 8.
a man of a choleric complexion, he is always either oringe or yellow
visag'd because he is most inclined to the yellow iaundice: or a little
swarthy, reddehaird, or of brownish color: very mege^ and thin, soon prouokt
to anger, and soon appeasd, not like the stone asbestos which once being hot
cannot be quenched: he is leanfac'd and sle^der bodied like Brutus and Cassius
He is according to his predominant element of fire which is most full of
leuity, most inconstant and variable in his determinations, easily disliking
that which he before approved: and of al natures in that this complectio^ is
counted to surpass, the choleric man for changeablenes is repu ted among the
wise to be most indiscreet and unwise. And indeed mutablenes and inconstancy
are the intimates and badges whereby fools are known.

(...). Wise men be like unto quadrangled stones
But fools (like turning Globes) are fickle ones.
And if at any time he prove constant and sted fast, it is as Fortune is --
co^stans in leuitate sua, stable in his instability: Let us now descend from
fire to air.

Cap. X. Of a sanguine temperature.
THe purple rose whose hi^ encomium that witty Poetresse Sappho in a sweet
Od^nce sang, did not meri^ to be adornd, with such beauteous titles of words,
to be lim'd out in so lively colors of Rhetoric, nor to be invested with such
a gorgeous and gallant suit of poetry, as this golden crasis, this happy
temperature, and choice complexion, this sanguine humor, is worthy of a
panegyrical tongue and to be lim'd out with the hand of art it self, Sappho
thus speaks of the rose.

(...) etc.
Which we may turn and change for our use, on this manner: if there were a mo
narch or prince to be constituted over all temperatures, this purple sanguine
complexion should, no doubts, aspire to that hie pre-eminence of bearing rule:
for this is the ornament of the body, the pride of humors, the paragon of
complections, the prince of all temperatures, for blood is the oil of the
lamp of our life. If we do but view the princely scarlet robes he usually is
invested with, his kingly throne seated in the mids of our earthly city, like
the Sun amid the wandering Planets: his officers (I mean the veins and
arteries) which are spread throughout this whole Politeia, yea dispersed in every
angle to execute his command, and carry the lively influence of his goodness,
reviving those remote parts, which without his influence would otherwise be
frettish with a chilnes, and in a short time be mortified: If we do but cast
our eyes upon these glorious mansions, the sumptuous palaces wherein he does
inhabit: the Dadalian costly Labyrinths where in he takes his turns: If we
consider his wise subtle counsailours which daily consort with him for the good
estate of his whole kingdom, the (...) spirits, the very seat of divine
reason it self the fountains of policy: If we mark this that his departing
is the procurer of a civil mutiny and dissension between our soul and body,
and that his mere absence bringe^ in a dissolution of our temperate political
state: if we weigh his excellent qualities he is endowed with, wherein consists
the union of the parts of the whole, I mean hea^ and moisture: If we note his
delicat viand, his delicious fare he feeds upon in his purity: his majesty in
aspiring so hie, his humlitie in, as it were, debasing himself so low, as to
take notice of his lowest subject, the most inferior part, to kiss even our
to^ (as it is in the proverb) to do us good: If we note the mighty potentates
that rebe^ and wage war against him, to ruinate his kingdom: as Acrasia,
Angor, Inedi^: all in^ continence and intemperance of Bacch^, Cer^s and Venus,
Care, Famine, and the like. If we poise all these together and many m^e we
cannot but imagine that the blood is either a caelestiall majesty, or a
terrestrial deity, that among all the humors it does far excel all, and
that he which is possessed with a sanguine pure complexion is graced with the
princeliest and best of all. For the external habit of body, for rare feature
they go beyond all that have this temper, being most decked with beauty which
consists in a sweet mixture of these two colors white and read, and for the
gifts of the mind it is apparent likewise to our understanding that they do
surpass al, having such pure tempered and refined spirits: neither do I think
that either melancholic men according to Aristotle, or choleric men
according to the opinion of Petrus Crinitus are enriched with a greater
treasury of wit, for if the soul do follow the te^perature of the body, as
certainly it does, they then must needs excel for invention who have this
best complectio^. Their spirits Coelius Rhodiginus.
sure have the most exact temper of all, wherewith the soul as being in a
paradise is chiefly delighted. Among all the humors the sanguine is to be
preferred says the Antiqu^ry: first because it coms nearest unto the principles
and ground works of our life which stands in an attempered heat and moisture.
Secondly because it is the matter of the spirits, where of chiefly dependes our
life, the operation of our vegetative and animal virtue, yea it is the chief
instrument wherewith our reasonable soul does operate: for this is the
philosophers climax. In the elements consists the body, in the body the blood,
in the blood the spirits, in the spirits soul. Thirdly because it is a
nutriment for all and singular parts of what qualities soever. (...)
It is termed in Hebrew (...) sanguis for his nutrition, and sure it is, as it
were, the dam or nurse from whose teats the whole body does suck out and draw
life.

Fourthly in that this humor being spent our life also must needs vanish away:
therefore some philosophers, as it is well known to the learned, did not only
surmise, but constantly aver that the soul was blood, because it being
effused, the soul also does flit from the body: but that was a mad dream,
and no doubts if the sound of judge meant had awoke them they would have
confessed themselves to have been enwrap ped in a clowdy error. They also that
affirm men of this constitution to be dullards and fools to have a pound of
folly to an ounce of policy, they themselves do seem not to have so much as a
dram of discretion: and do err the whole heavens. I confess a sanguine
complexion may be so, as any other in their discrasie, yet not as it is a pure
sanguine complexion, but as there is mixed with the blood either the gross
sediments of melancholy or the lenta materies pituitae, tough phleume, when the
blood is also ouerheated by reason of hot choler, or any other accidentary
cause that generates a surplussage of blood, or endues the spirits with a
grosenes and too hot a quality more then their nature can well sustain with
keeping their perfection and purity.

From whence the blood has his original, it is apparently known, especially
to them which are skild in the autopsie of Anatomy, the seat or fountain head
of it, is vena caua a great hollow vein, which strikes through the liver, from
whence it is conueighed by many cesterns, passages, and conduit pipes,
throughout the whole body: like spraies and branches from the stem of a tree.
It has his essence from the chymus or juice of our aliment concocted: his
redness is caused by the virtue of the liver, assimilating it unto his own
color.

To speak more of the external habit and demeanor of man that has this
complexion: he ever has an amiable look, a flourishing fresh visage, a
beautiful color which as the poet says does greatly commend one, if all other
things be wanting*

N^e minor his aderat subli^is gratia, formae,
Quae vel, si desint coetera cuncta, placet. Cornelius Gallus of him self.

With virtues graced full debonaire was I,
Which (all defaced) more highly dignifie.
They that are of this complexion ar^ very affable in speech, and have a
gracious faculty in their delivery, much addicted to witty conceits, to a
scholerlike (...), being fac^tosi not ac^tosi: quipping without bitter
taunting: hardly taking any thing in dogeon, except they be greatly moved, with
disgrace especially: wisely seeming either to take a thing some times more
offensiuely, or less greiuously then they do, ^loaking their true passion:
they be liberally minded; they carry a constant loving affection to them
chiefly unto whom they be endeared, and with whom they are intimate, and
chained in the links of true amity, never giving over till death such a
conuerst friend, except on a capital discontent: they are very hairy: their
head is commonly a (...) or amber-coloured, so their ^eards, they are much
delighted with a musical consent and harmony, having so sw^e a s^pathy
themselves of soul and body. And but for one fault they are ^ainted with, they
more well be termed Heroe^ hominum, and that is ((...) reason of that lively
abounding humor) they are somewhat too prone to Venery, which greatly alters
their blessed state of co^stitutio^, drinks up their hu^dum rad^le, enfeebleth
the diuinest powers, consumes their pith, and spends the substance of the
brain for sperma is (...) as many philosohhers, Stillicidium cerebri.
Macrobius lib. 1. Saturnal. at the end.
not without great reason affeuere: not ter ^ncoctus sanguis, therefore as
Macrobius says, Hippocrates calls (...) that coitus est paruus morbus
comitialis, and but for this they were superemine^t above all men, but their
rare qualities and admirable virtues, do more then cou^terpoize this natural
fault. For his resolution he is like the center, immovable, never carried away
with the heady stream of any base affection, but lies at the anchor of
confidence and boldness: he is never lightly variable: but being proudly
harnest with a steely heart, he will run upon the push of great danger, yea,
hazard his life against all the affronts of death it self: if it stand either
with the honor of his sovereign, the welfare and quiet of his own country,
the after fame and renown of himself: else is he chary and wary to lay
himself open to any danger, if the final end of his endeavor and ^oile be
not plausible in his demur ring judgment.

Cap. 11. Of the Phlegmatic humor.
THis humor is called of the Graecians (...) and of the Latins usually
Pituita, which as Aetius notes is so termed quasi petens vitam: by reason of
the extreme cold moi sture it has, being correspondent to the watery element,
whereby it does extinguish the natural heat in man: and being carried with the
blood, by his gross substance does thicken it, and stop the currents and
passages of the blood, at least does taint it with a contrary passive and
destructive quality. Yet of all the humors, the phisicions say, and it is not
improbable, this comes nearest unto the best, for it is a dulcet humor,
which being concocted is changed into the essence of blood, and serves
especially for the nutriment of the Phlegmatic parts, as the brain, the
Nuch^ or soft pappe and marrow of the chein bone: but this is natural: which
of al these humors does sonest digres into another gross cold nature which
will in process of time prove that pernicious humor whereof AEtius speaks,
their is the^ to be noted phlegma natural, whereof we spok eue^ now and non
natural of which these proceed Phlegm^ 1. Crassum, 2 Gypseum, 3 Falsum, 4
Acetosum, 5 Tenue, and some others. For the first; that which is thick is a
crude 1
substanee by multiplication in the ventricle, the bowels or the brain, or the
blood whereof Hippocrates advises men to euacuate themselves by vomit every
month, in his book de victus ratione priua^rum. But for the bowels it needs
not so much as for the brain and ventricle, for nature has so ordained, that
the yellow choler that flows from the gall into the duod^num should purge the
entralls, and wash away these Phlegmatic superfluities, and this in time will
turn to the nature of Gypseum 2
phlegma, which is of a slimier and in time of a more obdurate nature, insomuch
it will grow as hard as plaster with long remaining in one place, like fen*
water that turns into the nature of mudde: and this is it that stays in the
ioints and causes the incurable knotty gout, whereof the po et speaks.

Sol^re nod^sam n^scit medicina podagram,
Nec formidatis auxiliatur aquis.
This was also in a woman whereof Cael. Ovid. de Po^to lib. ^
Rodiginus makes mention: I read, says he, among the Learned, of a certain
kind of Phleume like unto plaster, bruised into water, which in a short space
abiding in the ioints of the members, grows as hard as plaster stone it
self: we have says he an example of a woman which was greiuously vexed with
an itch, in the spondles or ioints of the backbone, and reins: which she
rubbing very vehemently and racing the skin, small mammocks of stone fell from
her, to the number Caelius Rodiginus. cap. 12.
of eighteen of the bigness of dice, and the color of plaster.

There is, salsum of a saltish nature by the admixtion of brackish humors and
of choler, 3
which being in the ventricle, causes an hydropicall thirst, and somewhat
excoriates the entralls. Plato in his Timaeus speaks of this: (...) etc. for
phleum being by nature sharp and of a brinish nature is the offspring of all
diseases which co^sists of a fluxile humor, and according to the diversity of
places, whither this brackish humor does insinnuate it self, the body is
teend and accloid with diverse and manifold maladies: So Hippocrates speaks of
this, (...). Hippocr. lib de flatibus.
Bitter and salt phleume, whersoeuer it falls into unwonted places it does
exulcerate. There is 4
also Acetosum Phleg. sharp and tart, which almost is of the same nature with
the former, caused chiefly of the mixture of melacholy endued with the same
quallity: the last is called Tenue, which is very waterish 5.
and thin of substance, which we ordinarily term rheum: which comes of the
word (...) to flow: there be three kinds of it: the first is called Branchus
which has his current from the head into the jaws, the second is called
coriza or (...) which runs from the nostrils, we call it the pose, thereupon
blennus is used for a fool, homo obesa ^aris: as contrariwise homo ^ctae naris
for a wise man, the last is called catarrus of (...) and (...). whose matter
has the passage downward into the aspera arteria, the breast, and the rooms
that are co^tiguous, which usually is a cause of the cough: for the humors
makes an oppilation in the lungs, and stop the pores whence our brething air
does euaporate and whither it being drawn in does pierce and be take it self,
thereupon there is made a res^ltation and a struggling with the humor and the
air, which causes the cough: though it may happen also the cause being in the
aspera arteria, as it is well known to them, that are but initiated Hippoc. in
his book de flatibus sect. 3.
in Physic: though Hippocrates seems to say, all cough breeds in the midway
of the artery, not in the lungs: these are his words: for the spirit which we
attract, says he, is carried to the lungs, and is sent back by an (...) or
regurgitation, and when the rh^ume distilling down* does meet the spirit
ascending in the artery, the cough is caused, and the phlegmatic matter cast
up, which causes an exasperation in the artery by the humor which lies, in
the internal hollowes of the extuberances of our artery, which causes a
great heat to be ingendered there by the coughing motion, which heat draws a
succedent phleum, from the brain still more procuring an extreme cough. All
phleume is generated of cruditie, though it do attract some bad accidentary
quality whereof it has the denominatio^ and the phisicio^s are of that opinion
that natural phleu^e concocted will turn to blood: Suidas says of it, (...)
Suidas.
phleume is not engendered the first after meat, but the first af^e our aliment
is blood, phleume is the first after incoction. For the place or receptacle of
phleume, it is not determinate, but ^ is evident that it has his mansion in
the brain, and the ventricle, and the blood* Where in the first if it be not
euacuated in time, but still be suffered to accrue and clung together, it will
breed a dysodia, and will indaunger the whole nature, by damming up the poores
of the brain, and there generating an epilepsie apolexie, lethargy, vertigo
or any such disease that proceeds from such cold qualities and badde humors
which Fucshius speaks of at large, as also for the latter in the ventricle and
blood, if it Leon. Fucshius de san and mal. hum. corp. 19. 21. ^6. 28. 29.
be not purged forth, it will grow to such a pass, that most of our
nourishment will be converted into phleume, our veins will be possessed with a
clammy humor which may hinder the course of the blood, corrupting the spirits,
and bringing a mortifying cold, over all the body: or it will grow in the
ventricle to such a mass that it will at the receipt af any hot moisture send
up such an ascending some that it will be ready to quirken and stifle us:
instance mote be given of many that have been troubled with the matter of it
above measure. One lately was so cloied with this humor, that as he sat in his
chair, he was suddenly surprised of the surging some, who swooned as he satte:
and having oil of Synemon, (which is a souerainge help for it) ministered unto
him, at the length ca^ to himself by the heat of the oil which revived him,
and voided a great abundance of roped phleume by the loosening virtue of the
same: for the intimates of this complexion, they by nature are alwaise pale
colored; slow paced; drowsy headed of a weak constitution, for the debility
of natural heat: they be always dull of conceit, of no quick apprehension,
faint hearted, most subject to impostums: mild of nature, seldom ince^sed with
anger: vexed much with wrinching and griping in the bowels, sore tormented with
the grievous pain of the wind cholicke.

Cap. 7. Of a me lancholicke complexion.
THe melancholic man is said of the wise to be aut Deus aut Demon, either
angel of heaven or a fiend of hell: for in who^soeuer this humor has
dominion, the soul is either wrapped up into an Elysium and paradise of bless
by a heavenly contemplation, or into a direful hellish purgatory by a cynicall
meditation: like unto a huge vessel on the rolling sea that is either hoist up
to the ridge of a maine billow, or e^t hurried down to the bottom of the sea
valley: a man is ever lightly cast into a trance or dead slumber of cogitatio^s
by reason of his sad heavy humor, always stoically visaged, like grout headed
Archesilas, and them of whom the Poet speake^

-- Aer^mnosique Solones Persius.

Obstipo capite and figentes lumine terram,
Murmura cum secum and rabiosa silentia rodu^
Atque exporrecto trutinantur verba labello:
Aegroti veteris meditantes somnia* gigni
De nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse reuerti.
L^ke pumpion* headed Solonists they look
The dull earth is their contemplation book:
They madly murmr in themselves for routh,
They heave their words with le auer^ from their mouth:
They musing dream on the anticke axiom
Nought's framed of naught, to naught ne ought may come.
Of all the 4. this humor is the most vnfortu nate and greatest enemy to life,
because his qualities being cold and dry do most of al disagree from the
lively qualities, heat and moisture: either with his coldness extinguishing
natural inherent heat, or with his drines sucking up the native moisture: the
melancholic man therefore is said to be borne under leaden Saturn the most
disastrous and malignant planet of all, who in his copulation and conjunction
with the best does dull and obscure the best influence and happiest
constellation: whose qualities the melancholik man is endowed with, being
himself leaden, lumpish, of an extreme cold and dry nature, which cuts in
twain the thread of his life long before it be spun: in so much that he may
Euripid. in his Hecuba.
rightly say with Hecuba, though she spoke of a living death.

(...): I am dead before the appointed time of death: for this humor if it be
not often ho^ped with mirth or wine: or some other accidetall cause which is
repugnant to his effect, it will cause nature to droupe, and the flower of our
life to fade in the budding prime, these means to cherrish, foster and prolong
our life, are like the rays of the Sun, to raise and lift up the hyacinth or
violet being patted down to the earth with sudden drops of rain, whereof the
poe^ speaks.

Qualis flos violae se^ purpurei hyacinthi
Demutit pressas rore vel imbre genas,
Moxque idem rad^s solis ^epesact us a^i
Attollit multo (...) honor caput, etc.
Like as the Hyacinth with purple hew
Hangs down his head, ore^ drencht with silver de^
And e^t when Sol has drunk up th'drizling rai^
With smiling cheer gins look full pert again.
Even so the soul being pressed down^ with the ponderous weight of melancholy,
and as it were a thral unto this dumpi^ humor, is rouzed up with wine and
meriment especially, and iufraunchist again into a more ample and heavenly
freedom of contemplation. This humor is termed of many (...), as of Aulus
Gell: so of Cae Aul. Gellius lib. 18. cap. 7. Noc. Attic.
lius Rod: and others, who aver that those that are borne under Saturn,
melancholic me^ as Saturn is the highest planet of all, so they have the most
aspiring wits of all. Divine Cael. Rodig. 17. 5.
Plato affirms that those have most dextericall wits who are wont to be
stirde up with a heavenly fury: he says frustra poeticas fores etc. he that
knockes not at the portall of poets Inn, as furious and besid himself is
never like to be admitted in: a man must not with the fool in the fable rap at
the wicket with the six penny nail of modesty, ^ he mean to have entrance
into the curious rooms of invention: Seneca says nallum ^^ magnum ingenium
fine mixtura dementiae, wit never relishes well unless it taste of a mad humor,
or there is never any surpassing wit which is not incited with fury: now of all
complections melancholy is (...), furore concitata, most subject to furious
fits, whereby they conclude that melancholic men are endowed with the rarest
wits of all: but how shallow this their reason is, he that has waded into
any depth of reason may easily discern: They might prove an Ass also of all
other creatures most melancholic, and which will bray as if he were horn
mad to be exceeding witty, they might say this as well, that because Saturn
is the slowest Planet of all so their wits are the slowest of all; I confess
this, that oftentimes the melancholicke man by his contemplative faculty by
his assiduitie of sad and serious meditation is a brocher of dangerous
matchiauellisme* an inventor of stratagems, quirks, and policies, which were
never put in practice, and which may have a happy success, in a kingdom, in
military affairs by land, in navigations upon the sea, or in any other private
peculiar place, but for a nimble dextericall, smirke, praegnant, extemporary
invention, for a sudden (...) pleasant conceit, a comicall jest, a witty
bourd, for a smug neat style, for delightsome sentences, vernished phrases,
quaint and gorgeous eloquution, for an astounding Rhetorical vein, for a
lively grace in delivery, he can never be aequiualent with a sanguine
complexion, which is the paragon of all, if it go not astray from his own
right temper and happy crasis nay the former must not so much as stand at the
bar, when the latter whith great applause can enter into the lists. He that
wishes this humor whereby he mote become more witty, is as fond as Democritus,
who put out both his eyes voluntarily to be given more to contemplation. Of all
men we count a melancholicke man the very sponge of all sad humors, the
aquafortis of merry company, a thumb under th'girdle, the contemplative
slumberer, that sleeps waking etc. But according to physic there be two
kinds of melancholy, the one sequestered from all admixtion, the thickest and
driest portion of blood not adust, which is called natural and runs in the
vessels of the blood to be an aliment unto the parts which are me Cael. Rhod.
lib. 57. cap. 5.
la^cholickly qualified, as the bones, grisles sinews etc. the other is (...),
which is a combust black choler mixed with saltish phlegmatic humor or
choleric, or the worst sanguine. If you desire to know this complexion by
their habit and guise: they are of a black swarthy visage, dull-paced, sad
countenanced, harboring hatred long in their breasts hardly incensed with
anger, and if angry, long ore this passion be appeased and mitigated, crafty
headed, constant in their determination, fixing their eyes usually on the
earth, while a man recites a tale unto them, they will pick their face, bite
their thumbes, their ears will be soiourners; like Cleomenes in Plutarch,
animus est in (...), their wit is a wool gathering, for laughing they be like a
most to Anaxagoras, of whom Aelian says (...), he never laughed: they be much
given to a solein monastich life, never welnie delighted with consort: very
subject to passions: having a drop of words and a flood of cogitations using
that of Pythagoras (...): they are cold in their external parts: of a kind
nature to them with whom they have long conuerst, and though they seem for
some dislike to alienate their minds from their friend, yet are they constant
in affection.

But for the first kind of melancholy it is ever the worthier and better: This
they call the electuary and cordial of the mind, a restoratiue conseruice of
the memory, the nurse of contemplation, the precious balm of wit and
policy: the enthousiasticall breath of poetry, the foison of our best
fantasies, the sweet sleep of the senses, the fountain of sage advise and
good purueiance: and yet for all this it comes far behind the pure sanguine
complexion: neither do I think it is to be adorned with these habiliments
of words, and pranckt up with such glorious titles, as usually it is, of them
who do usually treat of it. For the latter, it causes men to be aliened from
the nature of man, and wholly to discarde themselves from all society, but
rather like heremits and old anchors to live in grots, caves, and other hidden
celles of the earth: the first may be compared to an Egle quae altissime
volat: sed tardissime se eleuat, which soareth hie, but is long ere she can
raise up her self; to Oedipus, of whom Euripides Euripid. in his Phaenis. sa.
says.

(...). So this melancholy causes one look to be on earth creeping, yet their
minds soaring aloft in heaven: The latter to Rufu^ in Auso: (the fond
Rherorician) of whom the Poe^ speaks, that there was no difference between
himself and his stone statue, but that it was harder and he softer Auson.


Vnum hoc dissimile est, mollior ille fuit. Or to Niobe when she was converted
into a marble image by Latona, for he^ that is possessed with this melancholy
has both soul and body as glewed unto the earth. The chief place of this
humor is the splen, though it be in many other diverse places. Now for all
these humors it is good for a man first to make a wise scrutinie whether be
inclining to the excess of any of them, then to use a diet, and to reject such
nutrimenies as will increase this humor which is predominant in him for the
natures of all usual meats, fruits, liquors, spices, herbs and such like,
it is eath for a man of reading or judgment, perfitly to be acquainted with,
or at least to give a guess at their properties and qualities.

For this purpose Master Cogan has made an abstract of our ancient authors,
not unworthy to be perused, entitled the Haven of health, wherein is set down
a criterion of usual qualities and predominant properties, inherent in the
forenamed subjects.

Chap. 13. Of the conceits of Melancholy.
FErnelius defines this latter kind of melancholy, which is feculent and adust,
to be mentis alienatio, Fernelius.
qua laborantes vel cogitant, vel loquuntur vel efficient absurda, longeque
aratione, and consilio abhorrentia, eaque omnia cum met^ and moestitia: a loss
of wit, wherewith one being affected, either imagins, speaks, or does any
foolish actions, such as are altogether exorbitant from reason, and that with
great timorousnes and sorrow. They that be accloied with it are not only out
of temper for their organo^s of body, but their minds also are so out of frame
and distraught, that they are in bondage to many ridiculous passions, imagining
that they see and feel such things, as no man else can either perceive or
touch, Aristot. lib. 3. meteor. cap. 4.
like to him in Aristotle of whom the Philosopher says it happened unto him
(...), etc. who being purblinde thought he always saw the jmage of one as
he was walking abroad, to be an aduers object unto him. We will treat of some
merry examples where of we read in Galen, lib. 3. de locis affectis. in
Laurentius Medices, cap. 7. de morbis malanchol. in Aetius, Scal^ liger,
Agrippa, Athenaeus and others. There was one possessed with this humor, that
took a strong conceit, that he was changed into an earthen vessel, who
earnestly entreated his friends in any case not to come near him, lest
peradventure with their justling of him, he might be shakt or crushed to pieces.
Another sadly fixing his eyes on the ground, and hurckling with his head to
his shoulders, foolishlie imagined that Atlas being faint and weary with his
burden, would shortly let the heavens fall upon his head and break his
cragge. There is mention made of one that persuaded himself he had no head,
but that it was cut off, the Physicion Philotinus to cure him, caused a heavy
steel cap to be put on his head, which weighed so heavy and pincht him so
greiuously, that he cried amain his head ak't: thou have then a head belike
quoth Philotinus. Julius Scalliger relates a merry tal^ of a certain man of
good esteem, that sitting at the table at meat if he chaunc'd to hear the
lute played upon, took such a conceit at the sound or something else, that he
could not hold his urine, but was costrained eft, to pish among the strangers
^ul. Scallig.
legs under table: but this belongs to an antipathie more. There was one so
Melancholicke that he confidently did affirm, his whole body was made of
butter, wherefore he never durst come near any fire, least the heat should
have melted him. Cippus, an Italian king, beholding and wondering at, in the day
time, the fight of two great bulls on the Theater, when he came home took a
conceit he should be horned also, wherefore sleeping upon that strong conceit,
in the morning he was perceived to have real horns, budding forth of his
browe, only by a strong imagination, which did eleuate such gross vegetative
humors thither; as did serve for the grouth of horns. We read of one that did
constantly believe, Peter. Mess. ^d Corn. Agrippa. lib. 1. Occul. Phil. cap 64
he was the snuff of a candle, wherefor^ he entreated the company about him to
blow hard, lest he should chance to go out. Another upon his death bed,
greatly groned and was vexed within himself above measure with a fantasy,
who being demanded why he was so sorrowful and bidden withal to cast his
mind upon heaven; answered that he was well content to die, and would gladly be
at heaven; but he durst not travail that way, by reason of a many thieves
which lay in wait and ambush for him in the middle region, among the clouds.
There was an humorous melancholicke scholar, who being close at his study, as
he was wiping his rheumatick nose, presently imagined that his nose was bigger
then his whole body, and that the weight of it weighed down his head, so that
he altogether was ashamed to come in to company: The Phisicions to cure him of
this conceit, invented this means, they took a great quantity of flesh having
the proportion of a nose, which they cunningly joined to his face, whiles he
was a sleep, then being waken they rased his skin with a rasour till the
blood thrilled down, and whiles he cried out vehemently for the pain, the
Physicion with a jirke twitcht it from his face, and threw it away. Of his
conceit that thought himself dead, it is related of many, who was cured after
this manner: they furnished a table with variety of dishes, and caused three or
four in white linen sheets to sit down and eat the meat in his
presence, who demanded what they were? they answered that they were Ghosts:
nay, then replied he, if Spirits eat then I think I may eat too, and so
he fell roundly to his victuals, having not eat any in a sennight before.
There was one that took a conceit he was a God, who was thus rid of his
malady: he was pend up in an iron grate, and had no meat given him at
all, only they adored him and offered to his deity the fumes of frankincense,
and odours of delicate dishes which always past by him: whose deity grew at
the length so hu^gry that he was fain to confess his huma nity unless he had
me^t to have been starued. The like we read to be reported of Menecrates who
being a great physicion and doing many wonderful ours, had such a swelling
pride and an ouerweening opinion of himself, that he esteemed himself a God,
wherefor he thus writ to Philip king of Macedone: (...): thou rulest in
Macedon, I in medicine: thou can destroy these that are well if it please
thee, I can restore health to them that are ill: I can deliver the strong from
sickness, if they will obey my precepts, so that they may come to the pitch of
old age. I Jupiter give life unto them; but it is apparent by Athen^us that he
did this as besides himself with melancholy: for these be his words. (...)
Athenaeus lib. 7. page (...).
that is: unto whom being possessed with this mad humor of melancholy; Philip
writ in an epistle thus: Philip to Menacrates sanitatem mentis, his right wits.
There was one that persuaded himself he was so light that he got him iron
shoes lest the wind should have taken up his heels. An other ridiculous
fool, of Venice, verily thought his shoulders and buttockes where made of
britle glass; wherefore he shunned all oc currents and never durst sit down
to meat, lest he should have broken his crackling hinder parts, nor ever durst
walk abroad lest the glazier should have caught hold on him and have used him
for quarreles and pains. But of all conceited famous fools, he is most
worthy to be canonized in the chronicles of our memory, that choos'd rather to
die then to let his urine go, for he assuredly believed that with once making
water he should drown all the houses and men in the town where he went: to the
taking away of which conceit, and to make him vent his bladder, which otherwise
would in a short time have caused him to die: they invented this quirke, to
wit, to set an old ruinous house forthwith on fire, the Physicions caused the
bells to be rung backward, and entreated a many to run* to the fire,
presently one of the (...) inhabitants, of the town, came running post have to
the sickeman, and let him understand the whole matter, showing him the fire:
and withal desired him all favors very earnestly and with counterfeit tears
to let go his urine and extinguish this great flame, which otherwise would
bring a great indamagement to the whole town, and that it will burn also the
house up where he did dwell: who presently not perceiving the guile, and
moved by the man's pitiful lament and outcry, sent forth an abundant stream
of urine, and so was recovered of his malady: diverse other pleasant examples
are recited of ancient writers: but our short breathing pen hastens to the
races end.

Cap. 14. Of the dreams of complections.
THe poetical writers make men tion of two sorts of dreams, the one
proceeding ex eburnea, the other e^porta cornea: from the former gate, fabulous
and false events do issue, from the latter true and full of sooth^ fastness:
which Coluthus the Thebane poet in his Helenes rape thus describes.

(...) Coluthus in (...)

Which Virgil, in the vi. of the Aenead. at (...)
the end thus also paints forth

Sunt geminae somni portae, quarum alter^ f^ur Maro6. AEnead.

Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus ^bris,
Altera candenti perfecta nit^ns Elephanto:
Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia manes.
Which two gates maugre this my waiward and dumpish Genius, which hales me at
this instant from my poetical throne, I will thus describe in our tongue.

Where slu^bring Morpheus wons there bin two gats
Twixt both dull Somnium in her cabin lies,
Who half a sleep hard at the dawning waits
To a ^nswere our nocturnall Fantasies:
Of hor^ it is, whence she does prophecy
Whence not, it is of burnisht Iuory.
Of these Homer in his 19. of the Odyss. a little after Pen^lopes dream of the
geese, Lucian in his Gallus or So^nium speaks also of duae aureae portae. two
golden gates.
Ausonius in his Ephem. Horat: in his 3. carm: 27. Luciane, Plato and many
others make mention. And true it is that all dreams be either true or false,
either prognosticous of some event to fall out, or false illusions: as when we
dream we have store of gold with Luc: and all our gold is turned into cole^.
But to draw more near unto our purpose: dreams be of three kinds, as Ioach,
Fortius (...), notes: Fatal, Vain, Natural.

Fatal or portentous which do forediuine 2
and are, as it were, prophets to presage and foretell events that shall happen
unto us, whither they be allegorical or not, such a dream is called, (...)
of (...) and (...) as the scholemen speak, because they* foreshewe and tell an
existent thing to come as we would say. It is termed (...) and (...)
especially if they be in a hie measure: although Aristotle deny that any dream
is sent of God, but profanely.

For this is the difference between Suidas.
(...) and (...), says Suidas, that the first is (...) (...) (...) (...), the
last fore-prophesies. These (...): or fatal dreams be prognosticous of either
good or badde success, as this, Cicero.
Hecuba dreamed that she had brought forth a burning torch, which was an
intimate of Paris who was then in her womb, and who should in after times be
the destruction and Fire brand of Troy; so Caesar Dictatour dreamed he had
copulation with his mother, which did vnclowd as by a silent Oracle, that the
earth the mother of all things, should be under his subjection. Penelope
dreamed of twenty Geese that came into her hall, and did pecke up all her
wheat: Fomer. 19. Odyss.
and that an Eagle came from a nie mountain, and seizing upon them, did
eftsoone kill them: which was a shadow of Ulysses (by the Eagle) who should
put the suitors of Penelope to flight.

Astyages saw in his sleep a vision of Herod. and Justin.
a Vine that did spread it self from the womb of his only daughter, by whose
flourishing branches all Asia was ouershadowed: which foretold by the Augures,
was a shadow of Cyrus, by whose means, Astyages should loose the kingdom.

Socrates in Dio: Laertius dreamed that he saw a young Cygnet wax flidge in
Apuleius de dogmat. Plat. lib. 2. and Laert.
his bosom, and eft being winged to fly aloft, and fill the air with
melodious carrolls: which did as it were, prediuine the admirable eloquence of
Plato his scholar. The history is well known of Craesus his dreams, whereof
Pertelot speaks to Chaunticleere, in the merry tale of the Nuns priest.

Lo Craesus which was of Lydia king,
Met he not that he sat upon a tree
Which signified that he should honged be.
Many more be rehearsed in that place which is worthy to be read: wherein the
poet shows himself both a Divine, an Historian, a Philosopher and Physician.
In treating of dreams we will not intetmeddle with these, the ominous and
fatal dreams we read of in the sacred writ. One portentous dream I will
recite which comes to my memory, and which I my self heard related of the
party that dreamed it. There was one that dreamed she was walking in a greenish
meade, all fragrant with beautiful flowers and flourishing plants, who whiles
she wondered and stood as amazed at the glory of the spring: an ancient sire
all withered and lean-fac'd with eld, the very emblem of death, made toward
her with a green bow in his hand, sharpning it at the end, who, as she fled
away from his pursuit did dartit often at her, the branch three times coming
very near her yet did not touch her at all; who when he see he could not
prevail with his aim, vanished eft away and left the bow behind, and she as
astounded and affright with the dream presently awooke: now mark the sequel
of it: within three days after she was for recreation sake, walking in a
greenish enclosure hard by a pond side, and on a sudden her brain was so
intoxicate and distempered, whether with a spice of a vertigo, or what amazing
disease soever I know not, but she was hurried into a deep pond with her head
forward, being in great peril of drow ning, and if she had not caught fast
hold by chance on a branch that hung over the water, she had been drowned
indeed. These also are fatal dreams, as when we dream of Eagles flying over
our head, it portends infortunatenes: to dream of marriages, dancing and
banqueting foretells some of our kinsfolks are departed; to dream of silver,
sorrow, if thou have it given thy self: of gold, good fortune; to loose an
axill tooth or an eye, the death of some special friend: to dream of bloody
teeth, the death of the dreamer: to weep in sleep, joy: to contemplate ones
face in the water, and to see the dead, long life: to handle lead, some
mela^cholick disease: to see a Hare, death: to dream of chickins and birds,
commonly ill luck: all which, and a thousand more I will not aver to be true,
yet because I have found them or many of them fatal both by mine own and
others experience, and to be set down of I arned men; and partly to show what
an ominous dream is, I thought good to name them in this chapter.

Vain dreams be: when a man imagins he does such things in his sleep, which
he did the day before: the species being 1.
strongly fixed in his fantasy, as if he having read of a Chim^ra, Sphynx,
Tragelaphus, Centaurus or any the like poetical fiction, sees the like formed
in his fantasies according to their peculiar parts: and such as when we
dream we are performing any bodily exercise, or laughing, or speaking etc.
these also may be fatal, as if we dream we do not any thing with the same
alacrity, with the like cunning, and in the same excellency in our sleep as
we did them in the day time, they foreshew some perturbation of body, so says
the Physicion in his treatise of Hippoc. in his book of dreams.
dreams: for he says that those dreams which are not adverse to diurnall
actions, and that appear in the purity of their sub iects, and eminency of the
conceived species, are intimates of a good state of health as to see the Sun
and Moon note clipsed, but in their sheene glory: to journey without
impediment in a plain soil, to see trees shoot out and ladened with variety
of fruits, brooks sliding in sweet meades with a soft murmr, clear
waters, neither swelling too hie nor running nie the channel, these sometimes
are vain and portend nothing at all, some times they signify a sound
temperature of body. The last kind which is most appertinent to our treatise,
is a dream Natural: 3
this arises from our complections, when humors been too abundant in a
wight, as if one be choleric of complexion, to dream of fire-workes
exhalations, comets, streking and blazing meteors skirmishing, stabbing, and
the like. If sanguine to dream of beautiful women, of flowing streams of
blood, of pure purplecolors. If Phlegmatic, to dream of surou^ding waters,
of swimming in rivers of torrents and sudden showers, etc. If Melancholicke,
to dream of falling down from hie turretres, of travailing in dark solemn
places, to lie in caves of the earth, to dream of the Devil, o^ blake and
furious beasts, to see any the like terrible aspects. Albertus magnus dreamed
that he druncke black pitch, who in the morning when he Coelius Rhod^.
awoke did void an abundance of black choler. Concerning these forenamed
co^plectionate dreams look Hippocrates de in somniis sect. 4 But these may
belong more un to a distemperature by a late misdiet, in any complexion
confusedly, then to a natural complexion indeed: as when a man after a tedious
wearisome journey does inflame his body with too much wine, in his sleep he
shall see fires, drawn swords, and strange phantasmaes to affright him, of what
complexion soever he be* so if we ouerdrinke our selves we shall dream (our
nature being welnie overcome) that we are in great danger of drowning in the
waves: so if we feed on any gross meats, that lie heavy upon our stomach,
and have a dispepsy or difficult concoction, we shall dream of tumbling from
the top of hie hills or walls and waken withal before we come to the bottom
as we know by experience in our own body, though not of a melancholic
constitution, yet it should seem too, that this humor at that instant
domineeres especially, by reason of the great tickling of our splen in falling
from any hie room, which we eath perceine when we awake suddenly out of that
dream. They that are desirous further to quench their thirst concerning this
point, let them repair unto the fountains: I mean to the plentiful
writings of such learned authors, as write of dreams more copiously, as of
Cardane that writes a whole treatise de insomni^s, and the Alphabet of dreams
and Peter Martyr part. 1. com. pla. cap. 5. and many others.

Cap. XV. Of the exactest temperature of all, whereof Lemnius speaks.
THey that never have rellished the verdure of dainty delicates, think homely
fare is a second dish, says the Poet; they that never have been ravished with
the sense-bereauing melody of Apollo, imagine Pans pipe to be surp^ssing
music: they that never have heard the sweet-voicd Swan and the Nightingale
sing their sugared notes, do persuade them selves, that Grashops and Frogs with
their brekekekex coax can sing smoothly when they crouk harshly: as Charon in
Aristoph: bidding Bacchus as he past to hell in his boat over Ach^on to row
hard, for then he should hear a melodious sound of frogs Aristophanes in his
Ranae.


-- (...) etc. Singing like Swans before their death: so they that have never
seen in any, or at least never contemplated this heavenly harmonicall crasis,
this excellent and golden te^perature, this temperament ad pondus, do surmise
that there cannot be a more persect crasis and sweet co^plection the^ those
that are vulgar to the common eye: when indeed there is no co^plection no
temper that is perfect and pure to any eye, though the sanguine do excel all the rest:

Quantum lenta solent inter vibur^a Cupressi. As far as the high and beautiful
Cypress tree peers over the limber shrub, and lower Tamarisk. This golden
tempera^ture must only be understood and seen with the internal eyes of
reason, seeing it has not a real existence. Which we may describe
notwithstanding, to show how near he that has the best, comes nie unto the
best and how far he that has the worst does wander and digress from the
best. He whom we are taking in hand to blaz^ out according to our meaner
pencill, may be likned to Cicer^s and Quintilians orator to Xenophons Cyrus, to
Aristotle's felix, to Sir Thomas Moors Eutopia, to Homers Achilles, to the
Stoics perfect man, to Euripides his happy soul in the end of his Electra,
and i^ his Hecuba where he says:

-- (...). Hecuba her words in Euripides.

He is in a most happy case to whom never a day their happens any ill. There
was never any of these in the same perfection they are described, who is so
happy? na, who on earth almost cannot say with the Sicophant in Aristophanes

(...) Aristop. in his Plutus. Act. 4. S^aen 3.

I am thrize unhappy, and fouretimes, and fiuetimes, and twelve times, and a
hu^ dred times. None of these (I say) are limd out, as if there were the like
in eminency and dignity, but either for affection or a fume of glory by their
applausiue description, or else for a debere, to show what they ought to be: so
this temperature must be depainted forth of us, not according to his existency,
as if there were the like exta^t but according to a kind of exigency, as it
should be in herent. The man then that has this crasis is absolute in the
equal poize of the elements: he is said to be perfect according to the perfect
square of Polycletus, who as Fabian report for his cunning did merit a name
above al mortal me^ for caruing im^ges, being called the Archety pus of all
artificers: in this eucrasy there is an absolute simmetree, a sweet concent,
and harmony of the first qualities: in the whole sub iect a conspiration of all
faculties. He that is endowed with it, all his senses be vigorous and lively,
all his inuate powers do perform their duties without endamageme^t each to
other, and without impeachme^t to the Hippoc. de vict. ^at. lib. 1. ^ct. 4.
whole. His material parts have (...) which implies that there is (...): his
brain is neither moist nor dry, his mind acute, industrious* provident, his
manners incorrupt, wit^, dextericall, pregnant, admirable: his memory stable,
like unto Senecaes who witnesses of himself that he could easily have
recited by heart, many things vsq^ ad miraculum, to the admiration of al men:
like unto Caesar's, who could speak 2 and 20. Seneca in his pro. logue to his
declamations.
languages, write, invent, and understand a tale told all at one time: his
nature calm not exposed to the blast of vicious perturbations, as he is not
rash and heady in his attempts, so is he no procrastinatour, but in all
enterprises making choice of wisdom and judgment his delegates: his
disposition is so generous that without all compulsion, he will rain in his
head strong and untamed appetite with the bridle of reason: he is neither
puffed up with prosperity, nor of an abject and drowping carriage by adversity,
though he be tossed never so upon the surging waves of Fortune, he holds
fast the helm of confidence, never in the least danger to sink down to the
gulfye bottom of despair: being in a peck of troubles he looses not a grain
of courage and true fortitude: for patience he is another Atlas that will
cadge a whole world of injuries without fainting, in who^ are affections, but
they be all used in their proper objects, he follows not their stream he is
witty, not addicted to scurrility, al his conceits are seasoned with the salt
of discre tion, as they taste not of a scaenicall leuitie, so they relish not a
Cynical gravity and severity: In matters of moment he demeans himself as a
grave vmpier, with all wise deportment, he balances al his words and deeds
with gravity and discretion, his tongue is the usher of his sage advise
repentance which usually lies at the door of rash folly never once comes so
much as within the precincts of his court: for his chastity he is an admirable
president and pattern, his crystal eyes and sweet countenance are the
herrauldes and characters of his gracious and compenable, and virtuous mind*
his very nod is vices scourge, in his whole habit, color, lineaments, beauty,
portratour, there appears an heroical majesty, their shines an admirable
decency, in so much that he may easily allure the greedy spect^tour, not only
to stand admiring of him, but with all entirely to embrace and love him. His
head is not oblique and angular but right orbicular: his haite not harsh but
smooth and soft, his forehead not har^oring in the wrinckling pale ^nuy, but
like theirs rather:

Qui Thymelem spectant (...) Catone^ his face is not over spread with the
clouds of disco^tent at any time but having a lovely amiable aspect, full of
all pleasa^ce, wherein the snowy lilly and the purple rose do strive for
pr^heminence and dominion: in his life he is neither a Democritus who ever
laughed, nor a^ Heraclitus, alwais blubbring as the Poet speaks of them.

^erpetus risu pulmonem agitare solebat
Democritus, quoties a limine mouerat vnum
Prohibi^que pedem: fleuit contrar^us alter.
The one each where with euer-kincking vain
The bellows of his breath he tore in twain:
The other with a double-^luced eye
Did sacrifice his tears to vani^ies
His gate also is sage and grave, not affected and strouting like a
stage-plaier^ his whole body (as Marlo says of Leander) as straight as Cerces
^ande: who is all gracious to behold: like Achilles of whom Maximus Tirrhus
says, he was not only to be extold for his external and golden locks* (for
Euphorbus in like manner had fair yellow hair) but because he was ado^ ned
with all virtue: in whom as Mus^ says of Hero their wons above the ordinary
number among the Poets to wit an hundred Graces: he is all favor as Amarantha
in the Poet was all- Venus:

Hic Amarantha iac^t, quaesi fas vera fateri, Sa^nazariu^ epigram. lib. 2.

Aut Veneri similis, vel Venus ipsa ^uit.
Here Amarantha lies, who was of right,
Like Venus fair, or ce^tes Venus hight.
Like Ephesius Euthimou^ of whom Achilles Tatius says that he was -- (...)
Achil. Tat. lib. 8. page 206.
as fair among men as Rodope amongst the virgins. Like Pindars Alcimedon of
whom he says.

-- (...) Pindar. Olymp. ^d. 8.

He was comely and faire-visag'd and did shadow his beauty by any blemish of
bad action. In whom both for internal and external good as once it was spo^e
of that Euagrius Scholast. lib. 6. cap. 1.
worthy Emperor Mauritus (...)-piety and fe^city linked themselves together
the former forcing the latter: who covered not only his head with the crown
and (...) his lims in purple, but imbellisht his mind also with precious
ornaments, who of all other Emperors empir'd over his own person, tyrannizing
as it were over the de mocratie of base and vulgar affections. Yet more for his
generous spirits and singular wisdom for that internal beauty, he is like to
Socrates of whom Xenophon in that pithy Apology, says (...). When Xenopho^ in
his Apology for Socrates at the very end.
I do call to mind the man himself, his wisdom, his generous mind neither
can I not remember him, nor remembering of him not highly extol him: and this I
will say that if any of them which have a zealous desire to obtain virtue do
converse with any with whom he may more profit himself, him sure I adiudge
most worthy of the fellowship of the Gods. To wind up the clue of our speech
with a patheticall place of the Poet: for all absolutenes, he is like unto that
famous Stilicon of whom ^laudia^ in his (...)* says* first inferring this,
(...) agre^s with that speech of (...) concerning the goddesses i^ (...) ^* ^rm
in some sort) that all good h^p is (...) to no man: some is graced ^ith thi^
beauty on this part* some on that (...) all favor: says h^ highly in his
praise, that others having but the compendium of excellency he alone had it in
the greatest volumes. Claudianus in his 1 of the panegy. ris. So Angelus Pol.
says of Laur. Medices in his 4. epist. epist. 2. Ia^ cobo Antiquario^. quibus
in singulis excellere alii magnum putant ille vnuiersis pariter emineret.


-- -- spar guntur inomnes
In te mixta fluunt and quae diuisa beatos
Efficient, collecta tenes. --
All those gifts which were dispersed among all, are combined in the, and whose
several parcels and as we may say very drops to taste on were happiness, they
all concur in thee, thou have the sourse and full stream, whereby thou may
even bath thy self in bliss.

Now my pen will needs take his leave of his fair love the paper, with
blubbering as you see these ruder tears of ink: I^ there be any parergeticall
clauses, not suiting true judgment, and as impertinent to this our treatise,
as surely some there be, I must needs ingeniously confess it as a default:

(...), Athenaeu^. q

That I may speak, though not with the very words; yet according to the sense
of Agathon in Athenaeus, to make a by work a work, is to make our work a by
work. Yet am I not plunged over head and ears in Parergaes. They are (if it
were so that I made much use of them) but as our po^ticall Episodeious as
Virgil has in his Culex whereof Joseph Scalliger in his book entitled
Joseph. Scallig.
Maronis appendix, and in his comment upon these words [ inter quas impia Lotos
impia] in the Culex, says: all these the Poets descriptions although they be
nothing but Parerga, notwithstanding they fill up the greatest room of the
pages of this poem: so that there is the least portion of that which is most
competent and requisite. So in Catullus description of his Puluinar Catul.
writes most of the complaint of Ariadne, of the three fatal Ladies, but of God
Hymen and of marriage scarce any whit at al so in this Culex says he, are many
words writ in the praise of the rural life, the shep hards happiness, the
limming out of plants etc. but of the Gnat he speaks least of all: for says he
in pictura tam tenui, nisi parerga Page 17.
adhibueris, quid dignum oculis proponi potest? in so little a toy unless
there were obiters, what would be worth vewing? which say ing may not much be
unfitting our purpose: though the Poets have a great prerogative to arrogate
whatsoever: I account this pictura tenuis in regard of it self: and if not I
hope I may intermeddle now and then a thing incidently by the way, so it benot
wholly out of the way. I know some selfe-conceited nazold, and some
iaundicefac'd idiot, that uses to deprave and detract from men's worthiness by
their base obloquy (the very lime twig of our flying fame) and that with
Aristarchus read over and over read a book only to snarle at, like curious
curres, and malign the author, not to cull out the choicest things to their
own special use: like venomous spiders extracting a poisonous humor, where
the laborious bees do sip out a sweet profitable Theodoret. in calce sermo. 1.
sic. I^ecrat. ad Demonio* ^. in fine.
juice: some such I say, may peradventure be moved at these Parergaes and other
escapes, as though they alone were Italian Magnificoes and great Turks for
secretariship, but if they be grieved, let their toadswolne galls burst in
sunder for me, with puffing choler: let them turn the buckle of their dudgeon
anger behind, lest the tongue of it catch their own dottril skins, I weigh
them not a nifle. When they have spoke all they can silly souls, they can
work themselves no great advancement, and me no great disparagement. But here
will we now cast our happy anchor, being in the Rhode and haven of our
expectati on: this little bark of ours, being soust in combersom waves, which
never tried the foming maine beforne, has toyled long enough upon the Ocea^:
Phoebus begins low to west: yea now, is gone down to visit, and call up the
drowsy Antip^des. If the radiant morn of favor do greet us with serenity of
countenance, we mean to attempt a further Indian voyage, and by the happy
guidance of our helme-mistresse Minerua, weel fraught and ballisse our little
ship with a golden traffic, what unrefined metal soever she is now ladened
withal. In the mean time we will lay in morgage a piece of our fallowed
invention, till our bankerout faculty be able to repay that deeper debt we owe
to true learning.

The Close.
AS flaring Phoebus with hirradiant face,
^throniz'd in a golden chatre of state,
The watching ^dles of the night does chase
To secke out hidden (...), all passi^onat
S^ man in richest ra^es of nature dressed,
Does quite obscure the glory of the rest.
Whatseuer thing is seen, it has his peer:
The City a sovereign, the heauen^ a Sun
The birds an Egle, beasts a Lion fear:
The flowers a Rose* in th^lims a ^art does won:
The World a Center: Center has a Man
Her lording* primate, metropolitan.
This man's a little world the Artists say,
Wherein a wise intelligence does dwell,
That reason hight which ought to bear the sway
The sphear^s our lims in ^otion that excel.
The consort which by moving (...) does fall,
Teelds harmony to both angelical,
Man's rarer gifts if we do duly scan,
Sag^ wisdom, peerlesse wit and comely f^ature,
He seems a very Dems* God, no man,
Embellished with all the gifts of nature:
His heavenly soul is in his earthly ^eld
An orient pearl within a ring of gold.
His co^ely body is a beauteous (...),
(...) fairly to the owners princely mind,
Where wandering virtues lodge often l^dg'd with sin,
Such pilgrims kindest entertainment find.
An I^ne, said ^, O no that name's vnfi^,
Since there stay not a night, but dwell in it.
Man is the centers rarest wonderment,
Who waxes proud with this her carriage
And decks her self with arras ornament,
For him to tread as on a lofty stage:
For him once yearly she her self does dight,
With greenest smarald to refresh hi^ sight,
The heavens are full of sadder anguishment
That they ini^y not such a worthy wight,
The earth is full of dreary lang^ishment,
That heanens e^y her that is hers by right.
The Sun^t that str^ues all day with him for grace,
At night for shame is feign to shroud his face.
Fair Cinthia's often in the pining waine,
When she inioyes not his society,
And e^t her glory it at ^ull again,
When he but daine^ to view her diety,
VVhilom invelloped in misty cares
She now displayes her bright dische^ild hairs.
True image of that (...) celestial power,
Equal to angels in thy happy state
Whose happy soul should be a pleasant bower,
^or Sanctity, her self to recreate,
By right Pandora has enriched the^,
With golden gifts of immortality
Thus man is made though he himself does mar,
By that alluring sin of luxury:
And from his excellency wend^th far,
By letting loose the raigne^ to venerie,
His soul in lust till death away it (...)
Like AEsopes pearl is in a dunghillpen^.
Look as the sable night with ietty h^w,
In darkness ^uffles ^p the gladsome day,
And Cynthia in her clowdy cell does ^ew,
Lest she the nights soul visage should be^ray
So noisome riot rising as a dampe
Does quite extinguish reasons burning lamp.
Chief fo^-man unto man is lavish Riot,
Which makes him be inferior unto man*
For when the appetite (...) his diet
The souls enseebled powers full little can*
Of glorious creatures greater i^ the fall,
Corruption of the best, is worst of all
Reasons fairest turret hiely seated i^,
(Seat of the souls power* which does most excel)
Within like ^urnings of Meander it is,
(Or Labyrinth) where Rosamond did dwell
Atriple wallth' Anatomists epsy
Before you come where Rosamond does lie.
The first is made of Elephantine tooth
Strongly compact, his figure circular,
The wall rough (...), and yet the work is smooth,
The fairest things not ever object are.
So clowdy curtains drawn oreth' azurdski^
(As ey^ds) coner Phoebu^ slumbring eye.
The other twain are not so strongly ^ight,
They rather serve for comely decency
And teach us that a prince within does sit,
Enthroned in pom^ in highest majesty.
That things more highly prizde are more pent in
Lest they mote be entic't with flattring sin.
So th'horne mad Bull must keep the golden fleeco
In bower of brass fair Danac must be pent,
The Dragon watch your fruit Hesperides.
The All^eyd Argus must fair ^o tent:
The labyrinth close peerless Rosamond:
The fragranst rose must thorns enuiron round.
The wall which framed is of iuory
Aglorious double cas^ment does co^taine:
Each answering both in vnisormity,
And both the fairest objects entertaine^
The opticke nerves be gallertes wherein,
The soul does walk and these free objects win.
Within this palace wall a Goddess pure
Whom Ratio all the learned schoolmen call,
Closely herself within does hear in mure,
A goddess sober, wise, celestial:
Who sitting, though within her regal chair^,
Often headstrong appetites her o^erbeare.
Riot the metropolitan of sins,
Lays daily seidge against this goodly tower:
And first by pleasing baits Riot begins,
Then by constraint this virgin to deflowre
The tower at length is raiz'd by battery,
Which could not be overcome by flattery.
Ay melso fair a Fort to be thrown down,
That it so fair, no longer time may last:
That lust should be impald with reasons crown^,
That ^au nous Riot should this palace waste:
That she the mistress of our lawless will
With vncl^ane excess thus her self should spill,
Ay ^onster sin of pleasing luxury,
The very hecticke fever of the soul:
The harbinger of woeful misery,
Sweet poison quaft out of a golden bowl,
Phre^sy of appetite blind Cupids gi^e,
To catch our brain-sicke Am^retto's i^.
The Lethe of a stable memory:
The wild fire of the wit* the mint of woe^:
A falling sickness to our treasury:
A mate, that ere with irreligion goes
An Epicure that huggeth fading joy,
Before eternity with least annoy.
Riot's a bark inth* mind unconstant main^,
Tossed to^ and fro with wafts of appetite,
Where reason holds the helm with careful pain,
But cannot steare this laden keele aright:
Here wisdom at a gall^slaue is pent,
Scourged with disgrace and fed with discontent.
Now eath it is to take the golden fleece:
The al^eyd rgu^ now a sleep is ^ast:
The quick eid Dragons slain by Hercules:
Fair Dana^ is deflowrd though nere so chaste.
By clues of winding pleasures now is found
Atract to kill the leefest Rosam^nd*
Abandon, and shake hands with riot then,
Once let him not in thy fair palace rest:
Happy's that soul that does not riot ken,
That keeps not open house for such a guest,
Who loves to have his lims with fatness lined
Their liu's within his li^s a meager mind.
Defeat these dainty li^t of wonted fare,
Weane thou thy appitite while it is young,
Lest that, it surfeting thy state impair,
With that two-sold port-cullis of thy tongue.
Stop thou the way le^t ^o much enter in.
The enemies of virtue but the friend of sin.
Who hunts naught else in the Aprile of his days,
But persi^n fair too wanton meriment,
A winter storm, in May, his life shall craze,
His fatal end i^ pyning drearyment:
The only meed that comes by luxury,
Is ser^le need foul end, and obloquie
Till fond desire be bannisht, from within
Against his liege a rebel he will rise,
Draw not the curtain ore this slumbring sin,
That light of reason may him* eft surprise:
For if in darkness thou do let him lie
Heel dream on naught, but hellish v^llanie.
When Morpheus does a sleep thy senses lull,
Use sleep with sober moderation:
Too little, weakens wit; too much, does dull;
And greatly hinders contemplation.
Who keeps a golden mean is sure to find,
A healthful body and a cheerful mind.
Catastrophe lectori.
Daigne Gra^taes nymphs, our vth to entertain;
Vntillour wit can reach an Ela strain*
Ovid.
Among Cames silver swan^ that sweetly sing,
We Baucis and Philemons praesent bring.
Julian.
Great Theseus, though Hecale were not able,
Vouchsav'd acceptance of her meaner table,
AElian.
Renowned Artaxerxes humbly took
The praesent of Synatas from the brook*
Our power is as a drop and little can;
Let this suffice, our minde's an Ocean,
Ere long, our Muse if now you daign to spare
She Will feed your ears with more delicious fare.
Qui non est hodie, cras magis aptus erit.
FINIS.

