IONAHS SERMON, AND Ninivehs repentance. A SERMON PREACHED AT Paul's Cross Jun.
20. 1602. and now thought fit to be published for our meditations in these
times.

By TO. WAKEMAN Master of Arts. and fellow of Balioll College in Oxford.

The second Impression.

Matthew. 12.41. The men of Niniveh shall rise in judgment with this generation
and condemn it.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Crown by Simon Waterson. 1606.

To the Christian Reader.
I am not ignorant (beloved in Christ Jesus) how fruitful this age of ours is
in bringing forth, to the view of the world, many new books, in so much that
wise men do account it a fault of these times, that so many simple pamphlets
are suffered to be committed to the press. VVherin, if I be justly blamed
with the rest, for publishing these my rude and raw meditations: accept of my
just excuse, which is not (as commonly others allege for themselves)
importunity of friends, for then I had printed my sermon, as soon as I had
preached it: being there unto earnestly desiered by many that heard me, as well
strangers, as of my familiar acquaintance. But understanding since, that many
copies, as they were taken by note, are scattered abroad in London and else
where whereof some have come unto my hands, and finding them to be very
imperfect: I am the more willing to publish the same, as I delivered it, not
adding, or detracting, any one word in the whole. And whereas in the second
general part, I largly amplyfied the several circumstauntes, when I first
penned the I do now only point at them, in this printed copte, partly to avoid
tediousnes, and partly because I was constrated so to do, when I preached this
sermon being then cut off by the vnseasonablenes of the weather, and
shortness of the time. But how simple and imperfect soever it be yet for the
arguments suke, befitting these heave times (which was an other cause of my
printing it) I am the rather bold, to offer it to the consideration of every
well-disposed Christian: beseeching God, who gives a happy success to alour
labors, so to bless it, that he who reads the same, may so meditate on the
partence and long-suffering of God, and of his judgment and justice: that by
the one be may be allured unto repentance, by the other deterred from sin. That
as the people of Niniveh, bearing the words of Jonas Sermon, did all turn
from their evil ways so the people of England, reading an exposition on Jonas
sermon may all become new converts unto the Lord. That as the Lord in mercy
dealte with them, in with-houlding his punishments so he may as mercifully
deal with us as this time, in removing his heavy plagues, and fearful
judgments from us, and from our Land. Thus recommending is to thy Christian
meditation, and my self, and all my studies to thy daily prayers, I bad thee
heartily fare well in the Lord. From Palioll College in Oxford October. 10. 1603.

Thine in the Lord, ROBERT VVAKE-MAN.

Jonah. 3.4.5.
The Analysis of the Text.
In these two verses I observe 2. general parts. 1. Jonas sermon to the
Ninivites, whereof there are 2 principal parts. ver 4 1 The patience and long
suffering of the Lord, in that he did not presently destroy these Ninivites,
but gave them a good space to repent: yet 40 days. 2 His justice and judgment
denou^cing destruction against them, if in the time allotted they would not
repent and amend. And Niniveh shall be destroyed.
2. The Ninivits repentance at Jonas sermon descriped in 4. circumstances ver.
5. 1 By their faith which was not fruitelesse. So the people of Niniveh
believed God. 2 By their fasting, which was not private. And proclaimed a fast.
3 By their attire, which was not costly. And put on sackcloath. 4 By their
number, which were not few, From the greatest to the least.


There are some other observations by the way pointed at, which are not
specified in this table.

A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's Cross Iun. 20. An. 1602
The Text.
Jonah 3.4, 5. Yet 40. days and Niniveh shall be destroved. So the people of
Niniveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the
greatest of them even to the least of them.


When Jonas the Prophet of the Lord (Right Honorable, The occasion and
argument of this Prophecy.
Right worshipful, and wel-beloued in the best beloved Christ Jesus) had a long
time in vain preached and prophesied in Jsraells he had an express charge
given him from the highest, to go and cry againg Niniveh the theife city of
the Assiria^s: that provoking them the gentiles to repentance, he might the
rath r lean the obstinate Israelits inexcusable. But such was, either his
wilful obstinacy that he would not, or his frail imbecility that he did not
regard his Lords designement: thinking with him self that his labor should
take little effect among strangers to God and himself, seeing it had done so
small good on Jsraell his own people. And therefore, in steed of going to
Nineveh whither he was bound, he shippeth himself for Tarshish, and commits
himself unto the sea, thinking thereby to fly from the presence of the Lord.
But behold he that is the God as well of the sea as of the dry sand, sendes out
his heralds after him, a great wind, and a mighty tempest: who raised the sea,
and rolled the waves, and rocked the ship, and so rowsed up sleepy Jonas, that
he finds no rest in the ship, the ship no safty in the waves, the waves no
quiet in the sea the sea no calm in it self, until the mariners had thrown
out Jonas to appease it. And yet see the providence of a good God to a
disobedie^nt Prophet: though he is cast out, yet the Lord does not cast him of:
though the mariners by his own appointment takes him up, and throws him into
the sea: yet a great fish by the Lords appointment swallows him up, and
castes him on the dry land. Being thus delivered out of the deep by the
mighty hand of God, he had the second time the same charge laid upon him,b
Arise and go preach to Niniveh the great city. Ion. 32.
Which the Prophet had no sooner hard, but behold his obedience to the Lords
call.c He arose, says the text, and went to Niniveh, according to the word of
the Lord. Yea to Niniveh as great and excellent city of 3. days journey, as
the Prophet calls it. Yea he cried against it, and said as before J read unto
you. Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed. So the people of Niniveh
believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of
them unto the least.

In which two verses, for my easier proceeding, and your better understanding,
may it please you to observe, and consider with me these two general parts.

2. The general divisio^. two parts
general parts. 1. Jonas sermon to the Ninivites in these words, Yet forty
days and Niniveh shall be destroyed. 2. The Ninivites repentance in the next
words, So the people of Niniveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, etc.

The 1. sets down a message from the Lord to a great City. The 2.
declares the conversion of a great city unto the Lord. In the 1. mercy and
judgment are preached by one, and that is Jonas. Jn the 2. faith and good works
are practiced by many, and they are Ninivites. Behold in the one, the duty of
all true Prophets, to declare with boldness the Lords will unto his people.
Behold in the other, the duty of al faithful people, to obey with alacrity the
voice of the Lords Prophets. The 1. general part contains in it these.

2. particular branches. 1. The parience and long suffering of the Lord, in
that he did not presently destioy these Ninivites, The subdivision of the 1.
into 2. mebers.
but gave the^ a good space to repent. Yet 40. days. 2. The judgment and
justice of the Lord denou^cing destruction against the^, if in the time
allotted they would not ame^dt And Niniveh shall be destroyed.

So that I may well compare this sermon of Ionahs to David's song Psalm. 101.1. My
song, says David, shall be of mercy and judgment. For lo while he says Yet
40. days, there is a song of mercy. And Nineveh shall be destroted, there is a
song of judgment. Or to that Himera.
river in Sicily, that parts it self into two channels the one yielding
fresh water the other salt: for behold while he says. Yet 40. days, there is
a stream of sweet water issuing from the fountain of Gods exceeding favor.
And Niniveh shall be destroyed, there is an Ocean of bitter water running from
the spring of Gods heavy displeasure. The 1. is a word of comfort to al
dispaiting souls, Yet 40. days. The 2. is a rod of correction to al presuming
sinners, and Niniveh shall be destroyed. The one declares unto us that God is
a God of compassion, if we will repent, Yet 40. days. The other that he is a
God of justice and severitie, if we still provoke him, and Niniveh shall be
destroyed. Yet 40. days, and Niniveh shall be destroyed. The 2. general part
declares the effect, The subdivisio^ of the 2. into 4. circumstances.
which this Sermon wrought in the Ninivits, or their repentance, which is
described by 4. circumstances.

by 4. circumstances. 1. By their faith which was not fruitless. So the people
of Niniveh believed God. 2. By their fasting which was not private, and
proclaimed a fast. 3. By their attire which was not costly, and put on
sackcloath. 4. By their number which were not few, from the greatest unto the
least.

1. They believed God. There is faith the true cause of good works described.
2. They proclaimed a fast. There is a good work the effect of a lively faith
deciphered. 3. They put on sackcloath. There is the garment of humility
expressed. 4. From the greatest to the least. There is a mutual co^version of
al declared. 1. They believed God. Behold their heathenish infidelity is turned
into religious piety. 2. They proclaimed a fast. Behold their luxurious
feasting is changed into moderate fasting. 3. They put on sackcloath. Behold
their royal robes are cast away for simple rags. 4. From the greatest of them
unto the least. Behold the consideration of the sins of all has wrought
repentance in all. So the people of Niniveh believed God and proclaimed a fast,
and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them to the least of them.

Thus you see (most dear and Christian brethren) the sum and substance of
that whereof at this time, by the assistance of the Almighty, and your
accustomed patience, I purpose to entreat eve^ the tenor of Jonas sermon to
the Ninivits, and of the Ninivites repentance at Jonas sermon. God grant J may
speak of the^ with the same spirit as Jonas did, and that all this great and
Honorable asse^blie may hear and receive them with the like fruit as did
these Ninivits. And so J come to the particular handling of the words
themselves. Yet 40. days.

Noah's dove came from the waters of the flood, with an olive branch in her
mouth. Genesis 8.11. Jonah in the Hebrew imports, and St. Jerome on the 1 of
this prophecy and elsewhere so interprets it) comes unto these Ninivets,
from the waters of the sea, wherein a little before he had been almost drowned
with an olive branch in his mouth, preaching mercy and peace unto them if they
would repent, and turn from their wicked ways. A singular argument of Gods
exceeding love and favor unto this city Niniveh. For he might presently have
sent his Angel from heaven to have destroyed it, as he did the host of
Senacharib. 2. Reg. 19.35. He might have consumed it with fire and brimstone,
as he did Sodom and Gomer. Genesis 19.24. He might have spoiled it with the edge
of the sword, as he did Jericho Ios. 6.21. He might have laid it in the dust
in the twinkling of an eye, as he has done many, and as he is able to do all the cities in the world. But behold the Lord is a pitiful God Psalm. 86.15. He
takes a milder course with Niniveh. He sends his Prophet to her, and gives
her a day, and a day yea even forty days together, before he will power down
the violl of his wrath, before he will execute his judgments on her. And as a
noble and worthy Emperor laying his sieg, and levying his army against some
famous and renowned city: beholding in it the goodly buildings, the statly
walls, the high ascending towers, the multitude of people, the numberless
number of babes and sucklings; of infants and innocent persons: from a noble
and heroical disposition is moved with the bowels of compassion toward it and
therefore in regard hereof does not presently batter it down and overthrow it,
but first sends his herald at arms to proclaim a parley for certain days,
and to offer peace unto the same: right so does the Lord of heaven and earth
deal with Niniveh that famous and renowned city. He saw the statelines of her
buildings, her thousand and five hundred towers, Munster, Cosmograph. l. 5.
cap. 61. Ion. 4. verse. vlt.
her high and spacious walls, her multitude of citizens, her sixscore thousand
infants and innocent persons, her head of cattle almost innumerable: all which
did make the bowels of compassion to yerne within him, and, before he would
overthrow, it to send his Prophet as an herald at arms, to proclaim a parley
of forty days and to offer her peace if she would receive it. Famous is that
of Scipio Africanus, that al things in wars ought to be assayed, before the
sword be drawn. And as famous that of the good Emperor Theodosius, who, until
ten days were past after he had besieged any city, never offered violence
to the inhabitants: saying and proclaiming every day, that those ten days he
gave them, to the end they should profit themselus by his cleme^cy, before they
should make proof of his power. But as far as light excels darkness, truth
error, heaven earth: so far, in pity, mercy, and compassion, does the
Creator of all excel the best of all his creatures. Never was there any so
pitiful, as he the God of pity. Never any so merciful, as he the God of
mercy. Never any so compassionate, as he the God of al compassion. O how often
does he persuade by promises, how often does he allure hy rewards how often
does he entreat by favors how often does he assay al fair means to convert
a sinful soul, before he draw out his sword of vengance against him? O when
did he spoil any country once, before he had spared it often? When did he
overthrow any nation in one day, which he had not most lovingly wooed before
many a day? When did yet any place feel the judgments of his fury, that had
not long before tasted the sweetness of his mercy? For this was the rule of
Gods own law, this was the decree of his heavenly will, that no city should
be destroyed, before peace were offered unto the same. as we read Deuteronomy. 20.10.
And in the Gospel it was our Saviors commandment to his disciples, that into
what house soever they did enter: they should begin the exordiu^ of their
message with a pax vobis saying peace be unto this house Luke 10.5, and it is
well worth our observing, that virtues and miracles were first wrought in
Corazin, and Beth saida, before their woe was pronounced against them. Matthew.
11.20. Yea the fig tree in the Gospel, although the Lord when he came and
sought it, found no fruit thero^, shall not be presently cut down, but shall
hane a year, and a year, and a year, to that, and shall be dug, and
dunged, before it be destroyed Luke 13.7.8. This also did the Lord of mercy do
in the time of old. He sent Noah to the men of the old world a preacher of
righteousness. 2. Pet. 2.5. We sent Lot to those wicked Sodomites in the spirit
of meekenes to beseech them not to do so wickedly. Genesis 19.7. He sent Moses and
Aaron to the Egyptian Exodus 5.1. He sent Prophets from time to time to the
children of Jsrael. He sent John Baptist, and our blessed Savior, and the holy
Apostles, besides signs in the host of heaven, and tokens in the elements, to
the people of Jerusalem, before they were destroyed. And although that city
were grown to a full measure of iniquity, and to the very height of al manner
of impiety, so that both the servants and son of God were slain by the^, the
Sabbath of the Lord polluted, the sanctuary of the Lord profaned, the law of
the Lord despised, the testimony of the Lord neglected; yet see the infinite
mercy and patience of a loving Lord behold, for a warning, full forty years
were allotted unto her, before God sent up Vespasian and Titus to sack-it. As
Eusebius in the 3. lib. and 8 cap. of his Ecclesiastical history reports.
Before which time, how did the Savior of the world call on her to repent, how
did he weep for her, how did he woo her as the brid grome his spouse to turn
unto him, and to forsake her evil ways, how did he manifest his love and
affection toward her? O Jerusalem Jerusalem thou that killest the Prophets and
stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thee
together, as the hengathereth her chikens under her wings, and thou would
not. Mat. 23.37. J will not trouble you with many testimonies, and examples out
of the word of God, to confirm the truth of this doctrine, being a point so
manifest. Look but into the 9. chap. of the book of Nehemiah, and the most
obstinate shall be constrained, will he nil he, to confess, that God is a God
of much patience, and long suffering. The whole chapter is spent in this
argument, setting down in order, the great benefits and blessings which the
Lord in his mercy had bestowed upon the children of Israel in times past, their
unthankfulness unto the Lord for the same, and yet the exceeding patience and
mercy of the Almighty extended toward them. For first, as we there may read,
Vid Nehem 9. read the whole chapter.
he considered their aflictions in Egypt, and hard their cry by the red sea,
he saved the^ in the deep, and drowned their enemies in the mighty waters. He
led the^ in the day with the pillar of a cloud, and in the night with a
pillar of fire to give them light. He came down upon mount Sinai, and spoke
unto them from heaven, and gave them right judgments, true laws, and good
commandments. He gave them bread from heaven for their hunger, and water out
of the rock for their thirst; he fed them forty years in the wilderness, they
lacked nothing, their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not. He
gave them kingdoms and people, he multiplied their children as the stars of
heaven, and brought them into a good land: where they possessed houses full of
goods, and did ear, and were filled, and became fat, and lived in pleasure
through the Lords goodness. But behold this people, whom the Lord had thus
extraordinarily blessed above all the nation in the world became rebellious, and
behaved themselves prowdly, and hardened their necks, so that they harkened not
to his commandments, nor remembered the marvelous works which he had done for
them: and yet for all this the Lord forsook them not. They made them a molten
calfe, and said, this is thy God, that brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
and committed great blasphemies; and yet for all this the Lord forsook them
not. They were disobedient and rebelled against him, and cast his law behind
their backs, and slew his Prophets sent to convert them: and yet for all this
the Lord forsook them not. They did evil before him, and sinned against his
judgments, and pulled away their shoulders, and were stiffnecked, and would not
hear and yet for all this the Lord forsook the^ not, and yet for all this did
he not consume the^, but forbear the^ many years together. O what a God of
pity, O what a Lord of mercy is this! abundant in goodness, gracious, and full
of compassion, of long suffering, slow to anger, and of great kindness. Joel.
2.13. Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin
Exodus 34.7. How truly might he say of this people, All the day long have I
stretched forth my hi^d to a rebellious people, to a disobedient gain saying
and vnbeleening people! Rom 10.21. How truly might he say that they had a long
time grieved him, and yet he had waited that he might have mercy on the^! Es.
30.18. How truly might be profess of himself, I desire not the death of a
sinner, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. turn you, turn you
from your evil ways, for why will ye die o ye house of Israel? Ezech.
33.1^. What should I say more (beloved in Christ Jesus) God is the same God
unto us al, as he was unto them: and there is not one to be found in this great
Congregation, from the most ancient father to the youngest child, but in some
measure has had experience of these things. Every one has felt in himself God
to be a God of much mercy and expectation. For when his Angel had offended he
stayed not at all for him, but threw him down to hell. When Adam had
transgressed he deferred not his punishment, but drove him straight way out of
Paradise. But if we examine our selves we shall find that he waits for every
one of us indeed, and forbeareth us some ten years, some twenty; some to 30.
some to 40. some to old age, some to dotage. Yea he spares us al because he
is the lover of souls as the Wisema^ calls him. He is patie^t toward us and
would have none to perish but al of us to come to repentance. 2. Pet. 3.9. He
makes as though he saw not our sins, because we should amend. Wisd. 11.20.
He prolo^geth our days, although we doevil against him an hundred times.
Eccles. 8.12. Let us then be ware (beloved in the Lord) that we abuse not the
patience and long suffering of so good a God, lest after so many sweet shewers
of mercy, and pleasant calmes of comfort, he power down upon us the bitter
storms, and hot thunderbolts of his judgment and indignation. And as the
Prophet tells Niniveh in this place: Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be
destroyed: So yet a little while, and if we will not repent and turn unto him,
behold a final destruction and overthrow shall over take us. And so from my
first observatio^, the patience and long suffering of God, in that he did not
presently destroit Niniveh, but gave it a good space to repent, Yet 40. days.
I now come to the second note of my first general part, which was the justice
and judgment of the lord, denouncing destruction against it, if in the time
allotted it did not amend, and Nintveh shall be destroyed.

And Niniveh shall be destroyed. Our Prophet does not come only with a song of
Gods mercy to Niniveh, but also with a song of judgment; intimating that if
they will not embrace the one, they shall undoubtedly feel the other. For
albeit, being a stranger to that place, a man of another country and kindred,
and Niniveh large and spacious, and full no doubt of many barbarous and cruel
people, he might in some sort (because he was flesh and blood) be discouraged
to deal so roundly and plainly with them, as to denounce so heavy a judgment
on the^, for fear least they should have killed him: yet behold the courage
and audacity of a faithful Prophet, He prefers the discharge of his duty
before the safety of his life: and, having received this message from the Lord,
he is not afraid (although he were but one and that a stranger) to pronounce it
in the midst of Niniveh, yea peradventure before the king and nobles of Niniveh
(for so it is probable) although it declare nolesse then Ninivehs overthrow
and destruction. Out of whose bold and faithful course of proceeding, let me,
by your Honorable and Christian patience (most dear and blessed brethren) give
this one note to my brethren and fellow-laborers in the ministry: that, when
they are to deliver their message from the Lord unto his people, out of these
and the like places, they be careful, A note for Ministers, from Jonas his
bouldnes.
by our Prophets example, to lift up their voices like trumpets, bouldly to
reprove sin and sinners, to tell the house of Jacob his iniquities, and
Israel his transgressions. Let them not be terrified to declare Gods judgments
against the greatest, let them not be a fraid of the faces of men, for the Lord
is with them. Ier. 1.8. They must with Amos preach the death of Jeroboam and
captivity of Israel eve^ at Bethel in the kings chapel and in the kings court
although with Amos they be banished for it. Amos 7.12. They must with Michaiah
prophecy the truth to Ahab, although with him they be hated for it. 1. Reg.
22.8. They must with Zachary tell the people of Israel, that because they have
for saken the Lord, the Lord also has for saken them, although by the
commandment of the king with Zachary they be stoned for it 2. Chron. 24.21.
They must with John Baptist tell Herod that it is not lavvfull for him to have
his brother Philips wife, though with him they be beheaded for it. Mat. 14.10.
They must with Nathan tell David thou art the man 2. Sam. 12.7. They must with
Eliah tell Ahab, it is thou and thy fathers house that trouble Israel. 1. Reg.
18.18. They must with Iehu tell Iehoshaphat, that for his wickedness the wrath of
the Lord is upon him 2. Chron. 19.2. They must with the Prophet tell Amasiah the
king of Judah, that for his sin God has determined to destroy him. 2. Chron.
25.16. They must with Azariah the priest tell Vzziah the king, that for his
tra^sgression he shall have none honor of the Lord. 2. Chron. 26.18. They must
with Nehemiah rebuke the Princes and Rulers of Israel, for laying such heavy
burdens upon their brethren, Nehem. 5.7. Finally they must with Jonas in my
text tell Niniveh, yea glorious and goodly Niniveh, yea stout and stately
Niniveh, yea proud and populous Niniveh, that for her sins it shallbe quite
defaced and overthrowen. Thus must the Minister of God be bold to reprove
sin in the mightiest ones in the world, and with the spirit of courage and
audacity beat down whatsoever lifts up it selfeagainst God.

Ispeake not this (beloved in Christ Jesus) to condemn al kind of mild and
gentle persuasio^: and to uphold the botte and indiscreete reproovers of our
time, Indiscreete reproovers not allowed.
who are so fervent and forward in denou^cing judgment against the least
offenders, that with James and John nothing will content them, but only fire
from heaven to consume them Luke 9.54. They are the of spring of cursed Cham,
delighting in nothing so much, as to uncover the nakedness of their fathers.
They are, as Saint Bernard speaks of such in his 78. Epistle, no^ correpteres
sed corrosores, not reproovers but gnawers. Not unlike the Cynicke Philosopher,
who for his impudent taunts against all, was commonly called of all Convitiorum
canis, the dog of reproaches. For as those Indians headed like dogs, in lieu of
speech, use to bark, as Pliny in his 7. lib. and 2. chap. writes of the^: so
these, in steed of speaking to their brethren after the manner of men, use to
bark at them, after the fashion of dogs. My speech does not apologize or
countenance any such, either dogged and in discreet raylers, or rude
intemperate reproovers.

J rather aim at those in another extreme, who are so far from being to
forward in reproving of sin, that they dare not take in their mouths but that
cold rehrehension of old Ely unto his sonns, Do so no more my sons, do no more
so. 1. Sam. 2.24. But as deceiptfull Ambassadors, either for fear of
punishment, or for hope of gain, they forbear to deliver the Lords Embassage
unto his people: Soothing them in their sins and flattering them in their
sollies, and furthering the^ in their iniquities. Those are our temporizing
preachers, our time serving Prophets, our tre^cher Chaplains who, either to
satisfy the lust of their humorous Lord, or to delight the itching ears of
their vain auditors, speak nothing but place^tia, court phrases, sweet and
pleasing words: that sow pillowes under men's elbowes, and build up their sins
as a wall, and daub up their filthy corruptions with the untempered mortar of
palpable adulatio^. Whom I may justly brand with the same name as Crates the
Thebane did those parasites, of his time who^ he called (...): because,
sitting at great men's tables, they were ready with that cunning disse^bler in
the comody to say, Ais, aio? negas? nego. Whatsoever they affirmed they would
affirm the same, and whatsoever they denied they would be as ready to deny
though never so untruly. right so, beloved, I am afraid our church has to many
such fawning and flattering Ministers: who sitting at noble men's tables (if
happily they be thereunto admitted) for fear of displeasing, will say as they
say: although their own conscience I doubt not many times tells them they have
said amiss. Speaking good of evil, and evil of good, putting darkness for
light, and light for darkness, bitter for sweet, and sweet for sower to use
the words of the Prophet Esa. 5.20. (...), Making merchandise of the word of
God, as the Apostle speaks 2. Cor. 2. vlt. and selling the cause of the Lord
for a meals meat, or as the Prophet tells us for handfulls of barley and pieces
of bread. Ezech. 13.19. J cannot more fitly resemble such false Prophets to
any, then to that flattering and dissembling Priest of Iuppiter: who when
Alexander the great (as Plutarch in his life testifies) came to the oracle,
saluted him by the name of Iuppiters son, and all to get some great present
and large-reward from him: so they, to procure the sooner unto themselves some
promotion Ecclesiastical, will make the Alexanders of the world believe, that
they are Demi Gods or at the lestwise a degree above the natural condition of
the sons of men. They are fit chaplains for such radies as the mother of
Cyrus was, who, as Plutarch reports, commanded, that whosoever spoke to the
king, he should use soft and silken words: for surely in their preaching and
reaching before such great ons of the world, they use noe other but such soft
phrases and silken speeches as shall befit their humors. And as the natural
bistorian in his 2. lib. and 41. ca. of his history reports of the herb
called Heliotropium, that it regards and looks toward the sun: ever as
he goes turning with him at all hours. yea even also when he is shadowed
under a cloud: so do they, in the whole course of their ministry, regard and
consider their Lords and Ladies humors, and thereunto do they apply themselves
at all times, yea eve^ then also when they are covered with the clouds of many
gross and crying sins. So that I may truly say of such, as the Philosopher
did of the like, who, as Nicephorus reports in the 10. lib. and 42. cap. of
his Ecclesiastical history, coming into an Emperors court, and there seeing
many sooth up great men in their sins, said of them, purpura^ ipsos magis quam
Deum colere, that they did more reverence purple robes then God himself and J
am persuaded (beloved in Christ Jesus) that they who thus sooth up the mighty
potentants of the world in their transgressions, quod purpuram ipsimagis quam
deum colant, that they more respect the countenance of man, then the favor of
the everliving God. For otherwise they would never, as many times they do,
conceal the council and will of God, to gain a little commodity and preferment
at the hands of a mortal man. And if it happen, (beloved) that these men come
abroad at any time, to preach among the vulgar sort in meaner places, they
have so used themselves to a smooth and pleasing vain, that even then J may
say of them, as Diogenes the Cynicke said of orators, as it is in the 9. lib.
and 19. cap. Elian. de varia histor. that they are (...) the very slaves and
vassals of the common people. For to win their least favors, they will be
favorable to their greatest sins. And as Pliny in his 5. lib. and 15. chap.
says that the river Jordan is a pleasant river, winding and turning in and
out, seeking as it were for love and favor, and applying it self to please
the neighbor countries. So do these time-serving preachers turn and wind
themselves in their sermons to the multitude: seeking rather to win their
favors by flatering them in their sins, then to discharge their own duties
to God by revealing his will unto the^. But let these men consider how much the
Lord is offended with such deceitful ha^dling of his word. Let them consider
the grievous complaint of the Lord against such false Prophets, who healed the
hurt of the daughter of his people with sweet words, saying peace, where
there was no peace. Jer. 6.13. Let them consider how much he was moved with
them that taught vanities, and spoke the vision of their own hearts, and not
out of the mouth of the Lord. Saying to every one that vvalked after the
stubbornes of his own heart, no evil shall come upon you, prophesying false
dreams and causing the people of the Lord to err by their lies and by their
flatteries. Ier. 23. Finally let the^ consider the severe judgment of the Lord
pronounced against such faithless messe^gers in the same Prophet. Behold they
that flatter the people in their sins, and sar that the sword and famine shall
not be in the land, by sword and famine shall these Prophets be consumed. Jer.
14.15.

Wherefore to conclude this point, let us (beloved) I speak this to al my
brethren and fellow laborers in this holy business, let us I say, as trusty
Embasadours, boldly deliver our Lords Embassage: not fearing him that can kill
the body only, but him that can cast both body and soul into hell fire. Matt.
10.28. And yet let us not seek to gal and grieve the wounded conscience of our
weak auditors, by to rash and indiscreete doubling and redoubling woes upon
them, alvvaies killing the^ with the killing letter of the law. Let us take
heed least if we thus always preach to others judgment without mercy, we our
selves be judged of the Lord without mercy. Let us rather by our Prophets
example, keeping the golden mean, temper them both together. Let us sometimes
with the sweet balm of the Gospel bind up the broken hearted: and yet
sometimes also with the hard hammer of the law bruze and break down the
strength of impiety. Let us sometimes as good chirurgions apply pleasant
lenitines to supple: and yet sometimes also sharp corasines to exasperate the
festered wounds of our sick patients. Let us sometimes like skilful Physicians
minister comfortable refections to cherish; and yet sometimes also sharp and
bitter potions to offend their diste^pered stomachs. Let us sometimes with that
good Samaritane Luke 10, with the oil of mercy cheer up the fainting co^
science of a poenitent Christian: and yet sometimes also with the wine of
reprehension rub up the co^tagious maladies of hard hearted worldlings. Let us
sometimes with the sons of Jacob stand upon the mount Gerizzim to bless, and
yet so^times also upon the mount Eball to curse the Lords enemies Deuteronomy. 27.13.
Let us sometimes with St. Paul Come in the spirit of meekenes to comfort: and
yet sometims also with the same Apostle with the rod of correction to control
1. Cor. 4. 21. Let us sometimes say with our master pax vobis, peace be unto
you Luke 24.36. and yet sometimes also vae vobis, woe be unto you. Matt. 23.13.
Let us sometimes be like that soft voice wherein God came 1. Reg. 19.12. and yet
sometimes also like John Baptist the voices of criers or crying voices in the
wilderness of this world Math. 3.3. Let us sometimes be like Barnabas sons of
Consolation. Act. 4.36. and yet sometimes also like James and John (...) the
sons of thunder Mark. 3.17. Lastly let us sometimes come with Jonas in my text
with a so^ge of mercy as in the first part of his sermon yet 40. days: and yet
sometimes also with a song of judgment as it follows in the second and
Niniveh shall be destroyed.

And Niniveh shall be destroyed. And herein a word before I proceed further:
Let me remove a stumbling block of offense, which may arise to the weak out
of these words: For whereas our Prophet here sets down, that after the space
of 40. days, Niniveh should be destroyed, it is manifest in the last verse
of this 3. chapter that God repented of this evil which he had purposed to do
unto it, and he did it not. council of the Lord infallible, how is the verity
of his word immutable, how are his decrees irresistable, how is his judgment
here denou^ced by Jonas inevitable? and Niniveh shall be destroyed.

Niniveh here is understood, the sin and iniquity of the people of Niniveh. As
if the Prophet had said, Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed, that
is, not the me^, the walls, and the buildings of Niniveh, but the sins and
transgressio^s of Niniveh; the sinful city shall become an holy city, the
idolatrous people a sanctified people, the height of their impiety shall be
destroyed by the tears of their penite^cy. Thus shall sinful Niniveh be quite
defaced, thus shall ungodly Niniveh be overthrown. Of this opinion was Sr.
Austen in his 21, lib. and 24. chapter de civitate dei. Where he says thus.
That God uses to overthrow sinners two manner of ways. Either when he
punishes the men for sins committed, as he did the Sodomites Genesis 19.25. or
when he destroys the sins of me^ through their unfeigned repentance, as in
these Ninivits. And in this sense, says Sr. Austen, is the word of the Lord
true, that Niniveh in her people and buildings stood still, but in her wicked
ways and transgressions she was overthrown.

But saving the judgment of so learned a father (whom notwithstanding of
alother of the fathers generally for his interpretatio^s of the Scripture I
hold to be most worthy of reverence) I rather fasten upon another
interpretation of these words. 2. Opinion
And that is that they are spoken by our Prophet with a condition implied in
them, as if he had said: the Lord your God is a patient God, he will not
wou^d you before he warn you. Lo he gives you yet 40 days more to bethink
your selves, if in this space you will not turn unto him, then assuredly you
shall be destroyed. And this I rather take to be the Prophets meaning in this
place: not only for that the whole current of our latter and sounder
interpreters do agree here unto, but also, because I know this manner of
denouncing judgment, is very usual with the spirit of God in holy scripture.
Witness that one place insteede of all, in the prophecy of Jeremy, I will
speak (says the Lord) suddenly against a nation, against a kingdom, to pluck
it up and to root it out, and to destroy it. But if this nation against who^ I
have pronounced, turn from their wickedness: I will repent of the plague that
I thought to bring upon them. Ier. 18.7.8. There you see, the condition is set
down in express words. If they turn from their wickedness I will repent. But
elsewhere it is necessarily employed and understood as for example. When
Abimelech the king of Gerar, had took unto him Sara, the wife of Abraham: God
said unto him, thou art but a dead man because of the woman which thou haste
taken. Genes. 20.3. Here the judgment seems absolute. But this condition
must needs be understood, that he was but a dead man, if he did not restore
the woman without touching her body. For when he had purged himself with an
upright mind, and innocent hand have I done this: the Lord forbear to execute
this sentence on him. So likewise the Prophet Esaie bids Ezechiah from the
Lord. to set his house in order, for he should die and not live, Es. 38.1.
What speech can be more absolute the^ this? And yet we must needs confess,
that this condition is therein contained: thou shall die, if thou appease not
the wrath of God by thy tears and unfeigned repentance. For when he had once so
done, the Lord removed away this judgment, and added unto his days fifteen
years, as it is in the same chapt. Agreeable to this is that of David, who
when he had killed Vriah the Hittite, and taken his wife unto himself: the Lord
told him, that for this, the sword should never depart from his house 2. Sam.
12.10. A sentence without exception: and yet when he confessed, that in this he
had sinned against the Lord (a condition no doubt in the former judgment
employed) it was told him by Nathan, that the Lord had put away his sin and he
should not die: verse. 13. So in the words of my text, here is destruction
denounced by Jonas against Niniveh, yet 40 days and Niniveh shall be
destroyed. And yet, Niniveh repenting, the Lord withholdeth his judgments from
it: and therefore we must needs understand a condition in the words: yet 40.
days and if Niniveh go on still in her wickedness, doubtless Niniveh for her
wickedness shall be destroyed. Having thus cleared this doubt, and made
manifest the meaning of our Prophet: let us now come to the next observatio^,
which in the beginning was proposed out of these words and Niniveh shall be
destroyed.

Tamberlaine that mighty conqueror of his time, that when he laid siege to any
city: he displaied the first day his white flag before the same, as a toke^ of
his clemency if they would yield unto him: Which if they then refused, the
next day he set up his red flag, as threatening the shedding of their blood, if
they remained obstinat: whereat if they were not moved, the third day he
advanced his black flag, to signify, that the door of all pity and
compassion was now shut up, and that nothing was to be expected, but utter
ruin and desolation. The like course, in some proportion, does the Lord of
heaven and earth take with his city Niniveh: he first displaieth his white
flag of mercy, not for a day with Tamberlaine, but eve^ for 40, days
together: whereat if they will not yield, they shall behold the red flag of his
severity, nay the black flag of his irrevocable judgment, denouncing their
utter overthrowe and destruction. For the saying is most true, Laesa patientia
fit furor, the patience of the Lord too sarre provoked, is turned into fury.
Seravenit, sed certa venit vindicta: it is long ere he revenge himself on
sinners, but he paies the^ with a witness at the last. And howsoever the
punishment of malefactors come ate, yet in never misseth in the end. As the
Plin. lib. 2. c. 7.
heathen man by the light of nature could tell us. Lento graduad vindictam
divina procedit ira. Tarditatemque iudicij gravitate pe^sat says Valerius
Maximns lib. 1.
another. God is said to have leaden seete because he comes slowly to
execute vengance; but hands of iron because when he comes he stricketh home.
And by how much the longer he expects our ame^dme^t, so much the more
strictly he will judge us if we do neglect. Experience teaches us that the
axe the higher it is lifted, the heavier it falls. A stone the further it is
cast up into the aier falls with greater force upon the earth. Awater course
the more it is stopped, when it breaks forth, runs with greater violence:
even so the longer the Lord hears and forbeareth to punish the sins of men,
the heavier will his punishment be in the end. And howsoever he can be content
along season to have patience with them: yet at the last, as he speaks by
the Prophet, he will overturne, overturne, overturne, Ezech. 21.27. Where, by
thrice repeating of the word, is understood an absolute destruction and
desolation indeed. Pliny in his 8. lib. and 7. cap. and Aristotle in 9. lib.
and 46. cap. de natura animalium do write of the elephant, that by nature he
is very mild and gentle; and others say, that he suffers many wro^gs of
inferior beasts but being still provoked by them to wrath his fury is not
pacified, until he has revenged himself to the full. That which is said to be
true of the creature, is in this sense most true of the creator of al things
God himself. His very nature and essence is, to be A God full of compassion
and mercy, flow to anger, and of great kindness. Psalm. 103.8. He susteineth
many wrongs of the sons of men: being crushed with their sins, as a cart is
laden with sheaues, to use the words of the Prophet: wherewith if they still
continue to load him, he will ease himself of his burden, and cast it on the
ground of confusion. And albeit, as the Psalmist speaks, he be patient, and
is provoked every day: yet if a man will not turn, he will whet his sword, he
will bend his bow, and make it ready. Psa. 7.12. For it is most true which
Gregory says in his 33. book of morals and 15. chapter. Vt pius, ita iustus
est conditor. As our maker is merciful, so is he likewise just. Gracious and
righteous is the Lord, Psalm. 25.8. gracious in the multitude of his mercies,
and righteous in the severitie of his judgments. Gracious to them that turn
unto him, righteous to them that cast him from the^. The Lord is slow to anger,
there is his patience to penitent sinners: but he is great in power, and will
not surely clear the wicked. Nahum. 1.3. there is his judgment to impenitent
reprobates. I have a long time holden my peace at your sins, I have been
still, and restrained my self, there is his long suffering declared: but now
will I cry like a traveiling woman, I will destroy and devour at once. Es.
42.14. there is his heavy wrath described. The Almighty is a patie^t rewarder,
there is mercy offered to him that will receive it: but he will not leave the
wicked unpunished. Eccles. 5.4. there is justice pronounced to him that will
neglect it.

Thus you see (most dear and Christian brethren) that love and wrath, pity,
and revenge, patience and judgment, as the 2. daughters of the great king, go
hand in hand: his mercy and truth do meet together, his righteousness and peace
do kiss each other. Mercy going before with a pax vobis, peace unto the^ that
accept it: judgment following after with a vae vobis woe unto them that refuse
it, the one coming with an open bosom to receive the penitent: the other
following with a drawn sword to devour the hardharted. Mercy is first offered
to leave the wicked inexcusable: judgment is last executed to destroy the
wicked that are culpable. For this is the usual course which God takes with
the sons of men: first to try them a good space by gentle forbearing, which if
it draw them not unto repentance, then his arrows of vengeance are ready
prepared for destruction. So did he deal with the old world: he spared it an
hundred and twenty years, but when he saw that the wickedness of man was
great in the earth, and that all the imaginatio^s of the thoughts of his heart
were only evil continually. Genesis 6.5. He did by a mighty flowd destroy
every thing that was on the earth from man to beast. Genesis 7.23. So did he
deal with the fig. tree in the Gospel, he spared it 3. whole years together,
and suffered it to be dug and dunged carefully: but continuing it self
barren, and making also the ground barren round about it, the Lord will no
longer bear with it, it must be destroyed, it must be cut down. Luke 13.7. So
did he deal with those Egyptians of old, he sent Moses and Aaron to instruct
them, who wrought diverse signs and miracles among them to win them to
repentance: whereof when none could move them, or pierce their hardened hearts,
they were quite overwhelmed in the midst of the sea, Exodus 14.27. So did he
deal with his own city, he sent Prophets and teachers early and late, to
woo her to Christ as the spouse to her bridegroom, he sent his own son to
win her from her sin: but when she would be gathered by none of these,
behold her house was left unto her desolate. Luke 13.35. Finally so does
he deal with Niniveh in my text, he gives her full 40. days for her
probation and trial: wherein if she forsake not her sinful ways, and
turn unto the Lord, there shall not a day or hour be further spent, until the
judgment of her overthrow be pronounced, and Niniveh shall be destroyed.

Now the greatness of this judgment, is here further amplified, from the place
against which it is denounced, being Niniveh, no petty town of the nations,
no obscure place of the world, no little village or hamlet of the East, no
small city in Assyria, as Bethlem was in Judah: but a great and excellent city
of three days journey, even then one of the greatest cities in the world. For
as Diodorus Siculus in his 3. lib. and 1. cap. Herodotus in his Clio and Strabo
in the 16. of his Geography have at large described, thy Niniveh was 400. and
80. furlongs in circuit. whereas Babylon, which Aristotle in his politics
calls rather (...) a country then a city, had almost fewer by one hundred.
And some have been of opinion that afterward as it grew in wealth, so it was
much more enlarged. Her walls were in height an hundred feet, in breadth
sufficiently capeable to receive three carts on a row, in compass 400. miles,
adorned with a thousand and five hundred towers, whereof the height of every on
was two hundred feet a piece. The buildings of it very fair, being (as some
have noted) eight whole years a raising up, and not by fewer at once then
ten thousand workmen. The state of it very comme^dable, being ruled by a
king and his nobles, Ion. 3.7. The people of it almost innumerable, seeing
there were six score thousand infa^ts, that could not discern between their
right hand and their left. Ion. 4.11. In a word if J name but Niniveh I then
name al, a beautiful and pleasant city, as the Hebrew word whence it is derived
imports. Not only a great city as Moses calls it, Genesis 10.12. but a great
and excellent city, or a city great unto God, as our Prophet calls it, o
herein is the judgment aggravated! This excellent and famous and renowned
Niniveh, this large and spacious and populous Niniveh, this fair and glorious
and goodly Niniveh shall be destroyed. Niniveh that imperial commander of all
the Eastern parts, that lifted her head above the nations, that dwelt in
confidence and said, I am and there is none besides me, Niniveh shall be
destroyed. Niniveh in times past highly renowned, proud of her walls and
bul-warks, puffed up in the wealthines of her inhabitants, and the goodlines of
her buildings, Niniveh shall be destroyed. Niniveh the mother city of Assyria,
the Metropolis of the Country, the golden head of the picture, the glory of
the earth, the seat of the Empire, the Lady of the East, the Queen of nations,
the riches of the world, Nineveh shall be destroyed.

Nineveh committed; how has she offended God: that she so great and
excellent, so famous and renowed city, should have so severe a judgment,
denounced against her from the Lord? Niniveh is here so threatened, are not
expressed in my text, but else where set down by the spirit of God. That this
city was given to idolatry, it appears in the second book of Kings where it
is said that Senacherib was worshipping his false God, in the temple of
Niniveh, when his two sons slew him. 2. King. 19.37, And if ye look but
into the third chap. of the Prophecy of Nahum; you shall find other sins of
this city there reckoned up by the prophet. For he calls it a mistress of
witchcrafts, a bloody city, full of lies and robbery, from whence the pray
departs not. Unto which sins, J may also add the sins of infidelity, and
gluttony, and pride, which I do the rather judge to be general faults among
them: because in their repentance (as anon by Gods grace ye shall hear)
mention is made of suppressing these sins, of suppressing their infidelity,
by believing in God, of suppressing their gluttony by proclaiming a fast, of
suppressing their pride by putting on sackcloth from the greatest unto the
least. But that one place is insteede of all the rest, to declare the sin of
Niniveh, it is in the beginning of this prophecy of Jonas: where it is said
that the wickedness of this people was come up before the Lord, where the
name of Wickedness in the original (as the learned note) signifies the
greatest extremity that can be, and is not restrained to this or that sin one
of a thousand, but is a most absolute, and all sufficient term, to al manner
of impiety.

Thus then you see (most dear and blessed brethren, beloved in the Lord
Jesus) that it is not for a small thing, or matter of light moment: but for
many and most grievous sins, even the height of al impiety, for which Niniveh
this notable city must be destroyed. For howsoever her state was most
powerful, her government most excellent, her walls most stately, her towers
most high, her citizens most wealthy, her name most renowned, her people almost
innumerable: yet nether the mightines of her state nor the excellency of her
government, nor the climing of her walls, nor the aspiring of her towers, nor
the riches of her citizens, nor the honor of her name, nor the multitude of her
people, if she once give over her self to sin; can make her secure from the
wrath of God. For greatness of sins will shake the foundation of the greatest
cities, and multitude of offenses will diminish and consume whole multituds of
men. Jericho the city of palme-trees as she is called. Deuteronomy. 34.3. being
withal a wicked and uncircumcised city, idolatrous in the worship of God, and
hostile to his people, had a lamentable end. For lo the men of arms, at the
Lords appointment, utterly destroyed all that was in it, both man and woman,
young and old, beasts and cattle, oxen and asses, with the edge of the sword,
Ios. 6.21. Tyrus was rich with the seed of Nilus that brought her abundance,
the harvest of the rivers were her revenews, and she a mart of the nations, it
was a glorious city, and her antiquity of ancient days: she crowned men and
her merchants were Princes, and her chapmen the nobles of the world. Es. 23.
Yet behold the judgments of the Lord, against that city for her sins, as it is
in the same chapter: it was told her, that her own feet should lead her a
far of to be a soiourner: for the Lord of hosts had decreed it, to stain the
pride of all glory, and to bring to contempt all the honorable in the earth. No
was full of people, and lay in the rivers, and had the waters round about it:
whose ditch was the sea, and her wall was from the sea yet, for her sins, was
she carried away, and went into captivity: her young children were dashed in
pieces at the head of the streets, and they cast lots for her noble men, and al
her mighty men were bound in chains, Nahum. 3.10. Yea Babylon called a great
city as well as Niniveh, that said in her heart, I sit as Queen, I am no
widow, and shall see no mourning: by reason of her iniquities has her
judgment pronouned by the angel: It is fallen, it is fallen, and is become the
habitation of Devils and the hole of all foul spirits, and the cage of every
unclean and hateful bird. Revel. 18.2. Nay Ierusaleus though the perfection of
beauty, and joy of the whole earth, Lament. 2.15. Though she were as dear
unto the LORD as the signet on his right hand, and the only spowse of the
great king of heaven: yet because she became wanton, and played the harlot,
and would not be reclaimed: she was made a spectacle of vengance and judgment
to all the coasts of the earth and nations of the world. That sanctified city
that chosen city of the Lord, that city built in unity, the Queen and
Empress of the Provinces, was so defaced, and leveled with the ground, that
not one stone was left standing upon an other, neither in their houses, walls,
bulwarks, turrets, nor in the altars, sanctuary, or temple, the old, the
young, the matrones, the virgins, the infantes, the princes, the priests, the
Prophets, and the Nazerites were al slain, famished, fettered, scattered
abroad, and utterly consumed. For further knowledge of all which, J refer you
to Josephus de bello Iudaico where these things are largely set down; and he
that reads that story with dry eyes, I will say that his heart is harder then
the hardest adamant, and himself less compassionate then the most barbarous
Scythian in the world. Si sit in viridi quid fiet in arido? If this be done in
the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke 23.31. If the Lord dealt so
severelye with the Jews that were the natural branches: what will he do unto
them that are but the wild branches? Romans 11.21. And if he brought so heavy a
destruction upon his own city for sin: then let not this famous city of London
flatter her self in her security: but let her, and all the cities of the
world fear and tremble, least committing the like sins, the Lord bring upon
the^ the like judgments. For as his mercy is comfortable: so is his judgment
inevitable, and they that will not with Niniveh embrace him in the on, in
accepting the time of 40 days, to their conversion; shall undoubtedly feel him
in the other, in receiving a perpetual judgment to their confusion. And so much
be spoken concerning this second circumstaunce, of the first general part.
which was Gods judgment, denouncing destruction against Niniveh, if in the time
allotted, she would not amend.

And Niniveh shall be destroyed. Now let us see, what further use and
application we may make of these things unto our selves.

Jhad thought (Right Honorable, Application of the former doctrines.
right worshipful and dearly beloved in Christ Jesus) when I first made choice
of this text to have applied this sermon of Jonas to this renowned city of
London being the Metropolu of al England as Niniveh was of Assyria, because in
my simple judgment this argument here handled may very well befit this place
and these times. But considering with my self that many of this great
assembly are inhabitants of other places of this land, I do rather think it
best to apply it to the people of England in general; that what is spoken of
them, every man in particular may account as spoken unto himself. And here,
beloved, to proceed according to our Prophets method. If ever there were
nation or kingdom under the cope of heaven, to who^ the Lord has manifested
himself to be a God of much patience and long suffering: surely ours is that
nation, ours is that kingdom. How has he desired Englands salvation, Gods
mercies to England.
how has he waited for her conversion, how has he sought to win and woo her
to contrition? He has sent her not one Jonas, one time, but many hundred
Prophets and teachers, daily and howrely to call her to repentance. He has
given her not 40. days as he did Niniveh, but full forty years and more to
bethink her self: under the peaceable government of a most gracious
sovereign. Never did any father so long endure, the untoward linesse of a
wicked son, never did any Prince so long suffer, the rebellions of a
disloyal subject, never did any Lord so long forbear, the punishment of a
negligent servant, never did any husband so long sustain the injuries of a
levvde-living wise, as he our gracious father, has done us prodigal sons,
as he our heavenly king, has done us vnnarural subjects, as he our mighty
Lord, has done us careless servants, as he our loving husband, has done us
faithless wines. His mercy and forbearance to the Israclits, was nothing, in
respect of that he has showed to us the people of England. He has delivered
us from the spiritual darkness of Egypt, the palpable obscurity of ignorance
and superstition. He has appointed us his laws and ordinances, his statutes
and his commandments. He has given us Manna from heaues, angels food, the
bread of our souls, the word of life, where with he has fed us these many
years. But as the young hinds in Job, being once grown sat with corn go
from their dams, and return not to them again. Job. 39.7. So we being fatted
and replenished with these and a thousand the like unspeakable benefits and
blessings forget and forsake the Lord of heaven. Witness our unthankfulness
and disobedience, our grudging and murmuring against our maker. Witness our cold
zeal and lukewarmenes in our profession, witness our backsliding from the
truth, our neglect and contempt of the word of God. Witness the burden of
innumerable sins, under which our land groaneth: enmity and dissension, fraud
and dissimulation, covetousnes and oppression, pride and ambition, adusterie
and fornication, swearing and forswearing, lying and stealing and the like, al
which had long since pulled down the heavy wrath of God and his just
judgments upon us: had not his mercy and loving kindness hindered the same.
Let us not (my dear brethren) to far provoke this gracious and loving God,
whom we have already grieved more then 40. years by our iniquities. You know
that pride, and fulness of bread, abundance of idleness, and no stretching forth
of hands unto the poor, were the very capital and head sins, which did
even wrest and wring from the Lord, his heavy and fearful judgment on
Sodom and Gomor. Ezech. 16.49. And yet who does not know, that all these
sins, and infinite other, do in as bad manner, and no less measure, reign
and revel in England what other sequel the^ is to be feared, the^ that the
Lord should shower down his plagues and judgments upon us, in as great
measure as ever he did upon the^? For he is the same God now, as he was then,
and his hearted to sin is still the same. We read of three grievous punishments,
which the Lord threatens to bring upon his people for their sins I wall
consume them, says he, by pestilence, by famine, and by the sword ser. 14:12.
Beloved in Christ Jesus, Gods judgments rustly to be expected on England, if it
do not speedily repent.
let not England slatter her self any longer with the Lords patience, for she
has provoked him to long. Beholdnow the axe of this anger is put to the root
of the tree, his fan is in his land to purge his flore, his fire is kindled,
his bow is ready bent, the arrows of his vengance are ready drawn to the head,
and the full viols of his displeasure hangs over our heads ready, to power
down the like or greater judgments upon us: if we speedely turn not unto him,
by a true and unfeigned repe^ra^ce. The great plague in England 1593. See Stowes
Cronicle.
The years are not yet many, nor the time long, since the inscriptions on your
doors without, were as evident testimonies of the destroying Angel of the Lord
within: since the arrow that flies by day, the pestilence that walks in the
darkness and the plague that destroys at noone day, devoured many thousands
in this city, and other places of this land. And had not Gods mercy bin the
greater, in saying then to his Angel, as in like case we read he did: it is
sufficient hold new thy hand 2. Sam. 24.16. A man might have wa^dred about our
conntry, as Diogenes sometimes did about Athens, with a candle and lantern in
his hand at noonday: to seek, I do not say, a good man, but any man at al,
and not have found him. The great dearth. 1597
The years are not yet many, nor the time long, since the husbandma^, as the
prophet spekaeth sowed much and brought in little, since the heavens over us
stayed themselves from dew, and the earth under us brought not forth her
fruits, since the staff of our bread was broken. and cleanes of teeth
fou^din alour villages, and want of victuals in alour cities. And had not Gods
mercy bin the greater then unto us in sending a plentiful increase: our skin
had cleaved to our bones, and withered like a stock Lament. The Spanish fleet
1588.
4.8. Finally the years are not yet many, nor the time long, since the sword
of a foreign foe, has bin shaken at our la^d, threatening an overthrowe of the
same: since tidings of wars, and rumors of manifold troubls, have bin sounded
in our ears: to say nothing of our wicked attempts and divelish conspiracies
of many of our unnatural countri-men at home. But o Lord as thou have given but
abad success to such evil interprizes: so we beseech thee still to bring to
naught the proiects and purposes of al such either foreign adversaries that
seek our realms destruction, or treacherous Absolons that lift up their
hands, against their dread sovereign, and thine anointed. Let us not think
(my dear brethren) that these judgments of pestilence, of famine, and the
sword, have come unto us by chance, and so gone away again: There is a God
above, that in some measure has made us taste of them for our sins: whom if we
still provoke, by heaping sin upon sin, assu redly he has these, and greater
plagues in store, to power down upon us. For the arm of the Lord is not
shortened: he that has stricken us once, can, and will, for our sins, strike
the second time. He that has smot some few of our nation with the sword, can,
and will, for our disobedience, if we repent not in time, with the sword again,
destroy many thousands and millions more. He that, with the plague of
pestilence, has taken away here and there on, can, and will, for our
unthankfulness, if we repent not in time, with the same, or a greater disease
take away The lamentable experience of this we feel in this year 2603.
whole multituds together, nay devour whole cities, and towns, and leave our
land as desolate as a wilderness. He that has punished our bodis in the time of
dearth for want of bread, can, and will for our rebellion, if we repent not in
time, suffer our souls to perish for want of spiritual comfort: yea he will
bring on our land, as the Prophet speaks, not a famine of bread, but of
hearing the word of the Lord, And we shall wander from sea to sea, and from the
North eve^ unto the East shall we run to and fro, to seek the word of the
Lord, and shall not find it. Amos 8.11 12. A heavy judgment of al other (my
dear brethren) and yet most usual, where Gods word is contemned and set at
naught. Great was the glory, and glorious the light, which the Church of God
sometimes had in Asia the less, at what time the blessed Eva^gelist St. John
and Policarpus, and many other scholars of the Apostles floorished there. How
famous for the word preached were those cities of Graecia, flourishing Churches
of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse, and Thessalonica, wherein St.
Paul preached, and planted so many wholesome doctrines of the Christian faith:
and to who^ he wrote so many divine Epistles extant in our church to this day!
But for the sins and iniquities, of the inhabita^ta of those places, were not
the bright shining lamps of religion quite extinguished among them, was not the
light of the Gospel quite taken from them and since removed into the West? Nay
the city Rome was once the mirror of nations, the glory of the world, the
wonder of the West, the sanctuary of religion, the very habitation of true
piety, when her faith was published throughout the whole world, Romans 1.8. But
when religious Rome once proved beastly Babylon, the holy city an harlot,
when idolatry and superstition began once to rule and reign in her: behold
her candlestick was removed into the northern parts, and among the rest to us
of this land: where if we give it no better welcome and entertainment the^
they did, how may we not justly fear the like judgment: least the Lord
deprive us of so great a blessing, and give it to Tartarians and Moors wild
and savage people, that will with greater alacrity receive it, and peradventure
with greater fruit entertain it, then we have done.

Wherefore (my dear brethren) yet the word of the Lord is amongst us, yet the
Prophets are in Israel, yet the pearl is in our field, yet the sound of the
Gospel is heard throughout our land: O the^ let us make more reckoning and
account of it, then heretofore we have done: lest this sun be defaced, lest
this light be put out, least it be told us, as it was told the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, that our candle stick shall be removed, Revel. 2.5. Least the
Ark of God be taken from us, as it was from the Israelits, 1. Sam. 4.12.
Least as Paul and Barnabas said to the Jews: to you is the word of this
salvation sent, but seeing ye put it from you, lo we turn unto the
Gentiles, Act. 13.46. So the Lord say unto England to thee o England have J
given my word but because thou have cast it away from thee, and iudgest thy
self unworthy of everlasting life, lo J will take it away, and give it to a
barbarous nation, that shall bring forth the fru^its thereof, Math. 21.43. Yet
the Lord offers his grace unto us: O then let us according to St. Augustines
Council in tract. 33. in Johan. Use it now if we will use it at all: Least the
gate of mercy, which to day is open, to morrow be shut, and never opened again
unto us! Yet the messengers and Ministers of God do beseech us for Christ his
sake to be reconciled to him: O then let us now become new men in the Lord,
least a heavier judgment light upon us! Yet the days of plenty are amongst
us: O then let us now with Joseph lay up in store, least we die in the
famine! Yet the season is calm and the weather fair: O then let us now with
Noah build up an arc, least with the rest we perish in the flowde! Genesis 7.21.
Yet the Angel tarieth at the gates of Sodom: O then let us now with Lot
depart thence, and have away with the Angel, least with that wicked people
we be destroyed! Genesis 19.24. Yet the bridgroome taryeth and waits for us O
then let us make have to enter in with him to marriages sole^nity: least with
the foolish Virgins, we be repelled, with a non novi vos, I know you not! Mat.
25.12. Yet wisdom cries in our streeres vsque quo? O how long will yea love
vanity? O then let us now seek unto her, least, seeking hereafter, we seek in
vain, and she laugh at our destruction! Prou. 1.26. Yet the Lord sets open
his storehouse of mercy: O then let us now run to him for a blessing, least,
coming too late with Esau, we find none though we seek it with tears! Heb.
12.17. Yet the Lord knocks at the door of our hearts: O then let us now open
unto him: least he say to us as he did to Jerusalem, O that thou had known
at the lest in this thy day the things that belong unto thy peace, but now
they are hid from thee! Luke 19 42, Yet the Lord cries unto us to a mend: O
then let us, in this acceptable time of grace, harken unto him, least he say of
us, as he did of a hard hearted people: as I have cried to you, and you would
not hear me, so a time shall come when ye shall cry unto me, and I will not he
are you. Zach. 7.13. Yet the Lord calls us unto him: O then let us now come,
least, if we come hereafter, it be too late: as Ioab came to Absolon, when his
barley fields were burnt. 2. Sam. 14.31. Yet the Lord waits for our return
from Babylon: O the^ let us now return unto him, while we have time, least
hereafter he say to us as the Angel swear there shall be no more time Revel.
10.6. Yet the Lord wooeth England and London, as he did Ephraim and Judah: O
England what shall I do unto thee, O London how shall I entreat thee? O then let
us embrace the riches of his bountifullnesse, and his exceeding patience: least
we heap unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath, and of the
declaration of the just judgment of God Romans 2.5. Finally yet the Lord, by
Jonas, cries in the streets of Niniveh, and many hundred Ionasses in the
Cities and towns of England, yet 40. days, and, if ye will not repent, not
only Niniveh but the rest of the land also shall be quite defaced: O then let us
al, with Niniveh in my text, repent us of our sins, believe in God. proclaim
a fast, and put on sackcloth, least this heavy judgment denounced by our
Prophet against Niniveh justly fall on us for our transgressions. And so much
concerning my first general part which was Jonas Sermon to the Ninivits with
the application thereof unto our selves. Now follows the consideration of the
second part in the next words, to wit the Ninivites repentance; whereof a word
or two and so I will commit you to God:

So the people of Niniveh believed God, proclaimed (...) fast. etc: Here is
the fruit and effect which this Sermon wrought in the Ninivites, described as
I toulde you before in these 4. circumstances, 1. By their faith, which was not
fruitless so the people of Niniveh believed God 2. By their fasting, which
was not private, and proclaimed a fast, 3, By their attire, which was not
costly, and put on sackcloth, 4. By their number, which were not few, from the
greatest to the least. The least of which 4 circumstances, if I might dwell upon
the^, would require a longer time, then is allotted me for the handling of
them all. And J must confess that my meditations have been so far enlarged
in this second point, that (the time being almost past and the weather so
suddenly unseasonable) I shall not now deliver, without offe^ding your
patience, the on quarter of that which I had purposed. How be it because I
perceive no man desirous to depart, but every one willing to stay, and so
settle himself unto attentio^: J will be bold to point at those four
observatio^s, which are included in this second part: briefly running them al
over, tanquam Canis in Nilo lambe^s, picking here and there a little, as may
most befit this auditory and these times, leaving the consideration of the rest
to every man's private meditation. Obser. 1.


So the people of Niniveh believed God. That is, they did believe Jonas sermon
to be as true, and the judgment therein denounced to be as certain, if they
did not repent, as if God himself had spoken it unto them. Thus faith comes,
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10.17. A notable groundwork
and sure foundation of their repentance, quo sublato, omne quod super struitur
destruitur adificium. Which being taken away and removed, in vain and to no
purpose do we build up our selus in sanctity of life, and sincerity of
conversation. For as the blessed Apostle speaks, He that comes to God must
first believe that God is, Heb, 11.6. Without this faith it is impossible to
please God, and what soever is not of this faith is sin. Romans 14.23. By how
much the more it augmenteth the commendation of these Ninivites whose faith was
the first stone in their spiritual building, their first step in their
Christian race, their first link in their golden chain of Christianity, the
first sign of their new conversion, the first degree in their holy
conversation, the first ron^d in their Jacobs ladder, where by they ascended up
into the presence of the Lord a strange and a wonderful matter, that is here
said of this heathnish and idolatrous people of Niniveh, that they believed
God. Where some thing was expected, there nothing is to be found, and where
nothing was looked for, behold great abou^da^ce: the fatted soil is become
barre^, and the barten ground be areth much increase, the natural olive is
withered away and the wild olive is become fruitful: the natural vine has no
grapes, and the bastard vine bears many clusters. Credidit Ni niveh, and I
sraell incredulus perseverat, credidit praputiu^, et circu^cisio manet
infidelis, says S. Jerome upon this place. Jonas had a long time preached to
the Israelits, and lo Israel was not Israel but a disobedient nation. He
preaches but one sermon among these Ninivits, and he finds more true
Israelites among them the^ in his own country: the circumcision skorneth, and
the uncircumcision are made heirs of the promises, the children prove rebels,
and the rebels are changed into children, the Jews contemn the word, and
the Gentiles embrace it. The Israelits that were the elect of God, the sons
of Abraham, the heirs of the covenant remain unfaithful: and the Ninivites
that were Gentiles in the flesh, that were called the uncircumcision, alients
from the common wealth of Israel, strangers from the covenant of promise, they
are found faithful. So the people of Niniveh beiceved God.

dead faith, and the Devils faith, as St. James calls it. Jac. 2. Faith in
them (which if it be a true faith is never solitary in any) brings forth the
good work of fasting. They proclaimed a fast. Faith leads the way as the
mistresie, fasting a good work is ready at hand, as the hand-maide. Faith as
the foundation is first laid, fasting as the building is raised on it. Faith
as the tree is first planted, fasting as the fruit grows thereon, faith goes
before as a cause of fasting, fasting follows after as an effect of faith.
And they proclaimed a fast. Not a contentious fast, as their was, who fasted to
strife and debate Esa. 58.4. Not an Hypocritical fast, as their was who
disfigured their faces, that they might be seen of men to fast Mat. 6.16. Not
a meritorious fast, as their was, who had thought, by this means to have
merited something at the hands of God Zach. 7.5. Not a superstitious fast, as
the fast of the Papists is, who hold it noe less then damnation, on certain
days to cate the least bit of flesh: and yet at the same times they can be
content, to epicurize it with the sweetest wines, hottest spices, daintest
fruits, that foreign countries, and most delicious fish, thet the farthest
seas can afford-But the Fast of Niniveh was an orderly fast, it was a public
fast, it was an absolute fast, it was a religious fast. Orderly, because not
seditiously under taken by the multitude, but designed and appointed by the
King and his Nobles. Public, because proclaimed to be kept, not of this or
that family, but of every thing that breaths among them both man and beast.
Absolute, because they did not, with the Carthusian monks and others of the
like sort, for bear flesh, and feed on dainty fish, and svvill in their
booles of wine: but as it is in the 7. verse of this chapter, they were forbid
to taste any thing at all. Religious, because they were commanded in this
their fast, to turn from their evil wares and from the wickedness of their
hands. O what a worthy fast was this, O what a singular means to appease the
wrath of God? Pliny in his 7. lib. and 2. chap. says that fasting spittle is
present death to serpe^ts. How true that is J know not. But of this I am sure
and certain, that such a fast as this, (so solemnly undertaken, so sincerely
performed,) cannot choose but be a great means, to weaken the power of the
great Dragon the old Serpent, and quench all the fiery darts of the Devil as
Ardertes Diaboli fagictae ieiuniotum fri^ore restringendae sunt.
St. Jerome speaks. This is the foundation of alother virtues as the same
father Ad Deem triadem virginem
calls it. This is the destroyer of sins, as De Elia and ieiunio.
Ambrose names it. This is the token of humility, and extinguisher of lusts,
as Epist. 121. and ser. de ieiuni^.
Avgustine terms it. This is the rooter out of all transgressions, as St.
Bernard usually defines it. This is the tamer of the flesh, as Gregory in many
places describes it. This is the expeller of temptations, as Tertullian
commonly speaks of it. This was the means which the Israelits used, when they
were distresled for the slaughter of their men by the Beniamites: they wept and
fasted all the day unto the evening Judge. 20.26. this was the means which
Iehoshophat used, when his enemies came against him to battle: He proclaimed a
fast throughout all Judah 2. Chro. 20.3. This was the means which David used,
when his child was sick, he fasted and lay al night upon the earth. 2. Sam,
12.16. Finally this was the means which the Ninivites used in my text being
terrified with the judgment denou^ced by the Prophet they believed God, and
proclaimed a fast.

they put on sackcloth. Ahabit very fit to expresle the humility of the mind,
and well joined in this place to fasting. For these 2. are the weapons of
repe^tanc as Saecus and ieiunium at ma sunt paenueti^^ auxilae peccatorum
Hierom.
St. Jerome calls them, And therefore the same father says: consequenter ad
ieiunium saccam copulant, vt inanis venture, and habitus luctuosus, ambitiosius
dominum deprecentur. They add unto fasting homely attire, thereby to further
their prayers, and to make themselves more fit, to apply their suite unto God.
And whereas no doubt they had offended God, both inwardly and outwardly: they
do herein show the signs of their grief, both within and without. Within, by
debarring their belly, and stomachs, of their usual substance, as they did by
their absolute abstinence in their fast. Without, by making that flesh which
had taken delight before in bewty and bravery to be now basely, and ugly
clothed, with no better a garment the^ simple sackcloth, wherein as Gregory in
his 35. ^^^moral notes, is showed a roughnes and a pricking, even the
compunctio^ of our sins: And Tertullia^ calls it maroris insigne the very
ensign and badge of sorrow: because heretofore, in ancient time, they did use
to wear it upon such occasions. Witnesle the Patriarch Jacob, who, upon the
news of his son Iosephes death, is said to rent his clothes, to put
sackcloth about his loins, and to sorrow for his son a long season. Genesis
37.34. Witness Mordechai, who, when the King had yielded to the bloody request
of Haman, for murdering all the Jews, put on sackcloth and ashes, and cried a
great cry and a bitter, in the midst of the city. Hest. 4.1. Witness David,
who, in sign of his sorrow for Abner, commanded the people to rent their
clothes, and to put on sackcloth. 2. Sam. 3.31. Witness, in steed (...) whereof J
speak, whose king rose up from his throne, and laid his robe from him, and
covered himself with sackcloth, and sat in dust and ashes, whose nobles
followed him, wose Commons imitated the^; from the highest to the lowest, from
the eldest to the youngest: from the richest to the poorest, all were clade in
sackcloth and base array, as it follows in the text, from the greatest to the
least.

Ninivets repentance is discribed, is taken from their number, which were not
few, from the greatest unto the least. For it is not one of a house, or some
few of a family, or some of the better sort of the people, that thus were
ready to humble themselves before the Lord: but all in general, and every on in
particular, from the eldest father, to the youngest suckling, from the greatest
potentate to the meanest peysant, of what sex, estate, or condition soever they
be, al are ready to further this holy duty. I might here justly take occasion
to speak of the duty of superior magistrates, who may be here understood by
the greatest, as also of inferior subjects, who are specified by the least:
how they should, as at al times so especially in the times of common
calamities, with a mutual consent, cast down themselves in a general
humiliation before the highest. But I can but point at this doctrine. Let it be
sufficient for our instruction, that seeing these Ninivits did so universally
perform this, that without doubt, they shall rise up in judgment against us at
the last day, if we be defective here in having the like occasion. For in
their holy exercises, behold a pleasant harmony and agreement, mayor aetas
incipit, and vsque ad minorem pervenit, says a good father. The elder fort
begin, and the younger they follow after; the superiors say to the
inferiors, look on me and do ye likewise. Iud. 7.17. And the inferiors
answer the superiors, as the people did Joshua, all that ye command us we
will do Ios. 1.16. In a word, as according to Philosophy in the natural
body, the heart alone is not warm, but the heat thereof is a propagating
heat, diffusing it self in an orderly sort to the rest of the members, even
the hands and feet the most remote parts of the whole: so in the commonwealth
of Niniveh, which was abodie politic, the Magistrates and governers
themselves were not only thoroughly warmed with the heat of devotion: but the
common people also, and vulgar sort did participate of that quality: and as
the precious ointment upon Arons head ran down by his bearde, to the skirts of
his clothing, Psalm. 133.2. So these notable effects of believing God, and
fasting, and putting on sackcloath, were derived from the king to his council,
and nobility, and from them to the meanest subject. And as we read of the
multitude of believers, that they were of one heart, and of one soul, Act.
4.32. So here was a general consent, among a greater number of new converts:
there was but one heart, and one soul, one mind, and one meaning, one faith
and one fast, one desire, and on attire, among them al from the greatest to the
least. O what a goodly sight was this? O how was it possible but that such a
general cry and consent as this so universal a humiliation, should be
acceptable unto the Lord? For if he has promised, that were two or three are
gathered together in his name, he will be in the midst of them, Math. 18.20. How
much more the, when so many thousands of al estats conditions, assemble
themselves in sasting, sackcloth, and prayer, before their God in the great
Congregation?

Thus you see (Right Honorable, Right worshipful most dear and blessed
brethren) what a plentiful harvest, comes af a little seed sown, what goodly
rivers ishue from a little fountain, what rare and singular effects, are
wrought in these Ninivits, by a few words spoken by the Prophet Jonas. Shall I
here commend the Prophets eloquence, who, like a good orator, did so rule and
reign in their minds, that as it was said of Hercules Celticus, the ears of
his auditors, were tied with a chain, to the tip of his tongue? Or shall I
attribute it to the soft, and gentle disposition of these Ninivites, who so
easily yielded at the sound of the Prophets voice? I his one general doctrine
ishueth from all the 4. particulars of this part.
Or rather shall I not here admire, at the powerful operation of the word of
God, that being delivered by the voice of on man, and that a stranger, it
should make so great a king, so stately nobles, so rich citizens, so many
thousand of barbarous and heathen people, to veil bonnet, and to descend from
the throne of their pride, and to cast down themselves, in fasting and
sackcloth before the Lord? Surely this is that word, which, like the snow and
rayn never returns void, but prospers in the thing where unto it is sent.
Es. 55.11. This is that word, which is the power of God unto salvation. Romans
1.16. This is that word, that is like a fire and a hammer that breaks the
stone. Ier. 23 29. This is that word which is lively and mighty in operation,
sharper then any two edged sword, and entering thorough, even to the dividing a
sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the ioints, and of the marrow, and
is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart Heb. 4.12. This is that
word, that is mightly through God, to cast down houldes and to overthrow
every high thing, that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and to bring
into captivity every thought, to the obedience of Christ 2. Cor: 10.5. Finally
this is that word, which made the disciples hearts to burn within them, while
they talked with Christ. Luke 24.32. Which made Felix tremble, Act. 24.26.
Which made the Jews to be pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.37. Which made David
confess, he had sinned against the Lord, 2. Sam, 12.13. Which made the people
publicans, and soldiers, ask John Baptist, what they should do. Luke 3.14.
Which made Jonas denounce destruction to Niniveh, and Niniveh to repent, for
fear of the destruction denounced so the message of their overthrow, overthrew
the message, the prophecy fell, and the city fell not, be cause her fall was
prophesied. O new and admirable thing, (says St. Chrysostom in his 5. Hom.
ad populum Antiochenum) the denu^ciation of death, has brought forth life, the
sentence of the destruction, has made a nullity in the sentence: such is the
virtue of Gods word, such is the authority of his everlasting truth.

And is this even so? Jsthe word of the spirit so mighty in operation, has
it wrought so strange effects, and brought forth such wonderful fruits, in
ignorant people, to whom the Lord sent but one Prophet, and that in so short a
space? How great then shall our judgment be of this land, to whom the Lord in
mercy has sent so many Prophets, and teachers, these four and forty years
together, to instruct us, and to call us to repentance: and yet we lie still
frozen in the dregs of our iniquities? For if we do but examine our selves
by these Ninivits, we shall find that our repentance comes far short of
theirs. Do we, in the first place, imitate the Ninivits faith in believing of
God? I know that many do, and God forbid there should be any in a Christian
commo^-wealth, either so wilfully ignorant, as not to believe, or so
maliciously obstinate, as not to confess this truth: and yet there are not
vvanting amongst us, and they of great place also it is to be feared, that
say with the fool in the Psalm, There is no God at all. Thou damned
Atheist, whosoever thou art, lift up thine eyes unto the heavens, and behold
therein, the sun, the moon, and the stars, the wonderful works of God. Cast
down thine eyes upon the earth, and behold therein, trees, pla^ts, herbs,
flowers, beasts, and cattle: and in them co^fider not the power of nature as
thou foolishlie call it, but of the God of nature, which framed and
fashioned all. Consider the ebbing and flowing of the sea, and the wonderful
works of the highest in the deep. Look into thy self a little world, how
art thou fashioned behind and before, within and with out, how wonderfully
art thou made with variety of faculties, distinction of members, proportion
of body, to say nothing of thy soul a heavenly creature? And if all this,
will not make thee confess there is a God: yet know this, that the horror
of thy conscience, for this thy so great blasphemy, shall make thee, whether
thou will or no, acknowledge this truth. Or if thy conscience, be seared with
an hot iron in this world yet be thou well assured, that the worm of
conscience, that never dies, in the world to come shall torment thee, in the
lake that ever burns, and in the fire that never goes out.

Do we in the second place with these Ninivites betake our selves to fasting
for our sins? What then is the cause, that there are so many amongst us, who
like those voluptuous Princes of Israel, do stretch themselves upon their
beds of ivory, and cate the lambs of the flock, and the calves out of the
stal, delighting them selves in the sound of the violl, and other instruments
of music that drink wine in boles, and anoint themselves with sweet
ointments, not remembering the affliction of poor Joseph. Amos 6.6. These are
the Epicures of the world, who will rather feasT luxuriouslie with dru^ke^
Holofernes then fast religiously with these godly Ninivites. These are they,
whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, whose only felicity
consists in delicate fare: being of his mind in the history Philoxenus apud
A^^^ianum de vatia hist. lib. 10. cap 9.
who said of his meat: that that was the sweetest which was the dearest. But
as the historian there very well cou^celleth (...). These examples must be
remembered, not that any should follow and imitate them, but that every one
should abhor and detest them.

Thirdly do we imitate the Ninivites attire, in clothing our selves in
sackcloth and course garments? How then comes it to pass, that the ugly and
detestable monster pride, has so overrun our land: that al estates, and
degrees amongst us, are so tainted and infected with this blemish? Noblemen in
the court, Gentlemen in the country, serving men every where, vpstart
Swaggerers and cutting Caveliers, who, when they have no inward qualities to
commend the^, they must have the ivy bush of long hair to hang over their
shoulders; not regarding St. Paul's reproof. 1. Cor. 11.14. nor Absolons
judgment. 2. Sam. 18.9. These are our inventors of new fashioned garments,
our French, our Turkish, our Spanish, our Italian Englishmen. For a man may
see a lively resemblance of al these in their apparel: as if the vanities of al
nations, were little enough, to make up the measure of an Englishmans pride.
Let them not think, that want of other matter, has driven us to tax these
follies in the^. It is rather want of grace in them, that they will not amend.
For if we should not cry out against these their foul, and filthy sins they
would, on day, cry out before the tribunal seat of God, against them and us.
Good God, that the sonns of Adam, should so far degenerate from their father
Adam! He good man wos content, with a garment of fig tree leaves to hid
bunakednes. Genesis 3^. But we will scarce be pleased with the ratest, and richest
workmanhip, that art or nature can afford, to cover our sinful bodies. Nay as
Pliny in his 5. lib. and first chapter noted the riott and excelle of his
time: so may we justly do the like of outs. Because forests are sought out,
far and near, for iuory and citron trees, and all the rocks of Gerulia are
searched for sheifishes, that yield the purple crimson color, to make our
apparel show glorious. But o folly and vanity of advanities says the same
another, ever to think, o^sidering our simple beginning, yt we were sent into
the world, to line in pride, and to adorn and deck our carkesses in braverie,
that are naught but clay and put refaction.

Finally do we with these Ninivites, in the last circumstance, generally turn
unto the Lord, and humble our selves before him, from the greatest unto the
least? what the^ is the cause, that all of us young and old, high and low, have
so erred in our ways: everyone, turning into his own race, as the horse
rusheth into the battle, to speak with the Prophet? Ier. 8.6. What is the
cause, that, in this bright sunnshine of the Gospel, such palpable darkness
of error and ignorance, such relics of superstition and idolatry, should
remain amongst us? What is the cause that so many of us, are mere temporizing
newters, luke warm professors, neither hot nor cold like them. Revel. 3.15.
halting between two opinions, coldlie professing the Religion established, but
in heart embracing Papistical false-hood? What is the cause, that the Iesu^ites
and Seminaries, find such secret favor amongst us: who, like subtle
deceavers, are at open war on with another, but yet tied to gither by the
tasse like Sampsons Foxes with fire brandes to destroy our Church? What is the
cause that, after the Gospel so long preached, holiness of life is so little
practiced: that many come not at all to hear the word of God or coming, with
the dease adder they stop their ears at the sound thereof or hearing it, bring
not forth the fruits of repe^ta^ce: or repenting for a time, return at le^ght
with the dog to his vomit, and the swine unto her filth? Lastly what is the
cause that our land is full of adulterers, and because of oaths the land
mourns, to use the Prophets words Ier. 23.10. that vsurye has corrupted the
rich cormorant, ambition the proud Prelate, covetousnes the greedy lawyer,
disdain the scornful courtier, deceit the cunning artificer, and the like.
that all estates and degrees, are known by their several sins, as every
gentleman by his several cognizance? Is this our universal conversion unto the
Lord? is this the fruit of the Gospel? are these the badges of our repentance?
Are these the effects, I say not of one sermon as Jonas his was to Niniveh, but
of so many thousand sermons, delivered from time to time unto us? Never more
preaching never less pra^^^ing.
Beloved in Christ Jesus, I am verily persuaded, that the immortal seed of
Gods word, was never more plentiful sown since the Apostles time, then it has
bin amongst us, these many years togitherithe Lord make us thankful for so
great a blessing. And yet as Lictantius said, there was never less wisdom in
Greece, then in the time of the 7. wise men: so I sear me it may be to truly
said, there was never less piety in England, then in this long eontinuance of
so many godly and zealous Pastors. Sodom and Gomer, Tire and Sidon, shall rise
up at the last day and co^demn us: for if halse so many lecturs, and sermons,
and exhortations, and instructions, had bin preached among them, as have bin
amonst us, They had surely repented in sackcloth and ashes. The Queen of the
South, shall rise up in judgment, against us at the last day for she came from
the uttermost part of the earth to hear the wisdo^e of Salomo^ Mat. 12.42. But
many of us, refuse to step out of our doors, to hear the heavenly wisdo^e of
the true Salomo^ Christ Jesus, revealed in his heave^ly word. The Publicans and
soldiers, shall rise up at the last day and co^demn us: for at the preaching of
on John Baptist, they were moved in their minds Luke 3.14 But let all the
Ministers and messengers of God, cry out til they be hoarce against our sins,
and yet our hearts ar nothing pricked, and yet our affections are nothing
stirred up. Those wicked Jews, that crucified the Lord of life, shall rise up
at the last day and co^demn us; for they, at on sermon of St. Peter, were
co^verted to the number of three thousand. Act. 2.41. But how many fermous shall
a man make amongst us, before he convert on sinful soul, before he bring
home one stray sheep to the sheepfold of Christ Jesus? The Ninivits as you have
hard, at one little sermon of a few words, delivered by one Jonas, repented in
sackcloth and ashes, from the greatest to the least, but we have hard, not in
this place only, but in all the corners, and quarters of our la^d, many hundred
Ionasses, yea many thousand pastors and prophets, and preachers of the word:
and yet for all this, where is our faith in believing God? where are the fasts we
have proclaimed? where is the sackcloth we have put on? where are the superiors
to design? where ar the inferiors to put in practice these holy exercises?
Lastly all the creaturs of God, shall rise up at the last day and condemn us:
for they, in their several places, do in their kind, perform their duty to
their creator, and are obedient to his word: but we only, as the most
unreasonable, and inse^sible of al other, continue obstinat and rebellious
still. The heave^s declare the glory of God, the lights obey him with fear, the
stars shin in their watch, the moon keeps her appointed season, the su^ knows
his going down, the waters fly at hi rebuke: the earth trembles and the
mou^tains shak. The stork in the aier knows her appointed time, and the
turtle, and the crane, and the swallowe observe the time of their coming: the
ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters cribb: but we only, as the
most unreasonable, and insensible of al creatures continue obstinate and
rebellious still. What should I say more (beloved in Christ lesus) senseless
stones are more obedient to Gods voice the^ we are. Behold Moses with his rod
stroke the rock but twice, and the waters gushed out abundantly. Number. 20.11.
but though the God of Moses, strik our stony hatts, twice twenty times, with
the hammer of his word: yet, where is that penitent Peter amongst us, J say
not, that vveopeth bitterly, but that sheddeth one tear, in remembrance of his
transgressions? Behold the stony walls of Jericho, after God had summoned them
by his Priests, sou^ding their trumpets thrice, at the third found, fell flat
upon the ground. Ios. 6.20. But we have resisted, not the third, or the fourth,
or the sift only, but more the five hundred solemn summons, and several
sounds: none of them could ever move us, none of them could once awake us.
Isidore in his 12. lib. and 2. cap. de brutis animalibus, reports of the young
Lions, that, after 3. days, they are raised and rowsed, by the roaring of the
old: but the Lion of the tribe of Judah Christ Jesus, by preaching of his
word, has roared, not 3. days alone but more the^ 43. years together amongst
us, and yet for all this we are not roused, and yet for all this we are not
awaked. what? is not Christ the same Christ still? is not his Gospel as
fruitful, is not his doctrine as effectual, is not his word as powerful now as
ever it was? yes my dear brethren. But the fault is in us. Our marble and
flinty hearts will not be softened, with the sweet shewers of Gods heavenly
word, co^fortably falling down upon the^: our stiff and yronsinewed necks, will
not bow with any yoke, either the sweet and easy voke of the Gospel. Mat.
11.30. or the heavy and unsupportable yoke of the law. Act. 15.10. our faces
are like whores forheads, that will not blush Ier. 3.3. our ears are so deaf,
our eyes so dry, our senses so dull, our wills so obstinat, our affections so
barren, our desires so cold: that neither the infamy and shame of the world can
move us, nor al gentle admonitio^s allure us, nor the terrible threatenings of
Gods judgments fear us, nor the continual preaching of all the creatures of
God under heaven persuade us unto repentice. Nay we are so soundly rocked and
lulled a sleep in the careless cradell of security, that neither the goulden
bells of Aaron, nor the thundering trump of Esaias, nor the well tuned cymballs
of David, nor the shril sound of Gods word, continually ringing in our cares,
ca^ once awake us. Being herein like to those bears, of who^ Selinus writes,
in his 39. chap. qui tam gravi semno premu^tur, vt ne vulneribus quidem
excitariqucant. who are so far oppressed with a heavy sleep, that though they
be wounded, yet can they not be wakened. Or like those fishes of who^
Aristotle in his 4. l. and 10. c. de hist. animaliu^ writes: that they sleep
so sou^dly that, though they have spears thrust into their sides, yet they
stir not at all: so sense-lesse also are we in this our carnal security, that
though the Ambassadors of the King of heaven, as so many sons of thunder, with
Jonas in my text denou^ce judgment against us, out of that word, which is
sharper the^ any two edged sword: yet for all this, we do not with these
Ninivits yield and cast down our selves before the Lord: but rather like to the
dru^kard sleeping in the top of the mast Pro 23. when we are thus strike^ we
feel it not, when we are thus beaten we awake not, when we are thus admonished
we amend not.

Wherefore (most dear and blessed brethren beloved in the bowels of Christ
lesus) to conclud al in a word, (...)
as he said to the Angel of the church that is at Sardis: so give me leave, I
beseech you, to say the same to every on of you, that hears me this day.
Remember how you have received etc. Rev. 33. Remember that this day you have
hard of a message from the Lord to a great city, and of the conversion of a
great city unto the Lord. Remember in the one Gods patience to Niniveh, in
sparing it long Yet 40. days: And yet his severe judgment of destruction, if
she would not amend, and Niniveh shall be destroyed: Remember in the other the
Nini vits turning unto the Lord, begun with faith, continued with fasting,
declared in sackcloth, performed of al, from the greatest unto the least. And
remember that the Lord has sent, the same messag this day to England, to
London, nay to us all, as he did to Niniveh: giving us yet time to repent, if
we will accept him. O then let us love him in his mercy: threatening our o
verthrow, if we do neglect him, o the^ let us fear him in his judgments, let
us now repent, while we have time, least hereafter we would repent, when we
shall have no time. Let us now turn unto the Lord, in believing on him, in
pinching our bellies with fasting, in clothing our backs with sackcloth, and
in a general humiliation of our selves before him, that so he may turn away
his wrath, and heavy judgments, from us and from our land. Let us now open
our ears, at the sound of his word preached. That being opened, we may hear
it carefully, and, carefully hearing it, we may conceive it rightly, and,
rightly conceiving it, we may believe it faithfully, and, faithfully believing
it, we may discern it fruitfully, and, fruitfully discerning it, we may
practice it effectually, and bring forth the fruits thereof accordingly, thereby
growing from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue, until at the last we
become perfect men in Christ Jesus. That so being now accepted as sons, into
the kingdom of grace in this world, we may hereafter be received as heirs,
into the kingdom of glory, in the world to come. Which the Lord of his infinite
mercy grant unto us all, for his Dear Sonns sake Jesus Christ, to whom with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, one eternal, everliving, and
only wise God, be rendered and ascribed all Honor, and Glory, Power and
Praise, Might and Majesty, Dignity and Dominion, now and for evermore. Amen.

FJNIS.

