A LEARNED AND PROFITABLE TREATISE OF GODS Providence.

Written for the instruction and comfort of the Godly: for the winning and
conversion of Sinners: and for a terror to the obstinate and profane: Divided
into six parts.

By RALPH WALKER Preacher of the Word.

DEVT. 2.7. The Lord thy God has bin with thee this forty years, and thou
have lacked nothing.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Thomas Man. 1608.

TO THE WORTHY, ANCIENT, AND most virtuous two houses of the Right Honorable
the Lord Harington Baron of Exton in the County of Rutland, and Sir William
Fitzwilliam of Milkton in the County of Northampton Knight; grace and peace be
multiplied from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
RIght Honorable, and right Worshipful, finding you always hand in hand,
nearly united, with those firm combining bonds of nature, virtue, love, and
pure religion, I have presumed, (hoping without offense to any) humbly to
crave you ioynt-Patrons of these my indigested labors: which being accepted,
as they are presented, signs of my humble love and duty, and may further
seem worthy the judicious reading, I have my desire, and the labor (I trust)
will prove lost on neither side. The subject is very divine, answering your
affections: exceeding high, not unbefitting your personages: most necessary,
and therefore not unworthy your studies. Touching my own meannesse, the
Heathen man pleades for me: Non quis, sed quid dicit attendito: Sencca.
Not who says, but what is said, ought to be considered. Christ is that good
Sower, his Ministers but as baskets containing the seed; Christus seminat, nos
Cophini seminantis.
amongst which, since it has pleased him to account me as one, (of all other
though most vnsufficie^t) my hope is, that I may inclusiuely say with
Augustine; Aug. de Doct. Christi.
Etiam in nobis aliquando ponere dignatur quod velit spargere: Even into us
silly ones does Christ sometimes vouchsafe to put that, which he purposes to
sow amongst his children. But the phrase is rude: I wish (Right Honorable) that
I could play the Rhetorician, docendo, delectando, flectendo; Aug. de Doctr.
Christ. lib. 4.
in teaching, delighting, persuading: yet since the first is a work of
necessity, the latter of victory, and that other but of mere delight, it
shall rejoice me to perform the two chief, leaving the less necessary to
those that excel therein. Seneca.
Non delectent verba vestra, sed prosint: Our words must rather bring profit,
then procure delight. The sick man respects the good potions, and not the
eloquence of the Physician: and it is a rule in Ambrose, Melius est vt nos
inteliigant populi, quam vt commendent Grammatici. Ambros.
rather to speak that the meanest may conceive, then that the Grammarian may
commend. But above all, the precept of the Apostle, Let all things be done to
edification, is most to be respected. In grave and divine sentences, it often
proves, vt dum numerus addatur, pondus detrahatur, that whilst men add an
eloquent form of words, they detract from the substance of the matter: August.
where we only desire that that which is shut may be opened, what good does
the golden key if it will not open, and what hurt does the wooden key if it
does open? If the method seem preposterous, Bern. ad Eug.
I appeal as Bernard to Eugenius; Confusa disterminat consideratio: If due
considerations will reduce all into order. Wherein my hope is the greater, in
that experience does teach, that the most worthy, and best affected, verum
magis amant in verbis, August.
quam verba, do rather look to the truth delivered, then respect the manner of
delivery. If nothing is said but what was heard before, yet facilis est
obliuio boni; Hieron.
A good thing (says Hierome) is soon forgotten, and therefore not
unprofitable to recall things to mind, that we may not be unmindful. The end
of all, Sunt qui scire volunt, eo tantum fine vt sciant, and turpis curiositas
est: alij, vt sciantur. and turpis vanitas est: alij, vt scientiam suam
vendant, and turpis quaestus est: aly, vt aedificent, and prudentia est. Bern.
whether it be only to know, which is but curiosity; or that I may be known,
which is but vanity; or that I may sell my knowledge, which is but avarice; or
that I may help others, which is Christian prudencie, I leave to God that can
judge the truth, and to you his dear children that have learned to think the
best. And thus committing your Honorable estates to the Almighties saving
protection, my labors to your favorable censures, and my self to your due
command, I rest,

Ever bound in all duty, always devoted in pure love, Ralph Walker.

To the Reader.
COnsidering (Christian Reader) the precept of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 6.33.
the practice of all Gods children, Luke 12.31.
Jn Cant.
Ea prius ampliusque curare quae sunt viciniora saluti: First and chiefly (as
Bernard says) to respect those things which are most available to salvation:
I cannot but wonder at the common course of the world, that whereas the
knowledge of the Providence of God, is most requisite to this purpose, being
both an introduction to the rest, and also simply necessary in it self; and
that the whole world being a school of the same, every creature a Tutor,
Quocunque te vertis, veritas vestigijs quihusdam quae operibus suis impressit,
tibi loquitur. Aug. de lib. Arbit.
every action a proof, and every motion a plain Demonstration; that yet
notwithstanding (as lamentable experience does teach) most men, if not in all,
yet in some points are wholly ignorant of the same. Whether this does proceed
from shame to enquire, sloth to learn, neglect to know, scorn to be taught,
or from a persuasion that we see well already, Multa nesciuntur, aut sciendi
incuria, aut discendi desidia, aut verecundia inquirendi; and quidem huiusmodi
ignorantia non habet excusationem. Bern. in Epist. Ad Valent. Jn Moral.
like the fool in Seneca, who though her eyes were quite out, yet would sooner
believe the house was dark at noone day, then that she had lost her seeing;
this ignorance thus far growing, or thus arising, can plead no excuse. Aliud
est nescire, aliud nolle scire: It is one thing (says Augustine) not to know,
and another thing to refuse to know: Gregory notes the difference, Nescire
ignorantia est, scire noluisse, superbia est: Not to know is ignorance, but to
refuse to know, is arrogancy. And who do refuse? Chrysostom tells thee;
Quibus fuit inueniendi facultas, si fuisset quaerendi voluntas: Those which had
means to know, if they had had wills to seek. Augustine tells me there are
two persons commendable in Religion: De vtilit. credendi.
the one, he which has found the truth, the other, he which would find it.
If therefore the consideration of the precept of Christ, of the practice of the
Church, of the necessity of this doctrine, of the dangerous estate of those
that are ignorant of it, shall move to a desire to be instructed therein,
this person I would help a little; of that former I would be helped my self:
and therefore dare not offer this my simple Treatise, (like an unskillful
Empirick,) to inform a Doctor: but seeing the contagion of sin very
extreme, and every good Physician to have more then enough to do to cure the
same, I have presumed to minister those approved receites, which of great and
good Physicians I have long ago learned. God sends the more excellent,
sometimes to the less excellent, as man to the ante, the swallow, the storke,
the crane, the ox, the ass, to learn understanding: my hope is then, Modus
dicendi apertus, est omnibus accessibilis, licet paucissimis penetrabilis. Aug.
ad Volusianum.
that the best may get some good from hence; if it be but from a sight of the
small gifts in me, to consider of the great in themselves, and so to be
stirred up to more thankfulness to God, and greater care to use them, they
shall not lose their labor. All true members though not in the same place, nor
of the same dignity, yet do labor the preservation of the whole. Every man
cannot bring gold and silver to the Temple: every one has not the skill of
caruing, and working curiously: if I may bring baser metals, so they be
necessary, or by working plainly, may help in the building, it shall be my
comfort, and I shall hartelie praise God for it: neither distrust I, but that
by diligent reading, and faithful prayers to God for a blessing, it shall be
effected. Quod credimus, debemus authoritati: quod intelligimus, rationi. quod
ceramus, opinioni. Aug. de vtil. cred.
And so leaving the errors of the wilful to their opinions which begat them,
but wishing that thy understanding (gentle Reader) may lean to reason, and thy
belief to the surest authority: I commit thee to Gods protection.

Thine in the Lord, RALPH WALKER.

THE ANALYSIS, OR sum of the whole Book.
1. That all things are maintained, governed, PART. 1.
and effected by Gods Providence: wherein,

1. That this Providence extends, 1. Generally to all. proved 1. By the word
of God. 2. Especially to his Church. proved 2. By the consent of the Fathers.
3. To the wicked. proved 3. By Heathen writers. 4. To the meanest things.
proved 4. By mere reason.


2. What this Providence of God is, PART. 2.
and the order he uses in governing by the same: wherein, 1. The definition.
2. The difference between Providence and Predestination. 3. False opinions, 1.
Of those which think there is no virtue of working in second causes, but that
God being in them, works all immediately of himself? confuted. 2. Of those
which affirm, God gouernes all things by a general influence only. confuted.
4. Gods order of governing: 1. Sometimes without means. 2. Sometimes against
means. 3. Usually by means.
5. Questions, 1. Why sometimes without means. answered. 2. Why sometimes
against means? answered. 3. Why commonly by means? answered. 4. What these
means are? answered. 5. Whether superior creatures work upon inferior?
answered. 6. Whether their operation extends unto men: and in what things?
answered.



3. PART. 3.
Whether Gods Providence is immutable or not: and if it be, whether it imposes
a necessity upon all things: wherein, 1. That all things fall out immutable in
respect of God. 2. Objections to the contrary propounded, and answered. 3.
That this immutabilitie inferres a necessity upon all things. 4. What is
meant by necessary. 4. What is meant by contingent. 5. That every necessity
arises from causes, 1. Jnternall, 3. External, or, 3. From both jointly
considered.
6. That causes are Definite, Their effects, Neccessary, how both true. 6. That
causes are Jndefinite, Their effects, Contingent, how both true. 7. Reasons
confirming a necessity over all things. 8. That no necessity takes away the
liberty of the will. 9. Objections against the distinctions propounded,
ansvvered.


4. That notwithstanding God effects all, PART. 4.
and that there is an immutabilitie and necessity in all things, yet that he
cannot be the author of sin: wherein, 1. Diverse opinions touching the Author
of sin. 2. That to will, is taken Properly. 2. That to will, is taken
Jmproperly. 3. That God wills the evil of the punishment: that is, the
natural evil. 4. That God wills sin, as a punishment of former sins.
5. That God wills sin as it is an action, Inward, or, Outward. 6. That God
does will sin as it is a guilt or bond. 7. That he does not will sin as
it is a transgression, but only willingly permits it. 8. The difference
between Gods effectual vvilling, and and his vvilling permission. 9. That God
can by no means be the Author of sin: proved 1. By his word. 2. By mere
reason.
Amongst many the last concluding that by no means possible, neither his 1.
Knowledge, 1. Contemplative. 2. Active.
2. Decree, 1. Within himself. 2. Without himself.
3. Will, 1. Efficient. 2. Commanding. 3. Permissiue.
4. Neither because he could hinder sin, and does not. 5. Neither because he
might have made man immutable, but would not: can make him to be Author of
sin.
10. That God. Common Nature, The will are sole causes of our actions: wherein
is showed, 1. Their virtue and manner of vvorking. 2. That they work that
which is good. 3. How (yet notvvithstanding) our actions become evil.
11. How sin is attributed in the word of God, to 1. God, 2. Man, 3. Satan.
12. A rule to know when our actions are Good, what causes either. 12. A
rule to know when our actions are Evil, what causes either.


1 Answers to the objections made against this maine position: PART. 5.
God gouernes all things: therein, Shevving further That the righteous. 1.
Overcome all afflictions. 2. Have comfort in all troubles. 3. Gain by all
adversities. 4. Are indeed rich. 5. Have true honor and blessedness.
That the wicked, 1. Are svvallovved up of their miseries. 2. Have true comfort
in nothing. 3. Lose by all things. 4. Are very poor. 5. Are base and miserable.

And therefore no disorder in Gods government.


2. Objections against the manner of Gods government, with answers unto them:
as, 1. To those against Gods using of second means. 2. To the absurdities
inferred from a grant of the use of means. 3. To the absurdities inferred from
his sometimes using no means. 4. To the absurdities inferred from the
immutabilitie of his government.


3. Answers to objections falselie inferred upon this doctrine: That God is
Author of the evil of the punishment.

4. Objections to prove God the Author of the evil of the sin: with answers
unto them.

6. The uses of the doctrines delivered: PART. 6.
amongst which, these especially.

1. From his effecting of all things: 1. To abandon fortune, and to acknowledge
Gods government. 2. Especially to labor, to be of Christ's Church. 3. To love
God above all. 4. To fear him in his works. 5. To pray to him for a blessing
on all things. 6. The rich not to insult over the poor. 7. The poor not to
repine at the rick. 8. None to deprave Gods government. 9. Thankfulness to
God, and not to sacrifice to our own nets. 10. To be patient in all troubles.
11. To seek to God, and not unto witches.
2. From his manner of governing: 12. To use means both for saving of souls
and bodies. 13. Not to despair when means are vvanting.
3. In that it belongs to him to punish sin: 14. To fear the committing of
the least sin.
FINIS.
A LEARNED AND PROFITABLE treatise of Gods Providence.
That all things in the World, whether they live, move, or have a being, are
maintained and governed by Gods Providence.
IT is a main infirmity crept into all, and never clean cured in any, to be
(as the Apostle says) (...) obtenebratum, Ephesians. 4.18.
darkened in the understanding. Experience teaches the blind man to be
incident to many miseries: though the way be plain, yet he will stumble:
though the path be straight, yet he will wander: though the day be clear,
yet he sees nothing, and if any thing, yet very darkely. Tit. 3.3.
Sin has blind folded all: none can see but those whom God does enlighten;
and none are so enlightened, but that they see obscurelie. Hence it is, that
although the Providence of God, is that plain way, that straight path, that
clear light, yet some stumble at it, some wander from it, some see it not at
al. Democritus thought God made not the world, Diverse opinions touching Gods
Providence.
and therefore could not govern it. Auerroes, that although he made it, yet
he is ignorant of what is done in it. Protagoras (worse then both) that it
has neither Governor nor Maker. Some think, that God respects the heavens,
but has no regard to that which is done upon Earth. Some, that he cares for
all, but yet commits the dealing in mean matters unto the sons of men; as
kings ouerburthened with weighty affairs, put over inferior causes to their
magistrates under them. Some, that God gouernes all things, but without the use
of second causes. Others attribute so much to their working, thinking all
things to be carried away with such a violent necessity, as yt God cannot
alter their working when he would, nor hinder their effects when it seems good
unto him. This being so, I hold it convenient, first to prove Gods Government:
and then in the second place to define, and show the manner of the same. And as
we see nature has received of God, that a master should have a general care
of all that is under him, and from this, in the chiefest place to respect his
children, in the second, his hired servants, and in the third and last, his
cattle and baser necessaries: so (undoubtedly) it is originallie in that great
Master of the whole families of the Earth, generally to provide for all, yet
chiefly for his children, less for his disobedient servants, and least for
other things subjected unto them. Unto the proouing whereof in order: First by
Gods word, whose authority cannot be rejected: Secondly from the consent of
the holy fathers, whose judgments are much to be reverenced: Thirdly, from
the opinions of Heathen writers, whose light of nature is not to be contemned:
Lastly, from mere reason, by men of least reason, not to be denied.

Gods general Providence proved by his word.
WHen God that reioiceth in mercy, was constrained to open ye doors of his
judgment house upon the whole world, Genes. 6.
because their great and their crying sins were still multiplied against him:
whereas the punishment might justly have redounded unto all both reasonable,
and unreasonable, (in as much as the reasonable had most grieuouslie sinned,
and the unreasonable with the contagion of that sin, were wonderfully
corrupted) yet God would have Noah to make an Arc, wherein not only some of
mankind, but of all other creatures also, should be preserned. A sure president
of his infinite love to his Church, and great care over other things. God
(says Job) is wise in heart, Job 9.4.5.6.7.8.
and mighty in strength: He rules the earth, he walks upon the sea, he
spreads the heavens, he commands the sun and it rises not, he closes
up Orion, Arcturus, the Pleiades and all the stars as under a signet: He
alone (says David) numbreth them, Psalm. 147.
and calls them by their names: He covers the heavens, prepares rain, and
makes grass to grow upon the mountains. Ierem. 23.24.
He is present (as himself says by Jeremy) to all his creatures: not as an
idle beholder, (as some foolishly have imagined) but as a powerful Governor
(as Paul teaches the men of Athens) giving life and breath unto al things;
Act. 17.24.25.26.
making of one blood all nations of men to dwell on the face of the earth. But
how and in what manner? determining the several times appointed, and also the
bounds of their habitations. Yea, (as it follows) in him we live, we move,
and have our being. But what more clear then ye words of Christ, Ioh. 5.17. As
yet ye father workth, and I also work. But what works he? and how works
he? the latter Paul shows, Ephesians. 1.11. According to the purpose of his will:
to the former David answers: Psalm. 113.5.
He dwells in the highest, and beholds the base things upon earth. Psalm.
136.25
He feeds all flesh both man and beasis. He makes the earth to bring forth
fruit for the use of man. Psalm. 138.6. Psalm. 145.16. Psalm. 147.
And who is like unto the Lord that dwells in the highest, and yet beholds
the base things upon the earth? He gives life unto all creatures, Deuteronomy. 30.
Deuteronomy. 28.
prolonging or shortning the same, as best seems good unto him. He bestows
his blessings upon the righteous, and punishes the sins of transgressors.
Wherefore, since God thus orders the heavens, the earth and the sea, feeds
all creatures, sends rain in his appointed seasons, opens the fountains
of rivers, causes the Sun to arise on good and bad, works all in all
according to the purpose of his will, feeds the little sparrowes, and
cloatheth the very lillies of the field, let us conclude with Job, The Lord
looks upon the ends of the world, Job 28.24.25.26. etc.
and has a regard unto all things.

God special Providence over his Church, proved his Word.
THe Church of God, and the wonderful love our most gracious Father bears
unto it, being the cause why all other things were created, and being created,
why they are maintained, it seems fitter to fall with Paul and Peter into an
admiration of Gods great mercy and goodness unto us, Ephesians. 1.3.1. Pet. 1.3.
then to go about to prove the same. Good uses of Gods special providence.
teach patience in adversity,

Before the foundations of the world were laid, The impulsive cause of God,
special care over his Church. Ephesians. 1. Romans 8.2.
it pleased God, moved through the riches of his grace and mercy alone, to
elect unto himself, and select from others, the whole number of his Church
unto eternal glory and felicity. Secondly, from this work of Election
within himself, he proceeded unto the means of accomplishing. He created
them by his power, yea holy and righteous: Our captivity by nature threefold.
but by our own inventions we fell into a threefold captivity: The first of
error, Romans 6.20. 2. Pet. 2.19.
Ioh. 8.34. The third, Romans 5.6. Ephesians. 1.10. Ephesians. 1.7. 1. Pet 1.19.
in mercy follows us: He sent his Son in an accptable time, who by his most
precious blood, and offering himself once upon the cross, effected our
deliverance, and reconciled us to God the father again: ignorance, The manner
and order of our redemption.
when he calls by his Gospel, and enlighteneth the eyes of our
understandings by his holy Spirit. Secondly, Note in this redemptions two
things: 1. that is by a price: so the word (...) signifies, and so Paul
teaches, 1. Tim. 2.
when by the same work of his word and Spirit, he works faith within us to
take hold on Christ and on his saving promise; the sole means of our
deliverance from eternal destruction, whereunto our sins had made us
subject. Thirdly, from our servitude to corruption by the virtue and power of
his resurrection, 2. a price of wonderful value: first, because our Redeemer
is the Son of God: secondly most righteous. 1. Pet. 1.18. 1. Cor 6.20. Heb.
9.12.13.14.
that as our head Christ Jesus could not be kept under the grave, nor detained
by death, but is certainly risen to eternal glory; so we his members
vnseparablie united, shall rise to felicity with him. Thus the Church being
elected by God of his free grace and mercy, (a work without repentance)
redeemed by the blood of his Son, when it was utterly lost, revived by his
word and Spirit, when it was dead in trespasses and sins, gathered when it
was dispersed, and so brought again unto Christ ye Shepherd, Bishop of our
souls, and now by the bond of his Spirit vnseparablie united unto him; how can
it be denied, that being thus blessed with all heavenly blessings, Ephel. 1.3.
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, it should not be in a most special manner,
guided, and preserved by him? Has he done the greater, and will he not do the
less? Romans 5.9.
Has he when we were sinners, justified us by his blood, and now being
justified, shall he not much more look unto us? If when we were enemies, then
much more being friends: If when we were wicked servants, then much more being
blessed sons: If when we were abiects, then much more being his best beloved.
The natural head prouides especially for the members of the body, the husband
for his wife, the deliverer for his delivered: and shall not Christ, our head,
the husband to his Church, the Redeemer of his people, especial maintain,
bless, and preserve his Church, his members, his Spouse, his redeemed? Our
virtues are mixed with imperfections, our love with some dislike, our care with
want of providing; yet what we have, we receive from God, who is love it self:
Does not he then love his Church abundantly, and from this love, especially
bless and keep it? Cast back thine eyes to the time past, behold the
present, and conclude of the future. For the first, look unto Noah, when the
wicked should perish, he being a figure of Christ's Church, must have his Arc
of deliverance. How miraculouslie did the Lord preserve his people in the land
of Egypt, even four hundred and thirty years from the promise made unto
Abraham? A figure of our deliucrance from Satan.
How wonderfully (by the hand of his servant Moses) did he deliver them from
the bondage of Pharaoh? first, without munition, secondly, with a mighty
overthrow to the Enemy: and having freed them from that slavery, how
strangely did the Lord restore them safe into their promised Country? The Arc
to assure them of Gods continual presence, the heavens (contrary to nature)
to yield them food, the rock to be enforced to send forth her streams, the
pillar of a cloud to protect them from heat, the shining fire to give them
light from heaven, the nations to be cast forth before them, and what not for
the good of his children? Esaias. 43.1. etc.
Therefore Esaias 43.1. Fear not, says the Lord that created thee O Jacob, and
he that framed thee O Israel, fear not; I have redeemed thee, I have called
thee by thy name, thou art mine: When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee, and through the floods that they do not ouerflow thee. When thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, thy
Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee; because thou
wast precious in my sight and wast honorable, and I loved thee, therefore will
I give man for thee, and people for thy sake: fear not, for I am with thee, I
will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from the West: I will say
unto the North, give, and unto the South, keep not back, bring my sons from
far, and my daughters from the ends of the Earth. Esaias 54.16.17. Esaias.
54.16.17.
All the weapons that are made against thee shall not prosper, and every tongue
that shall rise in judgment against thee, thou shall destroy and condemn: For
this is the heritage of the Lords servants, and their righteousness is of me
says the Lord. Neither has the Church of God had experience of the
performance of this Gods special Providence in former ages only, but even we
also in a most gracious manner have been especially blessed and delinered by
the same. How could this little Island, Apply.
in quantity a handful, in number few, enjoy so many, so great, such
wonderful deliverances, from the hands of Infidels, Tyrants, Heretics,
bloody Papists, in number infinite, some by open force abroad, some by secret
conspiracies at home, did not our merciful God most carefully look unto us?
Whence is it, that our dread Sovereign holds the crown of government in
peace? whence his miraculous deliverances from the hands of his enemies? Even
from Gods especial mercy and Providence over him. And why from his mercy?
wherefore from his special Providence? not only because he is the Lords
anointed, but especially, because he is his elected: A comparatis.
for if wicked kings have a special privilege, in regard they are Kings, how
much more our King, being a resolute Josiah, a religious David, a wise Solomon,
and a zealous Ezechias? How are the tender lambs amidst the ravening wolves
preserved from them? how the silly chickens from the greedy kite, waighting
continually to pray upon them? The eause of our deliverances from bloody
traitors, and that they fall into the pit which they dug for us.
must they nor both go to wrecke, unless there be a careful Shepherd, and a
loving hen? No less can the flock of Christ defend it self against tyrants
(those greedy wolves) unless Christ Jesus that good shepherd did most
carefully look unto it. No less can his tender chickens keep themselves from
being devoured by those ravening kites, the devil himself, the Pope of Rome
that Antichrist, with all his sworn and vowed Allegeants among us, did not
Christ Jesus (as a most loving hen) preserve and keep them under the wings
of his mercy. O thou beloved, consider then the cause of thy deliverances: It
is because God loves thee, and thus loving thee, appoints his Angels to attend
upon thee: Heb. 1.11. Heb. 1.11.
It is because he so respects thee, that an hair of thine head cannot perish:
Matthew. 10.30. Matthew. 10.30.
It is because of his never failing love, therein exceeding the love of a
mother to the child of her own womb. Esaias. 49.15. Esaias 49.15.
It is because he makes our case his case: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
Act. 9.4. Act. 9.4.
It is because he respects us, as that which is dearest unto him: Zach. 2.8.
Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. This being so, who
seeing Gods wonderful love to his Church, in electing it, in being elected, to
redeem it with the most precious blood of his only begotten Son, and being
thus redeemed, thus to respect, to love, and bless it, that can deny his
especial care and Providence over the same?

Gods Providence over the wicked.
IT is our merciful God, says Job, chap. 28.24. that beholds the ends of
the world, and has a regard unto all things that are under the heavens. Which
cannot be understood of a careless beholding, as some would have it, but of a
careful providing for them, as al must needs confess it. Is it likely that
God, who looks forth of the heavens, and beholds all the sons of men,
Psalm. 33.13. should look upon them to no end, or behold them to no purpose?
Surely no, he fashioneth as well the wicked as the godly in the wombes of their
parents: Eccles. 11.5. He governs their words, Prou. 16.1. He appoints out
their ways they shall walk in: Pro. 5.21. He exalts one, he casts down
another, Psalm. 75.7. He gives, and al men gather, he opens his hands, and
all ceatures (both good and bad) are filled with his goodness: Psalm. 104.28. So
that who is he that has not tasted how gracious the Lord is? yea, we see it
by experience, that the godly are often as the sheep feeding on bare commons;
whilst the wicked are as fat bulls of Bashan grasing to the full in goodly
green meadows; the sun shining upon them, the rain making their grownds
fertile, their flocks of sheep and kine multiplied, having children at their
pleasure, and so increasing, that they call their Lands by their own names:
Nay, if there were not a resurrection, a reward reserved for the godly, and
plagues for impenitent sinners, of al other (as Paul says) the Church of God
were most miserable. For (as the Wise man says) touching this life, all things
fall out alike both to the wicked and godly: yea whilst they living at their
hearts ease, lying in their beds of Iuorie, carowsing wine in their full vyols,
inuenting to themselves instruments of music, Heb. 11.35.36.37.
the Church of God (poor souls) in love corrected, are oftentimes nipt with
cold, pinched with famine, racked by tortures, tried by mockings, scourgings,
bo^ds, imprisonment, yea tempted, stoned, hewne asunder, slain with the sword:
All things working still for the best to those that love and fear his name.
Romans 8.
This prosperity of the wicked, and afflictions of the godly, (both proceeding
from God; on them, a judgment, upon us, an assurance of his mercy) have
astonished the dearest and wisest children of God, until going into the house of
God, they beheld their miserable end and sudden subversion. Now whence arises
this flourishing (yet fading) estate of the wicked? from their own wisdom,
from their own endeauours? Surely no, it is in vain to rise up early, to go
to bed late, to eat the bread of carefulnes, except the Lord gives a blessing:
and therefore whatsoever the wicked enjoy, proceeds wholly from Gods
Providence. As he increased the storehouse of godly Abraham; so he filled the
barnes of the wicked rich man: Luke 16. Luke 16.19.
As he made David King over his people; so he gave Saul the Scepter of
government, and therefore he was called the Anointed of the Lord. As God was
merciful unto Job, in not suffering Satan to take away his life; Job 4.12.
so he was long suffering unto Pharaoh, in that the first plague consumed him
not, for not letting his people go. As it came to pass by Gods Providence,
that Joseph should be preserved from death, Genesis 45.8.
and made Ruler over Pharaohs household: so the same God effected that Naaman
the Syrian, should be rich, mighty and honorable in the sight of his Lord the
King of Aram. 2. Kings 5.1.
And therefore our gracious God whose mercy rejoices against judgment,
extends his Providence to the wicked and reprobate.

That those things which seem meanest in our eyes, are maintained and kept by
Gods Providence.
NEither does our merciful God sit in the highest, regarding only his most
excellent creatures, as Angels, men and women, the heavens, the Sun, the Moon,
the number of the Stars, and such like; but, as David says, he beholds
all things: as comprehending his meanest creatures upon earth. Whatsoever has
life, motion or being is governed by Gods Providence: Act. 17.28. But the
basest things may be referred to all or one of these: And therefore things
most mean are ruled by his Providence. The Psalmist using the like
generality, Psalm. 145.15. says, that the eyes of all things do look up
unto God, and he gives the^ their meat in due season: in the one part of the
sentence showing Gods mercy in giving, Some read, (look unto,) some, (hope
in)
in the other, his creatures acknowledgement of the same, by their hope of
receiving. The Lions are strong, yet of themselves not able to provide meat for
their young: for they crying seek it at the Lord, Psalm. 104.21. Psalm. 104.21
and thus seeking it, find it at his hands. Look to the meanest things in the
heavens, Math. 6.26.
the blowing of the winds, the motion of the clouds, Job 39.3.
the rain dropping from them: the flying of the birds, all are ruled by God:
Psalm. 147. Matthew. 10.30. Look to the smallest things upon earth: the grass
upon the Mountains, fodder for cattle, herbs for the use of man, lillies to
adorn the field, all have their being, Psalm. 147.8.9.
and increase from God. Look unto the things under the earth: Matthew. 6.21.
They also have their being (says Job) from God, and there is a place in which
they are preserved. Yea, God orders the silly worms for his glory, as
appears in making the^ instruments of plaguing Pharaoh for his hardness of
heart; and means, to gnaw asunder the gourde wherewith his Prophet Jonah was
covered. Jonah 4.7.
Since then the meanest things in the heavens, on the earth, and under the
earth are vpholden by God and guided by his Providence, and that this his
goodness declares the greatness of his mercy, and secondly Ministers comfort to
his children, (for if God thus governs them, how much more will he be
present to those, that love and fear his name) let us not diminishing his
mercy, or depriving our selves of such comforable assurance, once call into
question his Providence over his meanest creatures, but with hearty
thanksgiving acknowledge the same.

Gods Providence proved by the testimonies of the holy Fathers.
Wisdom teaches, that it is good to build upon a firm foundation: the word
of God then being the ground work of this doctrine, we may with safety
settle our judgments thereon. When the Sun shines clearly, what needs the
candle to be lighted? when the word is evident, what needs authority of
fathers? To add light to the sun, or a spark to the flame seems small
discretion; yet since experience does teach, that the nature of man, is not
only hard to be drawn to the acknowledgement of an evident truth, but also
mere repugnant to that, whereby the eyes of his understanding being
enlightened, he might glorify God: It shall not be amiss to allege their
confessions, that the wavering in judgment may confess the truth with them.

Cyrill writing against Julian, Lib. secundo, and quinto.
affirms that God does not only direct all things to the behoof and full
harmony of the whole universally; but also is the Cherisher, Maintainer, and
Preserver of every thing in particular. Augustine says, De Trinit. lib. 3.
cap. 4.
that there is no creature, which is not governed by Gods Providence: and in
another place, he descends unto the particular, saying: Jn Psalm. 148. Tom. 8.
Who disposed the members of the gnat, and other small creatures, that they
should have their life, their goodly order, and moving? Propound unto thy
self one of the meanest of Gods creatures: consider the excellent disposition
of his members, his life, whereby he is moved to eschew death, and to use
means to preserve him: he desires pleasures, he flies troubles, he has his
senses, and an excellent motion beseeming himself, wherein he deliteth. And in
another place: He which made the Angels in heaven, made also the worms in the
earth. Has God made the Angels to creep in the dirt, and the worms to
remain in the heavens? No, he has given to every creature his fit place of
habitation: to that which is incorruptible, an incorruptible place of abiding:
to that which is corruptible, a corruptible place of remaining. Thus much
Augustine. Basilius Magnus has truly said, that fortune and chance are
Heathen men's words, Homil. 19.
wherewith the minds of the godly ought not to be busied. Chrysostom upon the
Ephesians: If a ship though well rigged and sound every where, cannot brook
the seas without a good governor; Lib. 1. cap. 16.
how much less can the whole world without the care and government of God?
Calvin in his Institutions: Whatsoever changes of things fall out in the world,
they come to pass, by the secret stirring of the hand of God. Beza in his
Confessions: All things are governed by Gods Providence. The consideration
whereof, made the ancient Philosophers, as Empedocles, Heraclites and such
like, to affirm that all things fell out by a certain necessity, although
they could not determine the manner how. But what should I stand upon more
allegations? He which will enquire further into them, I refer him to August.
de Prouidentia Dei, Tom. 1. lib. 1. Tom. 5.
to the same Author de Ciuit. dei, lib. 12. cap. 4. to Origin in Romanos, cap.
1. to Chrysostom, in tribus de Prouidentia lib. ad Stargirium: to Naziazene de
Paupertate curanda: with infinite others. All which omitted, I proceed unto
the third way of proouing this truth unto us.

Gods Providence proved by testimonies of Heathen Writers.
WHen as men darkened in their understandings, Ephesians. 4.18.
wanting the light of the Gospel, guided only by the rules of reason, shall by
manifold observations, gather undoubted conclusions of the Providence of God
over all his creatures; how shall Christians living in the glorious sunshine of
the Gospel, and professing themselves not only naturally to be ruled by the
same rules of reason, but supernaturallie by Gods holy Spirit, call that into
question, whereof they never doubted? The truth whereof appears thus unto us.
Plotin the Platoniste, affirms that Gods Providence is manifested unto us even
from the highest things to the very lillies of the field. Lib. 3. Enne ad. 4.
And for further confirmation of the same, has written three books to that
purpose. Porphyrius demanded this question of Nemetrius: Shall we (says he)
suffer a King to dispose of his matters as he lists, and shall we deny the
same unto God? Sinesius the Platoniste confidently affirms, that such as do
doubt of the Providence of God by inconveniences which happen, are fools: but
the wise are confirmed in the truth by them. Alexander of Aphrod, in his book
of Providence, has this excellent saying: It is too far disagreeing from
Gods nature, that he should have no care of the things below, (for that is the
part of an envious man:) and to say he is unable, is too unseemly, because he
is able to do whatsoever pleases him. Iuuenall has a saying, thus translated:

There wantes no God at all, where wisdom does advise:

But fools have fortune deifide, and placd' above the skies.

Amonius writing against Porphyrius, attributes a double power unto God: the
one whereby he knows all things; the other whereby he rules all things. But
if any list to hear the judgments of these men more at large, let him read
Theod. de affect: Graecorum curandis, entitled, Of the Providence of God. Also
the first book of Johannes Franciscus Picus Comes Mirandulanus, de Prouidentia
dei: wherein this truth is proved by the testimonies of many Heathen writers,
as of Orphaeus, Homer, Plutarch, Euripides, Sophocles, Menander, Diphilus,
Virgil, Phocilides, Hipocrates, Pythagoras, Plato, Plotin, Atticus, Platonicus
Auicen, Algazilus, Aristotle, and many others: all which I pass over, and come
unto the fourth and last way of proouing this truth unto us.

Gods Providence proved by mere reason.
IN this latter age, wherein iniquity has almost gotten the upper hand: and
wickedness approached very near the seat of judgment, some (I fear me) there
are, The reply of Atheists.
(I would to God not many) which dare affirm that the word of God, is but a
rule of policy, and that we yield unto it rather because it prescribes a
goodly order, then sets down a certain truth: though these are self-made
Idols, having eyes, but will not see, ears, but will not hear, hearts, but will
not understand, euicting consciences, but will not subscribe unto them. For the
confuting of whom, let me deal with them and others by mere reason, after
this manner. Reasons to prove Gods Providence.
And first with such as acknowledge the Godhead, but cannot see his Providence
in all things.

the world govern and preserve the same? Beasts (though without reason) care
for that which proceeds from them. Silly birds look to their nests they have
framed, and carefully hatch up their young that nature sent forth. And will thou grant thus much in creatures unreasonable, and deny the same in God the
Creator of them?

ever extends aid unto others, and wisdom directs al things to a certain
end. And therefore God being almighty, goodness, and wisdom it self, it must
needs follow that al things are governed by him.



the heavenly; the heavenly host to the glorious Creator, ever in subjection.
First, the day, then the night, the Sun continually running his race like a
giant in the one, ye Moon enlightening the other, never continuing in the full,
but always increasing, or decreasing. After darkness comes light, after a
shower, the sunshine, after heat, cold weather, after a storm, a calm. The
days do make the weeks, the weeks the months, the months the year: In
the year, the spring follows the winter, the summer the spring, the Autumn
ye summer, the winter the Autumn, and then comes ye spring again. These (we
see) keep their perpetual sucession and order. And therefore it must needs
follow that God by his Providence is maintainer of the same.

nor the sea to be compassed: the Sun causing the seasons of the one, and the
Moon ruling the tides of the other: Now both these are guided by the course of
the heavens, and the heavens (as we all acknowledge) by God alone; and
therefore by good consequence, the sea and earth, with all things therein
contained, are governed by him.



earth, making but small increase. But such beasts as might benefit man (how
huge, how strong soever) come home unto him, submitting themselves by whole
flocks and herds even to little children, and so increase abundantly. And
therefore since such things as might hurt us, fly from us, and such as bring
profit, and by whose lives, our lives are maintained, come home unto us, it
must needs be, that Gods Providence, (directing all things to our good) does
cause the same.

Esau and Jacob.
commonly called Twins. The one of these lives in a civil and honest manner,
and brings his hoary head in peace unto the grave. The other set on fire with
the vehement heat of envy, thirsts after blood, murdereth his neighbor,
and and so receives death, the just reward of his wicked fact. What is the
cause, both being by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.4.
that both of them fell not into the like transgression? Not diversity of
seed, for both were begotten by one man, and both borne of one woman: not
diversity of the planets, for they were both borne under one, and the same
motion of the heavens: both at one time, both in one place. So that it must
needs be, that God of the tiches of his mercy by his special Providence
blessed the one, and for the declaration of his Justice, by a voluntary
permission, suffered the other.

Near unto VVaternewton, County of Huntington.
the other has neither member hurt nor hair burnt. Who hindered their journey,
who sent the storm, who caused the death of the one, who so wonderfully
delivered the other, both standing close together? Surely God by his Providence
was effecter of al. Whence was it, Done in France.
that Steven Brune, that godly Martyr, could not be consumed with a fire of
fagots twice made about him? Whence that the vessels of oil twice powered upon
them, were rather means of quenching, the^ increasing the flame? Whence, that
these things denied their natural operation, so that the Hangman was compeld
to thrust him through with a sword? surely from Gods ouer-ruling Providence. The
Philosophers, observing the course of the heavens, and excellent order of all
things, and that amongst them many consisted of contraries, gathered an
undoubted conclusion, that there must needs be a chief Governor, whom they
indifferently called God or Providence, because the one cannot be without the
other. For it is as great wickedness to say that there is a God without
Providence, as it is mere folly to affirm God to have eyes without sight,
ears without hearing, might without mind, mind without reason, will without
wisdom, wisdom without a wise government, yea a Godhead without properties
belonging unto it.

Wherefore (as experience teaches) if the Counsel of a commonwealh cannot
cease without the confusion thereof; if the soul of man cannot forbear
working without the death of the party; neither the soul vegetative in
plants, without their withering; if the sun cannot go down without
procuring darkness, nor suffer eclipse; without some notable exchange much
more ought we believe, that if the whole world, with all things therein
contained, were not guided and governed by Gods Providence, al would fall from
order to disorder, from an excellent harmony of all things, to a confusion of
every thing, and from a confusion of every thing, to a not being of any thing.
The contrary whereof in wonderful manner appearing unto us, we ought to be so
far from doubting of Gods Providence, as that upon a steadfast persuasion of
the certainty thereof, we ought in thoughts, These three seen especially in
his government.
words, and deeds, continually bless, magnify, and praise his wonderful
wisdom, power and goodness for the same.

And thus much for the proving that all things are governed by Gods Providence.

THE SECOND PART, The second part.
wherein is especially contained,
What Gods Providence is, and the order which God uses in governing by the
same.
THe Providence of God is a work of God, Gods Providence defined.
by the which he does most wisely, freely, mightily, and excellently well
govern all things for the manifestation of his great goodness and glory. In
which respect he is called, a King, Jehovah Zebaoth. a God of Armies. The truth
of this appears: mightily, because he does not labor to bring that to pass
which he wills, neither can any hinder the same: Esaias 50.2. Fourthlie,
Providence agrees with Predestination in three things.
Their agreement is, in that both of them require knowledge, both are referred
to the will, and both have respect unto things to come. Their difference is,
Differs in two.
in that Providence respects all creatures, Predestination only the
reasonable: Secondly, Providence guides things to their natural ends, but
Predestination to an end above nature. As for example, to be the adopted son
of God, to be regenerate, to be endued with grace, to live holilie, and to
come to eternal glory. So that it cannot properly be said, that brute
beasts, or the good Angels are now predestinate, the one being not capable of a
supernatural end, the other possessed of this excellent glory. And thus much
for the definition, and difference between Providence and Predestination: Gods
order in governing follows.

For the understanding of Gods order in governing the world; it is needful
that we call to mind the three things contained in the word Providence. Three
things contained in the word Prodence.
As first a knowledge of all things. decree and purpose, which is actual
government, and the third thing contained in the word Providence, is
temporary, that is, Two parts of Gods Providence.
in his appointed time made manifest unto us. Hence we collect two parts of
Gods Providence, the one, A position touching the first part.
thus much may be affirmed: That Providence, as it is in God, is immediately
from God, and therefore most certain, that of his great mercy and goodness,
he has an everlasting care of, and in himself, over all his Creatures, which
he has not received of any other, or by the use or means of any thing
whatsoever. Touching the second part, Diversity of opinions, touching the
second part. Gods order in governing, tied to his actual government.
namely, Gods Actual government of all things (whereunto the order to be
entreated of is wholly tied) some think he governs all things immediately by
himself, in manner and order, as the light proceeds from the sun, the heat
from the fire, and nourishment from bread. Wherein, if they mean, that God
being the efficient principal cause of all things, does preserve and move
that natural force of working, which he gave unto them at their creation, or
that God uses the virtue of the fire to warm, and of bread to nourish, they
think well: but if they understand, that there is no virtue of nourishing in
the bread, nor of warming in the fire, but that God being in the bread, and in
the fire, warmeth and nourishes immediately by himself, and by neither of
them (as some have fondly thought, and some more fondly written) their opinion
is in no wise to be approved. For not only the Philosopher (guided by mere
rules of reason) but especially the word of God, (a truth that never deceaueth)
teaches thus much unto us, that the Creator at the time of his creating of all
things, gave together with their life and being, a certain natural power and
virtue of working: as the sun to expel darkness, the fire to yield a
heat, living creatures to be apt for procreation; and so in particular: Genesis
1.11. Those confuted who think that God works in, but not by his creatures.
Let the earth (says the Lord) bud forth the bud of the herb that seedeth
seed: the fruitful tree that bears fruit, according to his kind: Also the
tree which bears fruit, which has his seed in it self, according to his
kind. By the same commander, the sun naturally rules the day, the moon guides
the night, the waters bring forth in abundance every thing that has life. The
natural place for fish, is not to fly in the heavens, but to swim in the sea;
for the fowls of the air, not to swim in the sea, but to fly in the Heavens:
for man, neither to swim in the sea, nor fly in the heavens, but to walk upon
the earth. Now as God has allotted to every creature his proper place of
abode, according to his nature and kind, so he has given to every of them at
their creation, a certain power to work, and virtue in working, according as
their place and kind does require. Man walks naturally, fishes swim naturally,
foul fly naturally. The earth does yield her fruit, the waters bring forth in
abundance: yet so, as that God does not work in them, without their natural
working, but they by God, he blessing and moving that natural power and
virtue in working, which at their creation he infused into them. When the Lord
threatened, that he would take from his people the staff of bread, does he not
plainly teach that there is a virtue of nourishing in the bread? else, why
should it be called a staff? and wherefore should the taking away of that be
a punishment, rather then our being deprived of other things? This the enemies
of Christ had learned, and therefore chose rather to give him vinegar for his
drink then any other thing. Indeed oftentimes for our sins, the Lord does
take away that natural force of working in his creatures that should do us
good, and sometimes the virtue of those that would hurt his children: the one
is evident, in that Physic ministered does often lose his working; Dan. 3.25.
Sadrach and his fellows not burnt in she furnace.
the other apparent, in that fire does sometimes loose his strength of burning.
Yet this only shows his divine power, but abridgeth not his heavenly
ordinance. So that this appears untrue, that God should govern all things
immediately in his creatures, but nothing by them. Others again (falling into
a second extreme) have affirmed, yt God does work all in all immediately by
himself, but yet influxu quodam duntaxat (vt vocant) generali, by a certain
general influence (as they term it), the which he gave to every creature in
their creation, and does now no more but still keep and preserve the same: So
that now they will have every creature, by virtue of that influence received,
to work of their own proper nature only, God having no other stroke, but only
to maintain that influence, which at first in their creation he gave unto
them. As the sun to shine, the fire to warm, the heavens to be carried
circular wise, living creatures to beget, to eat, to sleep, men to understand
to choose, to speak of their own proper nature only, without any work of God
within them. To prove this their opinion, they allege that in the Acts: In
God we live, we move, and have our being. Also that to the Hebrews, Chap.
1. upholding all things by the virtue of his word. So that since some effects
do arise from necessary causes, some from less necessary, some from
contingent, and that they often fall out, praeter scopum operantis, beyond the
expectation of him that works, therefore they infer, that with this
Providence of God, does very well agree, man's free will, fortune, chance and
such like. But the ground work being taken away, that which they build upon
it, Those consuted which affirm that God gouernes all things by a general
influence only.
will quickly fall. That of the Acts, and the other to ye Hebrews, although they
both teach, that nothing can continue without Gods upholding, yet neither does
infer that God does not in a special manner govern al things vpholden by him:
yea, the one cannot be affirmed of God, but the other must be concluded,
unless we will say there is a Godhead, without properties belonging to it. For
it is evident, that God has not only a general working in every thing,
(which Divines call his general Providence) but that he does bring every thing
in particular to a certain end, very well agreeing with his justice and
glory: sometimes ouerruling, sometimes willingly permitting, sometimes
moderating, sometimes inclining, sometimes working contrary to the nature of
the things he works by; and this is called by Divines his particular
Providence, which our eyes do tell us has a special work in all things. We
know (as it has bin at large confirmed) that God deals otherwise with the
elect, then with the reprobate; otherwise with one elect, then with another.
He willingly permitted Peter to deny Christ; yet of his special grace moved
Paul to chide Peter, lest he should offend in not reprehending. Yea, in one
and the same elect, God does work diversely at diverse times according to the
good pleasure of his will: sometimes God withholdeth his grace, and then he
falls, sometimes makes a special supply of the same, and then he rises
again. At sometimes we only see the rod of correction, and then we tremble
for the least affliction: sometimes God shows us the staff of his spirit that
goes with the same, and then with courage we undergo the greatest troubles.
Psalm. 23.
But let us come to a special instance. If an axe fall forth of the hand of
him that cutteth wood, and shall slay him that passes by, I the Lord (says
God, speaking of himself) haae slain that man. In which effect, can we say
that God had only a general motion, and not a particular stroke according to
the good pleasure of his will? Who moved the man to cut the wood? who directed
the traveler to pass that way? at that same time, under that same tree? who
caused the axe to fall at that very instant of his passing by, and by the
falling to give him his deaths wound? Was it not a particular work of God in
plaguing Herod, Pharaoh, Manasses, Nebuchadnezzar and the rest his enemies? Who
caused that mighty wind to arise upon the ship in which Jonah was flying from
Gods presence? was it not a special work of God in afflicting Job, in
suffering the Caldeans to spoil him of his goods? In that the seed of Abraham
went into Egypt, and so long continued captive to Pharaoh; was it not a
special work in causing their deliverance, in giving them bread from heaven,
water forth of the rock, apparel that should not wear, the cloud to keep
them from heat of the day, the pillar of fire to enlighte^ them by night, to
make the sea stand on heaps for their deliverance, to cause it to return upon
Pharaoh and his host, to cast out the nations before his people, and thus
miraculously to bring them safe to the promised Country? Was it not a special
work of God in causing Joseph to dream such dreams, Genes. 37.
in suffering his brethren to take occasion thereby to slay him, in preventing
their purpose by the counsel of Judah, in sending the Ishmaelites to whom they
might sell him, in moving Potiphar chief steward of Pharaohs house to buy him:
Genes. 39.1.
and lastly being bought, in making him chief Ruler over Pharaohs house?
Surely this was a work of Gods wonderful love and exceeding mercy to his
Church, accomplishing that comfortable promise, that in the time of dearth his
children shall have enough. Yea it was a work of God manifesting his especial
and particular Providence over Joseph, and by consequence over every of his
children. And that both these are true, it evidently appears in that Joseph's
brethren being astonished at the sight of Joseph and his dignity, and upon
consideration of their former demeanor of themselves unto him, wonderfully
grieved Joseph, Aspeciall work of Gods grace, and an evident mark of his
children. Genesis 45.5.
hating revenge, and resolved to bless where he was cursed, and to do good
unto those that had done evil unto him, says unto them; Be not sad, neither
grieved with your selves that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before
you for your preservation. First, using words of comfort: secondly, showing his
deliverer, and causer of his preferment (God himself of his especial
Providence) and lastly, the end of all, namely, the good of his Church.

Therefore if the axe of Gods judgment fall upon us, if thou art afflicted in
thy body, robbed of thy goods, tossed in thy passage, exiled thy country, hated
of thy brethren, delivered by God, find favor with the Prince, art advanced
to honor; in all these (being either fatherly corrections, to withdraw us from
sin, or pleasing blessings to move us to holiness) let us acknowledge Gods
especial working for the declaration of his mercy and justice. But these men's
opinions being declared, and in brief confuted, I proceed unto the certain
order of Gods governing all things.

Gods order of governing may be said to be after a threefold manner. First,
Gods order of governing by his Providence threefold.
sometimes without means. Secondly, sometimes contrary to the nature of second
causes and means. Thirdly, most usually by the^ according as their nature
requires. And first of all of his governing without means. 1. Without means.


A King that is Governor of a large and ample kingdom, does not only rule
himself, but has also under him Counselors, and Magistrates for the same
purpose. These are means of governing which Princes must needs have, because
one cannot see all abuses, hear all causes, punish all offenses: but with God,
whose wisdom and power is infinite, from whom nothing is hid, and unto whom,
to will and perform are both alike, there is no such inabilitie, no such
necessity. And therefore to show his might and power, he will sometimes work
without the use of second means. Instances are plentiful. By who^ did God
create Adam and Eve? Genes. 1.27.
by whose ministry did he give the^ a law, Genes. 3.8.
whose voice did he use in reproouing their disobedience, who called Abraham
forth of his native country, Genes. 12.
and brought him into Canaan? By whom does God sanctify, Ephesians. 2.22.
and regenerate the elect; is it not by his holy Spirit, which is one with
himself? Exodus 34.
Who stepped between God and the Jews, to put the veil of ignorance before
their eyes? and to pluck it from the eyes of the Apostles? 2. Cor. 3.
By what secondarie means was that blessed co^ception in the womb of the
Virgin Mary? Matthew. 1.23.
Surely these were effected by God without the use of second causes. Neither is
this true in the things of a better life only, but also in things concerning
this life. Genes. 1.2.
After the Lord had created the Seas, Moses says that the Spirit of the Lord
did move upon them, not only making them goodly in proportion, but also
blessing and maintaining them. By what second means did God maintain Noah,
his family, Genes. 7.23.
and other his creatures so long in the Arc together? Where were the birds
that hatched the Quails in the evening, and the ground that yielded Manna in
the morning for Gods people? Exodus 16.13.
Deuteronomy. 29.5.
What second means were there of preserving the childrens shoes from
corruption in the wilderness? who kept Elias, 1. King. 19.8.
who preserved Moses in the Mount forty days together? Exodus 2.18.
Surely all these and sundry other are effected by Gods immediate power. And
therefore this is an evident truth, that God does sometimes work without the
use of second causes.

Touching the second manner of Gods governing, namely, 2. Contrary to the
nature of second causes.
sometimes against and contrary to the nature of subordinate means: sundry
instances may be given forth of Gods word. The red Sea, Exodus 10.19.
contrary to nature, Ios. 3.1.
at Gods commandment stood on heaps, and Jorden against his course was
divided in the midst, that Gods people might pass through them. It is against
the nature of the Sun to have his course staid, and to be caused to retire
back again. It is against the nature of the fire in that God by his special
Providence preserved Sadrach, Mesech, and Abednego: for whereas they being
matter subject unto burning were cast into it, yet no part of them were
consumed. It is against the nature of a corruptible body bound with ropes, Ioh.
11.4.44.
and lying dead in the grave to become sweet again, to arise, to have the
ropes fall off, and to be as lively a body as it was before. These with many
other we know that God in his government has effected; whence we conclude
that he is not so tied to second causes, as that when they fail, his
Providence cease unto us: for sometimes he works without means, and
sometimes contrary to their nature, for the declaration of his mighty power,
and wonderful goodness. But it is to be observed, that when God works
either of these two ways, he uses an incomprehensible and innisible virtue
of working, proper to his Deity only: thereby teaching us not to put any
confidence in second means, but even the^ when they wholly fail, assuredly to
hope for deliverance from God, who at the very time of greatest distress is
always nearest unto his children.

The third and usual way of Gods governing, 3. Usually by means.
is by second means appointed in his heavenly wisdom for that purpose. As by
the heat of the Sun and dropping of the clouds, the earth to yield her
fruit, the grass of the mountains to nourish the beasts, man to be
maintained by the sweat of his brows, to be fed by bread, to be warmed by the
fire, to be kept from cold by his clothes, by study to get learning, Foolish
conclusions from the immutabilitie of Gods decree, are here condemned.
by learning to come to preferme^t, by foresight to eschew dangers, and so
usually in all other things. So that the neglect of ordinary means is a
contempt of Gods ordinance, and a sin of presumption. This the Lord gives us
to understand when he says, Hosea 2.21. I will hear the heavens, the heavens
shall hear the earth, the earth shall hear the corn, wine, and oil, and the
corn, wine, and oil, they shall hear Israel. And thus much for these two:
first, what Gods Providence is: secondly, the order he uses in governing by
the same. Now to the answering of certain questions, which offer themselves
after this manner.



Reasons of Gods working, sometimes without, sometimes against means.
The first whereof may seem to be this: that we should learn and know that
he does not always govern by means, because he cannot rule without them,
but that he will at his pleasure manifest his infinite power over his
creatures, declares this his wonderful power, to show himself the sole
effecter of all things. Lastly,



Reasons of Gods governing usually by means, whereas be is able to govern
without them.
to show his wonderful love and goodness to his creatures, in that by the use
of them he approues of what he has created, and further gives this honor unto
them, to be (if I may so say) coworkers with him in his wonderful government.



is the Creator of all things: appearing in this, in that he has the command
and use of all things for the accomplishing of that which in his heavenly
wisdom he had decreed.

If they prove otherwise, it is because of our bad using them.
in that all creatures are means of our good, and ordained by God to be
helps and furtherances both of souls and bodies unto eternal glory. Indeed
they often turn to our greater condemnation; but this is by accident, in
respect of us, not of the creatures. Simile.
As wholesome meat in a good stomach is well digested, but in a bad stomach,
and a diseased body, turns into cruditie. The cause is not in the meat, (for
then it would work the like effect in all) but in the stomach of the body
that is evil affected.



means in his government, because we should not presume of his power or
Providence, either by neglecting the means appointed by himself for the
saving of our souls, or by rejecting the helps ordained for the preservation
of the body. For in all things we must have respect unto Gods will revealed in
his word, and not unto his secret will, whereof we are ignorant. Now the
revealed will of God, teaching by his own ordinance, at first in the person of
Adam, Genesis 3.
as also ever since both by precept and practice, that we must use the means
appointed, 1. Tim. 4. Not the want, but the contempt of means does abridge us
of help from God.
being sanctified unto us by his word and prayer, we shall not only tempt God
in the neglect of them, but also become unnatural unto our selves, in that we
regard not the means whereby our safety is procured. Lest therefore we should
be guilty of the one, or faulty in the other, it has pleased God for our
example commonly to use them, who otherwise (because his power is infinite)
could as easily govern without them.





But I will only recite a few, and those especially which concern Gods
children. As the Law, the Gospel, the Administration of Sacraments, the
ministry of men, prosperity, adversity, good Angels, and the heavenly
host, as the Sun, the Moon, the stars and such like. The Law to be a
schoolmaster to lead us to Christ. The Gospel to work a lively faith, and
true repentance. The Sacraments to strengthen our faith, that we should not
backslide. The ministry of men, because man by man may be moved, but the
voice of God is terrible, and who may abide it? Prosperity, that feeling how
gracious the Lord is, we may be allured to serve him who otherwise being
always fed with the bread of affliction, would easily think that God had
forgotten to be gracious. Adversity, that we should not (being fed unto the
full) forget God and our selves also, but tasting now and then on the cup of
affliction, may see our own misery, seek his mercy, feel his love, and
learn to keep his statutes. Therefore sometimes God will let loose Satan to
try thy faith: sometimes set up a tyrant to prove thy patience: sometimes
deprive thee of his word in native country, to see whether thy love unto it
be so great, as that thou will sell lands and living, to buy it in another.
Yet all these are means of thy good, according to that of Paul, Romans 8.28. We
know that all things work together for the best unto them that love God: even
unto them that are called of his purpose. Other means whereby God exercises
his wonderful government, (and those especial) are his heavenly Angels. By
these (as the overthrow of Saneherib does testify) armies are discomfited, 2
King. 19.35 Exodus 14.19.
hoasts delivered kingdoms preserved, Provinces defended, cities environed, as
Gods word at large does manifest unto us. But their especial charge is to
attend Gods children, Luke 2.10. Matthew. 18.10. Act. 12.15. Matthew. 4.11. Luke
22.43.
as Zachary and the Author to the Hebrews plainly declares: Heb. 1.14. They
are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, who are
heirs unto salvation. The fathers of ye Church have not only acknowledged
this truth, Gods mercy in bestowing a double benefit: 1. bonour: 2. a special
means of deliverance.
but the Philosophers also, and especially the Platonists. Vnicuique homini
simul ac natus est, adest suus Angelus inquit Menander: Menander says, that
every man as soon as he is borne, has his Angel appointed to attend upon
him. the same affirms Seneca Epist. 3. To these may be added the heavenly
host, with all things in the world contained. For as Gods power is infinite,
and his works innumerable, so the means by which he does effect and govern
all things, are not to be numbered.



As the ebbing and flowing of the sea, is ruled by the Moon.
(which is most apparent) but also by the concurrences and diverse operations of
the heavens; the Sun, the Moon and such like, they cause sundry qualities:
as by that of Hos. chap. 2. verse. 21. does easily appear. Augustine says, De
Trin. lib. 3. Witness. 1. The diverse seasons. 2. The increase and decrease of
marrow, blood, etc. 3. The ebbing and flowing of the sea. 4. The effects of the
Sun upon plants.
that the weaker and inferior bodies, are governed (after a certain manner)
by those which are stronger and superior. Dionisius affirms, that the
sunbeames have a great working in the generation of things visible. According
to that old saying: Sol and homo genera^t homine^, the Sun and a man do beget
another man. Yet these cannot properly be said, to work of their own power and
virtue, but God in and by them.



and sensitive soul, are in like manner subject to the working of spiritual
and heavenly substances, as other earthly and inferior bodies are, Tamen hae
potius sunt vegetatiuae facultates quam humanae, yet these actions (says
Zanchius) may more properly be said to be the actions of a living creature
having no reason, then of a man that has life and reason. From the heat of the
Sun comes the inflammation of blood; by the moving and shining of the Moon,
the abundance of fleame, and so in other things. But for those which are proper
unto man, of which sort are his understanding, and his will, we must thus
conceive of them: Angels do enlighten the minds of men, for they are Gods
messengers, and have the office of revealing the will of God unto us. Angels
enlighten the minds, move to deliberatio^, but incline not the wills.
But as touching the will which follows the examination of the understanding,
they cannot be said properly to move it, but by accident. Indeed they move
somewhat unto deliberation, but that our wills should be inclined to choose any
thing, this proceeds immediately from God. And therefore Solomon says, that
the heart of man is in the Lords hand, and as he pleases, he will incline the
same. To this agrees Augustine and sundry other. Wherefore I take it a certain
truth, De Ciuit. Tom. 5. lib. 5. and in his book, De Genesis ad literam: about
the end of it.
that men's actions generally considered, as they are the actions of a living
creature, are in some measure disposed and wrought upon by the heavenly Angels,
and celestial bodies: but yet so, as that their government is wholly at Gods
will. Also, that those Actions which concern the understanding, The error of
Priscillianus. that man's actions are governed by the Stars, is very foolish.
Aug. de haeres.
are in some measure ordered by the Angels: but the Actions of the will, are
wholly moved and governed by God: not by compelling the will, but only by
moving it forward, as best seems good to his heavenly wisdom: which moving,
is not an enforcing, but a gentle inclining. And therefore Augustine says,
that when God does move the wills of men, he does but only incline them from
an unwillingness, to obey him, unto a willingness to do that which does
please him. Whence is confuted the vain opinions of the Astrologians, with the
fond dreams of destiny Setters, concerning the virtue of Stars, and the
force of the heavens over the wills and the minds of men. And thus much shall
suffice for the showing what Gods Providence is, and the order which he uses
in governing by the same.

THE THIRD PART, wherein is especially contained, Whether Gods Providence is
immutable or not; and if it be, whether it imposes a necessity upon all
things governed by it.
That Gods Providence is immutable.
THe greatest difference between God and his creatures, First, that Gods
Providence is immutable.
consists in this, Ipse quod immutabilis est, nos quod mutabiles sumus, In
that he is immutable, but we subject to alteration and cha^ging. The one proper
to the Creator, because he is God, (for to be God and immutable, are both one)
the other peculiar unto us, in that we are creatures. If any thing should be
left undone, or done otherwise, then God in his infinite wisdom at first
determined, then must it needs be either for want of wisdom, (for why should
it be altered, but upon better consideration?) or else for want of power to
bring it so to pass, as he had before decreed, for (God still holding his
determination,) how could it be otherwise hindered? Now it is the greatest
injury, either to suspect God of inconsideration, who is wisdom it self, or
of inabilitie to perform, to whom to will and to do, are both one. What other
thing is Providence in God, then an everlasting decree of bringing all things
so to pass, as before he had determined? Therefore since this Providence in
God is everlastingly the same, that is, immutable, as God himself is
immutable, it must needs follow, that Gods actual Providence, which is the
execution of his Providence within himself, is also immutable and unchangeable
in all things, Malach. 3.6.
Malac. 3.6. I the Lord am not changed: that is, neither in regard of my
essence, which is immutable, neither in respect of the execution of my decree,
which at no time is altered, Isai. 14. The Lord has decreed, and who can alter
it? The Lords hand is stretched forth, and who can turn it back? In the
former the Prophet has relation to the decree of God within himself: In the
latter, to the execution of the same, Isai. 40. My counsel shall stand, Isai.
40. James 1.17.
and my will shall be done. Iam. 1.17. Every good giving, and every perfect
gift, is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, in whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning. Where it is plainly taught, that
although there is alteration in Gods creatures, yet that with God himself is
no such thing, Prou. 19.21. Prou. 19.21.
Many devises are in man's heart, but the counsel of the Lord shall stand. In
which words there is an opposition between man's purposes, and Gods decree: God
teaches us, that ours are many and diverse. In one and the same thing, our
minds are diversely affected, with sundry doubtings troubled: sometimes we will
have it done, sometimes not done. If it be not done, the not doing it, often
discontenteth us: If it be done, the manner of effecting it, commonly disliketh
us. Then in doing, we do not, namely, please our selves: Thus in not doing,
we do, namely, displease our selves. Our seeking to please shows our desires,
but our not being pleased, declares they are variable.

But Gods decrees are always one. What he has determined, that he will have
done. As he has determined, so it shall be done: and when he pleases to have
it done, even then it is effected. Before it was done, the not being done did
not displease him: now it is done, the being done does no whit dislike him: so
that the not doing, does not displease him, nor the manner of doing, at any
time dislike him. And thus Gods pleasing of himself at all times, admits of no
discontent at any time: his discontent in nothing, shows his immutabilitie in
all things. And therefore a certain truth, that Gods Providence is always
immutable.

Hezekias, Isai. 38. Thou shall die, and not live: and yet Hezechias lived
fifteen yeeresafter. Also that Nineueh should be destroyed within forty days:
Jonah 3.14. and yet their destruction followed not within the time prefixed.

We must always understand, Solution.
the denouncing of Gods judgments against sinners, not to be absolute, but
with this condition, unless we repent: for God wills both alike: that is, if
we turn unto him, his judgments shall not befall us; if we persist in our
wickedness, they shall certainly be accomplished. But admit that of Isaiah
against Hezechiah, Isai. 38. Jonah 3.14.
and this of Jonah against Nineueh, are to be understood without condition, can
it therefore be inferred that Gods decree, and by consequence his Providence,
is mutable and subject to changing? Surely no: for there is a difference
between his decrees, and his threatenings. The decree of God, and his heavenly
will, not depending upon second causes, but upon his infinite wisdom,
foreknowledge, and counsel, must needs be immutable. But his threatenings
which are ever denounced upon the consideration of second causes, namely our
sins, are according to their increase or decrease, As well mercy, if we
repent, as judgments if we do not.
altered and changed, for God willing the one, wills the other also. More
plainly thus: God does sometimes denounce his judgments against sinners,
according as their dangerous estate does require, and not that he has so
decreed the^ in his everlasting counsel, and from thence so willed them; but
because second causes, namely, our sins, do cry for vengeance against us;
the which God wills shall befall us, if we persist in our sins, but if by
the work of his spirit we forsake our wickedness, Gods will is, his judgments
shall be turned to mercy. So then his will is not altered, though his
judgments are not executed: because with his Threatenings does evermore go the
condition of repenting, always understood, though not ever expressed. It is
true, (the grieuousnesse of Hezechiah his disease being considered, and
secondly, that he was not likely to be cured by the help of man) that he could
by no ordinary means live long: upon which (the Lord purposing to show his
mercy and power) the Prophet might say unto him: Thou shall die and not live.
And yet for the declaration of Gods glory it came to pass that his life was
prolonged. So likewise, if we consider the grievous sins of the Nineuites,
crying for the full vial of Gods wrath to be powered down upon them, it must
needs be, that the destruction of their city was even at the doors: but God
who is rich in mercy, and faithful in all his promises, did upon their true
repentance, keep back his judgments, and saved their city from subversion:
a work not mutable, but agreeing with his mercy and justice.



The argument does not hold, Solution.
when it is drawn from the changes of things, to the change of the causes of
those things working by free will, (as God ever does) much less can it be a
good reason to prove that his will is mutable: for it was Gods will, that
ceremonies should be kept at one time, and abolished at another; kept before
Christ's coming, abolished after. In this therefore is Gods will one and the
same. Jn an Epistle to Marcellus.
Augustine makes this plain by an example after this manner. Simile.
The husbandmans works (says he) are diverse: At one time he sows, at
another time moweth, at another he ploweth his ground, at another carries forth
his compass; is therefore his Art changed, or his mind altered? surely no.
Therefore to reason from the change of the effect, to the change of the cause,
is no argument to make a man doubt of the immutabilitie of Gods Providence.

Judas, condemned by Herod, crucified by the Scribes and Pharisees, together
with all other things which befell him in his course of finishing our
redemption, although to me^, they were co^tinge^t, such as might fall out, or
not fall out; yet with God they were simply necessary, such as could not but
so come to pass. Therefore the question is thus answered.

Gods Providence does impose a necessity upon al things.
others appointed to no such certain ends) but does continually preserve them,
hence it is evident, that in respect of the first cause, namely, God,
(beholding all things clearly, and governing certainly,) all things fall out
by an immutable necessity, not possible to be prevented. But in respect of
the nature of second causes, working not by compulsion, but according to their
own nature, some things may be said to fall out necessarily, One and the same
thing, may be said to fall out necessarily, and contingently.
others contingently, having a liberty of falling out, or not falling out, yet
so, as that the Lord does continually guide and dispose them from their first
beginning, to their last end, as best may be for the manifestation of his
glory, for which they were ordained.

For the understanding of this aright, What is meant by necessary.
we must know what is meant by necessary, and what by contingent.

That is said to be necessary, which can consist no otherwise then it does
consist, and which can work no otherwise then it does work. As a man to be
endued with reason, the Sun to shine and such like. From whence this
conclusion follows: Every thing that is, as long as it is, has his being
necessarily: because it cannot but be, as long as it has a being. Now because
all things to come, are present with God, all one with him, as if they were
already effected, therefore with God all things fall out necessarily, so as
that they can neither be hindered nor altered: whence it is, that a cause cannot
but work that which it does work, and therefore, that it works necessarily:
as it cannot be but the Sun as long as it is the Sun, must needs shine:
and therefore that his shining is a necessary work which must needs be
performed. Now Necessary, and Contingent, being directly contrary, since we
perceive what is the one, we may easily conceive what is the other.

We call that thing contingent, What is meant by contingent.
which before it had any being, may be said to be hereafter done, or not to be
done, to have his being, or not to have his being: I say before it was done,
because being done, it is now no more contingent, but necessary: according to
that old saying, Omne quod est, dum est, necessario est: Every thing that is as
long as it is, has his being necessarily. For it is impossible, that that
which is already done, should not be done, or that now having a being, it
should have no being. But before it was done, it might have bin said to be
contingent. An effect may may be said to be contingent in two respects.
So that the effect of a cause may be said to be contingent, when it is in the
power of the cause to work that effect, of the causes simply considered) their
effects may be said to fall out, or not to fall out.



Whence the necessity of things arises.
that is, from the natures of things, or else from an external cause,
(impossible to be eschewed) or else from both of these jointly together.

A necessity arises from internal causes after this manner: 1. A rebus
interuis.
The Sun is said to shine necessarily, because it is of such a nature that it
cannot but shine: for it is ordained by God to shine naturally. The fire
burns necessarily; because God has given it such a nature that it must
needs burn. Every creature must needs be dissolved, because their natures
consist of corruptible contraries, and therefore they cannot always live. Now
this necessity arises from inward causes, whether it be from the form, (as
in the Sun and the fire) or from that whereof they consist, as in every
living creature. So a man not regenerate does necessarily sin: but this
necessity does not arise so much from any external cause, as from his inward
natural corruption moving thereunto.

Secondly, 2. A rebus externis.
a necessity arises sometimes from external causes: So the elect are said to
be saved necessarily: but this proceeds not from any inward cause arising from
themselves, but from an external cause, namely God, of the exceeding riches of
his grace and mercy freely electing them: upon which, all other blessings and
graces bestowed, do wholly depend. So likewise it was necessary that Christ
should die at the age whereat he did die, neither could he live any longer.
Whence arises this necessity? Not from any inward cause in Christ's nature:
for in that respect he was likely to live long: but hence it was (as Peter
teaches) because God of his determinate counsel and foreknowledge had
delivered him, Act. 2.23.
and therefore appointed the time of his death, and special manner of the same.
Of his time, Christ says on this wise: My hour is not yet come: teaching us
that there was a certain term which could not be exceeded. Of the manner he
also says: Behold, we go to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be
crucified. Thus the necessity of things does arise sometimes from causes
external.

Thirdly, 3. A causis internis, and externis coniunctim consideratis.
this necessity does arise, partly from internal causes, and partly from
external jointly considered. As in the Sun and the fire (with infinite
other) though the shining of the one and heat of the other are from internal
causes, namely, their natures: yet both these effects come to pass by Gods
decree, and actual power of continual working, which are external. And so in
all other things in particular.

But for the understanding of these things aright, Causes are either definit,
or indefinite.
we must know that causes are either definite, or indefinite: and what is
meant by either of them.

Definite causes, Causes definite
are causes ordained by God to work certain effects necessarily. In this
sense the Sun is ordained to give light, not so much by nature, (as
Philosophers say) but by the will of God (as Divines say). Causes indefinite.


Causes indefinit are such as are not ordained to work certain effects, but
have it naturally in their power, either to work or not to work. As for
example: It agrees with the nature of man to write, yet that he should not
write, does not disagree from his nature. So that (after that skill gotten) he
may be said to write, or not to write naturally. Whence it is that the Sun
and the Moon (with such like) are called necessary causes of their effects:
but living creatures (with others serving to their use) are not necessary, but
contingent. But yet we must understand, that causes are thus distinguished in
regard of their natures and virtue of working, given them by God in their
creation: for if we respect Gods everlasting decree, and his divine government
of every thing in particular, then all causes are ordained to their certain
effects, and every thing appointed to his certain end. Judas was not of his
own nature ordained to betray Christ: for as he was naturally man, it lay in
his power to do it, or not to do it. But if you respect Gods eternal will
and counsel, then is he truly said to be a cause ordained for that purpose.
And therefore that which Judas did unto Christ, was foretold long before by the
Prophets of the Almighty: as Peter (in the Acts) plainly teaches. Cyrus (in
his own nature considered) was not a definite cause of delivering the Jews:
yet if you respect Gods eternal decree, he was ordained (as Isaiah says) for
that excellent end. Therefore in regard of Gods decree Cyrus delivered the
Jews necessarily, and Judas betrayed his master necessarily: yet neither by
compulsion, but willingly and freely. For it is as hard for the will to be
forced, as it is impossible that it should will contraries at one and the same
time. One and the same effect may be said to be both co^tingent and necessary.
Hence it is cuident, that one and the same effect may be both contingent and
necessary.

Contingent, in respect of the nature and inward causes: Why effects are
called necessary.
necessary, in regrad of Gods immutable decree, and Divine Providence. Which
necessity is in two respects: things, has determined in his heavenly
counsel, that so it shall work. An act not to be reclaimed.
As for example: the Sun does shine of a twofold necessity; the one, because
the nature of it is such, that it cannot but shine (unless Gods ouer-ruling
power does hinder it,) the other, because it is Gods will, that in his ordinary
course, it should give light unto us. There was a twofold necessity that
Christ should rise from the dead, and ascend into heaven: the one, the will of
God, the other, because he was without sin, and therefore could not be
swallowed up of the grave, nor detained by death. In which respects, (as Peter
says) it was impossible he should be overcome. Adams sin was committed
freely, and by consequence was contingent: for his nature was of that sort,
that he could either sin, or not sin, either will a thing, or not will it,
according as seemed good unto him. If therefore you shall merely respect Adams
nature, then his sin was contingent: but if Gods eternal counsel, and
immutable will, then was his sin necessary, for God had decreed, that by his
fall, (as through a pinching narrow door) we should pass to receive a certain
assurance in, O foolix culpa, quae talem and tantum habere meruit Rede^ptorem.
and through Christ Jesus, of a far more excellent estate of glory. Christ
died freely, Isai. 53. He was offered, because it was his will to be offered:
Ioh. 10.11. I have power to lay down my life: yet if you respect Gods decree,
Christ died necessarily, both concerning the time, and manner of the same. It
must needs be that Jerusalem should be destroyed by the Romans; yet not
simply in regard of the city, or matter whereof it did consist, nor yet from
any necessity in the persons of the Romans, for they freely besieged it, and
willingly subverted it: and therefore it may be said, ye it lay in their power
to spare it. But if you respect Gods eternal decree, the^ they were necessary
means of the subversion thereof, because God (for their sins) had so
ordained it, as himself had long before declared. Wherefore we conclude, that
although Gods Providence does impose a necessity upon all things, yet that it
does not take away their natural working. And therefore in respect of God, all
things are done necessarily: but in respect of second Causes, some necessarily,
and some contingently. Yet we must observe, that whereas some causes are
definite, some indefinite; some effects necessary, some contingent, that this
wholly proceeds from Gods Providence: for he ordained them such natures,
prescribed them such an order, and appointed their manner and ends of working.
Therefore this necessity does not impugn this doctrine of Gods Providence,
but rather confirms the same. This may suffice to prove this necessity; yet
for confirming thereof, I will add some reasons:

Those things which God has foreknowne, Reasons to prove that Gods Providence
imposes a necessity upon all things. Reas. 1.
by his certain and infallible knowledge, those things fall out necessarily.

But all things are thus foreknowne:

Therefore all things fall out necessarily.

That it must needs be, Si praescierat Deus quod non est, praescientia iam
non est. Aug. de Praedest. lib. 1.15.
that those things fall out necessarily, which God has certainly foreknowne,
it is evident, because otherwise his knowledge should be deceived, which is
impossible. And that there is nothing which he has not certainly foreknowne,
it is likewise apparent: because he is an Alseeing God, to whom all times are
present: and therefore the conclusion is good.



But Gods eternal decree and counsel, (appointing all things) are
unchangeable:

And therefore all things fall out necessarily.

Of the former part of this argument, there is no question: because if God
should not decree all things, he should not be most wise: If not effect
according to his decree, Zanchius de Attrib. Dei. cap. 4.
the^ he should alter his determination, or be hindered of the same: but neither
of these are possible, because he is omnipotent, and his works without
repentance.

Of the consequence, there can be no doubt, (as has been proved at large).
And therefore the conclusion directly follows.

A third reason: Where all things are excellently disposed and ordered,

But such is Gods disposing and ordering of all things:

Therefore all things fall out necessarily.

That all things fall out necessarily, where there is a perfect government, it
is plain by reason, which teaches, that if things should come to pass by
chance, as having a liberty of falling out, or of not falling out, then this
order could not be preserved, because (being not thus disposed), they would as
often fall out preposterouslie, as directly.

The consequence is evident: Psalm. 104.22. Thou Lord have founded all things
in great wisdom. Now it is the property of wisdom, to govern all things in
a good order, and to direct them to a certain end, which being performed by
God, in which respect he cannot be the author of confusion, as Paul teaches:
1. Cor. 14.33. it must needs be an evident truth, That all things fall out
necessarily.

disorder, and an absolute necessity in things seeming most contingent:

Then all things fall out necessarily:

But both these are true:

For the first, There is an excellent order, where there seems greatest
disorder.
view the history of Joseph: Contrary to justice, the righteous is punished
by the wicked: contrary to nature, the death of a brother conspired by his
other brethren: contrary both to the Law of God and nature, children do agree
to dishonor God, and grieve the aged head and relenting heart of their father:
herein are the rules of humanity neglected, the Law of nature violated, the
commandments of God rejected, then which, what more odious to men, what more
punished by God? And therefore in this there seems more then disorder. Genes.
37.
Yet consider the history, and you shall find an excellent order in regard of
God, though the fact most vile and wicked in respect of Joseph's brethren:
First, God cast Joseph into two dreams, and gave him the knowledge of
revealing their meaning. From the certain declaration of them, arises an
hatred in his brethren toward him: this malice begets a determination of
killing him: this determination is prevented by an advice of casting him into a
pit: this purpose of his perishing in the pit, is likewise prevented by the
coming of the Ismaelites at that very instant: their coming gives
opportunity of selling him: from his being sold unto them, arises his passage
into Egypt, and a second selling him to Pharaohs chief Steward: Genes. 39.1.
from his buying him, arises a blessing upon his household: from this
blessing, a committing of all government into his hand: from this Authority,
an often recourse into his mistress her presence: from this recourse, her
beholding him: from her wanton gazing on his beauty, a wicked lust: from this
lust, an impudent petition of sleeping with him: from this petition, his
denial: from his denial, her false accusation: from this accusation, his
being cast into prison: this imprisonment is a means of revealing his gift of
expounding dreams: which brings him to the Kings presence, procures his
favor, and makes poor Joseph ruler over his whole Kingdom. Now to the intent
that we may see that this is no disorder in Gods government, but that of his
infinite mercy and compassion unto his Church, he effected the same; the
famine being great and general, Genes. 41.57.
God did put it into Jacobs mind to send his sons into Egypt for corn: where
all things being at Joseph's disposing, Genes. 37.5.
(whereof good Jacob and his sons never dreamed) according to Gods purpose
revealed in Joseph's dream of the sheaues, they do homage unto him, Genes.
42.6.
are kindly used by him, who was most vilely entreated of them (a president of
our wicked using of Christ, and of his gracious dealing with us) and lastly
receive corn sufficient for their relief, with other preferment at his hands.
Therefore, though in regard of the purposes of Joseph's brethren, this may seem
disordered: yet in regard of the end purposed by God in exceeding mercy, and
directed by his wonderful wisdom, al came to pass excellently well: because
God sent Joseph before hand into Egypt for the preservation of his Church.
Genes. 45.5.
And therefore where things seem unto us most disordered, there God governs
excellently well.

Touching the second, namely, That there is a necessity in things seeming
mere contingent.
that those things are necessary which seem most contingent, it is in like
manner evident. What seems to have less necessity of falling out, then that
Joseph should be sold into Egypt, and made chief Governor under the King?
that he should be a means of relieuing his kindred, and through his favor to
be kindly entertained? What more strange then that Abraham's seed should be
there increased as the stars of heaven? that this seed of Abraham after the
death of Pharaoh the first, should be kept in bondage the term of an hundred
and forty years, yet afterward (the Egyptians being spoiled) to return to
the promised land, there to serve the Lord their God? These things in respect
of us, may seem contingent, but with God they were absolutely necessary. And
therefore they were foretold by the Lord himself unto Abraham: Genesis 15.14.15.
according to which prediction they came to pass in all respects.

What seems more contingent, then that Christ should be carried into Egypt by
reason of Herod's persecution, that he should be called from thence by the
mouth of an Angel, that he should be betrayed by one of his Disciples, that
he should be sold for thirty pieces of silver, that Peter before the third
crowing of the cock should deny his Master, that the soldiers should cast
lots for his vesture, that he should be arraigned, condemned, crucified,
dead, buried, rise again, and ascend into glory? yet all these were foretold
in Gods word, and came to pass (as Peter says) by the determinate counsel of
God. Act. 2.23.
And therefore were simply necessary. Lastly, even lotterie, where chance
seems to have greatest stroke, and reason and advice least to prevail, and
therefore is called of the Poets, Blind lotterie, and unlooked chance, even
this is ruled by Gods Providence: Proverbs 16. The lot is cast into the lap,
but the event proceeds from the Lord. Jonas by casting of lots was found out
to be the party for whose sake God sent the storm upon the Seas: which could
not be done by chance, nor yet undone, because (being thereby cast into the
Sea, swallowed of a Whale, and remained in his belly three days and three
nights, but afterward cast upon the land again) he was therein a figure of
Christ's lying in the earth, and of the time it should contain him. In the
election of a new Apostle, the Lot fell unto Matthias, but not as having a
liberty of falling upon the other, for it was to show that he which knew al
things (as the text says) had chosen him. Act. 1.24.
Therefore if these things seeming mere contingent, fall out necessarily in
respect of GOD, though unto us (to whom future events are unknown) far
otherwise, how can we deny the same necessity in all other things, to which
the like liberty is not granted?

Further, it is to be observed, that although causes in their own natures not
definite, may incline unto either part, (as the will to choose or refuse) yet
these by Gods decree, incline to one part only: According to that of Solomon;
Man's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters, and whither he
pleases he turns the same: yet so, as that which we do, that we think
for that instant best to be done. But you must understand me of things
propounded to our choice, whereof there is in us a liberty of choosing or
refusing either. In which case, every of us may say by experience, that we are
moved to incline rather to the one, then to the other. Otherwise we cannot be
said to make a choice of any. Now this inclining of the will comes from God:
Psalm. 105. Prou. 16.1. and 20.24.
he works in us both the will and the deed, according to his good pleasure,
Philipp. 2.13. The Lord, August. de Gratia and Arbitrio. Tom. 7. cap. 21.
says Augustine, does incline the wills of men whither it pleases him, but
yet so, as that he does not disturb their natures, neither violently work
upon them, but does it by a pleasing inclining and gentle moving them forward.
According as Boaethius in his Topics, Vid. (...), and (...).
upon the word (...), (taken by him for destiny, or Providence indifferently)
very well notes. Thus we see that men will freely, yet necessarily: freely,
because they are only inclined and moved; never forced nor compelled:
necessarily, because GOD does move them to one part only, according to his act
of decreeing, which cannot be altered.



Every thing does take his name from his own nature, Solution.
the matter whereof it consists, and the manner of subsisting; and not from the
external cause of the same. Adam was not called God from the external cause
of his being, from whom he received the breath of life; but he was called
Adam of the earth, being the matter whereof he was framed. We do not call
such things as we do against Gods law, good works, from the external cause,
farthest removed from their working, but we call them transgressions of Gods
law, sins, and such like, from a defect within our selves, and from our own
corrupted natures; Even so, when we consider the natures of causes within
themselves, we call some definite, some indefinite, some effects necessary,
some contingent. Yea in this sense we say that our wills have some freedom.
But if we look unto Gods certain foreknowledge, his immutable will, and act
of governing, then has his infallible knowledge taken away chance, his
heavenly will, limited our wills, and his act of governing imposed a
necessity that cannot be eschewed. And thus much touching the immutability of
Gods Providence, and the necessity it imposes on all things.

THE FOVRTH PART, wherein is especially contained;
That although God does govern all things, and that so, as his government can
neither be altered nor hindered, yet that he cannot be the author of sin,
although he is the principal cause of every action, with the which the sin
concurreth.
Sundry are the opinions concerning this point. Diverse opinions thouching the
author of sin.
The Libertines affirm, that God so wills sin, as that he is the cause
thereof. The opinion of the Libertines.
And therefore that sins should not be reproved, because they are the works
of God. For (say they) it is not man which sins, but the Lord by man. If you
contradict them, their answer is, You are not regenerate by Gods Spirit, and
therefore cannot judge aright of his works. But this opinion tends wholly to
the liberty of the flesh, and therefore is devilish and damnable. The
Manichees have thought, The opinion of the Manichees
that God cannot so suffer sin, as that he should any way will it, and
therefore concluded, that there are two only Authors of all things: the one
the chiefest Good, the principal Efficient of all goodness: the other, the
chiefest Evil, the sole Effecter of all wickedness; as well the sin, as the
punishment for the same. And so they will have sins to be committed, whether
the Author of all goodness will or not. Others there are, which neither
consenting to these, nor agreeing with the former, would have God to will sin,
and that he is the cause thereof; yet that no fault can be imputed unto him,
but unto men, who commit it. Their reason is, Gods will is a rule of equity,
and therefore whatsoever he wills, the same is just and right. Thus you see
the diversity of judgments: whence arises the necessity of handling this
doctrine. In the entreating whereof, it is necessary to touch these three
points:

How far forth God does will sin.

That he can in no respect be Author of any thing as it is simply sin.

That the devil is the setter,

For the vnderdanding, How God does will sin.
how far forth God does will sin, we must observe that there is a double
evil:

The one the evil of the offense, 1. Malum culpae.
which is the sin: the other the evil of the punishment, which is the reward
of sin: 2. Malum poenae.
called evil, in respect it is hurtful to him which suffers it.

The Evil of the offense, Sin is to be considered three ways.
which is the sin, is to be considered three ways.



Because when the Gentiles knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither
were thankful, but became vain in their thoughts, and their foolish hearts
were full of darkness, therefore the Lord gave them up unto their hearts
lusts, and unto uncleanness.

Thirdly, as it is a cause of sins afterward committed. Such was the
ignorance of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.18. Such the blindness, and hardness of
hearts in the Jews, whereof Isai. chap. 6. and Paul, Romans 12. For these sins
of theirs, were punishments of their former sins: secondly, sins of the
mselues: thirdly, causes of their infinite other sins, as Augustine in his
Treatise against Julian teaches excellently well. Lib. 5. cap. 3.


Thus we see that God may will a sin, as it is a punishment, and yet not be the
Author of sin, as it is simply sin.

Note further, Three things concurring in sin.
that three things concorre in sins: The first, the deed, or action: and that
is either inward or outward: Actions, inward, or outward.
as evil thoughts, or of the heart, as wicked affections; or of the will, as
an evil choice, and an agreement to that which is wicked. Outward are those,
which are actions of the senses, wrought by the external instruments of the
body. Tull. in his Parad.
when he says, Peccare, est transilire lineas praefixas, and a scopo aberrare,
to sin, is to pass the bounds prescribed, and to wander from the mark;
expressed by the Grecians, when they call it, What sin is.
(...) or (...): and defined by the holy Ghost, to be the Transgression of the
law, 1 Ioh. 3.4.

the punishment they have deserved. And so is the third things considered in
sin.

Concerning the first of these three, God is the Author of the first thing
considered in sin, viz. the Actio^.
which is the Action: It is true that God is the principal Efficient, and
Author thereof: for in him we live, we move, and have our being. Touching the
third thing confidered in sin, namely the guilt, God is author of the third,
namely, the Guilt.
whereby we stand bound to undergo the punishment our sins have deserved,
there is no question, but that God does in like manner will the same. But the
second, namely the transgressing of Gods Law, which expelles the purity in
the action, and makes it wicked, breeds a doubt, whether God does will it or
not. For the satisfying whereof, I will first show, what it is to will.
Secondly, how far forth God does will the same.

To will is taken two ways: To will, taken two ways: 1. Properly.
properly, or improperly: properly, when we will a thing in respect of it
self, because we judge it good indeed, or at least, in appearance seems to
be so.

Improperly, when we will a thing, 2. improperly.
in respect of another thing, that is, because of some good that will ensue the
same and not in respect the thing we desire, is of the one nature good. In
which sense, men do often wish a natural evil. A man often desires the
cutting offan infected member: Simile.
he does not properly will the want of that member (for every creature aims at
his perfection,) but the good he hopes will follow the same, namely, the
health of his body. So that there is an improper willling of the one, because
we wholly desire the other. So that the cutting away of that member, may
rather be called a voluntary permission, then an effectual willing, because
the will according to the own nature wills that which is good either in
truth, or at least in appearance: and if at any time it is carried to the
contrary, this comes from a certain disturbing of the mind, whereunto none
can say that God is subject. Further, those things which we properly will,
those we like, love, and take pleasure in; but a known evil is never thus
affected, and therefore at no time we properly desire the same. Since this then
is thus with men, much more is it so with God: Whence it necessarily follows,
that he does willingly suffer sin, and that he does will that which
follows the same, namely, his own glory, but is no cause of sin, as it is
simply a transgression of his law, as shall be more at large declared. But care
is to be had, lest in going about to set down the mean, we fall into the
extreme, or laboring to eschew some danger, we slip into a greater. He that
shall say God does will sin, as it is a transgression of his law, shall not
go unpunished: neither may he which affirms that sin is committed against
his will, or without his knowledge, go unreproved; the former is to rob God
of his goodness, the latter of his infinite power and knowledge. In showing how
far forth God does will sin, seven things to be observed.
Therefore that we may escape the danger, keep the mean, and obtain our
desires, these things are to be observed.









Fiftlie, that he does will sin as it is a guilt or obligation, wherein we
stand bound unto God to undergo the punishments which our sins have deserved.





Before we enter the several handling of these, it is to be marked, that to
will and to do with God are all one. He does not any thing, which he wills
not, neither wills any thing, which by the virtue of his willing it, is not
presently effected. Therefore in showing how far forth God wills these
things, is also declared how far forth he is the Author and Effecter of
them. To which in order.

That God wills his own glory principally,
IF a known good thing, (as reason teaches) is properly the object of the
will, then does God will his own glory especially, because it is most
excellent in his sight. This end was propounded in his admirable frame of the
world, and especially in the creation of his Angels in heaven, and men upon
earth. 1. Cor. 10.22. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Exodus 2.3. Isai. 48.11. Prou. 16.4.
To this tended his precepts, his mighty power, and charge of sanctifying his
name: to this end, is the execution of his justice upon the wicked both in this
life, and in the life to come: to this tends the shutting up of all under
sin, the sending of his Son, the redemption of his Church, their salvation
in heaven, with all other mercies forth of the exceeding riches of his grace
for the accomplishing thereof, bestowed upon them. Yea in a word, (for this is
a known and confessed truth) to this tended the Law and the Prophets, Christ
and his Gospel, the Apostles and Ministers of our Lord and Savior with all
Gods works of wisdom, power, justice and mercy. Therefote I conclude this
with Paul: 1. Cor. 10.22. Do all things to his glory: Romans 11.33. To him be
glory for ever, Amen.

That God so wills the evil of the punishment,
THere is no evil in the city which the Lord has not done; The error of the
Coluthiani, teaching the contrary, (Aug. de haeres.) is here condemned.
Amos 3.6. Punishment is a good thing, because it is the execution of justice
which sets forth Gods glory, and therefore befitting him who is goodness it
self. Hence it is that Adams high presuming hand, was punished by God
himself. Hence it is, that he provided a Law for his Successors and promised
punishment by his own person upon the violaters thereof. 1. Sam. 2.31.32
And therefore the man of God denounced Elies punishment in the name of his
master. Therefore the Lord takes this authority to himself with an
abridgement of the like unto others: not only saying, I, but, I and none
others, forming the light and creating darkness, making peace and creating
evil. Surely he is the inflicter of punishment in whom is the right and power
of punishing: but these two belong both unto God. And therefore he alone the
inflicter of the same. That the right belongs unto God it is plain, because he
alone gives the law, and takes an account of the breach thereof: that this
power is proper unto him, it is in like manner evident, because experience
teaches, that man by strength or policy, does often escape from man. But if
he be never so strong, he cannot resist the Al-omnipotent. If he go down
into the sea, or fly to the uttermost parts of the earth, even there will the
Al-seeing God find him out, and his power sease upon him. If having this right
and power, he should not punish accordingly, there should be a disorder, and
continual neglect of his glory, because of an usurpation and challenging of
that by the creature, which so wonderfully sets forth the glory and justice
of the Creator. Therefore without doubt God is sole inflicter of punishment.
But it is objected:



God does punish sometimes by himself, Solution.
sometimes by others, yet always it is he which punishes. He exalts men to
that honor, gives knowledge to judge, wisdom to distribute, power to
execute. The chair of Authority is his, the sword is his, and he gives
strength to use them: And therefore we cannot properly say that Magistrates do
punish, but God by the. In this respect they are called his Vicegerents, Kings,
yea Gods upon earth: to this end that we might know that he which is the King
of all Kings, and God of all Gods, has given them this honor, and that he
will both rule and punish the world by them, and also give them some names of
exceeding dignity and honor, whereby we might see it, and acknowledge his
Majesty in them. Yet all this while, the names, the authority, the power and
wisdom being given, and vpholden by God, and that so, as that we cannot say
that they execute punishment, but God by them: (without question) men are but
second means, and the Angels ordained ministers, God only is principal
efficient in executing justice and judgment. And therefore both the good and
bad Angel is still at his command: the one must into the King of Ashurs army
when he is commanded: the other may not touch his servant till leave be
granted.

It is further to be observed in the execution of punishment, that God does not
will it as it is simply a destruction of his creatures, but as it is an
execution of justice and declaration of his glory: for being a perfect
goodness, he would never inflict a natural evil, unless it had respect to a
moral good. And thus it appears that God is the author of all punishment, and
wherefore he inflicteth the same.

Hence is confuted the vain imaginations of such as would have two Gods; The
opinion of the Manichees confuted.
the one sole efficient of al goodness, the other of all evil, as well the
sin as the punishment, and the punishment as the sin it self. But sin is
no other thing then a privation and absence of the good, neither (being
considered only in it self) has any being in the nature of things. For what
is a disease? want of health. What is hunger? a want of being satisfied. What
is barrenness? an absence of fruitfulnes: So what is sin? An absence of that
vprightnes and equity which ought to be in every action. Now this privation or
absence cannot arise whence they would have it, for it must needs be in some
subject: the disease hangs not in the air, but in the body of a living
creature, capable of health. Blindness, which is an absence of sight, must needs
be in eyes capable of seeing. Now the subject of any priuatio^ is good, because
it has his being and is vpholden by God: neither indeed (as Philosophers
teach) can evil be in any other as his subject, then that which is good. And
therefore nothing so evil (be it substance or action) which is not good: One
and the same thing, good and evil, in of (...) spects.
evil in regard of the privation and absence of the good: good, in regard of
the subject wherein it is. Therefore, since every evil is in some subject, and
every subject has his being and is vpholden by God, therefore the opinion of
the Manachies (proved by mere reason) is fond and foolish. The third point
follows.

That God wills sin as it is a punishment of sins before committed.
IT is usual with God (and this is a most grievous kind of punishment) to
punish one sin with another. Such was the hardening of the heart of Pharaoh,
and the blinding of the eyes of the Jews: which were not effected by God as
they were simply sins, but (as Tertullian says against Marcion) as they were
punishments of their former iniquities. Lib. 2. page 180.
God sent the devil to deceive Achab with a lie, put the spirit of error into
the lying Prophets: their lying was a sin, but God willed it as punishment,
and not as it was merely a sin of it self. The like appears, 2 Thessalonians.
2.10.11. Romans 1. Isai. 19. Isai. 29.
Because the Thessalonians received not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved, therefore God sent them strong delusions, that they should believe
lies. Tim. 7. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Augustine against Julian, shows that a desire to sin, is a sin, a
punishment, and a cause of sin: but yet in respect of God a punishment only.
This shall suffice touching this point. If any one list to hear more, I
refer him to that of Tertullian, before alleged: Contra Marcion. lib. 2. p.
180.

That God does will sin as it is an action in ward or outward.
ALthough sin cannot in very deed be separated from the action with the which
it goes, because every privation is in some subject, yet in mind there may
be a distinction, and in the understanding a separation of the one from the
other. Wherein we conceive the one to be good, the other evil: the evil
proceeding from our own corruption, How sin is distinguished from the action
with the which it goes.
the good from God alone, whether it be substance or action. Romans 11.36. Of
him, and in him, and for him are all things: when he says, all things, he
comprehends substances and actions jointly together. For since in God we
live, we move, and have our being, Act. 17.28. there is no question, but by the
virtue of the same power, all substances are maintained, and actions effected.
Tyrants persecuted the children of Israel: their malice proceeded from
themselves, but their strength to effect came of the Lord, Tom. 7. de Gratia
and libero Arbit. c. 20.
Isai. 7.17. For, as Augustine says, God does work in the heart of man, and
does move the motions of the will, that by them he may bring to pass,
whatsoever he has decreed: according to that of Solomon, Prou. 21.1. The kings
heart is in the Lords hand, as the rivers of waters; he turns it whither
soever it pleases him. all Gods creatures are his instruments of glory: we
cannot properly say that an instrument works, but the vser of the same. The
axe is not the squarer of the timber, but the Carpenter with the axe: so man
does not work of himself, but God by man. Thus much we acknowledge in the
Confession of our faith, saying, I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker
of heaven and earth. When we call him Almighty, we acknowledge an effectual
power, working all in all, according to the good pleasure of his will: and when
we confess him Greator of heaven and earth, we likewise acknowledge that he is
the Maintainer, Mouer, and Effecter of all things. And thus is God the effecter
of actions, though not of the sins which usually go with them. The fifth
point follows.

That God does will sin as it is a guilt,
AVgustine against Julian, Tom. 7. lib. 6. cap. 8.
disputing of ye guilt of original sin, says, that it is an obligation, wherein
every one that is in the flesh, borne carnally of the flesh, is bound unto God,
to undergo the reward of sin, namely, eternal destruction. This obligation
has his seat in the laws of God: made in his just judgment, his will setting
down the matter, and his justice ruling the form, and therefore must needs be
good: and being good, that the Lord does will the same. For since it is proper
unto God, to soue justice, and hate iniquity (as the Psalmist says) it must
needs be, that God wills our being tied to undergo the punishment our sins
have deserved, because therein is his Justice exalted, Gods promises
conditional: namely, if we by true faith take hold, upon them. Ioh. 3.16. 1.
Ioh. 4.9.
and our iniquities beaten down. Now this bond is cancelled by our gracious
Redeemer, the benefit whereof redoundeth only to such, as by a sledfast faith
exercised in the works of true godliness, take hold upon him: I mean such as
are grown to the years of discretion, and therefore capable of instruction,
of whom a holy life is necessarily required; not infants, who by Gods order of
creation, cannot perform the same, yet by reason of the promise, are within
the Covenant, and by a powerful and admirable work of his Spirit, (as Peter
Martyr says) are converted unto him. Vix been moritur, qui male vixit.
That man does seldom die well, that ever lived ill. Thus much by the way, And
thus much of this guilt, because I have spoken before of the same. The sixth
point follows.


FOr the understanding of this, A permission is taken three ways.
we must know, that to permit, or to suffer, is taken three ways. his will can
neither be forced, nor restrained. abundance we could relieve the distressed,
cloth the naked, feed the hungry, and such like; yet in these cases it is our
purpose to yield no help at all, and therefore do willingly suffer them to
perish. After this manner does God permit sin: and is excellent good in him,
because he is above the law, and yet does it to an excellent end, mixed with no
manner of ataxie or disorder at al: but is evil in us, in regard we are under a
law, which comma^ds we should do unto others, as we would others should do unto
us. God sees that man being naturally evil, cannot but sin, unless he be
prevented with the special assistance of his holy Spirit; he cannot but fall, A
threefold cause of Gods suffering of sin: 1. The declaration of his just
judgment:
either for the declaration of his just judgment, by punishing his sins, or
for the manifestation of the riches of his grace, 2. The manifestation of his
exceeding mercy:
by pardoning his iniquities, Romans 9.22. Neither does God permit sins (as
certain men imagine) unwillingly, or at least no way willing them: for this
does not agree with his omnipotency: 3. That we might know our own
weakness, and wholly rely on his grace.
but he does so suffer them as that he does will the suffering of them: the
which is added, lest men should think that God suffered any thing, the which
he did not will, which is impossible, because omnipotent. Neither does God
willingly permit sin in such sort as that he does like of it in that respect
that it is simply sin, (for his laws are to prevent it, and his justice
takes hold upon it) much less then does he put it into their minds, or is in
the least measure, Author of the same: so that it follows, that his permission
is voluntary, and we sole effecters of our own misery: Psalm. 81.13. I gave
them over (says the Lord) unto the lusts of their hearts, and they walked in
their own ways: Act. 14.16. God suffered the Gentiles (says the text) to
walk in their own ways. That this permission was in all respects voluntary,
Matthew. 10.29.
it is plain, in that a sparrow shall not fall on the top of the house without
the will of our heavenly father: much less then shall greater matters be
effected without his voluntary permission, as that Tyrants should persecute
his chosen, of which kind offsinnes Christ in that place speaks. Therefore
since no one has resisted the will of God at any time, Romans 9.19. Tom. 3. de
Trinit. lib. 3. cap. 4.
we may safely conclude with Augustine, that the same is the principal cause
of every thing, as well of the substance as of the several motions, nothing
being done, which has not either his commandment, or permission, forth of the
court of the great Emperor of heaven and earth, from the riches of his grace
and mercy in bestowing of rewards, or from the rule of his justice in
inflicting punishment: to which opinion of Saint Augustines, the learned of
this age do easily agree.

That there is a difference between Gods willing of that which is good,
GOd is properly said to will those things which are good, because he does
both approve, and also love them in that respect that they are good, and so
does effect them immediately himself, or mediatelie by others: But he does
condemn and hate those which are evil, much less does he approve and love
them, yet he does willingly suffer them, and that in wonderful wisdom, and
for excellent ends. So that the difference between the one and the other is,
in that the good is powerfully effected, the evil willingly permitted. The
first thus wrought, because of it self it tends to the end or dained: and
secondly, is the sole things whereunto Gods will is carried. The second thus
permitted, because the exceeding riches of his grace may the more redound to
some, and the strictness of his just judgment more declared upon others: both
jointly tending to his own glory and good of his Church, Note three
wonderful things in Gods effecting of this: 1. His infinite vvisdome. 2.
Power. 3. Goodness.
in that his power, knowledge, and will concur, to make sinnne being simply
evil, to tend unto another end, then the nature thereof will admit, or was in
the purposes of such as did commit it, once imagined. And thus much briefly,
for the difference between Gods willing of that which is good, and that which
is evil.

Thus having touched these several positions, wherein is especially showed,
first, the proper object of Gods will, and secondly, in what sense he wills
sin: now it remains to prove the consequence of all, namely, that God is
principal Efficient of all goodness, but never Author of sin, as it is
simply considered.

That God can by no means be the Author of sin, as it is simply a
transgression of his law.
THe truth of this position appears, Two ways of proving that God cannot be
Author of sin: 1. By his Word. 2. By mere reason.
first, from Gods word, secondly, from mere reason. From his word afthis
manner: Psalm. 5.4. Thou art not a God (says David) that love wickedness:
neither shall any evil dwell with thee. As though he should say; Thou God
shall free me from Saul and his conspirators, because thou art a God which
neither willest, nor any way approuest of wicked dealing: Habac. 1.15. Thou art
of pure eyes, and can not see evil: Thou can not behold wickedness. In
which place the Prophet does teach that the nature of God is such, that he
cannot abide (in contented manner,) to look upon sin, or behold iniquity in
another, much less does he will it himself. But we will reduce the Arguments
after this manner.

This is impossible that there should proceed any evil, from a cause which is
simply, and absolutely good:

But God is a cause in all respects simply and absolutely good:

And therefore no evil can proceed from him.

That it is impossible that there should proceed evil from a cause which is
simply, The proposition proved.
and absolutely good, who so wilful, that will not conceive it, who so blind,
that cannot see it? How can that be absolutely good, from whence proceeds
some evil? Wherein should an absolute good cause, differ from an evil cause,
if evil did proceed as well from the one as the other? Whence is it called
absolutely good, if it be mixed with evil? Is it because there is more
goodness in it, then evil? then is it no more absolutely good, but partly
good and partly evil. Can a compound be a simple, or a color obscured with
dark, perfectly white? No more can a cause partly evil, be said to be
absolutely good. Therefore being proved that GOD is a cause absolutely good,
it must needs be that no evil can proceed from him. Therefore in the next
place to the proouing of this truth unto us.

We call that sincere friendship, The assumption proved.
which is neither mixed with the gall of harred, nor colored with the gloss
of dissimulation. We hold that true faith, which is (...), sincere, and without
diffimulation, and therefore shall never fail. These, though never so perfect,
yet have their imperfections, and what goodness is in them, or in us from them,
proceeds from another: but God is goodness absolutely perfect, his perfection
is of himself, his goodness his essence, and his essence goodness it self,
from whence the goodness of all other things proceeds: he of himself, every
thing from him; he infinite, without time or measure, we in part and for the
time appointed by him. Thus is God such a goodness as is perfectly absolute,
and absolutely perfect in all things. Therefore when Moses desired of the Lord
to show him his glory, Exodus 33.18.19.
the answer was, I will make all my goodness go before thee: that is, I will
show unto thee a certain semblance of that my goodness which is infinite: I
will manifest my self gracious and good, so that, so far forth as the
shallownes of thy understanding will attain unto, thou shall perceive the
same. Gods goodness, and himself are all one: It is no idle quality, whereby
he is good only unto himself, but his goodness is such as does continually
by sundry and infinite means, communicate it self unto others. Upon this
ground David excites unto thankfulness, Psalm. 117.22.
saying, Praise ye the Lord all ye nations. All ye people praise him: for his
loving kindness is great toward us, the truth of the Lord endures for ever:
that is, the restimonies of his fatherly grace and goodness never have end.
Where the heavenly Prophet describes no idle goodness, but such a one as is
ever taking pity, ever working for the best, ever doing good: and therefore
having his mind busied with this consideration, and his heart full fraught
with the sense of what his mind did meditate, he breaks forth into a most
thankful admiration, The earth, O Lord, is full of thy goodness. So that God
is not such a goodness as sometimes cease, but ever works that which is
good, and is never wearied in his weldoing. But what needs long proose? since
God and his goodness are all one, it must needs be that himself being
infinite, his goodness is infinite, and therefore extends unto all; and so
impossible is it that himself should not be himself, as it is possible for
evil to proceed from his goodness which is himself: for such as is the
fountain, such are the streams that flow from it.

God has left a certain impression of this his goodness in his works of
creation. And therefore Moses says, that all things which God had made were
very good. If the goodness of the creatures was such, how great is the
goodness of the Creator? The blasphemy of Marcion confuted.
Most blasphemously therefore did Marcion affirm, that God which created
heaven and earth was not a good God. If he is not good, how should he create so
many good things? Nay, if his goodness was not infinite, how could the earth,
which our sins had caused to bring forth nothing but brambles, yield so many
diverse and excellent fruits? This wonderful goodness of God, is most
evidently seen in his work of maintaining, governing, and blessing all
things, which we call his divine Providence. Is not he good which maintains,
governs and blesses the world with every particular therein contained? Is
not he good, which gives life, motion and being? He which beautifies the
heavens with the stars, the day with the Sun, the night with the Moon; he,
whose Spirit, by the virtue of the Sun, the operation of the Moon, the
influence of the stars, the motions of the heavens, gives life unto al
things? Who made Marcion of such corruptible matter to be an excellent
creature? who gave him a divine mind, an understanding soul, with other
admirable gifts of nature? O blind and unnatural man, that could not see, or
durst deny him to be good, of whom he himself had received so many good
things! this goodness of God is so much more manifest, in that he never cease
to do good unto his enemies; of which sort was Marcion and others as yet (I
fear me) innumerable, who resisting this goodness of God by their open
wickedness, recompense his long suffering with carnal security, turn his
blessings into wantonness, and harden their hearts at his deferring of
judgments: which men never think that his mercies are to work a loving
obedience, his judgments to cause a godly fear, and that his long patience
expects a repentant reformation. God could destroy these men in a moment,
Deferendo, non auferendo: modo non poeniteant.
yet he does not: he could inflict present punishment for their sins, yet he
deferres it: he could show the tokens of his fury and wrath, as upon Sodom
and Gomorrha: but his mercy breeds delays. Why so? because it rejoices
against judgment, testifying his goodness exceeds our iniquities. This is
that goodness which Christ persuades to imitate as near as we may, saying,
Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect; who suffers the Sun to
shine, and the rain to fall both on the good and the bad.

But this goodness of God is seen in nothing so much, Ephesians. 2.4.5.
as in the manifestation thereof to his Church. Therein consists infinite and
perfect goodness: hence it is that he calls it home when it wandered, gathers
it when it was dispersed, awakes it when it was in the slumber of sin, Romans 5.
reuiues it being dead in transgressions, yea redeemes it being utterly lost,
1. Pet. 1.
not with corruptible things as filuer, gold, and such like, but with the most
pure and precious blood of his dear and only begotten Son. And now thus
called home, keeps it to the Shepherd of the flock and Bishop of their
souls; thus gathered, preserues it lovingly under the wings of his mercy;
thus a wakened, still sounds by the trumpet of his word that it should not be
lulled asleep in the cradle of security; Romans 10.
thus revived, gives still life unto it by the power of his Spirit: and thus of
the exceeding riches of his grace and mercy has delivered us from the
captivity of error, sin, Satan, corruption and eternal destruction; and so
by the same word and Spirit, Romans 8.
conducts us thorough the boisterous seas of this troublesome world, until he
has brought us to his haven of everlasting rest and blessedness. O the
wonderful and incomprehensible goodness of this our most gracious God and
merciful Father!

The Arguments drawn from reason, Arguments drawn from reason, to prove God
such an absolute Goodness, from whom proceeds no evil.
whereby those which are unreasonable, may be farther convinced, are very many.
The Philosophers defining that which we call, Good, say, Bonum est quod omnia
expetunt: That is good, which all do desire. But all desire God, ye goodness
they hoped for from him) and therefore God is an absolute goodns.

It is a better thing to give then to receive. Now if the goodness of
creatures is so much the better, by how much the more they communicate unto
others, then the Creator himself who communicates all unto all, must needs be
goodness it self: that is, one from whom proceeds no iniquity.

distinct things, then he should not be simple, but subject to composition.
Secondly, if he was not of himself perfectly and essentiallie good, then he
should be good by the participation of another goodness, which is good of it
self: and therefore should not be eternal, because he should have another
goodness before him. For that thing which is good of it self, is in nature
and order before that which it does participate his goodness unto. But God is
a most simple and eternal goodness, absolutely perfect, and therefore of
himself essentially good: so that this absolute perfection is proper to the
Deity only, in regard of which, al other things are merely imperfect. The
water made warm by ye fire, is imperfectly warm, because it receives heat
from another: so the goodness of all other creatures is imperfect, because
whatsoever spark of goodness they have, they receive it from God. So that the
most righteous, is imperfectlie just, the most prudent, imperfectly wise,
because both the righteousness of the one, and wisdom of the other, are
jointly received from God, who is wisdom and holiness it self. Yea, what is
the righteousness of the most holy, and wisdom of the most wise, being
compared with God? Surely filthy pollution, and palpable folly in his sight.
As impossible therefore as it is for God not to be God, or being God to lose
the properties belonging to the Godhead; so impossible is it for God being of
himself, an essential, absolute and perfect Goodness, to do any thing which
should not be good, that is, simply a sin and transgression of his law.
Honey, in that respect that it is honey, has neither sowernesse nor bitterness
in it: The Sun of the own nature is light, and therefore cannot admit of
darkness: The good tree by his natural virtue, yields forth good fruits, and
the bad, those which are evil. If these creatures by the ordinance of God,
cannot in their natures admit of contraries, how much less can the Creator,
that most perfect sweetness, most glorious light, most blessed tree of life,
admit of the gall of sin, effect the works of darkness, or yield the bitter
fruits of lust and concupiscence? Therefore as John says: 1. Ioh. 1.4.
God is light, and in him is no darkness: so we conclude, God is a perfect
goodness, and in him is no iniquity.

Psalm. 1.
The godly man sits not in the chair of the scorners, nor walks in the ways
of the wicked, but his delight in the law of the Lord, and therein does
exercise himself day and night: The wicked on the contrary, reject Gods
laws, and effect the works of darkness, and herein they take pleasure and
delight, as the fish to bathe in the sea: If these are carried this way, or
that way, according to their several conditions, how can God be moved to any
other then to good, being a most perfect essential goodness?

because man is deceived, through his corrupted nature, and by the false show
set thereon by Satan, to take that for good which indeed is evil. Yea to
those whose consciences tell them they refuse the good, and choose the evil,
even to them, does the good for that instant seem less beneficial, and the
evil more commodious and pleasing. But God being an absolute pure goodness,
can will nothing corruptly: he knows evil in all respects, it cannot deceive
him: he is not deluded with a false show, to whom all things are apparent: the
outward painting hides not the inward corruption from him, to whom all things
are naked: the nature of his own effects cannot deceive him, to whom the very
secrets of all men's hearts are evident: Satan may lead the blind awrie, but
he cannot seduce the Al-seeing: though his first assault overcame Adam and
Eve, yet many attempts could not prevail against Christ. Therefore if good be
the proper object of the will in the corrupted creature, how much more does the
pure Creator, the Al-seeing God, will only that which is good?

Thou Lord have hated iniquity, and loved righteousness. And Zachary, after
he had persuaded the people to eschew sin, adds the reason wherefore they
should obey, namely. For these are the things which the Lord of Armies has
hated. And therefore the will being carried with a certain affection to the
thing willed, how can God, hating sin and iniquity, merely will the same?

John says) that he might take away the sins of the world, and destroy the
works of the devil, Ioh. 1.30. 1. Ioh. 3.6.
he gave the greatest price, even his only begotten Son, that which was most
near and dear unto him. Now what wisdom can we hold it, to labor
continually to prevent that which we purpose continually to effect: and why
should we do that, for which we would give the greatest price to have it
abolished? Since we hold this to be folly in our selves, how dare we impute
it to God, being wisdom it self?

Sins are either of omnissio^, or commission.
But God is tied to neither of these: and therefore can fail in neither. If he
should be bound to any thing, how should he be ruler of all things? for to be
bound to a thing, and yet to have authority over that thing, agrees not with
reason. Now since all of us acknowledge God to be Almighty, which is to rule
al, and have authority over all, we must needs confess he is not tied to any
law, and therefore cannot offend against the law.

from the next cause of the same, and not from another cause further removed. A
tree blown down by the wind, is called a windfall, as attributing the cause
of the fall unto the winds, and not unto the heavens, which drew up the vapors,
whereby the winds were caused. When a man is scald with hot water, it is called
a scalding, as attributing the cause to the water, and not a burning, as having
relation to the fire, by whose virtue the water was heated. As these effects
are properly imputed to their next causes, so is sin unto us, and not unto
God, being the cause farthest removed in our actions, whereunto our sins are
joined. Though the devil was the setter, deciuer, and instigator in the sin
of eating the forbidden fruit, yet the transgression was properly Adams, else
how could Gods justice have taken hold upon him, and his whole posterity for
the same?

Either in the person of Christ, or on these which commit it.


But God punishes sin in all:

And therefore being Justice, cannot effect it in any.



But God cannot be the author of sin any of these ways.

And therefore not at all.

The former part of the Argument is evident. It remains to proceed to the
proof of the latter part. Touching the first, namely, that Gods foreknowledge
cannot be the cause of sin: God is said either to know things, or to foreknow
them.
we must note, that God is said either to know things, or to foreknow them:
between his knowledge and foreknowledge, there is this difference. The
difference between Gods knowledge, and foreknowledge.
Knowledge is general of all things both done, and to be done; but his
foreknowledge is restrained to things that are to be done hereafter. Secondly,
Gods knowledge extends to that within himself, as well as to that without
himself; but his foreknowledge is only of outward things, and cannot be said
to be of any thing within himself: because whatsoever is in God, is his
essence, which being from everlasting, in reason he cannot be said to foreknow
the same.

We must further observe, Knowledge is either contemplative, or active.
that this his knowledge is to be considered two ways. The one absolutely and
simply, as it is only in himself; the other secundum quid, respectively, as
when an Artificer makes that, whose manner and form he does foreknow. The
former is a contemplative knowledge, that is, a knowledge without practice or
effecting the thing foreknowne. The latter is an active knowledge, that is, a
knowledge joined with practice, or a working the thing foreknowne.
Contemplative knowledge no cause of sin.
Out of which division, this Argument arises: If Gods knowledge is the cause
of sin, it is either as it is contemplative, or active: But it is not a cause
of sin either of these ways: And therefore not at all.

That Gods bare foreknowing a thing will come to pass, Gods foreknowledge
cannot be a cause of sin.
cannot be the cause of the thing foreknowne; it appears: first, by the
natural signification of Theorica, contemplative, which is a mere conceiving
and understanding of a thing, without any working upon that thing, for then it
should cease to be contemplative, and should become active. Secondly, the
understanding, as it is in it self considered, cannot properly be said to work
any thing, for it is proper to the understanding to co^cciue of those things
which are without, and it is peculiar to the will, to be moved from the
understanding, to the working of those things, which the understanding
conceiueth. Now knowledge does belong to the understanding, and not to the
will; therefore of it self cannot work any thing outwardly: and if it work
nothing, it cannot be the cause of any thing, Causa enim est cuius vires est:
For that is the cause of a thing, by whose force or virtue that thing is
effected. The Physician knows his patient will die shortly: Simile.
The Carpenter knows his neighbors house will fall quickly: the Mariner
knows a leake not stopped in a passengers ship, will drown him presently. Is
therefore the Physitio^ the cause of his patients death: the Carpenter the cause
of the fall of his Neighbors house; or the Mariner the cause of the sinking
of the Passengers ship? Surely no: Therefore we conclude that Gods foreknowing
of sins, cannot be a cause of them.

Secondly, Gods active knowledge cannot be a cause of sin.
active knowledge cannot be a cause of sin: for it is not simple, but is
joined with the will: neither does knowledge work upon outward things, but the
will only. Simile.
A Shipwright from his knowledge prescribes the form of a ship, and directs
the way of making it: but his will going with his knowledge is active, and only
works in the same: because it is from his will that he works himself, and
from thence also that he commands others; for a man does not make a ship,
because he knows the way of framing it, but because he desires and wills a
ship, therefore he labors to have it. Indeed with God there is neither time
past nor to come, yet by yt order which we see he has set down in the course
of things, which is usually called a natural order, we may say, yt knowledge
goes before the will, and the will before the effecting of the work; for we
work nothing but that which we first will, neither will we any thing
properly, but that which our understanding does first conceive, and our
judgment approve. Now I hold it lawful by the consideration of this natural
course infused into the creatures, Though not strictly in all, yet in this we
now entreats of.
to ascend unto the knowledge of the divine order of working in ye Creator, and
so in humility to reason from things natural to supernatural. And this
seems Paul to warrant, when he says: Romans 1.20.
The invisible things of God, that is, his eternal power and his Godhead, are
seen by the creation of the world: the heavens declaring the glory of God,
and the earth showing his handiworke. Therefore it is certain that Gods
knowledge is not a cause of any thing, but that his knowledge and will
conjoined, effect all things. Wherefore we conclude this truth with Augustine:
Lib. 7. de Anima.
Deus nos peccatores pranoscit, non facit: God foreknowes we will sin, but
makes us not sin: according to that of Hierome: Non ideo peccauit Adamus quia
Deus hoc futurum nouerat, sedpraesciuit Deus, Dial. 3. aduersus Pelag.
quasi deus, quidille erat propria voluntate facturus: Adam did not therefore
sin because Godknew he would sin: but God, as he was God, did know what Adam
of his own will and accord was about to do. And thus much for the proouing
that Gods knowledge cannot properly be the cause of any thing. I come to the
second.

Before I enter the proving that Gods decree cannot be the cause of sin, Gods
decree is not a cause of sin.
we must observe that it is to be considered two ways: Gods decree considered
two ways.
First, as it is in himself before all beginnings, not manifested unto any:
secondly, as it is put in execution, and so made apparent to others. The former
is called an Act of decreeing within himself, the latter, the execution of
this decree effected without himself. Ephesians. 1.4.
The first is that whereby God has necessarily, yet freely from all
eternity decreed all things: the second is an Action of God, by which al
things in their appointed time are so accomplished, as in his heavenly wisdom,
they were foreknowne and in his eternal counsel decreed. Now Gods decree
considered either of these ways, cannot be an absolute cause of any actio^,
but only so far forth as God has willed that action. True it is, that God
wills not any thing but that which in great wisdom he had decreed: yet he
cannot so properly be said to be ye cause of any thing in that he decreed it,
as in that respect that he willed it, because his will effects what his
decree appoints: whence this argument arises:

If Gods will is not a cause of any sin, then much less his decree:

But Gods will is not at any time a cause of sin:

And therefore not his decree.

Of the proposition there is no question. Gods will is not a cause of sin.
It rests to prove the assumption: being the third and last part of the
disjunction.

The will of God, Romans 8.19. Ephesians. 1. Gods will is either efficie^t,
commanding, or permissiue.
being that whereby he most freely and powerfully wills all things, and that
with one and the same Act of willing, is distinguished into efficient,
commanding, and permissiue. 1. Efficient.
His efficient will is that whereby he either works absolutely of himself
without the means of any other; or if by others, yet so as that they do not
properly work, but God in and by them. 2. Comma^ding.
His commanding will is that, whereby he works by commanding and setting of
others to work. 3. Permissiue.
His permissiue will is that whereby he does willingly suffer sin to be
committed for the manifestation of his justice and glory. The two former ways
do so comprehend Gods working, as that (the thing being effected according to
the manner and end prescribed,) he is made the principal cause and author
thereof. But his latter way of willing, namely, his voluntary suffering, can
by no means make him the cause of the evil he does so permit. But all is
reduced after this manner:

If Gods will is the cause of any sin, then it is either as he does effect it
himself, command others to commit it, or because he does willingly suffer it:

But Gods will is not a cause of sin any of these ways:

And therefore not at all.

Touching the former two, because from a cause simply good cannot proceed any
evil, neither can he which is Justice it self, punish that in another which
he commands that party to commit; by reason of these and many more already
alleged, there is no doubt to be made of them. The question is about the
third, namely Gods voluntary suffering of sin, which although I have proved
that it cannot be a cause of the thing so suffered; yet because the adversaries
of this truth do draw most of their arguments from hence, Satan cunningly
raising many doubts of his goodness, who indeed is an infinite goodness in, and
of himself, and is also infinitely good and gracious unto others, I will by
way of confirming the latter part of this Argument, stand somewhat more upon
opening this truth unto us. What Gods permissiue will is, I have showed
immediately before. The fountain from which it proceeds is his foreknowledge,
as that from which all his actions, ( quoad extra, as Divines call them) which
are effected without him, have their beginning: and is thus distinguished,
either it is absolute and simple, Permission is either simple or respective.
as the suffering of Adam to eat the forbidden fruit, or it is respective and
has regard and consideration to the parties suffered. God determining thereby
to keep his law of justice unspotted, and yet to give a general rule to all
Magistrates how to use a wise moderation. As when God permitted the Israelites
to sell their children into bondage, and Moses for the hardness of the peoples
hearts granted a bill of diuorcement, Matthew. 19.8.
though from the beginning it was not so.

Touching this permission thus considered, Jn God permitting of sin, four
things to be observed.
these things are to be observed: First, much less with the unregenerate in
the secret counsel of God elected to eternal glory, though not as yet called
home to Christ Jesus the Shepherd of the flock and Bishop of our souls. For
if Gods divine power and rich grace, should not concur in this, then (alas)
men should never cease sinning, yea then their least transgressions should be
peccata clamantia, crying sins, sins of presumption, blasphemies and sins
against the holy Ghost; that so the committers might perish finally. Whereto
then should serve the gracious promises of God in Christ Jesus upon true
repentance by a lively faith apprehended? Alas to no end: Ephesians. 2.2.3.
for without the bars of Gods grace and mighty power, we inclining, the
world alluring, and Satan continually tempting; how should we eschew that great
and seareful sin, for which the grace of repentance is never granted? If this
was not true even in the wicked, most lamentable misery should befall all true
hearted Christians. We have experience of the truth of this doctrine in the
most grievous persecutions of the Church of Christ, and especially in that most
fearful conspiracy and infernal treason, devised, plotted, and prosecuted by
that Antichristian sect and devil incarriate Papists, against the Church of
Christ, his chiese Anointed, and all other the most religious, wise, and
honorable Peers of this Commonwealth, whom, had not the hand of the Lord (of
his especial grace to the Nursefathers of his Church) miraculously delivered,
they, (cursed be the souls that shall once intend it) as innocent lambs had
been delivered to ye bloody slaughterhouse of devilish Tyrants, the walls
of our Jerusalem had been broken down, the honor of our Sion laid in the
dust, yea, the many Pillars and sole Maintainers of our welfare being taken
away, (far be it from us O Lord: for this is most fearful to think of, how
fearful then O Lord to endure it?) we thewhole bodies of his Highness dominions
had come to a most lamentable subversion and overthrow. A comfortable instance
of Gods reslrayuing the sins of the wicked.
But (to the everlasting praise of our most gracious God be it spoken) they
have dug a pit, and have fallen into the midst of it themselves: the Lord
of the riches of his mercy has broken their nets, and our souls are
delivered from the bloody hands of these infernal, insatiate fowlers. O that
men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, Psalm. 107.
and declare the wonders he has wrought for the children of men! Surely the
policy of man prevented it not: they stood affected to us, (and holding the
grounds of their profession will always so stand) even as Satan unto Job, Job
1.
desiring (if the Lord would permit) to plague both souls and bodies: yet as
the Lord said, he would not suffer Abimelech to sin against him, Genes. 10.6.
by coming near virtuous Sarah; so let us al with one heart and voice
confess, that our merciful God would not suffer these devilish Papists to
proceed to the height of their hortible sins, by coming nearer his Anointed,
and honorable chosen ones, to extinguish the blessed light of Christ's Gospel,
and that admired happiness, which by their most religious, just, wise, and
careful government, we have enjoyed amongst us.

Further, In every permission, two Agents.
it is to be observed, that in every permission there are two Agents: the
person permitting, and the person permitted. The former has power to hinder,
and when he pleases does use the same. The latter has an ability of working,
and when he is permitted, does put the same in execution. In both of these
there is a voluntary action, as well in the suffered, as in the suffer: but
herein is the difference, the action of his will which suffers is only
inward, and works nothing in him whom it suffers: the party suffered
works of his own proper will, his end of working being not prevented, nor
his means of accomplishing hindered by the other: so that although in both of
these there is a voluntary action, yet one of them only is author of the
fact: And by consequence, God only suffering, and we wholly executing, he is
most pure and holy, and we only guilty of our sins committed. For although,
as Augustine says, Nothing is done in the world which the Lord would not to be
done, Enchir. cap. 95.
Vel ipse faciendo, vel voluntary sinendo, either by doing it himself, or by
a willing suffering of it to be done, yet he is altogether free from the guilt
of the transgression, though for the manifestation of his iuflice and glory,
he does suffer the same. Simile.
Admit there is a gappe open into my neighbors Orchyard, I see it, (yet not
bound to stop it) leave it open; if afterward another man's cartell go in and
spoil the fruits, shall I be liable to the trespass? surely noe. The Lord
sees there is a gap broken into his vineyard, by our fall in Adam: The heresy
of the Secentians Aug. de hares. and of Florinus and Blastus, (Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 13. and 28.) teaching the contrary, is very damnable.
he sees we will play the wild bores, break down his vines, spoil his
Church, persecute his holy ones, and so both injury him and his: If therefore
he makes not a stay by his holy Spirit, changes not our minds, alters not our
affections, nor preuents our purposes, and thereupon we work all this villainy
against his Divine Majesty; is he therefore a trespasser in his own wrong? It
cannot be: for he does not the hurt in his own person, nor is any way tied to
prevent it in others: which being granted, he can no ways be blamed for what
we commit.



Paul answers: In that he suffers with long patience the vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction, Romans 9.22.23
it is to show his wrath, De pradest. l. 1.
and make his power known over the wicked; and that he might declare the
riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy. In which (as Augustine says)
the Lord does well, for he does not suffer sin, but by his just judgment,
and whatsoever is just is good. For although sins are not good, in that
respect that they are simply sins: yet it is good that there should be
sins, otherwise God (to whom it is as easy to hinder evil from being done,
as when it is done, to cause good to arise from the same) would never have
suffered it to be committed: Fulgentius.
for how can we imagine that he who is goodness it self, and also
Al-omnipotent, Ierem. 23.
wuld suffer any evil to be done, unless by that evil he effected some
good? Clemens Alexandrinus.
the sins of the reprobate declare his just justice and judgment, upon the
vessels of reprobation; the fallings of the godly, his exceeding riches of
grace upon the vessels of mercy. Romans 9.17.32.33.
And thus in the depth of his wisdom he has shut up all under sin, Gal.
3.22. Romans 11.31.
that his justice and mercy might appear unto all men. Secondly, note, that
before this suffering of sin, there does ever go an offering of mercy, to
prevent the sin: so that if we are not staid from our iniquities, the cause
is not the want of Gods mercy, in not offering grace, but in the hardness of our
hearts, in not receiving it when it is offered. And therefore says Augustine,
Augustine.
Non ideo non habet homo gratiam, quia Deus non dat, sed quia homo non accipit:
Men want the grace of God to keep them from sin, not because God does not
offer it, but because when it is offered, they have not hearts to receive it.
Christ is the way to the wanderer, but he seeks by-pathes, and will not
follow him: A light to them in darkness, but they wink with their eyes and
will not behold him: An inuiter to his blessed Supper, Luke 14.24. Ioh. 6.35.
but men will not taste it: He knocks at the doors of our hearts, but we will
not let him enter: He brings the bread of life, but we will needs starve in our
sins: Prou. 1.
He makes proclamation that all may freely have it, yet men must be drawn or
none will receive it: Per totum vbique iacet agrotus: Aug. in Matthew. 9.11.
Every soul is sick of sin, ideoque magnus de coelo venit Medicus, and
therefore that great and gracious Physician is come from heaven to cure us: he
seeks unto us, knockes at our doors and offers his heavenly potions, imo
pharmaca benedicta, immensique valoris, yea blessed potions, and of an
exceeding great value: Simile.
but such are our waiward natures, such our affections mere repugnant to that
which is good, that we will not be healed. So that, merito perit aegrotus qui
medicum vlero venientem respuit, the sick patient does deservedly perish,
which peruersly refuses the good Physician when he willingly offers his help
unto him. Musculus.
The lame in the ditch does wilfully perish, whilst he reiects his neighbors
hand when it is offered unto him: so if men darkened in their understandings,
and having the veil of ignorance as yet before their eyes, do tread the paths
of sin till they stumble at the threshold of hell, and so fall into the pit
of eternal destruction; the cause is not the want of Gods gracy yt would not
enlighten them, but their wilful blindness that would not be enlightened. Ioh.
3.19.
For herein is their condemnation, in that (as S. John says) that light is
come into the world: but men love darkness more then light, because their deeds
are enill.



lunius answers, that it may as well be demanded, why he made him not God;
because immutabilitie is proper to the Deity only: neither is it (in the
judgment of the learned) as praise worthy to have a nature not subject to
temptation, as having a nature subject unto it, to resist the same when we are
tempted.

Thus it is evident that God can by no means be the Author of sin, Delapsu
Adami.
neither because he foreknowes it, Si diabolus seductionis potestatem non
accepisset, home probationis mercedem non accepisset. Chrysostom. Oper. impers.
homil. 55.
decrees it, willingly suffers it, or made man by nature subject to commit it.
It rests in the next place to show, first, that Satan and our selves are the
causes of the sins we commit. Secondly, that although in every of our actions
there are three caudes, and that every of these work that which is good, the
action may be evil, and that this evil proceeds from our selves.

That Satan and our selves are the sole causes of the sins we commit.
primitiuus peccator, Ioh. 6.
the first and original offender, from whom sin flowing as out of a maine
sea, conueieth it self into the whole posterity of all mankind, the
Scriptures are very copious in proving the same. Ioh. 8.44.
When the devil speaks a lie (says John) then speaks he of his own, for
he is a lier and the father thereof. 1. Ioh. 3.8.
So that he which commits sin, is of the devil, because the devil
sins from the beginning. To this end therefore is the Son of man made
manifest, that he might dissolve the works of the devil. Adam, Maxey in his
golden chain.
in him it arises as out of a spring, from this spring it is reserved in
nature as in a conduit, Romans 5.12.
from nature conveyed to concupiscence as by a pipe, which working in our
corrupted natures, causes sin and iniquity to be effected: so that now,
because every action has his quality from the root of the affection, and
from the intention of the next author, therefore is sin properly attributed
unto our selves, as the causes thereof. And therefore the Lord for the
disobedience of his people Israel in not hearkening unto him, says that he
gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, Psalm. 81. Genes. 6.5.
and they walked in their own ways. And what are these ways of men? Surely to
have all the thoughts of their hearts set upon wickedness at all times: Genes.
8.21.
To be inclined to cuil from our youth: Job 15.16.
To drink in iniquity as it were water: To love darkness more then light:
Tit. 3.3.
To be unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures,
1. Cor. 6.11.
living in malitiousnesse and envy, hateful, and hating one another. Romans
3.4. Romans 8.7.
So that the wisdom of our flesh is emnitie to God: for it is not subject to
the law of God, neither indeed can be. Hence it is that every man is tempted
to evil of his own concupiscence: Iam. 1.14.
that Pharaoh hardens his own heart: Genes. 8.16.
that Israel, and not the Lord, Ierem. 5.3. Hos. 13.9.
make their faces harder the^ brass: that what help they have is from the
Lord, but their destruction from themselves: for, Deus est prior in amore; God
first offers grace, Matthew. 23.37. Luke 13.34.
he would gather them under the wings of his mercy: but in that they are not
gathered, it is because themselves would not. Therefore I conclude this truth
with Paul, In that men are the children of wrath, it is from their corrupted
natures: for in that they transgress Gods laws, they are moved and ruled
therein by the Prince of the air, Ephesians. 2.2.3.4.
yet so as that they follow ye course of the world, and are led by the lusts of
their own flesh, which carry them as directly in the paths of sin, as it is
natural to the birds to fly in the air, and to the fishes to swim in the
seas. And thus it is manifest, that sin is justly attributed wholly to Satan
and our selves: to him, as the original and mouer: to us, as naturally and
desirously effecting, what we are moved unto: for he propounds a deceivable
price, posteaque currentibus velocitatem addit, and afterward helps us forward
in the race of sin, wherein we are running as fast as we may. The second
point follows.

That although in every of our actions there are three causes, and that every
of these work that which is good, yet that it is from our selves, that our
actions are evil.
THat it may appear how far forth God works in every of our actions, and
wherein the committing of sin does consist, I hold the handling of this point
very needful. Touching the first part, Three causes of every Action.
(which may be propounded by way of objection against the truth of the former
position) we acknowledge it a certain truth, that of every of our actions
there are three causes: the first, God; the second, common nature; the third,
our will. The first cause is of himself: the second and the third proceed from
the first, God working by them, and they by a certain virtue and strength
^eceiued from him. The first, being an ^bsolute good cause, must needs work
only ye which is good both in heaven and earth. The second (considered as it
proceeds from the first, namely, God working by it, and it by a virtue received
from God) is also good, and so works naturally in it self, and in the
parties under the same contained. The third cause, namely, our will,
considered as the second, works of the one nature (as I have already proved)
that which is good: for Paul says, Romans 2.14.
The Gentiles which have not the Law do by nature the things contained in the
Law. So that it is truth, that these are the causes of every action, Ephesians.
2.3. Romans 3.4.
and yet notwithstanding that we are by nature the children of wrath, the
wisdom of the flesh being enmity to God. Solution. Man's estate to be
considered two ways. Natural is twofold.
For the understanding of this, we must know that man's estate is to be
considered two ways. First, as it was in Paradise, pure and holy. Secondly,
as it is since our fall, wicked and sinful: so that natural, vel innatum, vel
agnatum: either borne in us, as naturally proceeding from common nature; Common
nature good.
or else borne with us over and above nature: the first is good, being that
which God created. Adam, The corruption of nature evil. How corruption is
become natural. How our actions are good: How evil.
which by reason of the general infection of every part, and impossibility to
have it removed, is now become in us as natural as the former. Yet those
things which are naturally in us as proceeding from common nature, are good:
but as our actions are considered to come from this corrupted nature, they are
evil. Common nature considered in it self as it proceeds from God, does only
cause, that from a man should proceed a man, from a sheep, a sheep, from a
Lion, a Lion, and so in particular. But if you shall consider nature according
to the next means it works by, and as it is by that means stained and
corrupted, then does it cause, that from a leaper should proceed a leaper,
from one troubled with the palsy, one subject to the palsy: from a nature
corrupted with sin, a creature defiled with iniquity. Genes. 2.3.
Adam at first was free from this corruption of sin, and had he not tasted on
the forbidden fruit, no doubt his posterity had remained in the same
condition: but after his disobedience he was infected with this corruption, and
so in that respect that he was the next means of him which succeeded him, and
his son the next means of him which came from his loins, and so all
considered as they come from their next parents, even from Adam unto themselves
by an ordinary succession, as Adam begat Sheth, Sheth begat Enoch, Enoch begat
Kenan, Kenan begat Mahalaleel: and so in particular, til thou come to the
next cause of thy self, namely, thine own parents, hence it is thou art
corrupted: for in that respect thou wast begotten by a man, thou also art a
man, but in that respect that man which begat thee was corrupted, thou also art
corrupted.

Admit a leaper beget another leaper: Simile.
the son is not a leaper in respect his father was a man, but because he was
a leaprous man. So mankind is not defiled with sin, in that respect we
proceed from common nature, or because we are begotten by man, in that he is
a man, but because all from Adam to thy self are defiled with sin, hence it
is, that thou thy self art polluted with iniquity. So that since the
corruption of our first parent Adam, we may now cry out with the Psalmist:
Psalm. 14.3.
There is none that does good, no not one. Thus you see, how man may be said to
do naturally that which is good; and naturally that which is evil: and
therefore that our actions in diverse respects may be both good and evil: good,
in that respect God, common nature, and the will not disturbed, does work, in,
and upon them: bad, in that respect they proceed from a nature corrupted, and
from wills, (not directed by the good Spirit of God) ever since the fall of Adam
wonderfully disturbed, which corruption and disturbing; since it proceeds not
from the three former causes, but from a defect of purity, and a privation of
good, crept into Adam by his disobedience, and from him derived to his whole
posterity (for though it is a defect yet it is properly said to be in us,
Simile.
as blindness is said to be in the eyes, which is no more but a defect and
want of the sight) hence it is, that God working in and by these causes, is yet
notwithstanding free from all sin, and we our selves the Authors of the evils
going with our actions: I say, going with them, for we must conceive a
difference between our actions and the sin, which is nothing but a privation
and want of the good. The actions are effected by God, but the evil going with
them, wrought by our selves: God gives strength to work, and a faculty to
will; but in that the action is evil, it is because we work indirectly, and
will preposterouslie. As for an instance: Judas betrayed his Master: In this
action, God gave strength and a faculty of willing to Judas as his creature,
yea and wrought in, and by that power, and those faculties which he had given
him in his creation; but when Judas thus maintained, and moved by the hand of
Gods power, came to the adding of his own covetous desire, and malicious mind,
to this work of God, therein he made the action evil, and himself the
Author of it. Simile.
As for example: the heavens give moving to the Planets by a direct motion:
but the Planets (though thus moved,) take an indirect and overthwart course:
Whence is it? not from the motion of the heavens, which is ever direct, but
from the natural inclination of the Planets, to be cartied indirectlie from a
direct motion. Simile.
A man spurs forward a lame horse; if in his going he halteth, the cause is
not in the man which put him forward, but in the horse which wanted soundness.
Simile.
The soul in a lame man mooues a halting body: if this party halt, the fault
is not in the soul (for it only mooues such a body as it is,) but in the
party halting, because he was lame: and therefore being moved, could not but
halt. God is this soul of the world; he gives life and motion to all: if they
halt in their motion; (that is, if man moved by his Creator, does sin
against his Maker,) it is because he does (as it were) spur a lame horse,
and move an halting body: wherein there can be no fault in the Moouer, but
in the parties moved. When the Sun sends his beams upon a dead corpse,
Simile.
the stinch will come the sooner, and be the stronger: the fault is not in the
Sun, (for then it would yield the like effect in all, whereas shining upon
flowers it causes them smell sweeter,) but in the corruption of the corpse
inclined upon the shining of the Sun, Simile.
to yield such a savor. The Earth gives life and nourishment unto all plants
alike: yet some trees yield sower fruits, as well as others pleasant: the fault
then is not in the earth, but in the stock which bore them. Good wine put into
a tainted vessel, loses quickly his natural sweetness: so good faculties
put by God into a corrupted soul, and good motions into a bad disposed mind,
alas, how soon they are perverted, and become evil within them! Simile.
A barren and dry soil makes seed which is good when it is sowed, to be
often pinkt when it is reaped: other ground again, is often so barren, that it
will yeed no fruit at all: Christ is the good Sower, his word the seed, our
hearts the ground, which are either so extreme hard that they will yield no
fruit, (as the hearts of the unregenerate) or if watered by the sweet
continued dewes of Gods holy spirit, the seed takes root and yields forth
some fruit, (as in the hearts of the godly) yet alas the kirnels are pinkt, that
is, their best actions mingled with many imperfections. The fault is neither in
the sower, nor in the seed, but in the ground, that is, the hearts of such as
should receive it. For, Vunum quodque recipitur secundum modum recipientis:
Every thing is received according to the measure, quality, and disposition of
the thing receiving. Good meat conveyed into a bad stomach, Simile.
turns rather into choler, then to wholesome nourishment: but as the cause is
not in the meat, but in the stomach that is evil affected, so in that life
and motion are abused, the cause is not in God which gives both, but in such
(as from Gods blessing enjoying them) do wickedlie use them. Simile.
The word of God, of the one nature, is the savor of life unto life, and
therefore is truly called the glad tidings of salvation: but when it is not
received by faith in those that hear it, (as it was not by the Scribes and
Pharisees in the days of Christ, nor as yet is by wicked livers, in the happy
continued time of his holy Ministers,) then it proves the savor of death unto
condemnation. Surely so the case stands between God and us: Actions in that
respect they are maintained, disposed, and receive a power of being effected
from God, they are good; but in that they become evil, and witness (with
other his good blessings) against us in the day of his great visitation, this
is from our own corrupted natures: for in that men turn from God (as
Augustine says) it is of themselves. De peccatorum meritis. lib. 2. cap. 5.


Psalm. 105.
as the Lord turned the hearts of the Egyptians that they should hate his
people. The Lord hardened the heart of Eglon, Judge. 3.
with many such phrases in his holy word.

Augustine.
says Augustine, God does harden, Non malum obtrudendo, sed gratiam non
concedendo, not by causing us to sin; but by not granting us his grace to
prevent our sins. To Satan, in that he is primitiuus peccator, the first
offender, John 6.
lays the deceivable bait of sin, and is evermore entising and persuading
to take it. To man, in that he does vilely put that in execution, which the
Prince of the air, and the corruption of his own nature does lead him unto:
and so he is the Author of the sin, and justly liable to the punishment
thereof, because every action has his quality from the root of the
affection, and from the intention of the next Author. Thus it is said, Exodus
7.3. That the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh: yet in the 22. verse of the
same chapter: and chap. 8.16. that Pharaoh hardened his own heart. But Paul
says, 2. Cor. 4. that the God of this world (that is, Satan) does blindfold
the eyes of Infidels. And therefore it is said of him, that he filled the heart
of Ananias, though the Lord had as great a stroke in that, as in hardening the
heart of Pharaoh. Again, 2. Sam. 24. I it is said, The Lord moved David to
number Israel: but 1. Chron. 21.1. that Satan moved David to number the
people: yet it is evident in the same chapter, that David himself was the
offender, because he sustained punishment, and upon repentance confessed his
sin to the Lord, saying in his own person, 1. Chron. 21.8. I have done very
foolishly, but I beseech thee O Lord, remove the iniquity of thy servant.
Which places must needs be understood in manner and form aforesaid. And thus
much touching the former position, and the answering of this demand arising
from the same. The next point follows.

A rule to know when our actions are good, and when evil: and what causes
either.
TO the performance of an action in a direct and beseeming order, Jn every
well disposed action, the knowledge and the will must go together.
two things must concur: The knowledge, and the will: knowledge works
nothing without the will, nor the will any thing aright without knowledge.
Therefore in every good action, a direct will and a good understanding
(whereunto is adjoined a conscionable practice) must go together: the will
working, What is the property of the will. What of knowledge.
knowledge ordering, the will causing, knowledge disposing, the will moving us
to work, but knowledge directing us to work so as the Lord commands.
Therefore above all we must labor and seek to God for spiritual wisdom and
heavenly understanding: for although thy will which sets thee a work is
natural in thee, yet this knowledge which is the directer of thy will, is
supernatural and comes from above. As the Mariner hoisting up the sails in a
gale of wind, Simile.
shall soon dash the ship against the rocks, run her on the sands, or fall
upon an unhoped for shore, unless knowledge (by the rules of the Card and
Compass) directs the Rudder: Even so, when the sails of our headstrong wills
are hoist, and that there wants a knowledge in the Card and Compass of Gods
holy word, which is a lantern at the stern in the stromie nights, and the
fool directer thorough the seas of this troublesome world to the haven of
eternal rest: alas, how soon do we spoil our selves against the rocks of
offenses, run with the multitude into the sands of sins, and so falling
upon the cross shore of an unlooked for event, Act. 8.3. 1. Cor. 15.9. Philip.
3.6. Galath. 1.13. 1. Tim. 1.13.
lose the hope of our best actions. Thus was Paui led by a violent will, and a
blind zeal, and so in that wherein he thought he did God greatest service, he
most of all wronged his heavenly Majesty. Prou. 1.
Therefore we must above all follow the advice of Solomon in seeking for
knowledge: the chiefest means of attaining thereto, being to pray continually
with David from the ground of the heart: Psalm. 119.
O Lord teach me thy statutes. And, O Lord open mine eyes that I may see the
wonderful things contained in thy law. Two things required to make the actio^
good: 1. That the means. 2. That the end be lawful and expedient.
Now this understanding teaches, that in the performance of every good action
there must be this double assurance: first, that the end be good, lawful, and
expedient. Secondly, that the means of accomplishing be squared by the same
rule. If thy purpose be good, and the means evil, thou sinnest in the manner
of effecting. If the means be good, but yet thy intent evil, thou sinnest in
the end of having it effected. It is a good end to purpose the hearing of Gods
word, to be thereby taught our duty: but to steal a horse to ride to hear it,
makes the action evil, because thou sinnest in the means. The fasting, giving
alms, and long supplications of the Scribes and Pharisees, seemed to be good
actions, (for such duties are both strictly commanded, and largely commended):
but because they were done of vain ostentation, and to be seen of men, they
failed in the end, and so made the whole action evil. Therefore if thou
would have thy actions good, both the means of effecting, and the end of
accomplishing must be good, lawful, and expedient; ever remembering, Modus and
finis constituunt actionem.
modum and finem constituere actione^; that from the means and end of
effecting, the action is well or ill disposed: well, if both be lawful and
expedient: evil, if there be but a failing in either. For whereas all
circumstances must concur to make ye action good; the failing but in one,
does make it evil. Hag. 2.12, 13, 14. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Hag. 2.12,
13, 14
Ask now the Priests concerning the law, and say: If any one bear holy flesh
in the skirt of his coat, and with the skirt do touch the bread, or the
pottage, or the wine or any meat, shall it be holy? And the Priests answered
and said no. Then said Haggai, if a polluted person touch any of these things,
shall it be unclean? And the Priest answered, and said, it shall be unclean.
Thus you see the truth of that before delivered. It tests the^ as a good use of
this doctrine, that we carry a narrow examination over all our thoughts, words
and ways: the want whereof causes (as James says) that not only in many,
James 2.3.
but in most things, we sin all. Note lastly, that thou may sin, when thou
do neither determine an end, nor use any means of effecting: for sins are
as well of omission as commission: as a man may sin in the manner or end of
praying, fasting, giving of alms, and hearing Gods word: so if thou will not
perform them at all, being duties which God requires at thy hands, thou shall
grievously sin also. 1. Sam. 2.
Elie offended in omitting that he should have done: his sons by committing
that they should not have done. So that it is not enough, either not to do
good at all, or if thou have begun yet to give over, because thou will neither
fail in the manner nor end, but thou must carefully seek into Gods word to
know what he has commanded, and then with all diligence perform the same:
assuring thy self, yt the neglect hereof, does not only deprive thee of a
blessing at Gods hand (for none receive a reward but such as labor in his
vineyard, neither knows he any at the day of judgment, but such as first
know him here in his members, and acknowledge him in their lives) but further
make thee subject to ye deserved wrath and just judgment of the great, and
fearful master of heaven and earth, in that thou receiuedst talents at his
hands, whether of knowledge, policy, strength, honor, riches and such like, but
had not the heart to employ them to the honor and praise of his name, who for
that end did give the^ unto thee. And thus much for the proving, that Although
God gouerns all things immutably, yet that he cannot in that or any other
respect be the author of sin. As also for the brief handling of other
necessary points thereon depending.

THE FIFTH PART, wherein are especially contained, Several answers unto all
such objections, Falsa veritatis coloretincta, tanto acquiora sunt, quanto and
esse falsa minime cognoscuntur.
as either directly, or by consequence, seem to contradict and gainsay the
doctrine of Gods Providence: As also unto such, as upon a grant thereof, or
otherwise from any pretended show of reason, Nullae sunt occultiores insidiae,
quam hae quae latent in similitudine officij. Cicero. Cavtio, apparens bonum
interitus inspicit, and malitiam ibi perpendit. Quae decipiunt nihil habent
solidi, tenue est mendacium, prolucet si inspexeris: Seneca.
are alleged to prove God the author of sin.
First, an answer unto all such objections as are made against this maine and
firm position: viz.

God gouernes all things by his heavenly Providence.
Opinio sola very similitudinese tuetur. Bern. Prudentia est in praecauendis
infidijs. August.
WOe be to you rebellious sons, because you take counsel which is not of
me: Isai. 30.1.
Isai. 30.

If this work be of men, 1. Act. 5.
it shall be brought to naught, Act. 5.

Therefore there are some works which are not wrought by God, and some
counsels which are not directed by him.



(are of men:) We answer that Gamaliel meant by the^, that if the doctrine of
the Apostles was cou^terfeit, it would come to naught; and not that there were
some counsels wherein God had no stroke: neither if it was his meaning, are we
to rely thereon, unless it were agreeing to the Canon of Gods holy word.



But (some are so impudent to say) there is no wisdom in God:

And therefore that he cannot govern by a wise providence:

That there is no wisdom in God, they would thus prove it:

Wisdom (as the Philosopher says) cannot consist without discoursing, Arist.
Ethic. 6.
reasoning, and comparing one matter with another: But there is no such thing
in God: Because it should infer an imperfection: And therefore they hold the
Assumption true.

God is absolute and complete in all, Solution.
without the least imperfection: And (to speak to our capacities) virtues are
another thing, and after another manner in God, then in us: As they are in him,
they are his divine essence, most perfect and simple: for his wisdom is his
essence, and his essence goodness and wisdom it self. And therefore must
needs be most sufficiently wise, to govern all things. Neither can this
wisdom, being this eternal Essence, be attained in succession of time, by
reasoning, discoutsing, or comparing one matter with another. For then should
that which is without beginning, be subject unto time. And secondly, we
should attribute doubting and ignorance unto God, (for in whom are such
imperfections, their reasoning, discoursing, and comparing of matters are
necessary) where as it is impossible he should have any such thing in him,
since he is Wisdom to judge, and an Al-seeing God, to whom the very secrets
of the hearts are manifest. Thus the holy Scriptures do attribute counsel
unto God, but without consultation: wisdom, but without reasoning: knowledge,
but without discoursing: a decree, but without deliberation; because there is
neither doubting nor ignorance in him. So that the Philosopher means in men
subject to suchwants, such means are necessary to the attaining of wisdom:
but in God, who is wisdom it self, from all eternities, there is need of no
such thing; and thersore can govern all things most wisely without them.



But in this inferior world, Qui importune radios solis aspicit, tenebrescit,
and inde nihil videre compellitur. Greg.
there is a great disorder and confusion of many things:

And therefore all things in the world are not governed excellently well.

The assumption is proved by several instances (as they take them) maine and
firm; As:



Instances of disorder and confusion falsely pretended.




This Argument has not only been available with the Ethincks, Solution.
to make them think there is no Providence, but also has moved many other
unto Epicurisme, and made them scoffers at Gods promises: Who (as Peter says)
say with themselves: Where is the promise of his coming, etc: yea, the
experience of some of these instances, has much troubled the minds of the
godly, Psalm. 73.74.75 Ierem. 13.
as David, Jeremy, Job and many others, and therefore may crave a larger
answering.

First therefore, it is answered: that there is no confusion nor disorder in
these things: for the confusion is only in respect of man, and not of God, or
the things governed by him, which are evermore excellently well disposed,
though (the veil of ignorance being before ma^s eyes) we are not able to
discern this excellent order. The fleshly man perceives not those things
which are to be discerned with a spiritual eye: My ways (says the Lord) are
not as your ways, neither are my thoughts, as your thoughts: so that until
these men go with David into the house of God, well may these things seerne
confused unto the^: but when they are enlightened by his holy Spirit, they
appear otherwise. A man that that is blind, or has sore eyes, thinks it is
dark when the Sun shines, or at least thinks her beclipsed with diverse
colored mists, when she is in her perfect beauty: Simile.
the cause is the imperfection in his eyes, and not any obscurity or confusion
in the Sun: So is it with him that shall look with a fleshly eye into Gods
works, be they never so excellently disposed, yet through his inabilities to
discern they seem confused. That which in the night, or a far off we judge
a tree, proves when we come nearer, or when the day appears, a more
excellent creature. So in the night time of our ignorance, and when we are
strangers from Gods Law; we judge preposterouslie of his works, but when this
mist is dispersed, or that we come to look more neerelie upon them in the
glass of his word, they seem so excellent that we are constrained to say, O
Lord how wonderful art thou in all thy ways, and holy in all thy works! In
great wisdom have thou made them all. But let us come unto the instances.

Thou say, JJnstance 1.
in that Stan tempted Adam, and made him and his posterity subject to sin.

that herein no fault can be imputed unto God, Eccle. 28.
for Adam was created righteous, but his own inventions made him evil.
Secondly, if God willed a declaration of his just judgment upon the vessels of
wrath, and the manifestation of the exceeding riches of his grace, upon such as
are ordained unto mercy, what right has the clay herein to reason against the
Potter. Thirdly, Gods children have now more cause to rejoice by an infinite
deal in regard of that bless dnesse received from the last Adam, then to be
sorry for their dignity lost in the first Adam. To which tends that of Paul
concerning the sin of our first Parents which is spread over all, and the
righteousness of Christ which is much more abundant to the salvation of the
Elect. And therefore we may say with Gregory, O foelix culpa, quae talem and
tantum habere meruit Redemptorem: O happy diseasewhich could not be cured but
by such a divine and heavenly Physician!

That the wicked line in greatest honor, prosperity, and abundance: Jnstant. 2.
but the god'y in poverty, disgrace, and affliction.
Jn sermon.
But, as Bernard says of Peter: Vt nouum itr, sic noui modi itineris: Triplex
est vita, naturae, gratiae, gloriae.
A new journey must have new ways of iourneying: so we say of the godly, when
they begin to enter the new life, (that is, the life of grace) then they must
have new coutses of living. Afflictions come by Gods decree.
And what are these? That in following Christ, we should take up his cross:
that in living holily, we should suffer persecution; that in our journey to
heaven, we should pass through many tribulations. Therefore says Augustine in
the person of christ: August. in persona Domini.
Venale habeo: quid Domine? regnum coelorum: quo emitur? paupertate diuitiae,
dolor gaudium, labor requies, vilitate gloria, morte vita: I have a thing to
sell, says Christ: what is it, O Lord, says Augustine? The kingdom of
heaven: but wherewith is it bought? for poverty true riches, for grief joy,
for labor rest, for baseness glory, for life death. So that poverty,
grief, labor, baseness, and loss of life, are the new paths that lead to new
Hietusalem, and the narrow ways that tend to ample blessedness. Now this
being the decree of God the Creator, who is wisdom it self, why should it
seem preposterous in the eyes of the creature who is but mere foolishnes?
Quid obsit vel prosit, medicus nouit non agrotus: Augustine. Gods decree of
afficting, grouded upon great reason.
What is profitable or hurtful to us that are patients, that wise Physician
knows, not we that are grieved. Secondly, this decree of God is grounded upon
great reason: both in respect of him afflicting, and of us afflicted. What sets
forth more the wisdom of God, then his ministering several potions of
affliction, according to the several conditions of his children, as well in
preventing the diseases of sin, whereunto they are subject, as in curing them,
when they are grieved with them? What more declares his mercy, then the giving
of the staff of his Spirit with the rod of correction, then the comforting
us in our distiesse, then the putting our tears in his bottle, then the making
our bed in our sickness, then the pitching his Angels about s, then the not
suffering the floods to ouerflow us, though they come near us; then the
causing that although heaviness continue for a while, yet joy shall come in the
morning? Wherein is the power of God more evident, then in giving us strength
to undergo so many troubles, then in casting us down unto the grave, and
raising us up again? These things have caused admiration in the very enemies
of God, and that amidst their tyrannies. Is there not good reason then, why
those things should be effected, whereby Gods wisdom, mercy, and power are
made evident, and not only to his children, but even to his enemies, whereby
they are left inexcusable in the day of the Lord? if there were no
persecutions, how should Martyrs glorify God by their sufferings? If no
trials, how should patience have been left for a virtue to be imitated? If
Satan had not been let loose to buffet Job, where had been his words of praise?
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, and blessed be the name of
the Lord.

Secondly, the afflictions of the godly are grounded upon good causes, 2. Gods
decree of afflictiong, is good and just in regard of us, as it appears: 1. By
our own reason.
in regard of our selves: as it appears, first by our own reason: secondly,
by our own practice: thirdly, by the profit we reap from them. In reason,
heaven could not be our sole place of bliss, if here we had no sorrow: if here
our happiness, that could not be a place of all joy. 2. By our practice.
The palm of victory is not due without fighting, the price without running,
nor the wages without laboring. This is reason, and therefore thus we
practice: an instance of one for all. Julius sextus lib. 1. cap. 11.
Cyrus King of Persir encouraging his soldiers against the Medes, brought them
to a great wood, where he set them to labor all the day long in cutting down
the same: but the second day prepared a dainty banquet for them, at their
eating whereof, he passed through the several bands, demanding which of those
two days were best: the soldiers answered, the second, because then was the
banquet: but how came you by this days pleasures, says Cyrus? they answered:
by yesterdaies labors. So (says he) by your pains in fighting against the
Medes, you shall obtain the victory, and after enjoy the banquet of the
spoil: So first we must conquer afflictions, and after be crowned with
glory. 3. By the commodities.
But the excellency of the cross is seen in nothing more, then in the
wonderful commodity it brings to those which are exercised therein. The body
is a stinking house, and infects the soul: a bad servant, and deceiues the
master: an untamed horse, and hurts the rider: a false friend, and often
preuailes: a bad counselor, and is sometimes heard. Hence it is that
Christians have their spiritual maladies: some troubled with the burning fever
of malice, hating where they should love: some with a dead palsy, not feeling
Gods mercies: some with a spiritual frenzy, rejoicing when they should
weep: some with an insatiate thirst, ever seeking after pleasures: some
crookt-shoulders, that they cannot look up unto heaven: some stark mad,
counting godliness loss, and earthly treasures, of greatest value: for
these, (whether crept into the godly, and so must be removed, or incident unto
the^, and so must be prevented) God has his several potions of heavenly
physic, which according to our natures, and grieuousnes of our diseases, for
days, months, or years, Gods potions to cure our spiritual maladies, are,
1. Diseases, imprisanment, b Inishment, etc. Profitable.
he does minister he does minister unto us. The first and principal of these
which by the instance, seems most bitter and hardest to be digested, are the
diseases of the body, imprisonment, banishment, loss of life and such like:
touching which though we hold them, being natural evils, to be gall in the
mouth, yet being received, we shall find them honey in the belly. Hebr. 12.11.
Exodus 1.22. 2. Chro. 32.20. Greg. in moral.
It is good for me (says David) that I have been in trouble, that I might
learn to keep thy commandments. Mala quae nos hic premunt ad Deum ire
compellunt: The afflictions which God lays on his children, compel them to
go unto him. They show us our sins: Matthew. 7.13. Ioh. 12.25.
Before I was corrected, I went wrong (says the Psalmist,) but now I have
learned to keep thy commandments. So that, Cum non potest disciplina
verborum, percommode vititur disciplina verberum: Gregor. in Moral. Philip. 28.
Hebr. 2.9.10.
When words will not prevail, then is the rod very profitably used. By
fanning, the wheat is separated from the chafe: by threshing, the corn is
reserved that the beast does not eat the straw and it together, Chrysostom opere
imperf. hom. 4.
whereas otherwise both would be devoured. So in that satan that ravenous
beast, 2. Cor. 11.22.
swallows not up the godly with the wicked, it is because God (reserving them
for his garner of glory) wills that they should be separated from the wicked by
the flaile of affliction. They humble the high mind: Luke 24.19.
and stir us up to faithful and earnest prayer to God for forgiveness of
them: Act. 14.19.
and reserve us till his coming. Moses) God sent the forty years troubles to
the Israelites: 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. Prou. 17.3. 1. Pet. 1 7 9. Deuteronomy. 8.2.
so that the hardened heart by affictions is oftentimes driven to God whether it
will or no: as it appears by the stiffenecked Israclites, Exodus 8.
Pharaoh, and diverse others. And therefore the tenor of Salmons prayer at the
dedicating of the Temple, is after this manner: if thy people in their
captivity and distress shall remember their sins, humble themselves, and by
fervent prayer forth of this place call to thee, O Lord, for mercy, then be
thou merciful unto their sins, and hearken unto their prayers. Apopyni auis.
Some birds are taught to speak (as some have observed) by beating them on the
head with an iron rod: some Mariners will not be wakened, till the water come
into the ship: so some men lie so sound asleep in the cradle of security,
Iud. 10.13.
that the cool water of affliction must be powered upon them before they will
waken. Some men will neither praise God for his blessings received, nor pray
for more unto him; so that the iron rod must teach them to praise him for what
they have, and never to cease praying for what they want. Oculos quos culpa
claudit, poena aperit: Gregor. in Moral.
The eyes which before through corruption of nature were bent to the earth, are
now by correction fixed on the Lord, as the eyes of a handmaid upon her
mistress. Afflictions quicken up Gods graces within us: Hieren.
Adiutrix virtutum tribulatio, says Hierome; Virtue is vpholden holden by
afflictions. Simile.
The fire flameth most when the wind blows hardest upon it: Silver is best
discerned in a dark vessel when it is full of water: so the silver graces of
God are most apparent, when the water of affliction is distilled from heaven
into our earthen vessels: so the sparks of graces within us are never so near
the flaming, as when adversity blows strong upon us. David was never carried
away with so fervent a zeal of Gods glory, with such divine meditations, with
such heavenly praises, with such fervent prayers. as when the tempestuous
blasts of Saul and his Counselors blew strong and sharp upon him. Prou. 3.12.
weep, and mourn, the tears distill from our eyes, suffer imprisonment,
hebr. 11.40.
bear the marks of Christ, live in the vale of many miseries, Hebr. 12.6.
and are continually tossed in the troublesome seas of this world by the
tempestuous blasts of furious Tyrants; yet we shall laugh, rejoice, and sing,
the tears shall be wipt from our eyes, Apoc. 3.19.
our feet shall be set in a large and ample room, the hill of Sion shall be
our rest, yea, because we have borne part of the storm with Christ, we shall
arrive at the haven of eternal rest and happiness with him. This is the
Lambs mark, the wedding ring, the seal of his love: This assures us of an
infinite deliverance, this is a sign we are espoused to Christ: This seals it
in our hearts, that we are heirs of a kingdom. Whom the Lord will strengthen
(says Luther) him he first makes weak: who^ he will quicken, him he first
casts into the jaws of death: whom he will exalt to heaven, him he will
first (as it were) cast down into hell. Si exceptus es a passione flagellorum,
exceptus es a numero filioru^, says Augustine: If thou art excepted from
suffering of stripes, thou art also excepted from the number of Gods children.
So that Luther and Augustine conclude plainly, that a poor estate,
persecutions, stripes, and loss of life, are infallible marks, that we are
in the way to eternal blessedness. Nisi correctis, Daus haereditatem dare
disponeret, eos per mult as molestias erudire non curaret: Unless God did
allot out unto his corrected children an everlasting inheritance, he would not
be so careful to instruct them by so many chastisements. But hear the truth
of this from him who is truth it self: Matthew 5.9.
Blessed are ye (says Christ) When ye suffer persecutions for righteousness
sake, for yours is the kingdom of heaven: and therefore Paul says, Hebr. 12.10
11.
that God does chasten us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness. For though at first it is not joyous, but grievous, yet afterward it
brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to those that arethereby exercised.

Another thing that often troubles us, Poverty must not trouble us.
is the poverty of the godly. But why should this grieve us? The commodity it
brings, is exceeding great: we may say of it, Plato de Iuslitia.
as Plato does of justice, Pauperum beatitudo si inspiceretur, miros
spectantibus incitaret amores: Poverty at the first view seems base, but if
we looked thoroughly into it, it would excite an exceeding love in us toward the
same: Gradus perfectionis paupertas, Matthew. 19.
says one upon thewords of Christ. Poverty is a maine step to perfection.
Men are unwilling to go a journey which carry a heanie burden on their
shoulders, Sed liberius ad viam tendit, qui in via onere caret, says Gregory:
Gregor. in Moral.
but they go willingly, when the burden is taken away. This burden is
riches, and therefore says Hierome: Sihabes, vende omnia; Hieronym. in Epist.
Si non habes, grandi onere liberatus es: If thou have store of wealth, sell
all: If thou have nothing, thou art freed from a heavy burden. This
provocation to a willing mind is poverty, the spur to set on our dull
natures in our race to heaven, is want of riches: and therefore, Quimihi onus
diuitiarum abstulit, me ad currendum citius expediuit: He which took the
burden of riches from me, made me to run both more willing lie and more
swiftly. He which is down laden, seldom gets to the end of a long iourny, or
if he does, yet exceeding hardly. And therefore says Christ, how hardly do
they which are rich enter into the kingdom of heaven? The more riches increase
the sooner do we wax cold in our love to God, and the more fervent in our
affection to them, noted by Moses caveat, Salomons prayer, Dcut. 6.10.11.12.
and Paul's preservative: If riches increase set not thy heart upon them.

Those which will be rich fall into many snares, and grievous lusts; which
will drown their souls in perdition. Blessed then be poverty, that unites my
heart to God: blessed be want, that keeps me from these snares and grievous
lusts: blessed be a poor estate, that preserues my soul from the pit of
perdition. Simile.
The fowler when he would take the silly bird in his net, does pitch his siale
to allure her. This bird is the godly man: this fowler Satan: this net
destruction: this stale, richer: Matthew. 4.1. Jesus was ledaside (here is the
bird) to be tempted of Satan, (here is the fowler) fall down and worship me,
(here is the net) The kingdom of the world and the glory thereof will I give
thee, (here is the stale.) But as the bird is safe from the fowler, so long as
she stoopes not to his stale, but keeps in the heavens: Glossa in Prou. 1.
Sic facile laqueos euadit in terris, qui oculos habet in caelis: so men do
easily escape the hands of Satan, whhich have their eyes fixed upon God
inheauen, and not upon these stales of riches and honor upon the earth.
Poverty auoides contention: men will not go to law for it: Job 15. Qui nihil
babet in mundo quod diligat, nibil est quod pertimescat. Gregor.
it frees from fear: the heeues will not break thy house for it; the tempests
will not shake thy high buildings: but Lord what contentions, what malice, what
long suits, what fear and horror is among the mighty! Men in abundance, want
the means of being stirred up to God by prayer for things necessary: and thus
they want that which should benefit them: O munera nondum intellecta, domi
paupertas, angustique lares!
men by abundance, become high minded, strong to revenge, forgetful of God,
stifnecked, hard hearted, yea committers of such sins, which the light of
nature and mere civility does detest and abhor. Note Moses advice to the
Js. raelites.
And thus they enjoy the means of that which brings destruction and misery:
yea, in a word, when men lie in their beds of down, carouse wine in their full
bowls, and invent to themselves instruments of music, oh then, even then,
(alas) are they most subject to those great and grievous sins, for which the
wrath of God is most fierce upon the children of disobedience. Is it not
needful then, Vt paupertas medicina sanet, quos diuitiarum cumulus sic
vulnerat? that that heavenly balm of poverty should cure those, whom the
abundance of riches does thus wound? Bern. in ferm.
To conclude, let the Jew which rests in earthly promises, seek for riches,
not we which are pilgtims, and look for a kingdom: let the Pagan, which
lives without a God, rejoice in worldly wealth, not we that have Christ and al
heavenly riches with him: let the riotous rejoice in their superfluities, not
we which know ye miseries they bring with them, and have learned from Christ,
that the poor are blessed: for howsoever ye world is bewitched with these
things, Bern. in Epist.
yet, possessa onerant, amata inquinant, amissa cruciant: when we have them
they load us: when we love them, they defile us: when we lose them, they vex
us. And therefore happy is he which is not troubled with them. This being
thus, it agrees excellently well with Gods Providence, that the godly should
live in want, and the wicked in abundance.

A third thing which much troubles us, The small account had of the godly,
must not trouble us.
is, that the godly live in disgrace, are reviled, and often prevailed
against, by such as have no fear of God before their eyes. That this is thus,
experience proves it true: but all this turns to Gods glory and the good of
his children. The godly have oftentimes their grievous falls; sometimes secure
in their sins, luld asleep in the cradle of iniquity: is it not good then
that God should use his trumpet to awake them? Shemei cursed David, called him
murderer, or man of blood: but David says: 2. Sam. 16.7.
It may be the Lord will look on mine affliction, 2. Sam. 16.12.
or tears, and do me good by his cursing this day. And howsoever Gods
children are reviled, yet surely the blessing does thereby redound unto them;
in as much as Christ has said: Blessed are ye when men revile you, and speak
all manner of evil against you for my names sake falselie, etc. And howsoever
they are in disgrace with the world, yet they are very gracious with God: for
if they were of the world, the world would love his own. but because they are
not of the world, but God has chosen forth of ye world, therefore the world
hates them. And howsoever they are prevailed against, yet Gods honor is
thereby exalted, and their own good procured. Joseph's brethren prevailed
against him: but greater was Gods glory, Genes. 45.
greater his honor, and greater the good of the Church. Satan was let loose to
vex Job; and the Caldeans suffered to spoil him of his goods: but thereby God
was glorified by his words of praise; The Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken away, and blessed be the name of the Lord. Thereby the Church received a
good: for his patience is alleged, and left for an example to all posterities:
and thereby Jobs good was greatly procured: for, first, (now God had tried him
and found him faithful) he is more gracious in his sight, Job 42.7.8.
and therefore Eliphaz the Temanite and his two friends that before so much
condemned Job, must now entreat him to pray to God for them, because he is
found faithful, and therefore shall be accepted. Secondly, Job in losing,
gained, for the Lord that suffered others to take his goods away, gave him
afterward twice as much as he had before. And thus in all these things there is
no confusion, Job 42.10.11.12.
but an excellent harmony, all things considered. For as the bodies, so the
souls of men and women have their diseases: Some troubled with the burning
fever of malice, hating when they should love: some with melancholy, mourning
for the world: Some with a dead palsy, that they cannot tread the paths that
lead unto Sion: Some with a spiritual slumber, that the sound of the Gospel
enters not their ears: Some senseles, not feeling Gods mercies: Some
phrentick, reioicing when they should weep: Some have their dropsy of
thirsting after pleasures: Some blind in judgment, cou^ting godliness loss,
and earthly riches of greatest value. So that wonderful need is there of
healing potions: and what these shall be, and when ministered, the fond affection
of the patient is not to be respected, but the receipts of the wise Physician
Christ Jesus, willingly received: because, Quid obsit, vel prosit, Augustine.
magnus hic and diuinus Medicus nonit, non agrotus: What does hurt or profit a
man, this great and divine Physician knows very well, and not he that is
grieved. The body is a smoking house, and must be perfumed: an evil servant,
and must be corrected: an untamed horse, and must be brought under: a false
friend, and must be tried: a domestical enemy, and must be weakened: an evil
counselor, and must be disclosed. If God which is wisdom and mercy, will do
this, can there be any disorder in his most wise and merciful effecting it?
But to bring under the vain rejoicing of the wicked, and for the settling of
the minds of the godly, in a grounded assurance of Gods justice and exceeding
rich mercy unto them, howsoever afflictions befall them, 5. Things to he
respected in the persons of afflicted Christians.
besides the forenamed commodities which adversity (of what sort soever)
brings with it, let us observe these things in the persons of the godly,
which do endure them.

First, 1. That they are conquerers in all.
that they overcome all afflictions and miseries whatsoever. Many (says the
Psalmist) are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34.19.
but the Lord delivers them forth of all. And though the floods came near
his soul, Psalm. 32.8
yet they did not ouerwhelme him. May not every one of Gods children from the
experience of this truth, Nahum 1.7.
say of himself, as David said of himself? Psalm. 71.20.
How great troubles and adversities have thou showed unto me, but yet thou have
returned and revived me again. Yea the poor Christian contemned in the eyes
of the world, 1. Cor. 10.13.
cries unto the Lord, and the Lord hears him, Psalm. 46.7.
and saues him from all his troubles. And how can it be otherwise? Psalm. 59.19.
The Lord is with us, and the God of Jacob is our refuge, he is our helper and
deliverer. Psalm. 40.17. Luke 21.18. Matt. 10.13.
Though we be poor and needy, yet he thinks on us, he numbreth our hairs,
he puts our tears in his bottle, we are as dear unto him as the apple of his
eye, he has loved us with an everlasting love, and therefore we are
conquerers in all through him that loved us. And though the righteous bear the
wrath of the Lord, because they sin against him, yet he will plead their
cause, Micah 7.9. Edod. 14.13.14.
he will execute judgment for them, he will bring them forth to the light, and
they shall see his righteousness. 2. Cor. 4.8.9.
So that although we are afflicted on every side, yet we are not in distress;
though we often doubt, yet we never despair; though we are persecuted, yet
we are not forsaken; Romans 8.36.
though we are cast down, Nulla nocebit aduersitas si nulla dominetur
iniquitas. Gregor.
yet we perish not. Afflictio arguit, non interficit: angit, non frang it:
extollit, non deijcit, Affliction corrects a man, it does not cause him to
perish: it bends him, it breaks him not in pieces: it lifts him up to heaven,
it buries him not in the pit of forgetfulness. For as the fire in the bush
consumed it not, Exodus 3.2. Simile. Genesis 32.
but made it shine brighter: so the fire of affliction consumes not the godly,
but makes them more glorious. Jacob strove all night with the Angel, but in the
morning got the victory: so in the nightime of our pilgrimage, we strive with
many troubles, but when the morning of Gods grace and mighty power appears,
we triumph over them. Miea. 7.8.
Rejoice not therefore against the righteous, O thou enemy, for though they
fall, yet they shall rise again. Say not we have devoured them: for God is on
their side, and though here they lament, weep and mourn, yet this finite
sorrow shall be turned into infinite joy. And if the godly amiddest their
persecutions, Ioh. 16.20.
see not means of victory, let them pray unto God, and he will perform it,
and give them grace to see it. When the King of Syria sent horses, chariots,
and a mighty host to compass Dothan in the night, that they might take Elisha
for disclosing his mind to the King of Israel, 2. King. 6.14.15.16, 17.
and that the servant of this man of God, arising early to go out, espied them,
he cried, alas master, how shall we do? but when Elisha had prayed to the Lord
to open his eyes, and the Lord had opened them, then the servant looked, and
behold the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire to defend them;
and then, (according to Elishaes advice) no reason he should fear, because
they were more that fought for them, then those which were against them. Even
so, many in their troubles, cry alas what shall we do; until by prayer their
eyes are opened to see Gods armies of deliverance about the^. Act. 4.30.
Who although a while they seem to have their feet in ye stocks, fast bound
with misery and iron, yet ye Angel of God comes at the last, and bids them
arise like strong men, 1. Cor. 10.13.
and then the chains of their miseries fall presently from the^. Therefore, O
vere tuta pro Christo, and cum Christo pugna, in qua (modo ne fugias) nec
vulneratus, nec prostratus, nec conculcatus, nec millies (si fieri possit)
occisus, fraudaberis a victoria: O happy fight (says Bernard) for Christ to
fight under Christ, Bern. in Epist.
in which (if we valiantly hold out) though we be wounded, beaten to the
ground, spurned with feet, slain a thousand times (if possible it could be,)
yet we could not but have the victory: because, 2. Tim. 2.11.
Licet pugna^do moriamur, tamen mortui mox coronabimur: though in fighting we
lose this miserable life, yet presently after we shall be crowned with the
Diadem of everlasting glory.

Secondly, 2. The godly have true comfort in all troubles.
the godly have exceeding comfort in all their troubles. And how can it be
otherwise? They have the Spirit of God dwelling within them: Ephesians. 3.16. Rom 8
9. 1. Ioh. 3.24. 2. Cor. 3.16. 1. Tim. 1.14. Galath. 5.22. Virtutas gaudium est
fons gaudij in propria domo nascens. Seneca.
their bodies are his temples: he is in them, and they in him. Now among
infinite other blessings, whereof Gods Spirit is an absolute cause, Paul
accounts joy to be one. A man cannot want pleasant springs to refresh him, that
has a fountain of sweet waters in his own house: no more can the godly,
having, fontem gaudij, in propria domo nascentem: the fountain of all comfort
in the temples of their bodies, want means to rejoice them. If the Angel in
the prison where Peter lay, Act. 4.30.
caused all the house to shine, what a glorious comfortable light shall that
blessed Spirit which is the light of the Angels themselves, Exodus 15.25.
give to those in whom it has his residence? 2. King. 2.
This is that blessed tree, that Al-seasoning salt, that makes the bitter water
of afflictions sweet and sauourie unto us. Where the rod of correction
strikes, Psalm. 23.
the staff of the Spirit does hold up and comfort. So that though the godly
sit in darkness (as men forgotten) yet the Lord is a light unto them. Mica. 7.8.
Romans 5.5.
Thus Paul speaking in the persons of the afflicted, says, we rejoice in
tribulations. And though this is not apparent to the fleshly eye, that sees
nothing but grief and cause of lamentation, yet the godly have an undoubted
feeling of the same. Non enim pereunt gaudia iustorum, sed mutantur a corpore
ad animam, a sensibus ad conscientiam: For the joys of the righteous do not
perish, but are only removed from the body to the soul, from the outward
senses, to the inward conscience, which is a thousand times more excellent. And
thus I conclude both these with David: The voice of joy and deliverance is in
the Tabernacles of the righteous. Psalm. 118.15.


Thirdly, 3. The godly gain by all afflictions.
the godly gain by all the troubles and adversities that befall them. They sow
in tears, but reap in joy: for men's cursing, they have Gods blessing: for the
worlds hatred, Gods love: for earthly riches, heavenly treasures: for fading
joy, enduring comfort: fortyrants contempt, Christ's favor; for their opposing,
Angels guarding: for friends forsaking, Gods receiving: for this life's losing,
their souls saving. Thus teaches Augustine: Augustine.
Percutis vt sanes, and occidis nos ne moriamur: Thou do wound us to make us
perfectly whole: and thou do kill us that we should not die finally. Thus
teaches David: When my father and mother forsakes me, the Lord takes me up.
Thus teaches Christ, that he that will save his life shall lose it: but he that
will lose it for his sake, shall save it. And thus is Christ to the persecuted
Christian, both in life and death advantage. But see more of this in the
answers to the particulars objected.

Fourthly, 4. The godly are truly rich.
the godly are wonderfully rich, though, (in the judgment of the world) they
are counted poor. The Lions lack and suffer hunger, but those which love and
fear the Lord, want nothing that is good. Is not this then to be exceeding
rich? Aug. in Enchir.
Ille dives, qui omnia quae vult, habet, nec aliquid vult quod non decet: He is
rich which has as much as he does desire: and desires no more, then that which
he ought: for riches consist not in the abundance, but in the manner of
enjoying, so that to have a little, and yet to desire no more, is to be truly
rich: and to have much, and yet still to desire, is (indeed) to be poor: or
at least though outwardly rich, yet inwardly poor: because though his barnes
are full, his mind is empty: and so they are rich, but he poor. But it is far
otherwise with the godly: they desire no more then they have, and in the
possessing of that which they have, they are not disturbed. Gregory.
Cui cum paupertate been conuenit, non est pauper (says Gregory): He that in
his poverty has all things going well, that man cannot be poor. But the
riches of the godly, are the ornaments of their souls, Venditis rebus nostris,
nullum magis charum accipimus pretiu^, quam nos metipsos. August. Augustine.
and the rewards thereof: not this worldly wealth which has his ebb, as well
as his flowing; and his means of hurting, as well as benefitting: Vbicunque
caro inuenit refectionem, inuenit defectionem; wheresoever the flesh finds a
refreshing, it shall also find a want and wearing. In this, the godly are
often poor in regard of the quantity; but in the other, which are true, and
tried riches, very abundant. Are not they rich, which have the most precious
graces of Gods holy spirit within them? which have Christ himself, who (as
Bernard says) has all riches in his left hand, Bern. in sermon.
and all honor in his right? yea, who are heirs of a kingdom, in quality,
rich, pure, shining, clear, gorgeous, most glorious, and fuller of all joy and
happiness, then tongue can declare, or heart conceive: In quantity, exceeding
spacious: in substance not subject to alteration, corruption, or malice of
traitors. Revel. 21.
To this of the riches of Gods grace and mercy they are freely chosen, and of
this, the whole world combining themselves together, can never deprive them.
These are treasures not subject to the blasts of the air, to the malice of
Tyrants, to the fury of the enemy, to the deceit of the flatterer, or to the
plots of the robber: Nec fraud surripiuntur, nec vi eripiuntur, they are
neither gotten by craft, nor taken away by force; and therefore permanent and
enduring. And thus Christ for our sakes became poor, 2. Cor. 8.9.
that we through his poverty might be made rich. And thus are the godly ever
rich when in the sight of the wicked they are counted poor.

Lastly, 5. The godly ever have true honor and happiness.
howsoever the godly are accounted wretched, yet they are most blessed:
howsoever base and vile, yet most excellent and honorable. Prou. 22.4.
The truth of this appears, in that the God of Gods, and King of Kings does
both largely reward them, and highly esteem them. For passing by many mighty
Princes, 1. Thessal. 1.
of the exceeding riches of his grace he elected them; being defiled with that
ugly leprosy of sin, he has cleansed them with the most precious blood of
his only begotten Son: being by nature the children of wrath as well as
others, he has justified them of his free mercy, sanctified them by his
Spirit, and called them by his word: thus though once they were dead, wandered
and were dispersed, yet now they are revived, called home, and in the
superabundance of Gods mercy gathered to Christ Jesus the Shepherd of the
flock and Bishop of our souls. In which estate, they wear now no more the
filthy rags of the old man, but by the hand of a lively faith, have the
glorious robe of righteousness, that is, of the new man Christ Jesus, put upon
them. This was our estate in regard of our selves. Ephesians. 2.3. 1. Pet. 2.9.
Ioh. 1.12. Galath. 3.26. Hebr. 2.11.12.
So that whereas once they were enemies to God, now they are made friends unto
him: whereas once cursed, now blessed: whereas once slaves to Satan, now sons
to God: whereas companions and brethren of iniquity, now brethren to Christ:
whereas once wedded to our lusts, now espoused to him: whereas once vassals of
wrath, now vessels of glory: whereas once captives to Satan, now free denizens
of a glorious city: whereas once led by the spirit that rules in the air,
now guided and governed by the good spirit of God: whereas once bondslaues to
Satan, now heirs of the kingdom of heaven. Is not this true blessedness, is
not this exceeding honor and dignity? A faithful man (says Solomon) abounds
in blessings: Prou. 28.20. Prou. 28.6. Prou. 19.1. Psalm. 1.1.2.3. etc.
and better is the poor Christian that walks in his uprightness, then he
that peruerteth his ways, though he be (worldly) rich. Hunc habe beatum (says
Seneca) non quem vulgus vocat, Sencca.
sed cui omne bonum in animo est: Account that man blessed who has all his
riches in his mind, not him whom the blind worldlings esteem blessed: Macrob.
because solae virtutes faciunt beatum: the virtues of the mind make a man
happy. The world having their judgments corrupted, and eyes blindfolded, are
misled in censuring, and deceived in beholding the state of Christ's Church: and
no marvel, Omne decus filiae Sion ad intus: The beauty of the daughter of
Sion is within her: which in as much as they want the spiritual eye, it is
impossible by the^ to be discerned. They pry into the imperfections and
outward blackness of the Church, but they behold her not in Christ, and so see
not her perfection and glory. Being for her prittie trimnenesse compared to a
Roe: for her louelines, to a dove: for her fruitfulness, to a vine: for her
holiness, to a Priesthood: for her royalty, to a Queen: for her safety, to
mount Sion: for her brightness, to the morning: for her glory, to the Sun:
for her beauty, to the fairest of women: for her glittering, to an Iuorie
tower: for qualities, called by Christ himself sweet, comely, perfect, and
most blessed. Now the Church of God consisting of the number of the righteous:
Lord, what do they count blessedness if these whom thou have thus blessed are
not truly blessed? If these whom thou thus honor are not right
honorable? whose souls are inricht with thy graces, whose bodies are kept by
thy Providence, and guarded by thy Angels; whose death is life, Hebr. 6.7.8. 1.
Cor. 3.22. Hebr. 1.13.
whose end is glory, and joy without end; whose authority is to rule all Gods
creatures, and this rule ended, to have a greater given them, even to be Judges
with Christ of the most mighty tyrants, and wicked Princes upon earth: Lo,
this is the portion of the righteous, this the inheritance of the God of Jacob:
and therefore they are truly blessed, therefore right honorable, therefore most
excellent.

The tontrarie to the five former, observed in the wicked.
much more when adversity frowns upon them. And how can it be otherwise,
since they want the Spirit of God which is the sole fountain of all comfort?
Secondly, David says, though their seat be upon an high hill, yet it is
slipperie, and therefore they fall, and in their falling come to a perpetual
destruction. As Pharaoh and his host were swallowed up of the seas; so they
are detained of death, kept under of the grave, and hell has dominion over
them. Thirdly, they lose by all: view their exchange: Luke 6. Prou. 14.
for a little joy, endless sorrow: for the love of the world, the hatred of
God: for the saving of this life, Triplex vox creaturae: 1. Possideto. 2.
Gratias habeto. 3. Rationem reddito.
the losing of their souls: for earthly pleasures, they lose heavenly joys:
to live at ease in this life, brings endless torments in the life to come. Yea
in the enjoying of what they most desire, they frame an indictment against
their own souls, and hatch up a devouring serpent in their own bosoms: noted
by S. James. when he says, James 5.2.3.
The rust of their silver and gold, and moths of their garments, shall witness
against them in the day of the Lord, and eat and consume their flesh, Am bros.
as it were fire: Habet enim ecclesia pecuniam, non vt sornet, sed vt eroget:
For whatsoever man enioyes from God, he is not to reserve it to himself, but
to use it to the glotie of the giver, and to the use of the distressed.
Fourthly, Pecunia aqua salsa est. sitim prouocans non sedans: Riches are as the
salt sea, not quenching, but provoking a thirsting after them. Now so much as a
man desires, so much he wants: and he which continually wants, how can he be
rich? Thirdly, look unto those things which the world esteems chief riches;
have they not their wings and do often fly from us, so that even in the
possessing, there is danger of losing, and when we think our selves most sure
of them, they are ready to be gone from us? This day the rich man says, Take
thy ease, Luke 12.20.
and repaste at full: but the next night came a final separation. So that it
seems they are servants lent, not hired, for so much as a year, a month, or
a day: and therefore (at the pleasure of him that lent them whether in whole or
part) must be gone again. Si quid arrisisset prosperum, taedebat apprehendere,
quia pene prius quam teneretur, auolabat: Therefore (says Augustine) if that
which is pleasing to the outward man did smile upon me, August. lib. Confess.
it was a grief unto me to lay hold upon it, because it was (in a manner) gone
again, before it could be gotten. Sola virtus altissimis de fixa radicibus.
Tull. Seueca.
Virtue has his sure habitation (says Tully) Quae vero extrinsecus sunt, ad
alium protinus transferri possunt: But those things which are without us, may
presently become another man's. Per Deum, dicimus aliena esse, Aug. lib. Solll.
quae aliquando nostra: and nostra esse quae aliquando aliena putauimus: At
Gods pleasure, both that which we counted ours is presently made another: and
that which we thought other men's, Quod efficit tale, illnd magis tale.
is made ours. Again, there is great want in riches themselves, and therefore
cannot make others truly rich, because nothing can give more to another, then
it has it self. Totas diuitias pluribus habere non licet, Seneca.
nec ad quemlibet veniunt, sine caeterorum paupertate: Many men cannot have the
whole number of riches: neither can one be enriched by their coming, but
another must be impouerished by their going. Agustine.
I conclude then with Augustine: Homo absque virtute est regio paupertatis: A
man in abundance without virtue, is a region of poverty, poor, and barren, in
which, though the wicked are mighty trees, Peccatum est pabulum diaboli.
Lactan.
yet they are not rich trees, in as much as they bear not fruit delighting the
King Christ Jesus, (and therefore not precious) but only mast, wherewith the
infernal swine are fed and nourished. For that which is highly esteemed among
men, Luke 16.15.
is abomination in the sight of God.

Lastly, the wicked are base and most miserable, though the honor they have in
this life is never so exceeding. Is it not a base and miserable condition to be
servants to their riches, subjects to their Iusts, captives to sin, and
slaves unto Satan; to will indirectly, to judge corruptly, to understand
darkly? What do riches, what do friends, what do worldly honor and pleasures
help him? View their sepulchers: Their bodies remain, but the men are gone,
and their trial is referred to the day of the Lord: where they shall find the
Judge against them, whom by their sins they crucified; the Angels against the^,
whom by their unseemly behavior they disgraced; the word of God against them,
which in the hardness of their hearts they contemned; his blessed Sacraments
against them, which by their pollutions they defiled: All his mercies against
them, in as much as by them they would not be allured; his judgments against
them, because thorough the^ they would not be terrified; the righteous against
them, because by them they were persecuted: lastly, Romans 8.
all Gods creatures against them, because through their sins they were
corrupted, and by their profane using them vilely abused. To whom shall they
cry for comfort? whither shall they look for help? If above them, Christ is
their angry Judge; if within them, there is an accusing conscience; Revel. 6.
if to the good Angels, they plead against them; if to the righteous, their
blood cries for revenge; if to other Gods creatures, they are armed men
prepared against them; if to their companions, they are in the same condition,
and cannot help them; if to the devil, he waits and labors to receive them;
if to hell, it gapes to devour them. Now should it be happy if the hills
could cover their infamy, whom the world thought to be famous, or that they
had never bin, who being the foolish judged to be happy. We confess they
planted vineyards, they multiplied their possessions, they fed daintilie,
they were clothed gorgeously, they lay in their beds of down, caroust in
bowls of Iuorie, invented to themselves instruments of music, and thus in
their abundance they found no end, nor in their rejoicing seemed to have
measure: August. de speculo bum. miseriae.
but one silly moment gave an end to all these things: and of all they had,
they took not any thing with them. They left their riches which they wickedly
sought after, and found the torments they never dreamed of. Of all they
rejoiced in, nothing is left: where is their pomp, where their banquets, where
their rich attire, where their great treasures, where their servants, their
subjects, their troops of followers, their multitude of clients? now they lie
in the grave, their eyes behold none of these: they are turned into ashes,
their sinowes departed from their joints: some think their bodies rest (and so
it is till the day of judgment: Luke 6. Gregor. Prou. 14.
) but in mean while their souls are plagued in hell. Extrema gaudia sequuntur
perpetua lamenta: Sweet meat has sower sauce: extreme joys great
lamentations. Bern. de medit. cap. 4.
Tell me (says Bernard) where are the lovers of this world which were here of
late? Tell me, what profit had they by their vain glory, their short joy,
their worldly power, their carnal pleasures, Vna poena implicat, quos vnus
amor in crimine ligat.
and their false riches? Where is their laughter, their joy, their boasting?
their bodies are given to be worms meat, and their souls are burning in the
flames of everlasting torments, whither their bodies afterward come, that those
which have been companions in their vain pleasures, may be partners in most
grievous pains. Quanta districtione feriat quos reprobat, si bic cruciat quos
amat? Gregor.
Si Deus tam aspere percutit vbi parcit, quam aspere percutiet vbi non parcet?
For if God corrects the godly whom he spares in mercy, how grievously shall
he wound the wicked, with whom he deals in the strictness of his justice? If
he sometimes whippe those whom he loves in this life, with what severity will
he plague those whom he hates, Bernard.
in the life to come? If he will beat his holy son, what shall become of his
wicked servant? Judge 4.
Sisera gives milk unto Iahel, cover him warm, and lays him to rest; but
then his destruction was nearer: so the wicked are fed with sweet milk of
delights, covered with rich attire, and luld asleep in the cradle of
security; but in mean while the sharp nails of Gods judgments do suddenly
pearce them. Gregory.
Vitulus mactandus, liber ad pascua mittitur: The ox reserved for the butchers
slaughterhouse, goes at his pleasure in the greenest meadows: so is it with the
wicked whom the butcher of the soul must lead to his fearful shambles. I
conclude then with Augustine: August. ad Marcellinum.
Nihil infoelicius foelicitate peccantium: Nothing is more unhappy then that
which the wicked esteem their happiness: who, though they seem to flourish,
( quoniam splendour tectorum attenditur, labes autem animorum non attenditur;
because men behold their outward beauty, and not their inward filthiness) yet
they are most miserable: Dum enim hos pollere Deus permittat, tunc indignatur
grauius: si impunitos dimittat, tunc punit infestius: For whilst God does
suffer them to flourish, then does be most set himself against them: and
whilst he sends them away unpunished, therein they are punished a great deal
more sharply. And thus the afflictions of the godly, and prosperity of the
wicked, agree excellently well with Gods Providence and justice.

The third instance of confusion to prove God gouernes not the world, is,
Jnstance 3.
in that the way to destruction is broad, but to heaven narrow, and few there
be that walk in it.

Coelum and terra and omnia quae in ijs sunt, August. lib. Conf. 10.
ecce vndique mihi clamant vt te amem domine: The heavens, the earth, and all
things therein contained, behold they never cease crying unto me, to love thee
O Lord, says August. Add Gods word to direct, his mercies to allure, his
judgments to whip us on; and what not, to move us, help us, and strengthen us
in this our journey? If then for all this we very hardly walk in it, and so it
proves narrow unto us, this is by accident, namely, Simile.
through our own wilful blindness, corrupt affections, and obstinate
wickedness. A master makes a banquet for his servants in an inner room, and to
pass into it, frames a door both large and wide. If these which are invited
will load themselves with huge burdens that they cannot enter, the door is
narrow in regard of the invited, and not of the inuiter. So stands the case
between Christ that inuites to his supper of glory, Luke 14.24.
and us that load our selves with infinite sins that we cannot go to it.
Augustine.
Non ideo non habet homo gratiam quia Deus non dat, sed quia homo non accipit:
In that men want grace, Romans 8.7. Romans 3.4.
it is not because God does nor give it, but because they have not grace to
receive it. Ioh. 3.19.
Herein (says John) is their condemnation just, in that, that light is come
into the world, and men love darkness more then light, because their deeds are
evil. So that the way is narrow in regard of us, and not of God. Secondly, if
many are called and few chosen, if few vessels of glory, and many vessels of
wrath, Romans 9.
what have thou to do herein? shall folly censure wisdom, or the clay
reason against the potter?



God can prevent all evils, Solution.
(whether of the punishment, or of the sin) and therefore is not impotent:
but he does suffer them, Qui mala tollit, prouidentia^ tolleret. Plotin.
yet therefore is not envious: for he does not suffer them as they are simply
evils, but as from those evils his power, mercy, and justice may appear: his
power, in turning evil to good; his mercy, in clensing and delivering the
elect of the riches of his grace; his justice, in condemning the wicked and
reprobate.



But the devils and wicked men resist God:

And therefore are not governed by him.

Though the devils and wicked men do resist God in respect of his will
revealed: Solution.
yet God does willingly suffer their resistance, limit the same, and turns it
to his glory. So that he is not so resisted, but that he does govern; nor so
opposed, but that he could overcome. Therefore this neither takes away Gods
providence, not diminishes his power.



But all things fall out by chance: Eccles. 9.11. and in many other places:

Therefore no providence.

The holy Scripture does use such words, in regard of us only, Solution.
to whom the causes of things and secret working of God is unknown, and
therefore (the events being simply considered) we say they come by fortune:
but not in respect of God, to whom all causes are known, and who works all
in all by them. If we respect the counsel, knowledge, and purpose of him that
by shooting the arrow at random, wounded Achab; we say Achab was slain by
chance: but if you respect the decree of God to punish the wicked, we say it
came to pass by his heavenly Providence. Secondly, whereas Solomon says,
that neither the race is to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread
to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of
knowledge, but that time and chance gouernes all things; we must understand
Solomon to speak in the person of the wicked, who having their eyes
blindfolded, and judgments corrupted, neither see perfectly, nor judge
directly. For if the actions of men, Prou. 15.9.
with their goings forth and commings in (yea the hoppings of sparrowes) are
governed by God; Exodus 3.21.
then (without question) he directs their races. If God be the Captain of his
people, Deuteronomy. 33.29.
the helmet and sword of Israel, that none can prevail against them, then he
must needs be the God of Armies. If the eyes of all creatures that look up,
receive a blessing, a blessing extended to the silly ravens of the field, will
God detain it from the wise? If those that sear the Lord want nothing, does
he not give sufficient riches to men of understanding? Lastly, he which
suffers grief wrongfully for conscience sake toward God, is counted thanks
worthy in his sight, 1. Pet. 2.19.
and therefore he will show favor to such as have the true knowledge of his
name.

If things fall out by chance in regard of us, Reply.
and not of God, whose Providence extending to all things, imposes a
necessity upon their several events; then you seem to approve Stoicall
destiny, which the godly condemn.



Natural, Mathematical, Stoicall, Destiny fourefold.
and Christian: Natural, when natural and definite causes do work their
proper and certain effects: as the fire does heat, the Sun yields light,
the water does moisten; and so in particulars. 1. Natural.
This natural or physical destiny, is no other thing but nature it self, as
it is noted by Alexander Aphrod. (an Interpreter of Aristotle) in his book of
Destiny to Seuerus, and Antonius. By Tullie, when he says, Multa impendere
videbantur, praeter naturam praeterque fatum: Many things hung over my head
besides nature and destiny. By Aristotle himself, when he says, Generationes
quae fiunt secundum naturam, sunt fatales: Such generations as are according to
nature are fatal. So that it seems, fatal is a fando, because it speaks in
that order, that is, is so ordained by God to work his certain effects.
Destiny or fate thus taken, is not to be blamed.

Mathematical destiny, 2. Mathematical.
whereby certain mathematitians do attribute particular effects to the
operation of the heavens, as the Sun, the Moon, the Stars and such like:
affirming no man to be borne, to die, to be rich, to be poor, to be happy,
to be unhappy, but by the sole operation of the heavens, and influence of the
Stars. Touching this destiny, we say with Augustine, Hoc fatum vere fatuum
est, August. de Ciuitat. Dei.
This is fools destiny: and so I leave it.

Stoicall destiny is noted by Tullie to be an ordinary succession of causes,
3. Stoicall.
wherein, by a near conjunction, one cause is the cause of another cause, and
that cause, the cause of that which follows, The error of Manes, teaching
fatal destiny, condemned. Eus. lib. 7. Socrat. lib. 5.
and so by a perpetual succession, one cause to be an absolute cause of
another cause, by virtue of their next and nearest conjunction. But herein all
honor is given to the creature, none to the Creator, and therefore this
destiny is most damnable, and wholly condemned by the former doctrine, wherein
all effects are attributed to God, and their necessity of falling out, to his
divine immutabilitie.

Christian destiny, 4. Christian.
(so called, because it agrees with the profession of Christians) is a
necessary course and goodly order of all things, depending upon Gods divine
Providence. This differs much from the former. The difference between Stoicall
and Christian destiny.
That separates Gods power from the operation of causes: this includes it, and
makes his will efficient of all things.



The more things any one is able to govern, Solution.
the more is his power magnified: and the more he will govern, the more is his
goodness manifested. So that for God to govern all, both great and small,
therein is his glory exceedingly exalted. Secondly, none of Gods creatures are
base in regard of themselves, but as they are compared with others. The Angels,
though base in regard of God, yet in respect of other creatures, are most
excellent. A horse compared with a man, is base, but considered with a fly, is
of great estimation, and so in particular: yea which of Gods creatures can we
behold, but upon due consideration, we shall find matter of admiration in the
same? even in the gnat, and little fly, as Augustine notes. But I proceed to
the rest.

Objections against the doctrine of the manner of Gods government, with the
answers unto them.
1. Against the means.
As by him al things were created, so by him alone all things are maintained
and preserved: Job 34. Ephesians. 1. Col. 1. etc. Therefore he uses no second
means in governing the world.

In these and such like places, Solution.
God does not exclude his creatures which he has ordained to use for ye
setting forth of his glory; but only shows that there is no other God in
heaven or earth besides himself: and that he only works all in all by his
mighty power, in such a manner, as that although his creatures do work, yet
it is by a strength and virtue received from him. We say Julius Caesar
conquered many nations: yet we do not exclude his Soldiers, whereby he
prevailed. Here is the only difference: Julius used them because he could not
subdue others without them: but God being Almighty uses his creatures,
because it is his good pleasure.

Absurdities inferred. 1. From the means. Solution.
and disposes of all ends, then we are not tied to any men for kindnesses
showed, or benefits bestowed.

We are not bound unto any men, or any other thing, as authors of our good, but
as they are Gods disposers, and ordained by him to be means of conueying it
unto us. If the King send a gift, we acknowledge him the bestower: yet ought to
be thankful to him that brought it. Thus David is thankful to Barzillaus the
Giliadite: Paul to Priscilla and Aquila: Romans 16.4.
yet they very well knew, that God was Author of al, and they but means
ordained.

If God often uses no means: 2. From the want of means. Objection.
then we are not to stand upon the using them.

It is great impiety to reason from the Creator, Solution.
to the creature: he is Almighty, and can work without them: we are weak,
and cannot want them. Secondly, God has ordained means to be helps unto man,
and commanded man to use means: Matthew. 4.
therefore to reject them, is to contemn Gods ordinance, grieuouslie to tempt
him, and wilfully to hurt our selves.



We must know that the doing of that which the Lord has forbidden, Solution.
will never profit any: for though it seems to help the body, yet it does
grieuouslie hurt the soul. Secondly, Leuit. 20.6. Esaias 8.19.20.
it was never known that ever any witch could enrich her self, or that any
one was bettered by going unto them, as in the uses it shall further appear.

Against the immutabilitie of Gods government.
then there is no free will in men: but the Church acknowledges a certain
freewill. And therefore this doctrine seems contrary to ye judgment of the
Church, that all things should fall out immutablie.

We acknowledge (as Calvin says) that men have a certain freedom of their
wills, that is, Solution. 1.
of choosing or refusing as it seems good unto them: as it appears by the
choice propounded by the Prophet to David, 1. King. 3.5. 2. Sam. 24. Deuteronomy.
30.19.
and by Moses to the people of Israel: yet so, as that God does always govern
our wills: in that which is evil, decreeing a voluntary permission: for some
good in that which is good, both strengthening our wills, Peccant per liberum
arbitrium non liberatum: Aug. There is a free will, and a will freed: to sin,
free: to good, freed by grace.
giving the motion and inclining them forward. Otherwise we have no free will
at all: for in our willing that which he commands, himself does work both
the will and the deed: and yet since it is not by a compulsion, but by a
gentle inclining, we grant a certain liberty unto them. August. de Ciuit.
Dei Tom. 5. lib. 5. cap. 10.
The first may seem to take away our freedom: because we are compeld to do
that which we would not do: as to be put to death by a tyrant, to be slain by
our adversary: yet our bodies and not our wills are properly said to be under
this necessity, because (do our adversary what he can) we may will our death,
No necessity ouerrules the minds of men. ibid.
or not will it: but this second does not: for although it comes to pass, that
that which is done, could not but be done, neither otherwise done then it is
done; and that our wills are under this necessity, yet (since it is by
enclining them, and not by forcing them) there is a certain liberty left unto
them: Otherwise how could it be said, that Christ must needs suffer; Luke 24.
and yet that he suffered willingly, and by consequence freely: Esaias 53.



The decree of GOD does not exclude, Solution.
but include the means appointed; because as he decrees the end, so the
means whereby it is to be accomplished. Ioh. 1. Gal. 5. Romans 10. Ephesians. 1.
Thus God in electing his children, gives his Gospel to work faith and
repentance, his Sacraments to confirm us, and his blessed Spirit continually
to direct us, and to quicken up his good graces within us: as fervent prayer,
hearty thanks giving, zeal of his glory, conscience to serve him, and such
like, Ephesians. 2. These necessary to salvation; though not to justification.
without which we cannot be saved. Thus God in his decree of electing, decrees
also the means of accomplishing: as by Christ's precepts, his practice, and the
word (...), signifying to predestinate, it plainly appears. As this is true
of the soul, so of the preservation of the body: for God has not only
given it a being, but a soul, by whose faculties it should be kept from
dangers: he has given food by which it should be nourished, clothes to keep it
warm, oil to make a cheerful countenance; yea and for the saving of souls
and bodies, all Gods blessings are given, and all still preserved. Thus
Ezechias though he knew he should live fifteen years longer, yet used a
plaster of figs. And Paul though he knew he should come safe to land, yet
gives advice and excites the mariners to the means how it should be effected.
How infinite many times did David fly from his enemies, use means of his
deliverance, and prayed to God for the same, and yet knew very well he should
come to the kingdom, yea and as infinite many times confessed God to be an
assured defense and deliverer of his children? Secondly, the revealed will of
God, commanding us to use the means appointed, must be a law to govern us,
and therefore we must not dream of his hidden will, whereof we are ignorant.

Objections and false conclusions inferred upon this doctrine, that God is the
author of the evil of the punishment: with the Answers unto them.


But that he wills no ones death, it appears: Ezech. 18.33. Ose 13.9. 1.
Tim. 2.4. 2. Pet. 3.9. Matthew. 23.37. Luke 13.34.

And therefore he punishes not all sinners.

There is a difference between the inflicting of punishment, Solution.
and the willing that a man should not come to that punishment: by these places
of holy Scripture, the Lord shows his desire to have men to eschew sin, The
objection propounded.
whereby they come to this punishmnt, and not when they have committed the same
that he will not punish them for it. Thus a good Judge gives his charge to
prevent stealing at one Sessions; Simile.
and punishes those which have broke it, at the next Sessions.

Secondly, if you respect Gods revealed will, that is, the means he uses for
our conversion and keeping of his laws, in this sense, he wills the death of
none: but if you respect his secret will, that is, his decree of reprobation,
Esaias 1.24. Matthew. 11. Luke 10.
then God may be said to will the death of infinite many, and that therein he
rejoices and takes pleasure, in as much as his power, and justice is thereby
exalted. His justice in that he punishes sin, his mercy, in that of his
grace through his son he saves some: his power, in that he can ordain for
his own service, both vessels of wrath, and vessels of glory.

Thirdly, 1. Tim. 4.2.
whereas God is said to will the salvation of all: we must understand by All,
some of every nation and degree whatsoever. Thus Paul notes when he says,
Pray for kings, and all in Authority; because it pleases God that some of
every country, nation and degree, should be saved. Thus the general, used by
Esaias 43.9. is expounded in the sixth verse, to be meant of the sons and daughters
of God.

But some reply, Reply. 1. Tim. 4.10.
that this cannot be thus: because it is said, that although God is especially
a Savior of the faithful, yet that he is a Savior of all, as well as of them.

David, Psalm. 33.6.
Thou Lord sauest both man and beast: Where (save) must needs be understood for
preserve and maintain: and so in the place before alleged.

False conclusions inserred.
there is man's will agreeing with Gods will, because it was his pleasure that
such a thing should fall out: In regard of the right of punishing.
And therefore man, for killing man, is not to be punished, though it lies in
God to punish him for it.

Where man's will agrees with Gods will in all respects, Solution.
the argument does hold: but in this and all other, there is infinite
contrariety: God wills a voluntary permission; man, a wilful effecting: God
often wills the death of a man if he be holy, as a blessing to give him the
life of the soul for the death of the body, and for momentarie troubles,
eternal ioies; if he be wicked, as a punishment for his sin, and to cut him
off from infecting his Church: but the murderer in killing of a man respects
none of these ends, but the satissying of his malicious mind, ye occasion being
as often unjustly taken, as of weakness given. So that in this and al other
such like, God wills his own glory in the execution of justice, and in
showing mercy to his children: Romans 12.9.
but the manslaier regards neither, but wholly the satisfying of his bloody
desire: whereby he multiplies his sins in approaching to the seat of
judgment: 1. These. 4.6.
for vengeance is the Lords, and to him only it belongs to repay.



Our unrighteousness does not commend Gods righteousness, Solution.
as it is simply sin, but by accident, namely, because when we do sin,
God does punish us for the same; which punishment being the execution of
justice, his righteousness is thereby commended: therefore let us not sin,
nor sinning (without repentance,) think to go unpunished, for it is for the
honor of the Judge of the world to execute judgment. Genesis 25.


Objections alleged to prove God the Author of sin, with the Answers unto
them.
Thus taught the Seleutians. Aug. de haeres. Thus taught Floring and Blastus at
Rome. Euscb. lib. 5. cap 13. and 28. Solution.
then it seems he is the cause of sin:

But God has done so, Prou. 16.

And therefore seems to be cause of sin:

God created not the evil man to sin, and therefore cannot be a cause of it:
but sinning to punish him for the same: In which case none can complain,
Psalm. 6.
because God will give to every one according to his work.



But God is the cause of all evil in the city: Amos 3.6. Esaias 4.
and therefore of sin.

There is a double cuill: Solution.
the moral, and the natural: the moral evil is the sin: the natural
evil, is the punishment for the sin: God is the Author of this, but not of
the other. And therefore the Prophet Amos theacheth in this place, that
afflictions come from God and not by chance and fortune, as some were persuaded.

Abraham to kill his innocent son: Shemeus to curse David: Genesis 32.2. Sam. 15.

But these are sins: Therefore God seems to be a cause of sins.

God commanded not Abraham to sacrifice his son of superstition, Solution.
as they that offered their sons and daughters to the idol Moloch; nor yet to
satisfy any malice or wicked thought in Abraham toward his son, (for this
was far from so holy a father) but only as it was a point of Gods divine
service, and to try ye faith of Abraham, who thereby was to be made a father of
al believers. And therefore God did well in commanding, and Abraham well in
obeying: Secondly, though the commandment was given to try Abraham, yet the
secret purpose of God, was to deliver Isaac, as the sequeale did manifest.

But on the contrary, Shemeus his railing on David, was from a malicious,
mind, and to satisfy his fury against him; the which was not commanded by
God, but only willingly permitted, and in the permission so ordered, as that it
turned unto David to be a correction for his sin, in which sense David says,
the Lord bad him do it. And therefore by neither of these, can God seem to be
the author of sin.

Exodus 12.25. chap. 3.22.
contrary to his own Law, Exodus 20. and therefore seems a cause of sin.

What God commands to be done, Solution.
the performance of that can be no sin: because sin is a transgression of
Gods law. Secondly, the Israelites being Gods people, and having lived in
great servitude in Egypt, and by their labors increased the treasures of
Pharaoh very exceedingly, there was good reason why they should reap some
commodity from the Egyptians at their departure. As usury permitted to Gods
enemies, but not among his people.
Lastly, many things may be done to the professed enemies of God very lawfully,
the which to enterprise toward any that profess his name, is a grievous sin:
the which in no wise can be imputed to the Israelites, and that so much the
less,



But God often does thus: Solution.
and therefore he is often a cause of sin.

Sin is to be considered either as it is simply a sin, or as it is a
punishment of former sins, by reason it is a begetter of more sins, and
makes the committer more miserable: as it is evident in the ignorant Gentiles,
Ephesians. 4.18. and in the hard hearted Jews, Romans 1.21, 22, 23, etc. God only
willing lie permits the former, and in his justice inflicts the latter; Lib. 5.
cap. 3.
as Augustine in his Treatise against Julian plainly teaches.



But sins are committed: And therefore God does will them.

Gods will is efficient, commanding, Solution.
or permissiue: the two former make God an absolute cause; the latter does not.
So that we confess that God does will all, both good and bad: the bad, by a
willing permission: the good, by his command and by a powerful effecting.

Joseph into Egypt by his brethren, which fact of theirs was a sin, and
therefore God wills some sins.

God willed the selling of Joseph into Egypt, Solution.
as it did make for the declaration of his exceeding power and mercy to his
Church: Genesis 48.
for thereby Joseph's deliverance was seen, his honor advanced, and the future
good of the faithful procured, as it appears by his supply of the want in
the time of famine, in which respect Joseph was sent aforehand by the Lord into
Egypt, as himself declares: but none of these were respected by Joseph's
brethren, but only an intent to make him away, for the satisfying of their
malicious minds toward him: therefore it was good in God, as proceeding from
his infinite love to his children: but evil in Joseph's brethren as proceeding
of an evil mind in them.



God does not command them, Solution.
nor effect them himself, as they are simply sins: but does only willingly
permit them, which permission (as I have proved) cannot make him a cause of the
sin committed. Secondly, though God give strength to the actions of the devil
and wicked men, and that to a purpose making for his own glory, and good of
his children, he does will the same, yet he is far from the intents of the
devil and wicked men in their actions, being that which makes them to be
sins: 1. Pet. 4.19.
God willed the redemption of mankind, and therefore the crucifying of his
son whereby it was to be effected: but the malice and hatred of the Jews
toward him, for which cause they did it, came of themselves. God wills the
chastisement of his children for the trial of their faith and patience; but
that Tyrants should imprison them, or put them to death unjustly, this
proceeds from a hatred in them toward Gods children: and therefore God wills
only the good, but the evil that is effected comes from themselves.



And therefore the means whereby it is manifested, that is, sin it self.





But God can hinder sin, and yet often does not:

And therefore seems often to offend.

The Proposition is true, Solution.
being understood of those that are bound to hinder sin, or of those that do
approve of sins in that respect they are simply sins: but God is above his
law, and therefore not tied to it. Secondly, in suffering sin, he no way
approues of it, for he punishes him that commits it, yea rather then it should
go unpunished, does punish it in his only begotten Son: so that the argument
holds in us that are his creatures, but not in God the Creator.



But God by permitting evil, does evil that good may come thereof:

And therefore God seems sometimes to sin.

The Assumption is false: Solution.
because it is not Gods permission which is evil, but the sin it self.



I confess (as Augustine says) that men do sin Deo gratiam non concedente,
Solution.
in that God does not give them his grace: yet God being not tied to give it,
and secondly his detaining it, making for his justice and glory, how can he be
blamed for not bestowing it? Yet further note: Non ideo non habet homo gratiam,
quia Deus non dat, sed quia homo non accipit. Man is destitute of Gods grace,
Romans 6.12.
not because God does not give it, but because men have not hearts to receive
it when it is offered. Aug. in Matthew. 9.12. (...). Plato.
Magnus de caelo venit Medicus quia per vbique terrarum iacet aegrotus: That
great and wise Physician is come from heaven, because the whole world lay sick
of sin: if men are not cured, this only is the cause: Muscujus.
Medicum vltro venientem respuunt; they wilfully refuse him, that would
willingly help them. Thus is Christ the bread of life, the light, the way, the
truth: in that our souls are not nourished, our understandings enlightened,
Ioh. 3.19.
this way not walked, the truth not received, nor our souls cured: Luke 14.24.
It is because we reject the truth, Ioh. 6.35.
refuse this way, wink with our eyes, will not taste this food; Apoc. 3.20.
but shut the doors of our hearts, lest he should enter and heal us.



But these are maintained by God:

And therefore some sins are maintained by him.

Whatsoever the wicked does, Solution.
it is evil in Gods sight, because it proceeds from a person not sanctified by
his spirit: yet we must make a difference between the actions and motions of
evil me^, and the disorder and sin which goes with them: God is the cause of
the one, but not of ye other. A good Musitio^ may give a good tuch upon a
string, Simile.
yet the sound may be bad, because the string is bad, or the instrument naught:
so God may move the actions of the devil and wicked men, yet their actions
good in respect of God, though evil in regard of them.



Aliud est innatum, Solution.
aliud agnatum: It is one thing to uphold common nature as a creature of God;
another thing to uphold the corruption of our nature: the one is natural, as
proceeding from common nature, and is good in us: the other is natural, as
proceeding from the corruption of our nature, that is, our sin in Adam, and
is evil in us: the former is vpholden and maintained by God, and it shows his
goodness, because it is his creature: the latter came first from our selves,
and is still continued by our own wicked lusts, and so is evil in us. Isai.
30.
In this sense Isaiah says unto us, Woe be to you declining sons.



But the second cause, namely man's will, is a cause of sin:

And therefore the first cause, namely God, has a stroke in it.



Sihon King of Heshbon, of Pharaoh King of Egypt, of the Jews, and many other
proceeded from God: Dent. 2. Exodus 3. But these are simply sins: And
therefore God is the cause of sin.

God does harden, Solution. Augustine.
non malum obtrudendo sed gratiam non concedendo, not by effecting sin in us,
but by not exhibiting of his grace whereby it is prevented. For touching sin
God has no positive will, In cludere, est clausis non aperire.
but only a privation of his grace, in respect of former sins committed. In
this sense God is said then to shut up under sin, when he does not open his
door of mercy: Gregor. Destruit cum deserit.
and then to destroy when he does forsake. And thus much the Hebrew Dialect
signifying (as the learned have observed) a permission, and not an action, does
teach unto us. This shall suffice for the answering of the objections. The uses
follow.

THE SIXTH PART, Containing the uses of the Doctrines delivered.
The use. THe evident proof that all things are governed by Gods providence,
the mother of superstition: What fortune is.
her first inuenters (by likelihood her best acquaintance) paint her blind,
standing on a bowl, and turning with every wind. Reason teaches, the blind
cannot guide, the wavering cannot stablish; that which is tossed it self, cannot
settle others. For how can he steare certainly which floteth himself on the
waters? how should fortune then govern any thing, being more uncertain then
uncertainty it self? But what is she? a word without substance, begotten by a
fond conceit, brought forth with fading breath, no sooner come, but gone, no
sooner heard, but forgot again. That which is fortune to the servant, Whence
foreune arises.
is none to the master; that which is fortune to the child, is none to the
father; that which is fortune to the fool, is none to the wise; that which is
fortune to those which are darkness, is none to those which are light in
Christ. So that take away ignorance, and her daughter chance will be quite
banished. The master lets a thing fall to see whether the servant will give it
again, or steal it: the servant thinks it fell by chance, but his master did
it to try him. So many things fall out amongst us (Gods ignorant servants) the
causes and ends whereof lie hid to us, yet in all God has his proper purpose
and working. Away then with fortune, wherewith the minds of the godly ought
not to be corrupted.

the contemners to hear, and those which do hear to be more attentive in
hearing, and forward in obeying. And knowing there is no other means then
poena and praemium, the Law and the Gospel (for though this only works
repentance, yet that other is a schoolmaster and leads us to Christ) these
two shall be the heads from which my arguments of persuasion shall be taken.
The rewards concern this life or a better. The benefits of this life, which
those that hear Gods voice and obey his will do abundantly enjoy, are
infinite many: view their blessedness, even in the midst of their miseries,
noted already in the answers to the former objections; In the answer to the
second instance in the third objection against this doctrine, God gouernes all
things.
and if they are happiein those things which make them seem unhappy, how
blessed are they in other things, wherein there is neither taste nor show of
misery? But alas, how can they want store of blessings, who have Christ the
fountain of all blessings? how shall God detain that which is dear, who has
given them his only Son, who is dearest unto him? and how shall his mercy be
failing to his friends, Romans 5.
when it was so abundantly manifested when they were enemies? If we hear his
voice, we are friends, we are brethren, we are sisters, we are sons unto
him. If earthly parents do love their children, and labor to profit them, how
should our heavenly father (whose love as far exceedes their love, as the
infinite Creator does the silly creature) fail in his love to his children, or
be wanting in his blessings toward them? But I leave the privileges of the
godly in the blessings of this life, and come to their happiness in the life
to come. In the description whereof we may aim, but cannot attain. He which
will be a certain reporter, must hear the matter himself; he which will
limme perfectly, must view that he would draw; and he that would judge of
harmonies, must hear the sounds: how then should silly man on earth, whose
senses were never partakers of this glory, be a perfect describer thereof? It
rests then (and so in the bowels of compassion as Ambassadors of Christ we
entreat you) that you rather seek to be partakers thereof, then to expect a
description from another: yet being the end of the hope of the faithful, it
shall not be amiss to speak something thereof.

That there is a place of infinite joy and blessedness for the godly, Psalm.
15. Psalm. 27. Matthew. 25. 1. Cor. 19. Hebr. 4.11. and 13.
none so vilde, that will call it into question, for God who is truth it self,
has always both taught and promised it: therefore Peter in the behalf of
himself and the Church (the sole partakers of this blessedness) breaks forth
into an hearty thanksgiving unto God on this manner: Praised be God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten
us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from death, to
an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that perishes not, reserved in
heaven for them which are kept by the power of God, through faith unto
soluation. (heaven) it has three significations, Psalm. 14.6.
as Paul notes, when he says, he was taken up into the third heavens: The
error of Basilides, that there are 365. heavens: (Eusebius. lib. 4. ca. 7.) very
foolish.
first, it is taken for the air above us: In this sense (I take it) the
Psalmist speaks, when he says, the Lord covers the heaven with clouds: and
thus the birds of the air are called the fowls of heaven: Secondly, Psalm.
8.89.30.
which is called the heavenly host, or beautiful apparel of the heavens:
Thirdly, Psalm. 15. Philip. 3. Psalm. 103. Matthew. 5.
And this is the place whither Christ our forerunner is gone to prepare a place
for us, that in due time he might gather us unto him: Revel. 21.
The glory whereof being described so far forth, as we may conceive of the
same, I leave the description, and come to the ioies therein contained, whereof
both souls and bodies shall be partakers. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.14. 1. Pet. 1.4.
The soul shall be adorned with wisdom, justice, and holiness, for the good
graces begun in us here, shall be perfected there: and that excellent estate
wherein we were at first created like unto God, shall then be restored a
thousand times more excellent: The mind shall lose her darkness, and be
replenished with all light; it shall know the might, power, mercy, and justice
of God, without any ministry of his word: The will shall want all evil
desires, and in a sweet content rest and stay it self on God alone, The
body, after the day of the Lord being joined to the soul, Matthew. 22.3.
shall ever remain glorious, subject to no changes, to no infirmities, not
needing meat, 1. Cor. 15.3.
drink, apparel, or outward means to preserve it: the agilitie thereof
shall be such, as that it shall move it self whither it lists: 1. Cor.
13.11.12.
the proportion such, as that there shall be no defect in any member. Dan. 12.
Matthew. 13.
And thus God having blessed both souls and bodies, shall give them a glory
which shall shine as the Sun and Stars in the firmament: and this glory
must needs be infinite, for that his glory which replenisheth all things,
shall cause it. And whereas the pleasures of this life, John 2.3.
either breed discontent in the possessing, or grief in the losing, those
blessed and perfect joys in heaven shall cause neither: for our abundance
shall not cause a loathing, but we shall still desire them, nor our desiring
implie a want, for we shall be filled with them: and not for a time, for then
there was grief in losing them, but for ever and ever; and therefore there is
an endless happiness in thus possessing them. Oh blessed happiness, and happy
blessedness; to have health without infirmity, Romans 8. Philip. 3. Isai. 25.
Deuteronomy. 8. Isai. 32. 1. Cor. 13. Ioh. 18.
youth without waxing old, fullness without loathing, freedom without bondage,
fairness without deformity, life without death, abundance without want,
peace without trouble, security without fear, knowledge without ignorance,
joy without sorrow, and light without darkness! What is Salomons wisdom,
Absolons fairness, Sampsons strength, Mathusalems long life, and Caesar's
reign? surely compared with the excellency of these things in heaven, they
were but folly, deformity, weakness, a point of a moment, and a servile
bondage. It is excellent to know things physical, but much more excellent to
know metaphysicall, to have the knowledge of the blessed Trinity, the
knowledge of the might of the father, of the wisdom of the Son, of the bounty
of the Spirit: Bern. in Medic.
O beata visio videre Deu^ in seipso, videre Deum in nobis, and nos in ipso: Oh
blessed sight to see God in his glory, to see God in us, and us in him. What
do thou desire O thou mortal man, which may content either soul or body?
if glorious sights: there you shall see the glory of heaven, of the Saints, of
the Angels, yea of God himself. If melody, there is the blessed consort of
praising God together: if to love God, then we shall love him more then our
selves: if friendship, there shall be no discord: if power and might, thy will
shall be as it were omnipotent, for as Gods will is effected by himself, so
thy will shall be effected through him: if honor, thou shall a thousand
thousand degrees exceed the honor that the might Emperors enjoy upon
earth: if riches, the largest Empire has his limits, the mainest Ocean his
bounds, Kings treasures often labor of consumptions, but the riches of heaven
are every way exceeding, they have neither end nor measure. This is that glory
(as Augustine says) which the Angels admire, which obscures the Sun, yea,
which, could it appear to ye souls of the damned, would make (as the sweet
tree in the bitter waters) even hell it self seem a paradise of pleasures.
But what should I say more of this blessedness? It has not entered into the
heart of man to conceive aright thereof; needs must it then be greater then
can be described: therefore blessed, and a thousand times blessed are they,
whom God does especially bless in this life, and so infinitely reward in the
life to come. Plures sunt, qups corrigit timor; meliores sunt, quos dirigit
amor. Gregor.
Now as these are means to quicken us up in a Christian course of serving God,
so his punishments prepared for the unrepentant, should then terrify from
sin, when his mercies will not allure to holiness of life. For as his rewards
of holiness are infinite, so his plagues ordained for the disobedient, are every
way exceeding. Consider the names of the place prepared; the Tormenters, the
diversity of torments, their co^trarieties, their generality, and their
continuance, and the truth of this will appear unto us. Topheth, a pit, Matthew.
18.
a lake, utter darkness: and what not to express the horror thereof? him,
what horror will they bring in the life to come, where there are legions, where
they appear in the ugliness of their own natures, and where they tyrannize
according to their own desires? The sorts of punishments are very many: Esaias 66.
and gnawing the strings of the heart: Matthew. 25.
The immercilesse fiery flame torme^ting both soul and body without
intermission: Luke 16.
nor can there be compassion where fire and brimstone do meet together: nor
can there be respit, where the flame is never extinguished: Apocal. 21.
nor can it be extinguished, since the breath of the Lord does alwaie kindle
it. Isai. 30.
Here the wicked have their dainty fare, their pleasant sights, their stately
buildings, their gorgeous attire, their troops of Attendants, but (alas) there
is a lamentable exchange of all things: Job 21. Isai. 65. Nahum 2. Joel 2.
In stead of their servile Attendants, ouerruling devils: of gorgeous attire,
ugly blackness: of stately buildings, a stinking lake: of pleasant sights,
direful shapes: of sweet music, gnashing of teeth: of dainty fare, and
abundance of what they desired, an extreme pinching want, with presence of that
which they most abhorred. Genes. 41.
Thus as the seven lean kine devoured the fat, so shall all the fading
ioynes of the wicked be devoured of their contraries. The seven years famine
consumed not all blessings: but this never ceasing famine is a deuourer of all
which the wicked had lent them: Dives in inferno, coge^te inopia, Gloss. in Ioh
27.
vsque ad minima petenda perductus est, qui sua tenacitate, vsque adminima
neganda, pauperibus restrictus est: The rich man, that through his covetous
desire, was so strait laced to the poor, that he would not grant the least
thing to relieve the^, is now being in hell, compelled to ask the least drop
of water to ease himself. And thus is their glory turned into shame, their
abundance into an extreme want, and their liberty into chains of darkness.
Stridor dentium solet sequi frigus.
Atque sic in imptorum interitu ipsa a suis qualitatibus tormenta discordant,
quia a conditoris voluntate, Ignis infernalis co^cremationem habet, lumen no^
habet: Oregor. in Moral.
dum viuerent discrepabant: And thus (says Gregory) the torments in hell, in
the destruction of the wicked, do disagree from their natures, because whilst
the wicked lived upon earth, they would disagree from the will of their Maker.
Neither are they only contrary in their qualities, Vt mentes impiorum ad
aliud dirigi non possint, nisi ad id quod vis doloris impellit: That (as
Hierome says) the mind of the ungodly can think upon nothing but that,
whereunto the very force and extremity of pain does compel it. Gathered
directly by the words of Christ, when he says, There shall be nothing but
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matthew 13. and 22. and 15.
If one member grieved, troubles the whole body, how shall the torturing of
all be endured? Neither is it only general, Matthew. 15.
Go ye cursed (says Christ) into everlasting fire. The portion befalling the
wicked, is a death without death, an end of joys, without end of pains, a
want of all delight, without want of any sorrow: this death ever lives, this
end ever begins, in this want, there can be no want: Aug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 13.
Nunquam erit homini peius in morte, quam vbi erit mors sine morte: Most
lamentable is it for that man which shall have a death without any death: whose
death shall ever live in pains, because his life was ever dead in sin. De
Ciuit. Dei lib. 19.
Ibi dolor permanet vt affligat, and natura perdurat vt sentiat, quia vtrumque
non deficit, nec poena deficiet: Sic ibi ignis co^sumit, vt se semper reseruet;
and sic tormenta augentur, vt semper remoueantur: and sic morientur vt semper
viuent: and sic viuent vt semper moriantur. Bern. in Medit. cap. 19.
There (says Augustine) does pain remain, that it might always torment, and
there does nature endure, that it might ever feel the pain: and because
neither of these can be wanting, therefore the plague can never have a ceasing.
O misery of all miseries, always to be dying, and yet never dead: always to
be in the consuming, and yet never consumed! what are your natures, O ye
tormentors, that ye are not wearied, ye torments that ye are not ended, ye
souls and bodies that ye are not consumed? Sutely you are always cruel to
them, because they were so cruel to crucify to themselves the Lord of life:
without doubt ye tormented, vos duri and indurati, and obdurati filij fuistis
Adami: you have been hard hearted, stiff necked, and of seared consciences,
your sins infinite, your iniquities malicious, and would you have God merciful
to stay the tormentors? you, whose stubble of iniquity could not be consumed
with the vehement flames of Gods love, would you now have ye infernal flames
to be wanting to you, or you to them? No, no, it is just that the hearts of
such as would not be mollified with the sweet continued dewes of Gods
blessings upon earth, should at length be so hardened that they should ever
endure the flames of fire in hell. And therefore the tormentors are never
wearied, the torments never ended, the tormented never consumed. It would be a
grievous bondage to be committed to the softest bed, to the sweetest garden, to
the fairest building all the whole life time: oh, what a horrible bondage is it
then, to be in an ugly, stinking, and irksome some pit of darkness, where he
shall have the devils tormenting him, even for ever and ever! If life could
end, if torments cease, or time could bring a period to their sufferings, that
hope that once they should be delivered, would a little ease them: but when
they have been tormented as many years as there are hairs on our heads, sands
on the shoares, and stars in the firmament, yet are they no nearer the ending
their miseries then when they began: for Christ has said they shall be
everlasting. And this is justice, that as their sins were infinite and our
God infinite, against whom they committed them, so they rejecting the saving
promise and grace offered unto them, should at last be punished with tortures
infinite, both for number and time of enduring. These are most fearful of
themselves, Considerations tormenting the minds of the damned.
Many are the thoughts which add to their misery, but these especially:

riches, glory, and pleasures which once they had, but now have lost, and have
found the contrary. They are gone down to the grave (says the Psalmist) and
of that they had, they have taken nothing with them: by how much more greater
were liberty, abundance, dainty diet: so much the more pinching, troublesome,
grievous, is scarcity, want and bondage to any: And therefore most grievous
to the damned that once abundantly enjoyed all things.

Omnes gehennae superat cruciatus carere bonis, quibus in potestate habuerunt
perfrui. This exceedes all the torments of hell (says Chrysostom) even the
thinking of that happiness, Chrysostom.
which (if they had received the saving promise) they might once have obtained.
But now what shall become of them (says Bernard) when that miserable condition
of being in hell, shall see it self deprived of all comfort, and being shut up
in utter darkness, shall undergo the censure of an everlasting
excommunication from the fellowship of Gods dear children?

Ierem. 8.
The summer is past, the harvest inned, the wheat placed in the garner of
glory, and the chafe committed to the flame of unquenchable fire. Once there
was a time for repentance, but now their is none: once this misery might have
been prevented Jn regard of Gods revealed will.
: but now neither eased nor ended. And therefore in Julian the Apostata and
other his associates, these words (never ended) fill up the full measure of woe
and sorrow unto them. Neither (in reason) can their lamentation help them,
licet enim stimulus sit poemtudinis, non est correctio voluntatis: Aug. de
fide, ad Petrum.
nec vnquam ab illis iniquitas ita culpatur vt iustitia vel diligatur vel
desideretur: For although there is in them some little fading touch of
repentance, yet is there no reformation of their unruly wills: neither is
there in them such a dislike of their sin, as that they can in least manner
love or desire yt which is good. And thus considering the place of the damned,
the tormentors, the number of their torments, their contrarieties, their
continuance, together with the circumstances increasing their miseries, we
cry out, woe worth the sin that causes such wretchedness, we will never
commit thee hereafter: avoid Satan, come under corrupted nature, cease ye
syrenicall songs of deceivable pleasures, we see your deceits, ye end of your
vile inclinations, the worlds pleasures are mere bewitchings, you al conspire
to make us children of wrath, as well as others: but by the grace of Gods holy
Spirit, we will cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the
Spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1.
and grow up to holiness in the fear of his name. This shall free us from
that which we see to be so infinite, so grievous, so everlasting: yea more
then that, this shall move our gracious God and merciful father, especially to
bless, keep, and deliver us in this life, yea, and to reward us with
everlasting happiness in the life to come: the dignity whereof being so
excellent, as it appears by the naked description, (and yet no heart can
conceive of the depth of a far more exceeding glory, to no mortal eye made
manifest,) needs must the benefit of beig of the number of Gods Church be
exceeding great and wonderful.

David says) Love ye the Lord al ye Saints. Nor does this worthy Prophet
teach any more, then he does practice himself. For finding Gods deliverances
to be wonderful, Psalm. 116.1.2.3.
and his ears open to his petitions, when the snares of death compassed him,
and the sorrows of the grave caught hold upon him, he cannot but break forth
unto the acknowledgment of this duty, I love the Lord because he has heard my
voice and my prayers: That is, compassed him about (as he says elsewhere) with
songs of deliverances. Exodus 21. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
When the Lord would excite his people to the keeping of the first and great
commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods but me: which (as Christ expounds
it in his answer to the demand of the Pharisaicall Lawyer,) is no other thing,
but to love the Lord with all our heart, Matthew. 22.37.
with all our soul, and withal our mind. His arguments of persuasion are taken
from his fatherly care and mercy unto them, saying that he was their God
which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage.
So that this is a special use to be made of Gods benefits and great care over
us, that when as he does superabound in blessings, we should abound in love,
the only sacrifice which God accepts, and that only duty which we may best
perform. Hoc praeceptum breue, leave, vtile, est: This lesson, to love God for
his benefits, is short, light and profitable. Short, that all may learn it,
none can complain of length or hardness: light, that the sick man in his bed,
the poor man in his want, the captive in his bondage, the prisoner in his
chains, and (that which is hardest) the rich man in his wealth without selling
his substance may learn to perform it. Profitable, none can complain of
losing thereby; nay who ever loved the Lord which has not thereby gained his
own soul, which is more then the world, and God himself, more then a
thousand souls? Nor do those benefits only, whereof we have an evident
sense and feeling move us to love the Lord, but even those also whereof we are
made partakers by their more remote operation, which being less sensibly
felt, as causes farther removed, Prouocations to make us love God.
are not so easily perceived by us, and yet continually admonish us to love
the Lord. Caelum and terra, and omniae quae in ijs sunt, ecce vndique mihi
clamant vt te amem domine. Heaven and Earth (says Augustine) and all things
therein contained, Clamant dupliciter: 1. Ostendunt dignitatem. 2. Ostendunt
bonitatem.
do make a continual cry round about me, that I should love thee O Lord. They
show thy worthiness, and declare thy bounty; such a world, such heavens, such
an ocean, such an earth, such spiritual, such earthly creatures, insensible,
sensible, reasonable, all wonderfully framed: Quocunque te vertis, veritas
vesti^ ijs quibusdam, quae operibus suis impressit, loquitur tibi, and te in
exteriora relabentem, ipsis exteriorum sormis intus reuocat. Aug. de Arb. lib.
Lord, how mighty, how wonderful, how wise art thou that made them! and
therefore worthy our love: and being thus made, thus to bless, to continue,
to increase, to multiply them, yea more, to fill us with them, (for thou have
said, Wherein have I grieved, or failed you? and we could not tell: thou have
said, What could I have done more to my vine then I have done? but we could
not justly complain,) and therefore thy bounty, thy superabunda^t bounty
must needs make us to love thee. Unto this love, mere nature excites us: son
the father: Pudeat ab exiguis enimalibus nos trahere mores. Seueca.
shall these follow the course of nature, and shall we degenerate? do these
love that they might live here, and shall not we love our Lord, our Master,
our Father that we might live eternally? Bern. Quod nisi per ipsum valuit
esse, sine ipso non potest sustineri.
Quisque ita conditus est vt ipsum necessario habeat protectorem, quem habuit
conditorem: Every one is so framed, that he must necessarily have him to be
his protector, whom he had to be his maker: because that which could not have
his being but from him, cannot be sustained but by him. Now God being this
sole protector, there is good reason why we should love him. A protector that
is wise, and can dispose for our good: omnipotent, therefore able to effect it:
merciful, and therefore will do it: just, and therefore will not decerue:
faithful, and therefore will not forsake: if man will ever choose an absolute
friend, why should not man (in reason) choose such a friend? Four things moving
to love others.
what can he desire that this blessed friend affoords not unto him? if
delight, there is pleasure at his right hand for evermore: if alliance, in
Christ he is thy gracious father: if present gain, thou art filled with his
benefits and compast with his deliverances: if future glory, thou art not
only attended with a guard of Angels in this life, Ama vnum bonum in quo sunt
omnia bona, and satis erit. August.
but shall further be crowned with everlasting glory in the life to come. And
therefore reason teaches that we should love God, such a father, so
delightful, so gainefull, so profitable to those that place their affections
upon him. And though these do continually crave our love, yet the riches of
his grace and mercy, do challenge it much more: they do move, but this
compels us to love him. The consideration of this being the fountain of all
Christian duties, yea giving life and taste unto them, and yet alas slenderly
regarded, and less performed, it will not be unprofitably (though perhaps
unfitly) annexed to this my purpose, to show Gods love to us, thereby to excite
ours to him again. Wherein consider the state we were in, vessels of wrath,
bondslaues to sin, to our own lusts, to Satan, of our selves castawaies for
ever: the state we now are in, vessels of glory, free denizens of heaven,
children of God, heirs of eternal happiness: how this is accomplished, John
3.16.
in that God sent his only begotten Son to redeem us from that fearful
misery, and to bring us to this exceeding glory: but how? by deposing his
crown of dignity, his glorious estate, his absolute honor, his perfect
joys, and so to become man in the flesh to undergo hunger, nakedness, want,
with other infirmities whereunto mankind is subject, sin only excepted. This
is wonderful love, but behold greater: he became Asham, (as Isaiah says) a
sacrifice for sin: he drew us (as Hosea says,) Hosea 11.4.
with the coards of man, that is, (as the Septuagint expounds it,) was
willingly bound with coards himself, that he might unloose the coards
wherewith we were tied. Ephesians. 2.18.
He redeemed us (as Paul says) with his blood shed on the cross: an
ignominious death, a fearful death, in which he underwent the fury of his
father, and the torments of hell both in soul and body, and all to free us
that were guilty, being guiltless himself. Thus he became a loving Noah, that
made an Arc of his own body to save us silly sinners, from drowning in the
pit of eternal perdition: thus he became a loving Pelican, that pierced his
own heart, that with his dearest blood we might be revived. It is observed,
that the Pelican having made her nest, and hatched up her young departs for a
little season, but in mean while, the serpent comes and poisons them all: the
Pelican perceiving it at her return, strikes the place against her heart,
washes them with the blood that issues, and after keeps them warm three
days, and so they are restored again. Christ is the Pelican, we his young,
Paradise the nest, Satan the Serpent, we are poisoned; Christ's heart is
stricken, (...), redemption: signifies a price given, therefore Paul, 1. Tim.
2. says that Christ has given (...), that is, a price, expressed by Paul
Ephesians. 1.7. to be his blood, 1. Pet. 1.19.
the blood issues, we are washed; he couers us that were dying with the wings
of his mercy, and so we are restored from death to life again. This
bloudshedding is that price which Christ gave for our redemption, a most
precious price, and of an exceeding value, to which, not silver nor gold, being
things corruptible, may once be compared. For it was pure blood stained with
no pollution of sin; and secondly, the blood of him that was the son of the
most glorious living God; Qui multa and gessit mira and protulit dura, nec
tantum dura sed etiam indigna: who (as Augustine says) did not only endure
tortures most wonderful, most grievous, but even such as were most
unbeseeming, and unworthy his person: for (as Bernard says) Habuit in dictis
contradictores, in factis obseruatores, in tormentis illusores, in morte
exprobatores: He had such as did contradict him in his sayings, observe him in
his deeds, mock him in his sufferings, reproach him in his death: He said he
was the Son of God; they said he was a blasphemer: By curing on the Sabbath,
he did that which was good; but they objected, he did that which was not
lawful to do: He was content as a servant to suffer for our sins; but they
in the bitterness of his pains, derided him with, hail master King of the
Jews: He submitted himself to the death, and they in this death cried, Thou
which destroyest the Temple, and buildest it again in three days, if thou be
the Son of the living God, come down from the cross and save thy self. And
thus in his sayings, deeds, sufferings and death, he had those which did
co^tradict, observe, deride and cast him in ye teeth. This being known, do you
not now know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 8.
that he being rich, for our sakes became poor, yt we through his poverty
might be made rich? And do you know this price given for our redemption, this
precious price, this exceeding price, in the giving whereof he underwent so
many miseries, so many torments, so many gain-sayings, so many observations, so
many mockings, so many scornings; and shall not these, not all these move us to
love him, yt bought us, Bernard.
and thus dearly bought us? O duri and indurati and obdurati filij Adami, quos
non emollit tanta benignitas, tam ingens flamma, tam feruens amator; O hard and
more then hard hearted sons of Adam, whom so great love, such flaming love,
so fervent a lover will not provoke, incense, nor move to love him! Behold him
on the cross, his head bowing to kiss thee, his arms to embrace thee, his
blood from the very heart, through hands, sides, and feet trickling down to
cleanse thee; heeres a sweet kiss, an humble kiss, a blessed kiss: by which
a barren ground yielding wholly weeds and brambles, is now made a garden of
most sauourie spices: in which heaven has stooped to earth, a King married a
beggar, yea more then all, God united to us, and we to him: through which,
death and destruction is abolished, and everlasting life and happiness procured:
And shall not all this move us to love him? I know all will answer, they love
the Lord: and, fie on him that loves not God, that thus deserves to be
beloved. But withal, Deuteronomy. 5.6. Matthew. 22.37. 1. Toto cord: 2. Tota anima: 3.
Tota mente: id est: 1. Jutellectu sine errore: 2. Voluntate, sine
contradictione: 3. Memoria, sine obliuione. Augustine.
thou must further learn to love him with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and this is that manner of loving which God requires.
And secondly, examine this love by the effects thereof, and thou shall find
few to love him fervently, many to love him coldly, infinite to love him
nothing at all. Touching the manner, (with all the heart, with all the soul,
with all the mind) it is (as Augustine says) to conceive of him in our minds
without any error: to obey him in our wills without contradiction, to lay him
up in our hearts without oblivion. Alias: 1. Sapienter, ne decepti: 2.
Dulciter, ne illecti: 3. Fortiter, ne oppressi. Bern.
Or (as Bernard says) with the heart, that is, wisely; with the soul, that
is, sweetly; with the mind, that is, strongly. Wisely, that we be not deceived
with the policy of Satan, and his crafty instruments. Sweetly, that riches,
pleasures, honor, by their sugared baits do not allure us. Strongly, that the
mockings of the scorners of Gods promises, or persecutions of Tyrants, do not
overcome us. And this is to love God with all the heart, with all the soul,
and with all the mind.

But I come to the effects of love, which are certain and many. Verus amor si
sit in affectu, necessario ostenditur in effectu: If true love be in the
affection, it ever shows it self in effecting. The fire yields heat or
smoke, and if neither, thou may say there is fire long enough, before men
will believe thee. This love is a fire, ( The fire kindled, says David, and at
last I spoke with my tongue) therefore if it yield not his effects in stronger
or weaker manner (say what we will) the love of God abides not in us.
Certain effects of loving God.
These effects are infinite, but I touch the chief, and leave the rest to our
due consideration.

Ye cannot love God and Mammon, says Christ. I account advantage, Philip. 3.7.
loss (says Paul) and all things dung, that I may win Christ: as if he
should say, These must be rejected before Christ can be loved. Where is your
love to God, you coueious Earth-wormes. Simile.
Duplicibus desiderijs nemo incedere potest: None can halt between two desires:
the eyes cast upon two things at once indifferently, behold neither perfectly.
But let them forsake the viewing of the earth, and it is a sign they behold
the heavens. And therefore I conclude with Gregory, Quantum frigescit quis a
curis seculi, tanto surgit ardentius in amorem Dei: By how much the more a man
forsakes that filthy vice of loving the world, so much the nearer he attaines
that blessed virtue of purely loving God.

Verborum abundantiam transmittit affectio: Philos.
It is a true rule, that our hearts are upon our delights, and much love sends
out many words. Christ the busband, every Christian espoused to him Consider
this, ye which always speak of your own matters. Jn Romans 8.
If a woman love her husband, she is ever talking and meditating on him in the
time of his absence: and put her by that subject upon any occasion, yet she
presently returns unto it again. This is verified in the Church: Cant. 5.
never satisfied but when she is talking and speaking of him. Therefore I
conclude with Chrysostom; Amantium mos est, de amato semper loqui: The lover
is ever meditating and speaking of the party beloved.

My soul thirsts after thee: with my soul have I desired thee. Isai. 26 9.
Romans 8.23.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: and if thou please to stay a while, yet I
desire to be dissolved and to be with thee. Mark this, ye which at no time
desire to die, nor Christ to come to Judgment.
And thus (as Bernard says) Anima amans, fertur votis, trahitur desiderijs:
The souls which love, are always wishing, and ever desiring; either that they
might go where the beloved is, or that the beloved would come to them.

Matthew. 21. Intrauit Jesus templum: Glos. Jngressus vrbem, primo adijt templum.
to hear it with reverence, and to lay it up in our hearts with all diligence:
to prefer it before our pleasures, before our profits: for therein is Gods
love known, and assured unto us; and thereby is ours incensed unto him. Psalm.
84. Psalm. 2.2. Psalm. 119.15. Psalm. 107. Luke 2. Act. 10.33. Act. 16.14. Act.
17.
And therefore such as snatch at small occasions to hinder them from hearing
Gods word, such as will busy their minds about any thing save on that thing,
such as will begin the day with any work, save with reading, hearing, or
meditating on Gods law; these show they are not his sheep, because they hear
not his voice, they are not of his household, because they first run not to
his home: Namque proprium boni filij est, primo currere ad domu^ patris: For it
is the property of a good and loving son (as Chrysostom says) its he first
place to run to the house of his father. Jn Matthew. 21.




love is most felt in their hearts, and when the heat of their love is most
incensed unto him (for persecutions are but bellows which blow the silly
sparks in us, and those strong flames in God) rejoice that they may show their
little love to God, and that God may extend the riches of his love to them. And
thus the Apostles having been beaten for preaching in Christ's name, departed,
Act. 5.
rejoicing they were counted worthy to suffer for his sake.

Necessary to be observed by Noblemens Chaplanes, and Attendants on great
Personages.
not casting pearls before swine, but keeping them within limits of their
calling, ever considering the time, the place, the person, and the occasion
offered. It is strange to see how many will be holy at home before their
Minister, before their religious Landlord; but if they come to company with
the wicked, if they aim at an office, if they depend upon some man's favor,
whether Atheist, or Recusant, presently they suit their behavior according to
his disposition, and so strengthen him in his sin, and prove themselves to be
time-pleasers, such as never can please God. But let Gods children learn that
they must show their love before Kings, and not be ashamed: God will have the
whole heart, and all the affections, they must neither be parted nor
dissembled: Ambr. in Hexam. The earthly master permits it not in his servant,
much less our heavenly Father in his children.
Quid enim nostro Creatore dignum referrimus, cuius cibo vescimur, and
dissimulamus iniurias? For what can we offer our Creator worthy his person, or
fit to be accepted, whilst we professing our selves his servants, feeding on
his food, and clothed with his liuories, do yet notwithstanding dissemble
the wro^gs and injuries which are offered unto him?

This is a certain effect of Gods Spirit.
surely then (and not until then) do such men love God: Ipse enim, Domine,
amat te, qui amat amicum in te, and pauperes and inimicos propter te: For he (O
Lord) does love thee, which loves his friend in thee, and the poor and his
enemies for thy sake.

Gratiarum actio opus Angelicum.
when the heart shall be ravished with his praise, and the tongue never ceasing
to laud his holy name, but that at midnight we rise up to praise him for his
righteous judgments, then may we say yt the love of God is shed in our hearts,
and yt from a sense and feeling thereof we render our love to him again.

Psalm. 119.136. Romans 6.19.
they labor a continual sanctification both of soul and body: In a word,
having been partakers of his rich love, of his superabundant love, of his
gracious promises, 2. Cor. 7.1. 1. Pet. 1.17. Psalm. 103.4.
they forth with cleanse themselves from al filthiness of the flesh, and of the
spirit, and grow up to holiness in the fear of the Lord. Can a servant love
his master, A strange love in Papists, yielding neither inward affection, nor
outvvard obedience.
and yet not labor to please him? a wife her husband, and yet in all honest
and lawful things cross him? A child his parents, and yet disobey them? A
subject his Sovereign, and yet rebel against him? It is impossible. Can we
then disobey God, reject all obedience, and cast his precepts behind our backs,
and yet say we love him? no, no: our sins are the soldiers that apprehended
Christ, that led him to judgment, that pleaded against him, that caused the
fury of his father, the torments of his soul, the thorns on his head, the
spitting in his face, the pearcing of his sides, y nailing of his hands, the
boaring of his feet, and the scoffings of the world (for though ye whole world
had combined to do this against him, Hebr. 6.6.
if we had not sinned, they could never have effected it:) can we then love
him, and yet retain our sins against him? Remember that as many as sin,
crucify to themselves the Lord of life. And shall we rebel against him,
laboring to platte a new crown of thorns upon his head, to dishonor him, to
rip up his wounds, and by our spears of blasphemies to pearce him through
again, and yet say we love him? If I profess love to any never so strongly,
Simile.
and yet when his back is turned, break his head with my weapon, let me
swear never so much that I stand affectioned to him, will you credit that I
love him? so many exclaim they love God, but when we behold their delight in
sin, and small care to serve him, we may undoubtedly conclude they are
infestuous enemies unto him: For this is Christ's rule, If you love me, keep
my commandments.

David had ascribed unto the Lord the power of breaking the bow, Psalm. 46.9.
of cutting the spear, and burning the chariots in the fire, Psalm. 115.3.
presently he inferres that man should be still, and know the Lord: And good
reason, for if God thunders, the earth melts away: Psalm. 46.7.
He is the Lord of hoasts, and can make an invincible army of his weakest and
basest creatures, 1. Cor. 10.22.
as of flies, frogs, or lice to pluck down the high looks of the most
proud and stiffenecked Pharaoh upon earth. Psalm. 52.6.7.
Therefore let no man trust in the multitude of his riches, in his wisdom, in
his own strength, but let every one see this and fear.

1. Tim. 4.
yt is, prayer and supplications, Luke 18.1. and 21.36. Act. 6.4. Romans 12.12.
Ephesians. 6.18. James 5.4. 1 Pet. 4 7. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
in and through Christ Jesus made unto him. And therefore the holy Scriptures
often excite to this duty of watching in prayers, of being instant in
supplications, of calling upon God at all times. Cur petere, quaerere, pulsare
nos compellit, etc. Why (says Augustine) does God enjoin us to ask, to
seek, to knock, since he knows what is necessary for us? because (says he)
he would that our desires should be exercised in prayers, whereby we might be
possessed of that which he has prepared to give us. The enemies are many, and
always giving the onset: the dangers great, the miseries infinite: but we are
weak, we are fools, not able of our selves to subdue, to prevent, to
withstand: for the enemy has entered our walls, and we have a kingdom
divided amongst our selves. Is there not good reason then, we should always
stand upon our spiritual guard, having evermore recourse to him, whose wisdom
must illuminate our understandings, whose mercies prevent our miseries, whose
strength subdue our enemies, and whose al upholding power cause us to stand?
Exodus 17.11. Hence note the strongest munitio^ of the land, to be the prayers
of Gods children.
As long as Moses prayed, Israel prevailed: but when he ceased, Amaleck had the
better. The reason is (as the Gloss says) Plus valet vnus sanctus orando,
quam innumeri peccatores praeliando, One holy man preuailes more by prayer,
then a thousand sinners by blows. Even so, as long as thou have recourse to
God by faithful prayer, thou shall prevail against Satan, things shall go
successively with thee; but if thou art failing in this duty, he will
prevail against thee, thou shall be crossed in thy desires, hindered in thy
purposes, and find it but a left handed action, whatsoever thou take in
hand: for although there be no apparent resistance, yet there is evermore an
inueterate corruption, and stinging poison going with the same, until there
be a purifying thereof, by the word of God, and by prayers. 1. Tim. 4.8.
The experience of this, that nothing goes successively without Gods blessing,
nor that God will bless any, but those which call upon him, (for though Bildad
did falsely assume of Job, Job 8.5.6. 2. Chron. 20.3.4. Nehem. 1.11. Nehem.
4.9. 2. King. 4.33.
yet he did truly auerre of God, that if a man pray unto him, then he will
make the habitation of the righteous prosperous) made Gods children that they
durst never take in hand any thing, until before hand they had sent up their
supplications and prayers to God, for a blessing upon it. Neither was it
performed slightly, but with great devotion, and a fervent desire: neither
seldom, but often: Dan. 6. Luke 2.37.
good Daniel prays thrice a day: David, day and night: Anna is always busied
in supplications, James that servant of God is never well but when he is
serving on his knees: so that (as the Ecclesiastical history reports) they
were like unto camels knees in hardness. But Lord where shall we find such a
Daniel, such a David, such an Anna, such a James? Surely let me only appeal to
the small comfort men have in their proceedings, to their unquiet rests,
troubled actions, disturbed minds, and vnpacified consciences, and then we
shall easily conclude (without which they will not be induced to believe it)
that all this comes to pass, because they rush into their businesses, as the
horse into the battle, never praying to God for a blessing, by whose power
they are effected, by whose wisdom they are disposed, and by whose mercy
they turn to our good.

they come to the heavens) and therefore their supplications are to no purpose:
and by consequence not to be used.



Greg. in Dial.
since they will never hearken unto his voice, that early and late, day and
night, does call unto them. If I shall behold iniquity (says David) the Lord
will not hear me: Greg. in Moral. Isai. 1.15. Prou. 1.28.
Tunc cor nostrum fiduciam in oratione accipit, cum sibi vitae prauitas, nulla
contradicit: So that then only (as Gregory says) there is hope we shall be
heard, when our lives do not plead against us, as fast as our tongues do for
us. But if the cry of our sins do drown the voice of our prayers, or
whilst thou pleadest for thy self, there are thousands that plead to more
reason against thee; how should God which hears not sinners, hear thy
prayers, or grant thy desires? And thus the prayers of the wicked being dead in
their sins, become as the stone Diocodes, which laid to the mouth of a dead
man, does then only (as it is reported) lose his virtue.



Seruat tibi Deus quod non vult cito dare, vt tu discas magna magnopere
desidorare: God does all this while reserve his blessings for thee, because
thou might crave great matters, Augustine.
with great desires. In which case, non negat sed commendat: God does not deny
his mercies but commend them unto us; Diu enim desiderata, dulcius obtinentur:
For that which is longest desired, is sweetest when it is possessed.

sends want: when they ask liberty, sends imprisonment, and so in other
particulars: And wherefore then should they be so tied to the calling upon him?

Aug. Super virtus in infirmitate perficitur.
Quid obsit vel prosit, Medicus nouit, non aegrotus: That wise Physician knows
what will profit or hurt us, 2. Cor. 15.
not we that are grieved: And therefore, Aug. sermon. 54.
audit suos Deus ad necessitatem, non ad voluntatem: God hears his children
according as their need requires, and not as they desire. A child will often
crave a knife that would hurt him, but the wise father will put a book into his
hand that should profit him. The receipt of the Physician is often contrary to
the requests of the patient: Simile.
yet we follow the direction of the one, and restrain the desires of the
other: Shall we admit of this in the case between the Physician and us, (in as
much as we know the imperfections of the sick man's desires, and hope of the
skill of the Physician) and shall we not approve of the same in our
supplications unto God, in the case between him and us, he being approved to
be that wise and perfect Physician, and we manifested to be fools and
imperfect in all things? Israel desired to have a King, and was heard; Satan to
tempt Job, and was heard; the devils to enter into ye swine, and were heard:
but when Paul desires his persecutions to be removed, Gods answer is, My grace
is sufficient for thee: yet herein God was a gracious father unto him, and an
angry Judge unto them. So that Gods mercy consists not in the giving what we
desire, but in the bestowing what is best for our good. And in this sense God
never fails his children, if in faith from a pure heart, with a fervent desire
they incessantly call upon him.

effect any thing, rise we never so early, and go we to bed never so late,
except he gives the blessing, the rich are herein taught not to insult over
their poor brethren, but to hold themselves, by how much the more they have
received upon earth, to be so much the more engaged unto God in heaven. He is
the effecter, we are but his means: he is the owner, we are but stewards:
seeing then we possess nothing, but to the use of another, nor obtain any
thing but by free gift, why should we be proud of that which another has
wrought, or boast of that which is not our own? yet it is strange to see how
pride does increase with riches, and arrogancy with honor: Isai. 16.6.
but let Moab know that his strength is not as his pride, for God that exalted,
Prou. 29.23.
will bring him down. The way to honor is to be humble in the spirit: and
the strongest building, is when humility is made the foundation. Would thou
be great? repute thy self small: Augustine.
Vis magnam fabricam construere celsitudinis? de fundamento cogita humilitatis.
What is it to dwell in the clefts of the rock, to keep the height of the
hill, to make the nest as high as the Eagle, Ier. 49.15.16. Psalm. 89.11. Isai.
2.11.
if all this while the pride of thy heart shall deceive thee? shall not God
that always resists the proud, bring down thy high looks, make thee small
among the nations, and despised among the people? Augustine.
Sine humilitate excelsa apprehendere, est sine radice auras petere: ruina hoc
est, non incrementum. To attain an high estate without humility, is to grow
to an high tree without any root, which is rather a grievous ruin, then a
prosperous increase. For where pride and an high mind as mistresses go
before, Prou. 16.18.
destruction and downfall, their never failing attendants, do always follow
after. Surely, if the mighty men would think how much they are tied unto God
for their riches and honor received, and what a strict account they must
render in the day of the Lord, they should think the time too short, to be
thankful, too short to set forth his honor that gave them, too short for the
preparing of themselves that their account might be blameless before him; much
less should they find time to meditate on that which makes them upon a
pretended (and not just) occasion to insult over others. But sure, howsoever
men are failing in this durie (as Lord who^ do not these things make proud, if
thou do not humble the^ by thy blessed Spirit?) Prou. 18.3.
yet let them know, that contempt is the badge of the wicked, and scorning the
mark of the vile man, whereby extolling himself, debasing the poor, and
boasting of his wealth, they are more exalted, he is dejected, and his
possessions prove dispersed: Cito diuitiae dissipantur, Superbia Angelum secit
Diabolum: humilitas hominem deum. August.
si ventum superbiae patiantur: Riches are but dust, which are then most
subject to be dispersed, when a blast of pride shall blow upon them. A wise
king seeing riches or honor bestowed on his subjects to be misimploied, does
grieve that he gave them: but if they use them well, he is excited to give
more: Cito benum amittitur nisi a largiente custo diatur. Greg.
so ye best way to peruent the taking away of that we have, is to eschew pride,
which angers him that gave al: and the best way of increasing either riches or
honor, is by humility to excite him to give more; for this is an effect of his
Justice to resist ye proud: and a work of his mercy, to give to ye humble.

Jnuidia est dolor soelicitatis alieuae. August.
difficile est in prosperis inuidia carere, sola miseria caret: It is hardly
seen that men should want some to envy their prosperity, but adversity has
this privilege, that none repine at her: but as the great men are taught not
to insult, so the meaner not to repine; for God that gave the higher estate to
the one, gives also the lower to the other: both of these agreeing with his
heavenly wisdom, and that excellent order, which in all things by his divine
power, is successively maintained: for where there is not the superior and
inferior, the ruler and the ruled, the great and the small, the more excellent
and the meaner; there can neither be good order, nor continued succession: and
therefore God has ordained in all his creatures, that some in honor and
dignity should exceed other, and that some should have (being furnished from
himself to that purpose) power and authority over other. Amongst the heavens,
some are higher, some lower, the stars exceed in dignity, every bird
cannot be a Phoenix, an Eagle, or a Faulcon: all fly not alike swift, so are
not alike high; as some breed in valleys, so some on mountains; as some in
cedars, so some in shrubs: upon the earth, every flower cannot be a lilly,
every tree a stately oak, every stone a rubie, so they should be less worth,
and less regarded: amongst beasts, all are not lions; amongst fishes, all are
not whales. If the wisest man on earth frame a house, he will not make every
room alike, every camber shall not have hangings of orize, nor every one be
garnisht with a cubbord of plate. If in these things we hold it an excellent
order, making both for their dignity, and for their continuance; why should
the poor repine at the state of the rich, the inseriour at the superior,
desiring to be equal with him? In the frame of a man, all members have not
the like place, all the like dignity; if all were head, al eyes, all mouth, it
would be a monster, no more a wonder: so in a commonwealth, (which the nearer
it comes to the proportion of man, the more excellent it is,) if all were
heads, all rulers, al rich, surely there would follow a confusion of all
things: for the corrupt inclinations of our hearts that suffer us not to be
quiet when we are mean, would without doubt stir us up to be troublesome
when we are mighty: In as much as those which in their mean estates envy
their superiors, when they come to be advanced will never endure their equals.
But these men must know that since abundance, honor, superiority, are effects
of Gods Providence, therefore in no wise they must envy them: If God will make
Jacob most of all to respect Joseph, shall his brethren therefore conspire
against him? If God will be abundant in bestowing (since he gives thee more
then thou deseruest) shall thy eye be evil, Matthew. 20.
because he is good? but (alas) we are stricken with an acrisie: envy has
made us without judgment: if we saw what an excellent estate God has given
to every one, Reasons to move us not to repine.
( been enim scit coelestis Medicus quid nobis daturus sit ad consolationem,
and quid subtracturus ad exercitationem: is to be ministered to every patient,
and whereof he is to be restrained,) if we regarded the necessity of rich and
poor, of superior and inferior: if we considered the meanest estate as
compared with his inferior, and balanced with our unworthiness; the silliest
soul must then needs esteem his estate happy, and God infinite rich in mercy
unto him. Sicut rubigo ferrum, sic inuidia anima^ in qua nascitur corrumpit: A
great folly, to make that a means of blinding us, which is ordained to
enlighten us.
As rust eats the iron, so does envy the soul of him that retains it, says
Basil: Men's inuidi, dum de alieno bono affligitur, de radio solis obscuratur:
The mind of the envious man, (says Gregory) whilst it is disturbed at
another man's good, Inuidia Siculi, non inuenere tyranni maius Tormentum. Horat.
becomes as the eyes of him that is blinded with gazing on the Sun. So men
that envy the prosperity of others, hurt not the envied, but themselves which
envy them. For envy (says Solomon) is the rotting of the bones. Prou. 14.30.
The wisest course then is never to hate any, but ever to love all: Hanc
virtutem habet charitas, vt sine labor nostro, aliena bona nostra facit: This
virtue has love (says Augustine,) that it makes those things which are none
of ours, without any pains to become ours. But above all, look upon true
riches, view that never fading glory, Qui faucibus inuidiae carere desiderat,
illam haereditatem appetat, quam numerus possidentium non angustat: He which
will be free from repining and envying, let him desire (says Augustine) that
inheritance and labor for those riches, which none can engrose, nor all the
world diminish. The former being considered, and this performed, we shall of
necessity say, Return unto thy rest, Psalm. 116.7.
O my soul, for the Lord has been beneficial unto thee.

Simile.
are often beyond ye reach of the mean subjects capacity; that which is
convenient with them, seems needless to him; and that which they find and
know to be a work of necessity, therein (peradventure) he can see no reason
at all. Yet are their works to be reverenced, his understanding faulted, and
so himself justly silenced. So stands the case between God and us: he is
wisdom, we are ignorance; he is justice, we of corrupted judgments: and
therefore though we see no reason in his works, yet we must not dare to
censure him of disorder in his government, nor of injustice in his dealings.
Job 21.22.
Shall any teach God knowledge, who judges the highest? What if Job see the
wicked live, wax old, and grow in wealth? what if their houses are peaceable
without fear, and the rod of God is not upon them? Gregory.
Vitulus mactandus liber ad pascua mittitur: The ox that is for the butchers
shambles, has liberty to feed fat in the meadows: and he himself concludes,
that God will divide their lives in his wrath, and they shall suddenly go
down to the grave. What if the ways of the wicked prosper (as Jeremy says),
what if they be in wealth that rebelliouslie transgress? Desperato aegro
omnia concedit Medicus, to him which is sick unto death the Physician will
give leave to eat or drink any thing: Ierem. 12.
and therefore himself concludes, that such are prepared for the day of
slaughter: what if they which work wickedness, are set up, and they which
tempt God taste not of dangers (as Malachy says)? Malach. 3.
what if the wicked does compass about the righteous? what if wrong judgment
proceeds against them, Habak. 1.
(as Habacuck says) yet the conclusion is, that the East wind shall be before
the faces of these persecutors, and they shall gather captivity as the sand.
Therefore although God does thus bestow his blessings on the wicked, defer the
account, and suffer them in their sins, yet there is no disorder in as much
as his mercies proportion out their miseries, and his deferring is no omitting,
but an augmenting of their punishments. What if the righteous are continually
fed with the bread and water of affliction? what if they are persecuted,
imprisoned, beaten? Gregor.
Seruandus iugo premitur, the sheep reserved for store, must feed in bare
commons: and the ox which shall live, must learn to bear the yoke. So Gods
children must bear the cross, infinite are the commodities it brings in this
life, together with assurance of glory in the life to come. Nullus ergo de
flagello murmurat, nisi qui causam percussoris ignorant: Gregor.
Therefore no man murmures at correction, but such as know not why men are
corrected, nor what good it procures.

And thus neither the righteous nor wicked can take exception at Gods dealings,
for his High Commissioners, Mercy and Truth, are ever set together, ministering
true justice and judgment to his people.

Men must not sacrifice to their nets, that is, attribute any thing to their
own wit, strength or endeauours.
but his good pleasure and sole grace, moving him thereunto) we are taught
continually to be thankful to the Lord, for this his wonderful care and
Providence over us. Thus David making a catalogue of Gods deliverances, and
mercies to his people, ever and anon does wish, Psalm. 107.
that Therefore they would praise his holy name for his goodness, and declare
the wonders he has wrought for the children of men. Yea every Psalm is a
Psalm of praise, Colos. 3. Colos. 4.
and every verse does declare a thanksgiving, showing that we ought continually
to be exercised in praising of him, that is always in bestowing blessings upon
us. And therefore Paul wishes, Ephesians. 5.
that both at all times, and in all things we should be thankful. It is
strange that man should be silent in praising of God, when as every work of
God (as Gregory says) does excite thee to praise him. Do the works of God
please thee? then be thankful for them, and as God has showed his love to
thee, so by praising his holy name, declare thine to him again, lest (as
Augustine says) in those things wherein he has pleased thee, August. conf.
lib. 4.
thou by ingratitude should displease him. This is a heavenly work to
praise the Lord: this makes silly men upon earth to be saints in heaven: ^ern.
in Cant.
Vae tacentibus de te, (Domine) quoniam loquaces muti sunt: Conf. lib.
Woe unto them (says Augustine) whose ingratitude has silenced them from
praising of thee, for though they babble much, yet they are dumb. Sed foelix
lingua quae non nouit, nisi de diuinis taxere sermonem: But that is a happy
tongue, which (as Hierome says) can tell how to frame it self to no thing, but
to praise the Lord. August. ad Aurelium.
We can cartie nothing better in our minds, utter nothing better with our
mouths, express nothing better with our pens: no sentence so short and
pithie in speaking, none so sweet in the hearing, none so plain in the
understanding, none so profitable in the uttering. It moves God to give thee
blessings, which the wicked never enjoyed; and it causes him to take from the
wicked, and to give unto thee. Quod dedit gratis, tulit ingratis: That (says
Augustine) which God has bestowed on the thankful, he has taken away from
the unthankful. Hebr. 13. Apoc. 19.
This is that sacrifice that God ever approues, for it always smelles sweet
in his nostrils: and it is that sacrifice which Satan mislikes, for it ever is
offensive unto him: I may say of that, Bern. in Cant.
as Bernard of our loving of God, If thou do watch, Satan cares not, because
he never sleeps; If thou do fast, Satan cares not, because he never eats
any thing: but if thou art thankful to God for his mercies, this is it that
grieves him, because thou performest that unto God, being a silly creature
upon earth, which he could not perform, being an Angel in heaven. And thus
you see that al Gods blessings require thankfulness, it is commanded by God,
pleasing in his sight, profitable to us, and troublesome to Satan: Therefore let
men praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders be has wrought
for the children of men. If you ask me in what things we must praise the Lord:
my answer is, in heart, in tongue, in conversation, in all things we take in
hand: Praise him from the ground of the heart (says David:) It must be begun
in the heart, uttered with the tongue, and declared in the life; the tongue may
praise him, and it is but babbling, while the heart thinks not on it: the mouth
may bless him, but it is but abominable, if our lives shall curse him: Plus
vale^t opera, quam verba: Deeds are of more force then words: a man may praise
him with ye tongue in this world, yet never praise him in the world to come:
but he which praises him (says Augustine) both with life and with tongue,
shall be sure to praise him with the heavenly Angels in the life to come. If
you ask with what affection: with all alacrity and joy of the heart. David's
Psalms must be sung with David's spirit. If in what place? before kings and
not be ashamed: If how long: always: Dignum est semper gratias agere, quia
deus nunquam cessat benefacere. Gregor.
Since God never leaves to multiply his blessings upon thee, thou must never
cease to praise him: therefore David is not contented with the day, Ingratitudo
est ventus siccans fontem pietatis, rorem misericordiae, fluenta gratiae. Bern.
but at midnight he will rise and praise the Lord for his righteous judgments.
Ingratitude is a nipping Eastwind, drying up the fountain of godliness, the
dewes of mercy, and sweet streams of grace: and howsoever the wicked are
content to devour Gods blessings, as the swine the acornes from the tree, never
looking to the author of them, yet, it becomes the Saints to be thankful:
howsoever our servant shall fail in thankfulness, yet we cannot endure our
sons to be vngrarefull.

Amos 3.6.
which the Lord has not wrought, since it is he that sends war, that
casts down, that corrects at all times, that makes the rod great or small,
and strikes the blow sharp or gentle at his pleasure, we are hereby taught
patiently to endure all afflictions that ever befall us. If we endure, Romans
2.7. Hebr. 10.36.
God offers himself as a loving father unto us: but if we resist, we lose the
reward, and cause him to strike the more sharply. If the body suffer, and
the mind resist, we rebel in what we can, and suffer what we cannot help:
Non qualia sed qualis quisque patiatur, interest: De ciuit. Dei.
It skilleth not what we suffer, but how we suffer, says Augustine: Gregory
shows the reason, Sine ferro and slammae Martyrs esse possumus, non sine
patientia: The sword or the flame makes not the Martyr, but the patience of him
that shall suffer. Hebr. 6.22. Apoc. 13.10.
And therefore the Scriptures bid us not to follow the sufferings of the
fathers, but their faith and patience in suffering: and thus a true faith and
meek patience are ever joined together: David that said, I believed, and
therefore I spoke: says also, I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou
Lord did it. Sicut acunabulis Ecclesiae fuit iniquitas premens, sic
iustitia patiens, says Hierome: As from the infancy of the Church, there was
evermore iniquity oppressing, so there was a holy Patience enduring: that
which he condemns in the wicked is cruelly in persecuting; that which he
commends in the godly, is a meek patience in suffering. What should I urge the
several reasons to enduce us unto patience? The infinite precepts, Matthew.
21.19. Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 4.2. Colos. 1.12. 1. These. 5.14. Titus 2.2.
the spirit of God supporting and co^forting us, the benefits of the cross,
the glory of God, the salvation of our souls? these have bin partly touched,
and they are subjects commonly handled, and therefore (I hope) well known unto
us: Afflictiones praecedentium consideremus, and non erunt grauia quae
ieleramus. Gregor.
I desire only therefore that Christians would enter a double meditation:
first of Christ, for if the consideration of the Fathers and Martyrs of the
Church, will cause us to endure afflictions with patience, shall not much more
the consideration of the sufferings of Christ Jesus my gracious Redeemer, who
is, tam speculum patiendi, quam primium patientis: Bern. in Cant.
as well a perfect glass to show me how to suffer, as a sure reward for those
which do suffer? And though all his life was subject to many miseries, The
first consideration of Christ.
yet let us especially behold him on the cross, that sight is most effectual
unto us: behold him then, his head crowned with thorns, his cies blindfolded,
his ears filled with reproaches, his mouth with vinegre and gall, his face
polluted with spitting, his cheeks bruised with buffeting, his knees
shiuering, his shoulders shaking, his heart grieved, his body and soul
tormented, his ioints racked, his hands and seete nailed, his sides pierced.
Lord will not the servant suffer willingly for his master, when his master
has patiently endured all this for him? Nihil adeo grave est, quod non
aequanimiter toleretur, si Christi passio ad memoriam, reducatur. Gregor.
has not the righteous suffered for the unrighteous, and shall not the unjust
for the just? has he willingly endured all for thee, and wilt not thou
patiently endure a little for him? was he content to suffer wholly for thy
good, and walt not thou in patience suffer for thy own? but howsoever
afflictions are hard to flesh and blood, yet nothing is so grievous which will
not patiently be borne, if these torments of Christ be called to remembrance:
these were non tantum mira and dura, sed otiamindigna; Gessit mira and pertulit
dura, nec tantum dura, sed etiam indigna. August.
not only wonderful and grievous, but (considering Christ's person) unworthy
to be suffered: but that thou being a sinner, should be chastised for thy
sin, and corrected that thou might amend, it is no indignity at all.
Exodus 15.
Therefore if the water of affliction seem bitter, cast in that sweet tree,
the cross of Christ, and it will be pleasant unto thee. The serpent lift up
in the wilderness, Numb. 21.9.
cured those which loockt upon it: so though men are stong with the fiery
persecutions of tyrants, yet if they behold Christ Jesus lift up upon the
Cross for our sins, we shall not die but live and possess our souls in
patience. 2. Consideratio of our selves.
Non sine flagello exist, qutisine peccato venit, and tamen patiens erat: He
which came into the world without sin, went not out of the world without the
whip, and yet he patiently endured the same, showing that we which came into
the world full of sin, and ever since lived vilely, should deservedly look
for correction, and when it comes, endure it patiently. And this is the second
consideration, namely of our selves. A man faults not the sharpness of the
Chirurgions knife, when he considers the corruption of his sore, and that it
must needs be launced: the sick patient willingly takes in the bitter potion,
when he finds his disease grievous: so if we consider the corruption of our
souls, we desire to be launced with the knife of correction: if we consider
how sick we are of sin, we will willing lie take in the bitter potions of
affliction, that as a preparatiue, they may make way for that precious balm of
the blood of Christ to cure us. These things considered, if the Lord should
kill us, yet let us trust in him: if thy house shall be a place of correction,
and that from the day of birth, to the day of death, if the yoke shall not be
taken from thy neck, nor the staff from thy shoulders, yet endure patiently,
willingly and gladly. Sola suga victoriam perdis: moriendo non perdis.
This privilege has Patience, that although it is always in the combat, yet
it ever returns victor. And therefore Vincentius said to Datianus, that he
could prevail more by being persecuted, then this other by persecuting. Nor
does it only triumph in every thing, but also gain by all things. The
barrenness of the field does fill his barnes, and when there are fewest
grapes, Manifested in Job.
his cellers are most full: when these takes from him, he adds unto him: when
the fire burns his cottage, it builds him a castle. And thus does Patience
conquer and gain in all things, and in and through him, Gods children shall
gain here, and triumph ever in the life to come.

Psalm. 50.15. Numb. 11.1. Ios. 7.7. 1. Sam. 7.6. 2. Sam. 24.10.
Call upon me in the time of thy trouble, and I will bear thee, and thou shall
glorify me. This is the practice of the Church: Moses for himself and the
Israelites, Joshua for himself and the people: Samuel, David, Ezechias, Asa,
Esras, Nehemiah, leremias, Daniel, 2. King. 19.15. 2. Chro. 14.11. Esdr. 8.21.
Nehem. 1.11. Dan. 9.3. Mark. 1.4. Matthew. 8 5. Act. 9.40. Lament. 5.1. Matthew.
26.39. Prou. 18.10.
the Leper, the Centurion, Peter, the whole Church, and Christ himself when any
afflictions befell them, evermore had recourse unto God that inflicted them.
This is grounded upon reason: He makes the wound and binds it up, he
smites, and his hands make whole: therefore seek unto him: his name is a
strong tower, and therefore he can help: he respects us as the father his
son, as the mother her infant, and therefore when the righteous run unto
him, whose mercy and power meet together, they shall be sure to be exalted.
He is that wise Physitio^ which knows our diseases, which has a world full of
potions, if he please to use them, which can help us without them, if it seem
good unto him, which is as ready to come, Seekers unto witches condemned.
as we are to send, which is never so detained by others, but that he can
attend us, nor comes to us for his own gain, but for our profit: and therefore
in all our afflictions let us seek unto him. Hence is condemned that vile and
damnable practice of many, who for the curing of themselves, saving of their
cattle, or finding of that which is lost, will presently forsake God, and have
recourse unto the devil by his servants the Witches: which how foolish and
wicked it is, may appear by that which has been said already, as also by
these reasons following: Ask no question of the dead, but turn unto the law
and the testimontes. Nor does God only forbid it, but also severely punish it:
Leuit. 20.6. Manifested on Theodotus Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 14 and on Buddas:
Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 17.2
If any turn after such as work with Spirits, and after Southsayers, to go a
whoring after them, then will I set my face against that person, and cut him
off from among his people. Secondly, Constantius, Can. 26. Quest. 5.
of the Extrauagants, and the most commendable and worthy laws of this
Commonwealth. Thirdly, exercised, in as much as the inticer and setter of a
robbery, is as ill and as punishable as he that commits it. Nero caused
Tyridates King of Armenia to send into the East for men to instruct him in
Magic.
Nero and Julian the Apostata were very mighty, and exceeding rich, but
becoming studious that way, fell from their great abundance to exceeding want.
Satan was most beholding to these of all other, and therefore if he would
help any, then undoubtedly them: and if they could not profit themselves, then
much less others yt should seek unto them. If we find not the experience of
this in some things, yet in othersome: and if not at first, yet certainly
afterward. Job, he must ask leave, and after he had obtained it, cannot go
beyond his commission: yea all the witches and devils in hell are subject to
the prayers of the faithful: for though Simon Magus fly aloft, yet he falls
suddenly at the prayers of Peter. Since then their works tend to destruction,
and that they are tied as the bear at the stake that cannot exceed his
chain, except he be loosed; nor hurt, but when he is vnmuzzelled, yea he is
subject to be whipped himself at the pleasure of his keeper: what extreme
madness is it for people to give themselves unto witchcraft? what wonderful
folly to seek unto Beelzebub the god of Acaron, whereas there is an
Alomnipotent, most wise, most gracious, and merciful God in Israel? 2. King.
1.3.
Sure I know no reason, except they hold themselves better acquainted with
Satan, then with God, and therefore will have recourse soonest unto him. But
howsoever this I am sure, that because they receive not the love of the truth,
therefore God sends them strong delusions. 1. Cor. 5.5.
But it may be objected:

Empusae, Lamiae, Marmolyciae, Satyri, Incubi and Succubi (as Augustine
notes). De ciuit. Dei. lib. 8.
Eleazar made demonstrations before Vespasian and his sons Titus and
Domitian: and Solomon himself, De Antiquit. lib. 8.
as Josephus writes, made a book of Exorcismes, and therefore why may they not
be used at this time?

That which was lawful then, Solution.
may be unlawful now, in regard of the circumstance of time: then was the Law,
now the Gospel; then were diuinations, but they ceased at the coming of
Christ; the^ were many things suffered in much darkness, but at the coming of
the light they were quite expeld. Much less reason is it the^, that things
which were unlawfully used in times past, should be continued now. Touching the
latter part of the objection, take the answer of Peter Martyr: I dare not
(says he) deny the truth of the story, neither will I affirm it to be true:
only I think that it pleased God to grant such a thing to the Jews for that
time, or else that Solomon writ that book when he fell from the worship of the
true God, unto the adoring of the gods of the Gentiles: for that there were
such Exorcismes used unto the Apostles time, it appears by the history of
Sheua: Act. 19.13.
but that such abominations should be detected, men allured to hate them, and
to love the truth, it appears plainly by that history recited. Therefore
howsoever the wicked put their trust in witches, and seek to Soothsayers,
Psalm. 20.^.
yet let the righteous trust in God, and call upon his name, for he is the
sole tower of defense, and they which run unto him shall be sure to be
exalted. Prou. 18.10.
And thus much for the uses arising from this doctrine: God by his heavenly
providence, directs, governs and disposes all things. I proceed unto an
use or two from his means of governing, and secondly from this, that he is the
inflicter of all punishment.

Uses from Gods manner of governing.
In that God in his government of the world does commonly use means himself,
and has also ordained that we should use them, David knew he should be
delivered from his enemies, and settled by God in his kingdom, yet uses means
for his deliverance: Paul knew he should come safe to the shore, The rejecting
of lavvfull means, is a tempting of God.
yet advises the mariners to stand to their tacklings: Ezechias that he
should be restored, yet uses a plaster of figs: Deuteronomy. 6.16. Matthew. 4.7.
and yet it is strange to see how many men will foolishly omit, and
presumptuouslie reject the means of their maintenance, and daily preservation
which they are commanded to use, and wherein there is not a special revelation
of Gods will and purpose: not remembering that he which labors not for his
family is worse then an Infidel, and denies the says. The error of
Alcibiades teaching the contrary, (Eusebius. lib. 5. ca. 3.) most vile and
wicked.
But men do more naturally savor of the flesh then of the spirit, and
therefore in things that concern the body they will be very provident, and in
this case they least offend: but in the means that concern the saving of the
soul, they are too too remiss, if not wholly negligent. Witness the
lamentation of the ways to Sion, their negligent hearing of Gods word in the
Church, their seldom reading and meditating of it at home, their not calling
upon God, with the omitting of receiving the holy Communion: all which do
testify that they are either worse then beasts in not respecting their souls,
or that they are fools in relying on Gods secret will and purpose, and in
mean while reject that which is revealed unto them. These men must know that
these things being means ordained by God, to beget faith, to work repentance,
to mortify sin, to live holily, without which we cannot be saved, that the
neglect of these, is the neglect of salvation also. And therefore as God does
predestinate to salvation, so he does predestinate withal the using of the
means whereby men shall be saved, as the word ((...)) in the original,
plainly teaches. And howsoever we dare not teach that the omitting of these
things is the cutting us off from salvation, because God is not tied unto
outward means; yet we truly affirm that the contempt of the^, knowing them to
be means of salvation ordained by God, does cut men off that they cannnot be
saved. Now if it be an omitting of the means to have a price in our hands to
buy them, and not to have the hearts to disburse it, whether our seeking of
occasions to be absent from the word and blessed Communion, whether our
backwardness to come when we are so often invited, whether our small regard
in hearing, and less in practicing, be an omission or a contempt, I leave to
God and men's consciences to determine: only this I am sure, it is too nice a
distinction to stand upon in matters of salvation: the failing in the one, is a
sign of falling into the other; and in thee that art not able to answer an
idle thought, it will be Christian wisdom to prevent so vile a deed. But
let these men remember, that since the Law leads us to Christ, The Gospel is
the power of God to salvation.
and the Gospel begets faith and repentance, comforts us in adversity,
humbles us in prosperity, declares Gods love unto us, shows how we should
love him, reueales his power, our weakness, his wisdom, our folly, his
grace, our natural misery, enlightens our dark understandings, informs our
judgments, confirms our faith, reformes our lines; that therefore these
blessed means with others ordained in them, are sole declarers of the way to
happiness, excite us to walk in it, who otherwise would not enter it, and
being entered, do keep us in the same. And therefore as the man that desires
to be at a city, shall never come at it, if he reiecte the ways leading to
the same: so many fools wishing after many days spent in the lusts of their
flesh, to be at new Jerusalem, and yet all their life time rejected the ways
that God appointed for the leading unto it, will rather despair in what they
desire, then have any assurance of their coming thither. Therefore howsoever
the wicked and foolish desire to die the death of the righteous, and at last to
be partakers of their blessedness, and yet reject the means whereby they
should attain it, (like men that desire their health, and yet are never well
but when they fall into surfets) yet let the righteous have these blessed
means evermore in high estimation, let them be sweeter to them then the honey
and honey comb, for by them Gods servants are taught, and in keeping them
there is great reward.

hook in the nostrels of Zenacherib, make a little oil and meal a long time
to nourish his children: he can feed them by the fowls of the heaven, he can
cause the irons to fall off, and the gates of the prison to open of their own
accord, he can muster an army of his meanest creatures able to subdue the
might Princes: therefore, since this mighty and fearful God is one and
the same, whose mercy is not diminished nor his arm of power shortened, there
is good cause why we should always hope in him, and then especially when we
are most destitute of apparent help and comfort. Luke 15.
The father will never declare his love so evidently to his son, as when
others do oppose themselves most strongly against him: and shall not God both
in power and mercy infinite, at such times especially regard his children?
Bern. in Cant.
Nihil omnipotentiam deiclariorem reddit, quam quod omnipotentes facit omnes,
qui in se sperant. Nothing more declares the omnipotency of God, then Gods
making those to be conquerers in all things that put their trust in him. And
therefore says David, They trusted in thee, Psalm. 18.
and were not confounded: No marvel, O Lord, for thou art the rock, the
shield, the fortress, the horn, the refuge, the strength of thy people, how
then can they fall? 1. John 3.
thou art just in thy promises, how then can they be destitute of aid, when
thou have promised, that if they ask, thou will minister it unto them? thou
have elected them of thy grace, Luke 11.
and redeemed them of thy rich mercy, how then since thou have given the
greatest and the dearest, should thou deny the less or that which is of
smaller value? Tria considero in quibus spes mea tota consistit: charitatem
adoptionis, veritatem promissionis potestatem redditionis: I consider three
things (says Bernard) whereon my whole hope is staid in the greatest troubles:
Jn Cant.
Gods love in adopting, his truth in promising, and his power in delivering:
what then if the tempest grow strong, Psalm. 46.2.3.
and the waves of this troublesome sea rise on high? what if sands and rocks
inuiron thee, that thou art likely to be eaten up of the one, or broken on
the other? what if the tacklings break, and the mast blow over? yet trust in
the Lord, this threefold cord fastened on Christ makes a strong cable, and a
firm anchor, whereon whosoever relieth, shall never perish in the greatest
tempest, though both the wind and the tide be against them. For if Gods
Providence extends to his meanest creatures, then much more to his children, as
Christ himself teaches: and if at all times, Matthew. 6.
sure then especially when the greatest troubles and dangers beset them.
Wherefore we conclude, that since the Lord of hosts is with us, Psalm. 46.1.4.7.
As Shiloah that comforted Jerusalem.
and the God of Jacob our refuge, therefore there is a river whose stream
shall ever make glad the city of God: therefore if we make him our hope and
strength, he will be a help ready to be found in the greatest troubles.

Lastly, Jn that God is Inflicter of all punishment.
since it is a privilege belonging to God alone to be the inflicter of all
punishment, we are taught in all Christian wisdom to repent us of our sins,
to take hold on Christ, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh,
and of the spirit, and to grow up unto holiness in the fear of the Lord, that
so he may be induced not to enter into judgment with us. For surely though the
world makes but a jest at sin, and a toy to commit iniquity, though they
play with it, as ye fish with the bait in her mouth, not regarding the hook
till she see it has caught her, yet at last they shall find that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Hebr. 10.
and that when his register of what is done amiss, shall be opened before
them, they shall not be able to abide it. As is the means the thief can use
for his delivery, and the disposition of the Judge, before whom he is to be
arraigned, so is he raised up to hope, or driven down to despair. Now all
have sinned: if we use the means Christ Jesus, the sole Redeemer of the
world, by a lively faith exercised in the works of righteousness, we shall
be freed from the censure of condemnation: but if thou shall reject Christ and
vnrepentantly delight in the works of darkness, behold the nature of the
Judge, and from thence the fearfulness of his judgment, and so avoid (I
beseech thee) the sins that will cause it. First therefore we consider that
God is infinite in mercy here, and therefore will very severely punish in the
life to come. The means of present maintenance, adds to the grieuousnes of
the theft: and the clemency of the Prince, makes the rebellion more
punishable: how then shall the wicked appear before the Lord, when ye heavens
and ye earth, with all things therein contained, shall declare both his
worthiness and bounty, when his Ministers shall object their infinite sermons,
their preaching of the Gospel, their daily exhortations: when his Angels object
their attendance, service, and ministry: when as Christ himself shall object
his poor estate, the observations of the wicked, the contradictions of his
enemies, the reproaches of the scornful, the scarres in his body, the spear in
his side, the nails in his feet, the bowing of his head, the spreading of his
arms, the shedding of his blood, and all for to cleanse thee, how strict will
God be in punishing? when thou would not be cleansed? Secundum magnitudinem
misericordiae in praesenti, erit magnitudo furoris in futuro: As God is most
abundant in mercy now, so he will be most furious in punishing the^. And
therefore, says Gregory, Greg. in Moral.
how shall he endure his displeasure there, that contemned his rich mercy
here? The second consideration is of the justice of God: If he spared not
Adam for eating the forbidden fruit, Genes. 3.
if not the whole world, because they rebelled against him, Genes. 7.
if not the Angels that sinned, 2. Pet. 2.4.
but committed them to chains of perpetual darkness, yea if he punished his
righteous Son for the sins of the elect, Ephesians. 2.13. Esaias 53.8.
rather then sins should go unpunished, how hopest thou to escape, which art
by nature the child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
which art but one, which may not be compared to the Angels, which art a
wicked servant? what shall become of the unprofitable shrubbe of the desert,
when that goodly Cedar of Paradise shall be stricken? Hieron. Dan. 7. Malach.
3. Isai. 30. Ose. 11. Amos. 4. Apocal. 6.
Neither shall God appear to the unrepentant in the strictness of his justice
only, but also in the zeal and fury of the same: so that then they shall cry:
Hide us from him that sits on the throne, and from the fury of the Lamb:
Tunc nec diuitiae diuitibus prosunt, He that by nature is a lamb, is enforced
by sin to show himself a Lion.
nec paerentes parentibus intercedunt, nec Angeli pro hominibus verbum faciunt,
quia natura iudicij non recipit misericordiam: At that time (says Chrysostom)
riches shall not profit them, one man shall not make intercession for another,
the Angels shall not plead for them, Ezech. 7.19.
because the nature of the judgment admits not of mercy. Mallent omne
tormentum sustinere, quam faciem Iudicis irati videre: They had rather (says
Augustine) suffer any punishment, Prou. 11.23.
then behold the angry countenance of that fearful Judge, whom by their sins
they displeased. The third consideration is, that he to whom it belongs to
punish sin, is an Al seeing God. Many break the laws of the Prince, upon
hope of concealing their offense, but the sins we commit against the Prince
of Princes cannot be hidden: he knows the secrets of the heart, Job 11.11. 1.
King. 16.19. Psalm. 139.3. Ierem. 16.17.
searches the reins, and understands the thoughts long before: Thou
compassest my paths (says David) and my lying down, and art acoustomed to
all my ways: Whereupon says the Gloss: God does so consider the ways, and
compass the paths of every one, that every idle word and vain thought shall
be judged. Lord, how shall the wicked be able to appear before thee, when not
one, but all their sins shall be mustered in thy presence? how shall they be
able to undergo thy censure for all, in number like the sands of the sea, when
they cannot make answer for one, and that of the smallest? Ierem. 29.23.
Malach. 3.5.
But what men have committed, that cannot be concealed: for God is both the
Judge and the witness: Boethius.
Indicta est probationis necessitas, cum agamus coram oculis Iudicis cunctae
cernentis: In the divine law, the necessity of proouing is forbidden, because
we do all things in the sight of the Judge that shall try us: Sicut capillus
non perit de capite, ita nec momentum de tempore: As the hair perishes not
from the head, but God takes note of it, so no time passes (says Bernard) but
God keeps account of it. Therefore seeing our sins are so infinite, and that
they are al known unto God who shall judge them, it behooves men to fear the
committing of more, because the account they are to make, is so large already.

The last consideration is, that this Punisher of finne is Almighty. Isai.
14.27. Isai. 51.15. Matthew. 10.18. James 4.12. Isai. 47.11.
He is a God of armies, the Lord of hosts is his name: when he will save, none
can destroy, and when he will destroy, none can deliver: Chrysostom.
Nee resistendi virtus, nec fugiendifacultas: we have neither power to resist,
nor means to fly away: He which caused the mountains to shake at his
Majesty in giving the law, he shall cause the proudest sinner to fear and
tremble when he shall denounce his sentence of judgment upon the violaters
thereof. Qui ceciderun ad vnam vocem Christi monituri, quid facient sub voce
indicaturi August, in Ioh 18.6.
If the soldiers fell down at the voice of Christ in the form of a servant
admonishing them, how shall the stoutest gallant be struck to the ground, at
the voice of the Lord of life in his glory and Majesty judging them? Therefore,
howsoever the world, the flesh, and the devil do deceive men, howsoever they
judge the serving of God lost labor, and that they had rather live and die in
their sins, then remember their Creator in the days of their youth, yet let
them at last return to the truth again: the nature of their sin is a
beastlike rebellion: the punishment, eternal destruction: the punisher,
Almighty, thou can not escape him: Maiesticall, thou can not abide him:
Al-seeing, thou can not hide thy self, nor thy sins from him: Just, for he
punished his righteous Son, and therefore will not spare his vile servant:
Rich in mercy now, and therefore will abound in wrath and fury in the life to
come: therefore when thou art entised to continue in thy sins, and to defer
thy conversion to God: say unto thy soul, Genes. 16.
as the Angel to wandering Hagar: O my soul, from whom have thou fled? from
the Lord of life a gracious God, and merciful father to all those that obey
him: and what art thou doing? defiling thy self with sin and iniquity, and
enfolding thy self in infinite miseries: And whither art thou going? to be
punished by an Almighty, most just, and Al-seeing God; now most merciful, but
when he shall enter into judgment, exceeding furious: now gentle, then angry:
now long suffering, then auenging: therefore O my soul, what can thou
answer when he demands an account, what will thou do when he shall enter
into judgment with thee? peccata latere, erit impossible: peccatorem
apparere, intollerabile: That thy sins should be hid, it is impossible: that a
sinner should appear, it is intolerable. Back then again, O my soul, go
to the Lord thy God right humbly, confess thy sins, and acknowledge thine
iniquities: say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and earth, and
am not worthy to be called thy servant: but O Lord rich in grace, infinite in
mercy, true in thy promises, for thy dear Sons sake put away my sins:
instruct me, that I may strike my hand upon my thigh, and unfeignedly repent
for them: Show me thy salvation, that they swallow me not up: work in me by
thy holy Spirit and word, a true faith in Christ Jesus my gracious Redeemer;
and being thy redeemed, O my sweet Savior stay me with thy Spirit, that I
fall not from thee: uphold me with thy grace, yt I be no more the servant of
sin: yea, create in me a new heart, and a new spirit, that as I have been a
weapon of unrighteousness ever heretofore, so I may be a member of
righteousness always hereafter, that as thou have been infinite in mercy to
me I may increase in obedience to thee: then shall I no longer fear the
terror of the great Judge, but to the joy of my heart, say, my Redeemer lives:
then shall I desire no longer the deferring of thy coming, as the wicked
servant, but as a good child, desiring always to see the face of his father;
and as one in pure love espoused, wishing no thing so much, as to be with her
beloved, even so will I for my self and all that love thy coming, cry, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly: even so, (for thee and us al,) Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

