RABBONI; Mary Magdalens Tears, Of Sorrow, Solace.


The one for her Lord being lost.

The other for Him being found.

In Way of Questioning. Wondering. Rejoicing.


1. Quest. Whether it were He.

2. Wond. That it should be He.

3. Reioy. That indeed it was He.

Preached at S. Paul's Cross, after the Rehearsal, and newly reuised and
enlarged: By Thomas Walkington, Doctor in Divinity, and Minister of the Word at
Fulham.

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Griffin, for Richard Whittakers, and are to be sold
in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Kings Head. 1620.

To RABBONI: My dear Lord and Master, my sovereign Savior JESUS.
IF all our limbs, o Lord, were turned into tongues, they all were far unfit,
and most unable, to limb and pencill frrth thy praises, to pay their due debt
of dutiful thanksgiuings, for all thy gracious mercies and deliverances: Thy
heavenly worth may be be much more adored by silence, then by our ruder
utterance, In lieu of that my humblest devotion I owe unto thy Sacred Self
(the Beameling of that euer-glorious Sun) I have selected no other Patron,
but Thee, o Lord, my sole Aduancer, whose devoted (though unworthy) Chaplain I
ever wish to be: To whom I dedicate and consecrate these few lines, the true
copy of my loyallest affections, the Widows Mite, this poor Corban, which I
cast into thy Treasury, not out of superfluity, but mere penury: desiring to
be enriched with thine abundant mercy.

I am (o my Rabboni) obliged much more: I owe my self, and that I Will pay, and
would pay more, if more I had: but all I have, and all that is within me,
praise thy holy name.

The good things, o Lord, I have received of thy bounteous hands of mercy, I
merit not, and the evils which I have not received at thy hand of Justice, I
do deserve: O let me partake of the sweet influence of thy blessings, from
the mount Gerisin, and free me from thy curses on that mount Ebal.

I aim not at the guerdon of this respectlesse world, the mouldring rubbidge
and remainder of our fall, the defaced Emblem of our ruin: for we know that
every creature groneth with us also, and trauelleth in pain together unto this
present.

I breath and pant after true perfection, that vnfathomed bliss of thine: who
will give me the wings of a Dove (having the Oliue-branch of peace of
conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost) then would I fly away, and be at rest,
and set footing in that thy Celestial Arc, free from all sublunary
inundations. Let the impure Ravens, who usually adiourne the day of their
conversion, continue still to feed on putrid carrion, the garbidge of
transgression, and never have any care thither, to return unto thy Arc
again, I sure will feed on Thee, the Bread of life, the Manna that came down
from Beth-lechem, the house of Bread.

Omnia amarescunt, vt tu mihi Domine dulcescas: All things of this life do
utterly distaste my soul, like vinegar and gall, and myrrhed wine, in respect
of that true gust and relish of thy goodness and sweetness, which in this
earthly pilgrimage to heavenly Canaan, that flows with milk and honey of
eternity, thou exhibitest unto us all, as a viaticum, or iournall provision in
that holy Eucharist, thy pure flesh, our meat; thy prizelesse drops of blood,
our drink,

Lord, I have loved the beauty of thine house, and the place where thine Honor
dwells: my soul gaspeth after God, as a thirsty and dry land where no water
is: My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God, o when shall I appear
before thy presence?

There is my true Treasury, and there my heart also.

O good Jesus, be unto me a Jesus, a Savior (thus will I cry with devout
Anselmus) and to all that do believe in thee: Else when thou sit on that
glorious Tribunal to judge the quick and dead, when those books shall once
be opened, of all our Item'd accounts, and of all our consciences, each line
writ in capital red letters accusing us, every letter condemning us, (for the
letter kills) then with Job we will say, Lo we are vile, and cannot answer
thee, one of a thousand, without thy sweet prompting mercies.

We humbly beg at thy rich hands, by thy brinish tears, and precious blood
thou once did shed, and by that unparalleled love, that shed both tears and
blood, blot out that Cheirograph, the handwriting of ordinances against us
all. Though we have committed that which justly might condemn us, Thou have
nor lost, nor forgot that, whereby thou can assoyle and save us: O say unto
our souls, that thou art our salvation.

O let thy crimson prizelesse drops of blood, that yet thrill and trickle down
thy azur'd veins, to each believing soul (they being not yet dry) let that
truest Purgatory expiate our crimson scarlet sins.

O our good and gracious Rabboni, what are we (vile wretches) without thee:
Lodges of sin: cages of all impurity: loathsome and nasty carcasses; scarce fit
to be repast for worms, who justly might expect and gape for far more dainty
morsells: satchells full of all corruption: vnrinsed vessels of dishonor: and
fuel for Tophet in Gebenhinnom.

All our hopes is in thy death, o Jesus: thy death is my merit, my merit thy
mercy, and thy mercy the pulley, to draw on that death, to ransom me, and
make me merit. I never can be bankrupt in merit, so long as thou, o Lord, art
so rich in mercy.

O good Jesus, my Rabboni, thou that did daigne to descend from the Zenith of
all glory, to dwell in the Nadir of all obscurity; the pure crystalline spring,
that issued from the boundless sea of all blessedness: Thou euer-flourishing
Spray, and Science of Eternity: The delicious Fruit of the Virgins womb; the
sacred Inn where thou vouchsafedst to take up lodging in: The Sourcing
Fountain of all Graces, and of all our Actions: The Hope of all the ends of
the Earth: The Sanctuary and Refuge of all our sinful souls: The Anchor of
our hopes, even from our mothers breasts: The Crowner of our patient Triumphs:
Our sweetest Solace and Companion, in this wilderness of Sin, as we go along
unto the Land of Promise: The Haven and Harbor of our Rest: The Consummation
of our Bliss: Accept, o Lord, our meaner sacrifice, our Holocaust, that
Burnt-offering of praise, we tender and present upon the Altars of our hearts,
wholly enflamed with the love of Thee.

O Lord, lodge in the poor Tabernacle of our souls: be Thou there entombed,
o good Jesus, stay thou there in that Sepulcher, wherein never man (as our maine
Repose) but God and Man was yet laid: roll away the heavy Tombstone, our
flintinesse of heart, that presses Thee down, as a Cart with sheafes: yet
Lord abide there still: Abide with us, for it draws toward night, and the
day of our life is far spent: O let it never be said of Thee, -- Resurrexit,
non est hic: He is risen, he is not here. Lord ouer-mantle us with thy mercy:
illumine our darkened capacity: accept this our loyal duty: cancel all our
debts: create in us clean hearts: support and vnder-shore us with thy divine
and gracious hand, from future further lapsing: bind us up all in the bundle of

(...) The book must be beholden to the courtesy of the Reader, there be so
many mis-prints, or misprisions, for words, accents, poynting. As,
Page 10. line 15. orizon for oraison. page 13 lin 21.22. That was, I and yet
is. page 20. lin. 5. (...). p. 21. Rabbi David, in the margin over against
Thammyz. p. 24. l. 22* watches. p. 25. in marg. vicant. for Cant. 6. p. 22. l.
13. beards. ibid. l. 19. of whom -- our help stands. p. 41. l. 10. dreads. p.
42. l. 2. pamphlet. p. 43. l. 11. Lady (as some write) Prostibulum. p. 46. l.
6, 7. read she thinking this, that to despair of mercy was. p. 48. l. vlt. in
pieces. Like a etc. p. 59. l. 1. Quot membra. p. 96. marg. Lachman dimhar
hablan iomanah. Sir. p. 106. l. 17. now for thou* p. 111. l. vlt. to live with
thee. p. 121. marg. (...). p. 132. l. 10, 11. a Non-Hierarchy: It brings not in
a Gauel-kinde etc. p. 138. l. 6. add etc. p. 139. marg. Ezech. 10.13. p. 141.
l. 18. venashuua. p. 149. l. 19. Cheirograph. p. 150. l. 14. read, for that.
ibid. l. 16. read, we shall bathe and drench our selves.

RABBONI. JOHN XX.XVI.
LO here is the little Clowd, 1 Reg. 18.
that arose out of the sea, no bigger then a man's hand, out of which did fall a
great rain.

Lo here is the little Well that grew into a great river, Ester 10.10.
and flowed over with great waters.

Lo here the Iliades of Homer in the shale of a nut: a very curt and a
concise speech: the style and word of Mary Magdalen uttered to him, who is the
Word, (...) at or between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5.


Genesis 32.24.
So Genesis 32. vaieauech ^sh gnimmo. And there wrastled with Jacob, a man unto the
breaking of the day. Exodus 15.3.
So Exodus 15. (...) A man of war. A man (...), for excellency, the second
person in Trinity, Angelus Domini, and Dominus Angelorum, The Angel of the
Lord, nay, the Lord of Angels: for so in two neighboring verses is Christ
termed, The Angel of the Lord, and the Lord, Acts 7.30. and 31.
Acts 7. Vriel, the God of light; Gabriel, the God of strength; Raphael, the
curing God; and Michael, who is like our God? one man: of whom, as it was said
of Heraclitus: Diog. Laertius in vita Herac.
(...)

(...), --

One man to me as three thousand, and they that are numberless, as no man to
me.

Vnus homo nobis moriendo restituit rem.



This man has restored salvation to us, by so lovingly and mercifully dying for
us, that we for ever might live and reign with him, and this is this Rabboni.

Secondly, one woman: a woman? O mulier, Origin.
non mulier, twice that Father cries out, as admiring her great worth: O woman,
no woman.

Non mulier, o Dea certe, more fit to make a Goddess in Heaven (if Heaven
admitted any such) then a woman on earth. Mary Magdalen, a noble woman, one of
the bloud-royall of the Tribe of Judah, sister to Lazarus and Martha, which
three divided the Inheritance from their father Syrus And Eucaria was their
mother.
. Magdalum castrum, the Castle Magdalen, fell to her share (which castle was
near unto Naym) from which she had her name. To Martha fell Bethanie, not far
from Jerusalem, where Lazarus was raised out of his grave by Jesus, where
Christ out of the Mount Oliuet ascended up to Heaven: John 11.
and to Lazarus their brother fell many possessions at Jerusalem: Vide Hadrico
m. Delph.
a woman of nobility, nay of divinity, a heavenly Saint, a Convert, she cries
Rabboni.

vnum opus, one action, one singular affection in them both: the vnprizeable
love of the one to the other. (To let that pass, Redditio effectus non causae,
(...).
many sins be forgiven her, there was Christ's love to her, for she loved
much, there was her love to Christ:) But this: to the point: Christ Jesus his
love appeared to her in this; In first appearing to her after his resurrection:
To Mary alone, not to the Disciples, but to Mary first. To a woman: as a woman
was, Nuncia mortis in Paradiso, The messenger of mortality, of death in
Paradise: So this woman, Mary, was the messenger of life new begun by Christ
his resurrection. Heming.
And to this woman, as being S. Hierom. epist. de Quaest. Hedibiae.
most memorious and mindful of all the mercies and benefits, wherewith Jesus
her dear Savior had enriched her soul.

Mary's love to Christ, in running to and fro, to the Sepulcher, and from the
Sepulcher: to tell the Disciples, and even to preach like that blessed
Coheleth, a shee-Preacher, the resurrection of this Rabboni, in so soon
returning, staying, standing at the Tomb, in weeping, and wailing, and howling
for his loss, in vigilantly looking and searching her lost Lord; never
linning, until she had found him whom her soul loved.

His love to her, in calling her Mary; her love to him, in calling him Rabboni.
As Agamem: and Menelaus.
(...), we may term them, Nobile par, a pair of sweet Turtle Doves, true
Lovers indeed, Lovers in life, and Lovers in death, their Loves as strong as
death. This twofold cord, cannot easily, nay, can never be broken.

Two Lovers, that only in Aristinaetus (...).
number yield to the three graces. In whom there is a rich Exchequer of all
heavenly graces. In one of them especially, of whose fullness we all have
received grace for grace. John 1.16.


Mary's enamoured soul was, Vbi amauit, non vbi animauit: Where it liked, not
where it lodged; not in her own, but in Jesus his blessed bosom, who loved
her so incomparably: she loves him with a most unfeigned, untainted, and chaste
affection: but here is the difference of both their loves. In Mary's to
Christ, it was (...), due debt, for her to love him. In Jesus his love to her,
it was (...), Grace, and favor, and mercy, a free gift in him: He loved her,
1 Ioh. 4.19.
and so he loves us first. 1 Ioh. 4.

And here is that pugillus farinae in hydria: 1 Reg. 17.
The widows handful of meal in the barrel, which the Lord God our heavenly
Eliah, or El-iah increase to the feeding of all our souls, until (as in that
Text) the rain do fall, that is, some others sweeter and selecter doctrine
do drop on you, as the deaw, as the shower upon the herb, (...) sing of
Christ, and sing of Mary; sing of Mary, and sing of Christ; Christ says to
her, Mary; she answers him, Rabboni.

First of Mary, who here cries Rabboni.
The winged Quiristers of Heaven, the Birds, unto whom God has granted the
large patent of the whole air, as his glorious Chapel, to sing their sweet
notes and anthymnes, their shrill praises unto God Almighty in: In winter time,
in drizling clowdy weather, and when the day is shut in, they, silly souls, as
all disconsolate and drowzy, do sit within their bowres and eaues, and on
their branches. But when the winter is past, Cant. 2.11.
the rain is changed, and is gone away, when the flowers appear in the earth,
when the time of singing of Birds is come, when the cheerful spring arises,
to apparel the earth with such ornature, as that Solomon, in all his royalty
and princely paludaments, may not compare with it; and when the glorious Sun
vnlockes the door of the morning, to run his race like a Giant, then they
begin to prune and pick themselves, and in their circling turns do mount and
soar aloft, and chirp and caroll out their praises to God Almighty, as
rendering their dutiful devotions and thanks unto the Lord, who thus reflects
the beams of the Sun upon them.

Lo here (Beloved in our Lord) a heinous sinner, that was aye, and yet is;
for this viper can never be shaken off from S. Paul's hand, Ios. 15.
this Iebusite will needs remain (...) wonted sluices, her eyes, the
daily-dropping Conduit-pipes of her grief. She goes wringing her
myrrh-dropping fingers, being robbed by the Sabeans, the cursed Jews, of her
prizelesse pearl, the signet of her own right hand, Jesus her Savior, whom
she tendered and loved as the apple of her eye, she is grown Extaticall,
intranced, in a deliquium, a swound, ready to fall, ready to dye.

After her running to and fro, her timorous heart, throbbing and panting within
her, with her iourneying and greeuing, her seeking and sighing, she at length
takes up her Inn, at the tomb of Jesus, the Host of the house of Israel, and
there thinks to refresh and recover her pining consumed soul with her
restauratiue wonted Manna, the bread that came down from heaven: But out alas,
the childrens bread was gone, no crumbs were left for the silly whelps that wait
at their Masters table: She, no lost sheep, seeks the lost shepherd of her
soul, she disburses many a brinish silver drop, many a salt tear that drilled
down her cheeks, into the lap of the earth.

Was it I pray you, to mollify the earth, which, as she thought, was grown
obdurate, hard-hearted, in so soon delivering up her Lord, in retaining and
keeping him no longer? or else did she, trow ye, bedeaw the earth in
thankfulness, as having carried these hallowed feet of his, and having borne
her own defiled feet unto the sacred Temple, Recedentibus discipulis Maria non
recedebat: she stayed and wept, vt propheticum.
the presence chamber of the King of Kings, where Jesus powerfully preached,
and she her self was happily converted? No, Tears were her meat day and
night, whiles they said, Where is now thy God?

See Bonauent: lig. vit. cap. Jesus intumulatus.


no: Rachel mourned for her lost Lord, and would not be comforted, because he
was not. And thus she mones.

Aye me, poor forlorn wretch, I have lost my Lord, my most loving Lord, the
crown of my head, of my hopes; the Shrine of my bliss; the Sanctuary of my
disconsolate soul; the Grave of all my greefes; the Rock where I, the Dove,
did make my nest; whose five wounds were as them five Cities of refuge unto
me, who so often fled from his sacred presence to do the works of darkness,
whose Sunshine brightness never yet could brook any impiety or impurity.

O wish I now rather to dye, then to live; for thus dying, I may live, so
dying, I may happily find him, whom I see, I cannot find living, therefore
Viuere cum ne queam, sit mihi posse mori.

O Let me dye, 1 Reg. 19.4.
Lord now let thy servant depart in peace, it is now enough, o Lord, take my
soul: so shall I have a full fruition of thee, o Lord, in Heaven, the City and
College of deceased Saints. Alas, what good can I enjoy on earth without thee?
and what good shall I not enjoy in Heaven with thee? For with thee is the
wellspring of life, Psalm. 36.9.
and in thy light shall we see light, the light of that Celestial Goshen. O
call me no more Naomi, no more Mary, but Marah, Bitterness: Lam. 3.15. Lam.
3.15.
He has filled me with bitterness, and made my soul drunk with wormwood.
Yet here is the benefit of bitterness; Marcus Heremite, Marcus Heremita 2. lib.
in his book De Lege spirituali, Wormwood is good for ill stomachs, (...).
(and so for good no question) it will stir up still a far more eager
appetite in me to desire Christ Jesus, the hidden manna, Ioh. 6.34.
(...), Lord give us evermore of this bread, Praeda canum lepus est, Mart.
vastos non implet hiatus. We put on sable weeds, and mourn for our ordinary
acquaintance departed, Corporis factura. Corporis fractura.
and yet we know that they were but earthen vessels, as there is a moulding, so
there is a marring of the body, as there is a Genesis, so an Exodus, a coming
in, so a going out, they are our Harbingers sent before us, S. Cyprian. lib. de
mortalitate praemittuntur non amittuntur.
we have only left them for a time, not lost them. But Mary Magdalens
sorrowful madrigals, in a higher key, they aim at another far more eminent
and glorious object: she wept not with those indiscreet women, Exech. 8.14.
for Thammyz, which, as some write, was a brazen Image with leaden eyes, which
being molten with heat, seemed to weep, and then the women, in sympathy, did
weep too, and mourn for their Goddess, Rabbi David, and Rab. Shel. (...)
which was thought to be Adonis: no, she mournes not for Adonis; but for
Adonai, her Lord, her sole Mediator, Lord of Lords, she deplores his absence,
in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand, pleasures for
evermore.

She complains, (...) Ioh. 20 2. (...). Verse 13.
They have taken away the Lord, first; but after, she betters her style, They
have taken away my Lord: And this is suitable to that of Christ, in calling her
first (...), Ioh. 20.15. Verse 16.
woman, then after that, Mary.

See, I beseech you, her unparalleled and vntraced love. First, John out-ran
Peter, yet she ran very hard too, almost as soon there as they. Peter, the
Disciple that is said to love Christ best, the accounted Primate of the
Apostles; Theophylact. (...).
and John, the Disciple who is said to be the best beloved of the Lord,
Cubicularius Domini, Cyp. lib. de ablutione pedum.
the Chamberlain of Jesus, as S. Cyprian says, to whom Christ commended,
Thalamum humanitatis the Bedchamber of his humanity; his mother; Mary
Magdalen, was not much behind them in expedition. Triplex hic funiculus
amoris: Love is as strong as death, and ought to be for him, especially of whom
it may rightly be said, as in that riddle of Sampson, out of the strong came
sweet, for he alone was able to save. Mary stayed after them: the weaker sex,
but stronger in affection. They ran, but their devotion was sooner spent, was
sooner out of breath, they stayed not: she stood still and blubbred out many a
tear, when as she saw that Jesus her Rabboni was gone.

Stetit, she stood still, and stood to it: not like Peter, a flincher, a
reuolter, an abiurer of Christ, for he cowardly went out and wept.

Stetit, she stood: oportet Mariam stantem flere, stantem mori, It behooues
Mary to stand to her tears, I (as Vespasian said at his death of an Emperor)
to dye standing.

Stetit, she stood: she had no prop, no pallet, no ease for her grief, no
bed of down, to cast her sorrow asleep on, as David had his couch, Every
night wash I my bed, and water my couch with my tears.

Stetit, she stood: A positure of the body, ready still for to remove, as if
she would never lin seeking, until she had found him, whom her soul loved,
and so much desired.

(...). ver. 1.
Mary comes first, early, while yet it was dark, like a Manna-gatherer, very
early, (...), Septuagint.
to find him happily out, whom her soul, (...) Enter le ch^^n and le loup.
I say, affected and embraced so much. In that time she came unto the
Sepulcher, John 20.1. when she by course of nature should have been in bed,
and fast asleep. But her eyes are like the morning watch, that watch for the
morning: she takes away from Nature, to give to Grace. Peradventure, in the
whole circuit of that night, she gave no sleep unto her eyes, nor any slumber
to her eye lids, in musing of him, who is the Keeper of Israel, that neither
slumbreth nor sleeps, but watches over hers and all our souls.

Thus with the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3.
she may well say, In my bed I sought him, Si non inuenit amor quando inuen^et
tepor? Gilbert. Abbas sir. vicant.
whom my soul loved, I sought him, but I found him not: and so she rises
early, and sought him, but found him not. The watchmen can tell her no
tidings of him, she asked the two Angels in linen, Ioh. 20.12.
the one sitting at the head, the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus
had layen. Those Nightingales, Pausanias in Baeoti^s.
that were making of their nests, and singing at the Sepulcher of Orpheus, that
heavenly Orpheus, our Savior Jesus. The Angels she sought not, but (...) all
our hearts: Cant. 4.15.
O fountain o^ these gardens, o well of living waters, o the springs of
Lebanon water and moysten, o Lord, with thy special grace, these gifts and
heavenly virtues of thine own plantation. Cant. 4.16.
Thus let my beloved come to his garden, and taste of his pleasant apples, his
delicacies his sweetnesses. (...) Of Meged delicatum dulce pomum. So Meged
shammaijm is the deaw, the excellent gift of Heaven.
So peri mega^ thau signifies. This word in the plural number denotes out unto
us, both the multiplicity and excellency of Gods graces, wherewith from his
heavenly Exchequer, he in mercy and bounty does enrich us.

Well, Mary enquires of Jesus himself, whether he knew where Jesus was, and
she calls him (...), Lord, which S. Hierom seems to tax in way of dispute, for
that she calls the Gardener, Lord; and Jesus but Rabboni, Master.

But here, Beloved in our Lord, was her fervent and longing desire, much more
expressed, in giving such a title to the Gardener, as whereby to woe and to win
him, to tell her the sooner, as being impatient to brook the least delay: S.
August. in Sermon. 133.
or else, as S. Augugustine, Prophetat and nescit quando dicit Domine, This was
in a prophetike strain, by a heavenly Enthousiasme, calling him Lord, who was
Lord indeed, who has upon his garment, and on his thigh, Revel. 19.16.
a name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. But sure it is no more then
thus, (...), Cyr, or Sir, write it as you list: as if on this manner. O my
dear and gentle Sir, good Gardener, Thou seem to be the Keeper of this
garden, where the love of my soul was laid, where he was interred, Petra in
petra, nouus in (...)

Nor was she like to timorous Nicodemus, that came to see our Savior by night,
no beameling of heavenly boldness illustrating his too too darkened soul. Nor
was she like to Joseph of Arimathia, (...), Ioh. 19.38.
the Counselor, who secretly, for fear of the Jews, begged of Pilate the
body of Jesus: but she, like an heroyke spirit, steeled and maled with a manly
resolution, she fears not death it self, maugre the breards of all them that
may stand in opposition, in despite of al affronts, Ego illum tollam, I will
take him away, and will never basely beg any other help, but his alone, of
whom our help stands in the name of the Lord, who has made both heaven and
earth: Ego illum tollam. Lo here a resolute new S. Christopher. Lucan. lib. 6.
Quam non mill modi mortis, etc, As Lucan of Scaeua, that valiant Soldier of
Caesar, so we may say of her, She feared not a thousand sorts of death, to
lose her dearest life for him, in whom she lived, and moved, and had her
cheifest being.

And thus Mary speaks, and mournes, and pines within her self, and weeps. No
man, but would rather have imagined Mary her self had been the Gardener, who
with the full bottles of her heart, the water pots of her head, her eyes, did
all to be-water that garden.

O heavenly showers, such sweet rivers make glad the City of God.

Thus while she, with a languid, dead, and longing eye, a heart full heavy,
big with grief, was sighing, and sobbing, and blubbring, and crying, O stay me
with flagons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love, S. Augustine.
cap. 35. medit.
Quia te Domine Jesus prae caeteris dilexit Maria ideo meruit, etc. Because Mary
loved thee, o Lord, above all, therefore she obtained to be both seen of
thee first, to be called of thee so lovingly, Mary, and to call thee so
loyally, Rabboni.

Jesus our gracious Lord speaks to Mary in a passionate strain of affection,
no obiurgation and chiding, as some do write: S. Chrysostom. Homil. 28. and S.
Cyrill. 10.45
But as S. Chrysostom says, out of a singular and deep affection, and
compassion, he vtters out this one word, Mary. The only Electuary and
Cordial, the Ros Solis, to recover her drowping and dying soul: Mary. Unto
whom she turning with an open and a nimble ear, for the touch of such a
heavenly string, with a lively alacrity and cheerfulness of spirit, having
thus heard his sweet and gracious voice, in terming her Mary, she out of a
singular, dutiful, and strict obligation of her love to him, echoes back
this one and sole reciprocal word of her lowly love, and most humble respect
unto him, Rabboni.

Non nouit ex vultu, Oraculo non oculo credebat.
fides ex auditu. She knew him not at first by his outward lineaments: faith
comes by hearing. She heard him, and then believed in him. Thy rough garment
shows thee to be the Gardener; but thy voice is Jacobs voice: I, Jacob indeed,
the true supplanter, the true wrastler, supplanting the old Adam, thy elder
brother, for thou have got the birthright, and the blessing, for thou art the
First-begotten, Revel. 1.8.
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, Romans 1.25.
and God blessed for evermore. Thou art Jacob the true Huntsman, Genesis 27.
who have brought the true venison, the pleasant and sauoury meat, the
salvation of thy beloved brethren, unto thine everlasting Father, that
celestial Isaac; for God would in no wise the death of a sinner: S. Bernard.
For this, o thou heavenly Jacob, thou did put on our sins, these were thy
rough skins, o Lord, wherewith thou wast arrayed: But in mere mercy thou have
got the blessing, not for thy self (with old Jacob) but for me, o Lord, and so
for all, who claim an interest in thy prizelesse drops of blood, Heb 9.14.
the true Purgatory, that purges our consciences from dead works, to serve the
living God. I therefore, and let us all therefore, with the golden Censors of
the Sanctuary in our hands, and in our hearts burn devotion as incense unto
thee, and with the 24 Elders we fall down before him, Revel. 4.10, 11.
that sits on the Throne, and worship him who lives for evermore, and we will
cast our crowns before the Throne, saying, Thou art worthy, o Lord, to receive
glory, and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy wills
sake, they are and have been created: but more, and much more, for thy dear
loves sake, thou have redeemed us by that thy dearest bloodshed, powered out
for our salvation.

What? do I hear the sweet voice of my heavenly Jacob? calling me Mary, out
of his mercy? o then let me return back the drops of my dearest love and
dutifulness, and acknowledge (...) we may in this respect of Mary's: Few or
none at all such Mary's, nay, hardly ever such a Mary, save Mary Theotocos, the
mother of our Lord. Mary Magdalen, much loving, and much beloved of Christ,
styles him Rabboni,

O well-deseruing duty unto an all-meriting love, guarded with Gods especial
grace, vshered on by faith, attended with singular affection, devotion,
admiration: she is as out of her self, her self being wholly in Christ, her
more then second self: for she estimates and prizes him far above her self:
she believes it is her Lord, and Master, and Savior, yet stands she agashed
and amazed first, at this so sudden, happy end inexpected sight.

O heavenly change, a blessed Convert, a true Penitentiary: Thus, Beloved, thus
she was not; she that is now Christ Jesus his Follower, his Retainer, was
erewhile Satan's seruitour, the daughter of darkness, very loath to have been
seen in committing the deeds of darkness, but now with Henoch, Genesis 5.
she walks with God, as in the presence of God: with S. Basils Virgin, she
dreaded the sight of holy Angels, and the souls of Saints departed, who (if
they see) might mourn at her unchaste and lewd misdemeanor: Marcus Drusus in
Velleius Paterculus.
she, with Drusus, now desires her house may be so built of the Architectours,
if there be any skill in them, as that every one passing by, might see what was
done within. She paints not out, with the men of Crete, Melancthon.
Jupiter without eyes: For he that made the eye, shall not he see? she knows
of it, she thinks on it, that it cannot be (...) and hard to be sit, who
will often cast Reason, I and Grace too (the Riders) did carry her away a
ho-gallop, even to the brinke of death, the suburbs of Hell. O blessed, and
evermore blessed be God, in that like Marcus Curtius, she was not hurried
headlong into the gulf, the bottomless pit, Tsalmaueth Beershacatb, the
shadow of death, the fountain of destruction, where there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

Beloved in our Lord, they run far that never turn: God has his own
times, and hours, and moments, for the conversion of a sinner, though his
soul be litted in a crimson die of sin, the blood of Jesus shall lauer and
rinse it, as white as that snow in Salmon, if we return to him by weeping
Cross, and bathe our selves in Bethesda, the tears of true repentance, the
sacred poole that God delights to see a sinner swim in.

Mary Magdalen, while she was plunged in the midst of mare mortuum, the dead
sea of her misdeedes, acknowledged not this blessed Rabboni. But after her
heavenly retired thoughts, her deep and serious consideration of that Legion,
wherewith she had been possessed, the talent of lead wherewith her soul was
burdened, her infinite sins she had committed* her good and gracious God she
had displeased, the terrors of eternal death she had deserved, and with all
his remarkable mercies, Esa. 55.
who is multus ad misericordiam, of much mercy, and very ready to forgive, as
the Prophet terms him: Fulgent. ad Venantiam filiam.
And as Fulgentius well says, In hoc multo nihil deest in quo est omnipotens
misericordia and misericors omnipotentia. In this [much] is nothing wanting,
wherein is both omnipotent mercy, and merciful omnipotency, she thinking to
despair of mercy, was most impious, and sacrilegious, and derogatory to the
sufferings of her sweet Savior, she then was big-bellyed with sorrow for her
sin, and brought forth like an Hebrew woman without Midwife, such a fair
offspring, such an issue as is acceptable to the Lord of Hosts, even her
relenting tears, the sweetest Wine and Hypocras of Angels, the sad and drery
drops that pierce the Following Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4.
CHRIST JESUS, which make him supple, and mild, and gentle, and move him unto
mercy. And thus, as Dionysius and Egesippus record, she betook her self
solitary and sequestered from all the world, and the pleasures thereof, unto the
mountain Balma, Dionys. in Matthew. 20.
full thirty years, to meditation, fasting and prayer (for which, as also for
sitting at Jesus his feet, and hearing him preach, she might be truly said of
Christ to have chosen the good or better part: Luke 10.42.
) And, as Josephus reports, after Christ's ascension from the Mount of Olives
into Heaven, she never could endure any company.

See now how this new Convert puts on now a new livery, she that before stood
in defiance of Jesus, and scorned to have the title and name of any of his
mean, despised Followers, now happily challenges him to be her Master, and
Lord, and calls him by the name of Rabboni: Isa. 63.1.
lo here is the saving power of him who is mighty to save.

O do but ponder the difficulty of her and our turning after so much sinning,
it will make us much more admire, and stand in a deep amazement at the
exuberant love and mercy of our Lord and Savior Jesus. In the prime act at our
first entrance into conversion, when we begin to forsake Satan, and never till
then, o Lord, to feel the plunges, and pangs, and convulsions, and apoplexies,
and swounds, that the soul has with Satan: now is the time for Satan, the
most of all to bestirre himself, to labor tooth and nail, Dum a Deo auertimur
ludit. Dum ad Deum conuertimur laedit Satan.
to continue his long challenged interest in a sinner: now he fomes, and
rores, and rages, and rends, and tears (as much as is permitted him from God)
a poor sinner in pieces, like a savage, fierce and hungry Lion, so long as his
prey, the silly Lamb, is under his paw, so long will he play with it, and
lick it with his tongue, and dandle it over with an easy gentle tallon; but
if it once seek to struggle, and to make an evasion and escape out of his
claws, timorously to crawle away, then begins he to yell and rore, and with
his cruel clutches, and merciless teeth, to seize upon it, and so to devour
it. So long as Jacob stayed in Labans house, he was at quiet; but when he
departed to his fathers house, then was he pursued.

And thus, in the very beginnings of turning to God, it fares with Mary, and
all the Elect of God: see then, how vigilant, and busy, and furious, Satan is,
sweating and toyling, by all possible means, to scrue a sinner on to (...)
Deliverer, our souls often escape, as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler,
the snare is broke, and we are delivered.

We will sing an (...), a song of victory and triumph unto God, All glory unto
him, who curbs in and martingales Jobs proud Horse, Job 39.22.
so that he cannot fling and yerke out at his pleasure: who binds the strong
man, who rebates and duls the edge of Satan's fury, who stints his malice, who
limits his power, who cancels this huge Ocean, with a Gnadth po, (...) huc
vsque.
hitherto shall thou come, and no further, here lay down thy proud waves.
(...) Job 38.11. Ierem. 5.22. Theodoret. ser. 4. page 66.


As Theodoret of the sea, so we of him, (...). Satan cannot range beyond his
tethering. The heavenly Xerxes gives more then three hundred stripes unto this
sea: he will trample over this Hellespont, (...). Herodotus.
as he pleases: for this is that omnipotent Lord, whom the winds and seas do
obey. Lo here Nicocreon the Tyrants head is laid indeed in a platter;
Diogen. Laert. in vita Anax. archi.
Anaxarchus, the Christian Philosopher, I mean, needs not fear his pounses.
Lo, all that he has is in thy hands, but save his soul or life, meddle not
with that, Job 2 6. Satan cannot enter into a silly heard of swine, except
Jesus, like the Centurion to his servant, bid him go: nay more, without the
Divine Providence and Permission, he has not so much power, as over the
bristle of a Swine, Porcorum setae, Tertullian.
the very bristles of Hogs, are numbered to God, that heavenly Arithmetician,
how much more your hairs, and all your members, are they (...) (...), even
besides himself, and as it were, struck with an astounding thunderclap.
Satan only bruized her heel: This blessed woman being of the seed of that
more blessed woman, or of that man, who is God blessed for evermore ( Cuius
sanguis prius profuit quam fuit) by a powerful faith did, S. Bernard. hom. de
Coena Domini.
as it were, break his head, did stop the mouth of this roaring Lion, Heb. 11.
Heb. 11.33. She, though once a public and notorious sinner, a stigmaticke,
branded, a marked sinner with murderous Cain, she now shakes hands with all her
old and sweetest embracements: she gives a bill of divorce to wantonness,
unto the which she had been so long wedded: she refuses to be called the
darling daughter of the world, choosing rather to suffer a short affliction, to
endure a hard penance with the children of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season: she disrobes and strips her self of all her princely
paludaments, her rich array, her courtly acoutrements, her sumptuous weeds, and
puts on the comely attire of a true Penitentiary: she bathes her soul in a
full sea of tears, which never shall have ebb: she comes with all expedition,
making all haste to God, to kiss the Son least that he should be angry: No
lingering now, no delaying, no putting off from day to day, lest too late she
should come and knock at Mercies gate: so she being very sensible of the
loathsome savor of her own sins, Amos 8.2.
that Basket of Summer fruit, a whole harvest ripe and ready for the sickle;
she takes an Alabaster box, of very costly and odoriferous ointments, whose
sweet perfume and flowery sent, might happily confound, and take away the
rancknesse and rottenness of her sins, from the sacred nostrils of her Savior
Jesus, she comes to Simon the Pharisees house, who had enuited Jesus, as a
guest, to take repast with him, she comes trembling, and blushing, and
crouching, and blubbring, to the table where Jesus was sit down, she came
quiuering behind that Lord, that saw her well enough, she did her decent
obeisance, she bowing down her self, began to kiss the feet of her dear
Savior, and to wash them with her tears (the lively expression of her
penitence and penance) and she wipes them clean with her disheueld locks,
that she had laid out before for lewd enticements: Quod membra tot olocausta:
S. Gregory.
Every limb that she had lent before to sin, now she makes an Holocaust, a
sweet burnt Sacrifice to Christ: Her Tears are her best Advocates and
Proctours, to plead for mercy and remission before the Throne of grace. O
Taciturnitas clamosissima: A silence that spoke much in the ears of. Almighty
God, who though the everliving Word respects sad and sighing thoughts, as well
as words: this, suitable to Abels blood, that vocal blood, that was so loud and
shrill an Orator, to Heaven, for to declaime against the massacring and
assasining hand of that his guilty brother: Never a word she spoke, for she
knew it was unto the Word, who knew her speech that was retired into her inner
Cabinet, the private withdrawing chamber of her heart. And more, lest the
sacred feet of Jesus, should seem unto the dissembling Pharisees, to take a
taint, to receive the least pollution by her sinful tears, the pudled water
of her infected heart, her soul that had the crimson grain and dye of all
iniquity, and so her action might be unpleasing and distastefull unto that
Jesus, who did refuse to drink the vinegar and gall; therefore Mary, to take
away that stench, annoyleth his hallowed feet with a sumptuous oil, Of
Spikenard.
a precious balm, and in another place, she powered ointment on his sacred
head, an ointment of so much worth, that Judas the Treasurer, the Bearer of the
burse, repined (but in an easily-detected policy) with a Quanto melius, How
much better had this been sold for three hundred pence, and the price thereof
employed to the behoof of the poor? which Judas spoke not out of love unto
the poor, but for enriching of himself, by unlawfully detaining the alms of
the poor, for he carried the bag, Ioh. 12.6.
(...), the purse, or tongue (the word of the Evangelist) for that was it, he
thought would always speak for him: well, Mary came and anointed Christ her
Saviors feet, not because, by that she could add any sweetness, but more
lively to express her thankfulness, for he was he, of whom the Spouse
speaks Cant. 5.16. vecullo macomaddim, Canc. 5.16. (...), and (...). Nazianz.
he is wholly delectable, nothing but sweetness it self. In which her
weeping, and then annoyling of Jesus his feet, we may by the way essentially
(...) tent Believer) is sufficient to wash away the magnitude and multitude of
all thy sins, be they never so mighty, be they never so many: For great
sins, he is a God of great mercy, and for many sins, he is a God of much
mercy, of manifold compassion. One grape of the clusters of the vine of
Engaddi, is able to cheer and revive thy swounding and dying heart. One glance
of favor, one glimpse of mercy is enough. An Ephah, a Gomer full.
Mercy is like Manna, he that gathered much, had nothing over, and he that
gathered little, had no lack: Misericordia est miserorum chorda, Vrbanus
quartus in exposit. 51. Psalmi. Qua, de lacu facis and miseriae extrahuntur.
says Vrbanus, Mercy is the line or cord, by which wretched souls are haled
up (with Jeremy) out of the dungeon of iniquity and misery; this is the
threefold cord of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ, which cannot easily, nay, which
never can be broken, for whom the Lord loves once, he loves to the end, the
gates of hell shall never prevail against them, the dear Elect of God shall
stand fast for ever, like the Mount Sion, which cannot be removed: O Peter,
Peter, Satan has desired to fan, and sift, and winnow thee, but I have prayed
that thy faith fail not. Revel. 7.
And there were sealed unto the Lamb, an hundred and four and forty thousand,
of all the Tribes of the children of Israel: and a great number besides, which
no man could number, of all nations, and kinreds, and people, and languages,
stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes,
and palms in their hands: And these are they that came out of great
tribulation, and have washed (...) their souls, to be Anathema's, as being
forsaken of their God, no God of mercies now to them, nor Father of
consolations, the Lord standing (as David expostulates with God) a far off:
Psalm. 10.1.
no gleame of comfort, no beameling of bliss, but all dismal and shady night
upon the surface of the soul: yet at the length, as plants that seemed
withered and dead, (...). Naz Orat. in Laud. Cypriani.
in that dull and downe-looke of winter, (as that Father terms it) have new
life infused into them, by the blessed rays of the Sun, when the quickening
spring does once put in: so the dear Elect, they have their blessed spring and
sunshine of grace, to revive (as it were) their drooping and languishing
souls, to make them flourish, and blossom, and bud in faith again. And that
poor remainder, that small spark of faith covered in cold embers, interred
(as it were) in the Sepulcher of their hearts, shall once be raked up again*
and kindled, and grow to a big flame, the blessed Spirit of God, that breaths
where it lusts, (...), with heavenly bellows, blowing it up again: and so
it proves the sacred fire of Gods Altar, that never goes out: For needs must
Gods eternal determination (in whom there is no shadow of change) stand sure
and immutable, of saving his Elect.

Faith, in the chosen Sons of God, may have a pang, a spasme and convulsion,
(...), non (...). Faith may look all forlorn, and pine, and win^le away, but
sure it withers not.
a qualme, a swound; but it shall not dye: It may be remota, but not amota;
percussa, not excussa; it may have remissionem, not amissionem; it may have a
slip, a fall, but no falling (...) on into Mary's heart, from embracing the
holy service of this Rabboni, from turning unto him with tears of true
contrition: In one of the premises, the Mayor of his counterfeit Syllogism, he
puts in all her sins; in the other, which is no Minor, he lays before her,
her long dwelling in the tents of Kedar, her continuance in sinning, and
withal, the rigor of the Law, the judgments of her God, and so winds up a
weak conclusion, otherwise then that in S. Paul, Romans 11.32.
Romans 11. for that is a conclusion of mercy, Conclusit Deus omnes in
incredulitate, vt omnium misereatur: He has shut up all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy on all: For this tells her, and so all the discomforted (not
discomfited) children of God, that now there is no balm in Gilead; that the
good Samaritane is passed by: That the Prophets spotted Leopard and ugly
Black-more can never be rinsed white: Ierem. 13.23.
That her name was Legion, and that Elgibbor, or Gabriel himself, the God of
strength and power, was unable to dispossess Zabulus, that subtle Serpent,
who was more subtle then all the beasts of the field: Genesis 3.1.
That they that rise not early, can gather not so much as one gomer full of
manna: That the unwise Virgins come too late to knock at mercies gate: That
her sin, with Cains, was greater then God could forgive: That the childrens
bread is not to be thrown to dogs, who are not worthy of the crumbs of mercy,
that fall from the table of the Lord: S. Cyprian: but Hierome says 2. ag.
Iouinian, it was Montanus his heresy before Nouatus: for Montanus was in
Commodus his time, but Nouatus in Decius, etc.
That Nouatus was no Heretic, for denying all virtue of repentance, unto them
that sinned after baptism, who, if they once fell, could never rise again:
That Hels Nabuchadonosors fiery furnace is the guerdon and wages of sin,
whose fervent flame made by naptha, and pitch, and tow, and faggots, does lick
up and devour all rebellious transgressors.

Thus forms he from hence a sophistical inference, a cunning conclusion,
derogatory to true Divinity, that notorious sinners are never to expect for
mercy. But as S. Ambrose, Ambrosius Coriolanus.
seeing S. Augustine to be too nimble a Disputant, and too much skild in
sophistry, caused this to be sung in the Letanies, A logica Augustini libera
nos Domine: So let us all pray, From this Logic of that grand Sophister,
Satan, Good Lord deliver us. See, I beseech you, how with this Logic, this
great Enginer of arguments, accosts and sets upon the soul of devout S.
Bernard, when the agony and pangs of death were on him, a little before his
soul and body, these two friends of long acquaintance, did take their last
leave one of another, (yet not last, if we have an eye to the resurrection, at
the latter day.) Thus the Devil, the great Iempter, appearing to him, did
accuse him, saying, He had no title nor interest, he could make no plea nor
challenge to the Kingdom of eternal bliss. In vita Sancti Bernard.


This holy Father being nothing appalled, or cast down with Lucifer (who was
indeed himself cast down like lightning) made this present reply. I confess
with that faithful Centurion, that I am not worthy to enter under the heavenly
roof of my dear Lord, except the Word do say the word: nor can I challenge it
by any merit; I build no such Babel, which will come tumbling down upon my
own head, but Jesus my Savior (whose divine power, the true Vbiquitary, is
now present with, and assistant unto me) has taken possession of Heaven by a
double right, Iure hereditatis, and Iure redemptionis, by right of inheritance,
and by right of redemption: by the first, he has got possession for himself,
as the eternal Son of that eternal Father: and by the other, in regard of
his death and passion, and of his redemption, he has purchased and obtained
Heaven for me, and for every penitent Believer: At which words Satan departed.
And thus, thanks be to the Lord, S. Bernards soul, (as no question, Mary
Magdalens) escaped, as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler, Psalm. 124.6.
the snare is broken, and it was delivered: And thus he peaceably resigne^ his
soul into the hands of him that created it, like Babilas the Martyr, he
uttering these his last words, the vp-shot of his life, them words of that
Negnim zemiroth, 2 Samuel 23.1.
the sweet Singer of Israel. Now, o my Soul, Psalm. 56.13.
return unto thy rest, for the Lord has blessed thee, he has delivered thy
soul from death, thine eyes from tears, and thy feet from falling, henceforth
shall I walk with the Lord in the land of the living. Thus, Psalm. 57.11.
o Lord, thy mercy reaches unto the Heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds:
wherefore we will praise thy name: yea, our souls shall be satisfied with
marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63.6.
when our mouths praise thee with joyful lips: These are the golden Cymbals,
that so much delight thy skillful ears, o Lord Almighty.

O let us all return with Mary Magdalen, with penitential tears, unto this
blessed Rabboni, who cries to us for to return, Can^. 6.12.
Shuui, shuui, hashullammith, shuui, shuui: Return, return, o Shulamite,
return, return. Four times Return: for God the Fathers sake return, for
God the Sons sake return, for God the Holy Ghost his sake return, for the
whole and holy Trinities sake return.

And if so be we turn unto the Lord, he will accept of our penitency, (for
he bottles up all our tears) and he will receive us into mercy, the mercies
of our God shall embrace us on every side. Maryes penitency, and so the
repentance of us all, is the Asylum, the Sanctuary of every sinful soul;
the Birthday of our regeneration, the Super-sedeas of all our spiritual
debts, the heavenly Jordan, to bathe and wash the leprosy of our souls and
bodies; it is the red sea wherein the host of our spiritual Pharaoh and
himself are drowned; it is the swelling waters of the deluge, that carries the
Arc of the soul aloft, and keeps it from drowning in perdition; it is the
casting out of the old leaven of maliciousness, and the eating of the sweet
bread of sincerity and holiness; it is the (...), S. Chrysostom. Homil. 15.
upon 2 Corinthians.
an house of physic for every sick soul, the Hospital or Inn of the good
Samaritane, the Physician of our souls, where the wine and oil of consolation
is; it is the source and spring, the draw-well of Gods fathomlesse and infinite
mercies; one drop of which, one mite, one crumme is sufficient to wash away our
crimson sins, to feed our starued discontented souls withal: O Lord, thou
Celestial* Almoner, give us of the broken meat of thy mercies, which thou have
laid up in more then twelve baskets full, for them that turn to thee, and
turn us, o good Lord, with Mary Magdalen, so shall we be turned unto thee, o
Rabboni: for we persuade our souls, that if our sins were more in number by
millions, then those of Mary Magdalens, yet thou in mercy would race them
all out of thy book of Items. Fulgent. B. of Rusp. in Africa lib. de poenitud.
and retributione.
And for this, I beseech you read that heavenly and comfortable book of
Fulgentius forementioned, to Venantia of penitence and retribution: wherein he
has bundled up the places of the Scripture, pregnant for this purpose, saying,
Non est perfecta bonitas, a qua non omnis malitia vincitur: nec est perfecta
medicina, cui morbus aliquis incurabilis inuenitur: There is no absolute
goodness, that ouercomes not all maliciousness, nor perfect drug, or true
skill in physic, that leaves any malady uncured. And he shows moreover,
that if Judas, as he legally repented, had trusted in Gods mercy, he surely
had been saved: The Lord has his own peculiar times and places, of gathering
together that which was scattered, of bringing home the lost sheep upon his
own shoulders, to the heavenly fold: of running to meet, of falling on the
neck, and kissing the riotous Prodigal. He has a -- Toll lege, S. Aug. with
Tull Hortensius in his hand, found the Bible under a fig tree. lib. confess.
-- under the tree, Take up and read, [the 13. to the Romans, the three last
verses: For S. Augustine -- Not in surfeiting and drunkenness etc. He has a
shining light from Heaven, both to darken and illumine Paul's, or Saul's eyes, as
he traveled to Damascus, Acts 9.
breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord; was
their not a heavenly trap laid, by this Rabboni, our Lord and Savior Jesus, to
catch this Courtier in? to make a Courtier a true Convert? (A thing, some will
say, something rare:) Yet surely, there be many Courtiers very holy, religious,
and devout, and God increase the number of them: But sure, a chain is sooner
and fairer made of purest gold, then of impurer metal mixed with earth. Christ
Jesus, with his heavenly gospelling, his powerful preaching, caught this
notorious sinner, Mary Magdalen.

Penalty always follows not immediately, nor falls upon the neck of impiety:
Thus many, by the unspeakable mercies of him that wholly is composed of mercy,
who, in their April and prime of youth, have grievously sinned; in their years
of more maturity, were happily reclaimed: of Apostata's, became Apostles: of
Saul's, persecuting; were made Paul's, divinely preaching: of Succisores, were
made Successores, to use Bullingers words: of Cutters, and Swash-bucklers, and
profane persons, were made Captains over the Host of Israel, Successors of
that (...), 1 Pet. 5.4.
the chief Shepherd (...)

RABBONNI.
(...); etc Who has measured the waters in his fist, Esa. 40 12.
and counted Heaven with his span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in
mea, sure, waighed the mountains in a weight, and the little hills in a
balance? Esaias 40.

O sweet Jesus, my brain is a broken cisterne, to contain thee, the water of
life, the euer-flowing springs of Lebanon: Cant. 4.15.
my carnal reason, but like a blind Bartimae: my tongue, like dumb
Zacharies, locked up in my mouth, when I should run descant on thee, o
Rabboni.

O let my tongue be the pen of a ready writer, to treat of thy wisdom, thy
mercy, thy greatness, thy goodness: my pen, that like a cursed Israelite,
ranging like a poor pilgrim, in a wilderness of secular objects, often, nay
too often, lothing that Celestial Manna, surfeiting on pleasancies, calling
rather for the cucummers, the onions, the garlic, the fleshpots of Egypt,
wherein is naught, but Mors in olla, Death in the pot, o thou man of God, I say
my pen is too unfit a pensill, to limb forth thy praise, to describe thy
glory, excellency, and perfection: (...). Nazianz.
O neither is it safe for pollution, to enter into the holy Tabernacle, without
washing at the golden lauer: no more then a weak, blemished, sore eye may gaze
upon the Sunbeams: O therefore purge me, o Lord, with hysope, that my hand, my
heart, my tongue may appear before thy glorious presence, as white as snow in
Salmon, that so thou graciously may accept of this my meaner sacrifice, in
my thought and speech of thee O Lord Rabboni, wishing my very heart and soul
were made an Holocaust, burnt in fervent devotion unto thy most sacred service.

Rabboni.
O my dear Lord and Master, En amo te, S. Aug. lib. meditation. cap. 18.
and si hoc parum est, amem validius: Lo, I love thee, and if this my love be
too little, o give me power to love thee more. Cant. 2.16.
Dothi li vaani lo. And, Any ledothi vedothi li harogneh bashoshannim. Cant.
6.2.
I am my Well-beloueds, and my Well-beloued is mine, who feeds among the
lillies, full of all redolency, and full of all purity. Mary pays tribute of
thankfulness unto her Lord, for his dear love exhibited unto her. As the
water sources and springs in her heart, so it bubbleth up in her religious
tongue: for, ex abundantia, out of the abundance of the heart, Matthew. 12.34.
the mouth speaks.

The tongue is either (...), or (...), cauod, or chalon, either a man's glory,
his grace, or his grief, either his renown, or his reproach.

Here Mary awakes her glory; Awake my glory, awake my lute and harp; Glory,
that is the tongue, See Moll^rus on that Psalm.
the sweetest tuned instrument of music, to ravish the ears of the Almighty.

The Poet says of Menelaus, for his curt and excellent speech, (...)
(...), Homer.
--
He spoke very concisely, but sweetly and shrilly, for he was not addicted to
the descant of many words, neither to err, and go astray from the scope he
first aimed at. Here is no battologie, no vain babbling, but very few words:
nay, but one sole word, and that is not ociosum verbum, Mat. 12.36.
an idle word, she shall give no account thereof: she had learnt the first
verse of the 39. Psalm, which Pambo was nineteen years a learning; I said I
will take heed unto my ways, that I offend not with my tongue. She spoke this
one word to the Word, Eccl. hist.
who himself used not many words; for his (...), was his opus; his (...), was
his res; his fiat, was his fuit. Psalm. 148.5.
He spoke [but] the word, and they were made, Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, and
Hell, and all that in them is.

Thus this Rabboni says; I will, be thou whole: be it as thou beleeuest: so
thy faith has saved thee. He uses no fair flourish of the ignorant
Empericke, who brings his Patient into a trance, by needless words of Art:
Thus he says, Mark 5.41. To the Ruler of the Synagogues daughter. Ioh. 11.43.
Matthew. 27.11. And being accused, he answered nothing. ver. 12.
Talitha Coumt, to the Damsel, and (...), to Lazarus, Iazarus come forth.
Thus, when the chief Ruler asked him, Art thou Jesus, the King of the Jews?
He answers never a word, but (...), Thou say it: And thus this Rabboni calls
her by one word, Mary.

This is the dropping of the word, Ezech. 20.46.
Ezech. 20. And thus says Job, Job 29.22.
super illos stillabat eloquium meum, my talk dropped upon them, Job 29. Thus
Mary becomes an excellent Scholar of so worthy a Tutor, she speaks but one
word, but this one word comprised a great deal more then what she spoke: as
that of Caesar in the Senate, when he saw Brutus, his own adopted Heir, to
stab him, (...), says he, Etiam tu, mi fili? What, and thou my son Brutus?
So that of Eliah unto Naaman, 2 King. 5. lech le shalom, 2 Reg. 5.19.
Go in peace. Here Mary vtters but one sole word, Rabboni. And, o thou
blessed Rabboni, set a watch (o Lord) before our lips, that we offend not with
our tongues.

Rabboni.
List, o list, unto her heavenly tang, her sweetest strain, see how divinely
she runs descant, here is the curious Diapason of her soul, which harmony
falls not under the censure of every vulgar vntutoured ear; for this heavenly
name comprizeth all the names of Christ, as he is Jesus a Savior, Christ the
Anointed, Gnimmanuel, God with us, etc. In all these is he Mary's, and our
Rabboni, S. Bernard.
Mel in ore, melos in aure, Iubilus in cord; Honey to the mouth, melody and
harmony to the ear, and a Iubile to the heart: He it is, who after the
striking with the divine finger of affliction, begets true concord and
reconciliation between God and us. Harken, I pray, attentively to her
insinuated division.

O my dear Lord and sweet Savior, my Master, the love of my soul, whom I
have sought thus long sorrowing: Where have thou harbored and lodged all this
while? O thou precious Balm of Gilead, why wast thou thus long locked up from
thy true Love, from my sad soul, all all forlorn and wounded, and gashed with
grief? Thou, whose lively Idaea, divine character, and fair feature, my soul
has copied out of my senses, that were the first Penmen of thy perfections
(blessed in that they have seen thee, and heard thee) whose exact pourtraiture,
and lively lineaments of face, are there more fairly limbed forth, then that
which thine own pure hands did reach unto Agbarus King of Edessa, impressed on
the handkerchiffe, (if credence may be given unto that:) O my Lord, whom I
have ever set as a seal upon my heart, and as a signet on my right hand; for
whose sake I have paid unto the Air many a sigh, and many a sob, the
subsidies of mine indebted soul, and unto the earth many a brinish and salt
tear, the tribute due unto my dear Lord.

Where wast thou, o good Lord? Whither wandredst thou out of thy new Sepulcher?
What sacrilegious impious hands did steal thee away? Or did thou, by thy
Divinity, steal thy self away? For sure I deem it an omnipotent, divine, no
humane hand took thee away.

O my Lord, my Rabbi, my Rabboni, my Teacher, my Preacher, my Conuerter, my
Savior, I cannot, I will not forget thee, though thou were a great while longer
absent: still my memory shall be the Register of all thy benefits, the true
Recapitulatour and Treasurer up of all thy kindness. My tongue sent in
Embassy from my princely heart, shall ever send forth such streams of
thankfulness, as it first received from thy sacred flow; o thou Ocean of all
bliss. Thou art the Manna, Angels food, the food I fed upon, I feed upon, my
daily bread, my supersubstantiall bread, Lachmam dim. har: in the Syriack Lords
Prayer.
my To morrow bread, my bread that lasts for ever, the bread which I most now
hunger after, for man lives not by other bread only, but by thy word, o thou
euer-blessed Word.

What, have I once more happily set eye on thee? whose glorious face, the
Angels, Seraphims, and Cherubims (those watchful Sentinels of Heaven) desire
ever to behold, and are never glutted with thy glorious presence, and sweet
resemblance. And have I once more heard thy pleasant voice? who have the words
of eternal life, and never any man spoke like this man? O thy face is comely,
and thy voice is sweet. Thy lips drop down pure myrrh: thy love, o Lord, to me
is better then wine: henceforward will I never serve other Master, I will
everlastingly serve thee: I Will never wear any other livery, but Christ Jesus
our Saviors crimson one, for he it is that came from Edom, with red garments
from Bozrah, Esa. 63.
who treads the wine press of Gods wrath alone: I will ever follow thee, o
Lord, -- per tesqua, vepres, dumeta, praecipitia: through all the craggy,
thorny, steepy places of this world, through thick and thin, I will be another
Jonathan, whose soul shall ever be souldred and glued unto thee, o thou the
eternal David; I will follow the Lamb, where ever he goes; I will account
all as dross and dung, to win thee, the only lucre of my soul; the Kingdom
of Heaven shall suffer violence by me; I will esteem all the afflictions of
this life, nothing worthy of that weight of glory, that shall be happily
revealed unto me in the hiest Heavens.

O my Prince, my Priest, my Pastor, my Master, my Physician, my Redeemer, my
Savior, my Protector, my Tutour and Guardian, still be thou present, o Lord
with me, and when thou art taken away, o let me be gathered unto thee, who
ever gatherest together, and never scatterest thine Elect: Sic mihi contingat
viuere sicque mori. O let me thus live, o let me thus dye. Lo, I have begun to
serve thee, a mere vassal unto Legion before, a vessel of dishonor, a true
Haemeroissa, who had had an everlasting bloody issue, The bloudstone.
but for thee the truest Haematites, whom I but touching by the hand of faith
(even the hemme only of thy garment) must acknowledge to be my Raphael, my
medicinal curing God.

O thou Solace of my disconsolate soul, thou great Preserver of men, thou
Easer of the fretting yoke of all bondage, thou Master, thou Friend, thou Father
unto all servants, for thou thy self tookest on thee the shape of a poor
servant, for us who are no sons, but slaves, for me the Gally slave of sin
and Satan once, still, o still, let me be thy servant, thy Mary, and and still
and ever shall thou be my Rabboni.

And this is the Quintessence, the Balm, the Pith and Marrow, the Heart of the
Text.

Rabboni.
Rabboni is a Syriacke word. As the Soldiers of Solon forgot the purity of the
Athenian language; whereupon, as the Histories record, (...).
Soloecisme had its first name: So that the Jews, in the Captivity, forgot
their own native Hebrew tongue, and brought in another tongue into Palestina,
the Chaldaean and Syriacke tongue, which was much used in Christ's time: In
which tongue some Thargums of the Mosaicall Law were made by Onkelus, the
sisters son of Titus the Emperor.

From hence in the new Testament (as there be many Greek words coined from the
Latin, as (...), (...).
and the like) these words used in Christ's time were mere Syriac: Raca,
Mammona, Bariona, Golgotha: Reco, Momouno, Bariauna, Gogoultho, for which the
He brewes do use Rich, Gnosher, Benionah Golgoleth: Golgotha.
So Christ's word upon the Altar of the Cross Sabactani, have thou forsaken
me, Mat. 27. was Syriac: which David in the 22. Psalm. has Gnasabtani: and
thus Abba, Hacaldemo, Moranetho, or Maranatha, in Hebrew, Adonenu bo our Lord
comes, so Bethcasdo, Bethesda, the house of Gods mercy: And thus Rabbouni.
Rab, and Rabbi, Hebr: Ribbon, Calde: Rabbon, and Rabboni, Syriac. The Calde and
Hebrew [ I] is turned into [ a] in the Syriac: as Miriam into Mariam, Migdal
into Magdal, Ribbon into Rabbon.

This which Marie uses is a Syriac word, saluting him by this which is as much
as Master, or as some with an affix, my Master, or my Lord, by this
acknowledging Christ to be God.

Before Christ's death none termed him Rabboni, but Rabbi. Mar and Maran also is
the Lord, but Rabbon is (...): Maran is (...): the first is a Lord, Father of
his Family, or Children, having sole true just dominion over all. (From whence
that word is derived and fet, 1 Pet. verse. 5.
(...) to be dominering Lords over Gods Inheritance, to usurp authority and
domination over the flock of Christ: Ezech. 34 4.
as it is Ezekiel. 34. to rule with cruelty and rigor, beparech.)

The latter is master over his servants only. S. Paul's word Maranatha, comes
of Mar, or Maran, Dominus, a Lord, and atha venit, comes, that is, the Lord
comes (whose servants we either are or should be) and brings a malediction or
curse upon us. Maranatha dominus venit.
It is a word of cursing and Imprecation, as if thus, -- If this be so, or if
it be not so, so Christ judge me now, or at his second coming to judge both
quick and dead.

Rab, Rabbi, Rabbon, Rabboni, a man of mickle worth, Honorable, a Doctor, a
Teacher of much skill and repute for his manifold gifts, and great and
multiplicious knowledge, as Theodoret calls Plutarch, (...): of much learning
and manifold experience. Thus were the learned Jews called Rabbis, or
Rabbis, Esaias 19.20.
Esa. 19. Veijslach lachem moshiang varau. He shall send the Egyptians a
Savior, a great man, and shall deliver them: where the Septuagints do not
translate slate (...) only (...). Ier. 50. Ierem. 50.29.
Call up the Archers against Babell, the word for Archers is there Rabbim, (...)
that is, they that have a great deal of knowledge and singular skill to
shoot, as he in Pindarus with his dart -- (...). Olymp. Ode 10.
(As we say at an inch, or at a hairs breadth) that none escape; for so it
follows in that verse. I pass over with contempt that conte^ptible name that
that scoffer Julian calls Christ by, in his Misopogon. Chi. I leave him to this
his Judge.

(...). Clemens 1 Paedago. 2.
Christ our blessed Savior is (...), He has many names given unto him.
Clemens calls him the Paeonian or Apollinean Physician, to cure the
imbecillities of man, and the sacred Inchaunter of all diseases of the soul. O
let us run and hie to him for cure alone, for all the world in regard of him
are miserable comforters, and Physicians of no value, Job 16.2.
Job 16.2. and Job. He it is that forgiueth all thy sins, and heals all
thine infirmities, Psalm. 103.3.
Psalm. 103.3. a Psalm of unspeakable comfort. Here is our heavenly
Aesculapius, therefore Ecclus 38.9. Ecclus. 38.9.
My son fail not in thy sickness, but pray unto the Lord, and he will make
thee whole. He, as S. Bernard says, has both pretiosas and speciosas
medicinas, S. Bern. Ser. 4. in vigil. Natal. Domini.
both good and goodly, costly and cordial physic, profitable for sanity,
delectable for sight, sweet for the taste.

S. Cyrill according to the Scripture calls him the escape Goat according to his
divinity, S Cyril 9. contra Iulianum. (...) Leuit. 16.
as he is the Goat for oblation according to his humanity. O let us pray unto
God in his name, and pray to him, who is our Mediator and only Savior, God
and Man, and so let us live that we be not separated with the Goats on the
left hand. Math. 25.


Justin. Mart. in dialog. cum Tryphon p. 255.
S. Justin Martyr calls him the stone knife, for spiritual circumcision: Lord
give us this true circumcision of the heart, in the spirit, (not in the letter)
whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans 2.29. (...).


He is called in Bonauent. lib. de ligno vitae superessentialis radius,
Bonauent. li. de lig. vi^oe, cap. last but one.
and radius fontalis. The Headspring Beam whose being is above all being. Lord
illustrate now every dark corner of our souls sitting in Ignorancy.

Damascenus.
He is termed of Damascen (...) the wonder-worker: nor wrought he miracles by
the help of Beelzebub, but by his own omnipotent power he cast out Devils,
for a kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, Si nos non credamus
Christi miraculis en nos facti sumus miraculum, If we believe not the miracles
of Christ, though we see them not, lo we are become a miracle to Gath and
Askelon: Blessed are they that see not, and yet believe.

He is called by Sibylla (...) the Fish, Sybilla.
in a riddle and dark saying, according to the five letters (...), Jesus
Christ the Son of God the Savior: on this fish, broyled on the Altar of the
Cross, by the heat of passion, and his own fervent affection, we do all feed
upon by faith.

He is the Fish taken in the net In vndis passionum, in the waters of his
sufferings, out of whose mouth we pay our Tribute of satisfaction to our God.
For, but for him the blessed Ram that so happily was caught in the bush, all
we the sinful seed of Adam should with Isaac have been immolated, and
offered up by our heavenly Abraham, the Father of all Nations.

Archangelus Burgonouensis Minoritanus. lib. Cabal. dogmat. page 109.119.120.
The Cabalists do call him Vau, a conjunction copulative, because he does
combine and join together God and man: and Cochmah the wisdom of Cheter, God
the Father; for so the Thargum Hierosolimitan begins at the beginning of
Genesis, Becochmah Breshith Barah Elohim: In wisdom God created at the
beginning, etc. according unto that of the Psalmist, In wisdom have thou made
them all.

Vid. Theologicae Orphicae lib. secundu^, cap. 12.
The Mahumetans call him in the Alchoran Ruhella: anima^, spiritum, soul,
spirit, breath, flatum, verbum Dei, word of God; and much there is in Alchoran
writ in honor of Christ.

He is termed also of the before mentioned Justin Martyr: wisdom, the
day star, the staff of Jacob, and the like.

He is called Messiah, (...). Ioh. 10.
the anointed King, Priest, Prophet. In S. John, the Door, no entrance into
the heavenly Holy of Holies, but by him.

The Vine whereinto (let us all pray) we may by faith as lively branches be
inoculated and ingraffed; Ioh 15. (...).
so shall we surely bring forth fruit worthy of repentance: Lord grant we
may ever abide in thee. (...).
The good Shepherd, Lord grant that we thy Flock may ever be fed by thee.
Ioh. 1.29.
The Lamb of God, Ioh. 1. (...), Anagram: (...). Thou art that sheep, that
Lamb. The pascall Lamb on earth: that Lamb to whose supper we shall be
invited to in heaven, Reuelat. 19.1.

He is called (...) the chief Shepherd of the sheep in 1 Pet. 5.4. The
Bishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 5.4. (...). 1 Pet. 2.25. Genesis 49.10.
1 Pet. 2. and the last.

He is that fore-prophesied Shiloh, that is a Savior.

He is in that courtly Prophet Esaias called Peleh, Esaias 9.6.
wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace: wonderful in his conception, birth, and actions: In his conception, by
the spirits ouer-shadowing of the pure Virgin Marie: who can declare his His
generation is (...). Just. Mart. qu. ad orthod. 67. Damsc. 4.14.
Generation? Borne (...), of the purest and inculpable blood of the Virgin
Mary: if, that his title be not too great. Thy name is great, wonderful, and
holy, Psa. 99 3
Wonderful, in being borne, Borne. Nouo ordine. Inuisibi^is monstratur
visibilis. Noua natiuitate -- Virgo intacta est soecunda. Vid. Toletanu^
consilium. (...). Damasc. 4.14.
and yet immortal, never dying according to his Godhead: Baptized, and yet
washing away of sins: paying tribute, but yet out of the mouth of a Fish:
weeping, and yet wiping all tears from our eyes. Counsailour, for his
unspeakable wisdom: Everlasting Father, being Alpha and Omega, the first and
the last: The mighty God, being mighty to save, Esaias 63. the first: The Prince
of peace, Sar shalom, who leads our feet in the way of peace, who gives us
peace of conscience, who brings us to everlasting peace. Amongst all his
glorious names Marie terms him here Rabboni.
So here Rabboni. O thou that art wonderful in all thy works, work thine
own good work in us, make us to be borne again, to live in thee, and
everlastingly to with live thee: O Counsailer advise and direct us: O mighty
God save us: O everlasting Father, let us be everlastingly thy sons: O
Prince of peace, rule us in peace, and conduct us safely to thy endless peace:
Finally, o thou Rabboni, grant that we may ever serve thee, in righteousness
and holiness, all the days of our life, and after this our wretched life,
wherein we too much are servants unto Sin and Satan, draw us after thee,
(for to that end, thou, o Lord, art lifted up) grant that we may follow thee
our Master, follow thee the Lamb, where ever thou go, even to those
Celestial many Mansions in thy Fathers house, to sing that new song of
Halliluiah, unto the blessed Trinity for evermore.

Rabboni; Master.
Magister, Master; some will have of Magis, as Minister of Minus: some of -
(...), skild in wisdom: for Magus and Magia, among the old Persians, were
names and words of honor, and of wisdom, and knowledge.

Some will have Magister of (...), the greatest, so your eminent personages and
Magistrates are called (...), the Great Ones. In all these regards Christ may
be called Master.

CHRIST is Mary's Master, (...). 1. As her Lord and Ruler, she being of his
house, of the household of Faith. 2. As her Builder, Creator, and Maker. 3. As
her gracious and tenderhearted Father, her Abrech, Father and King, or tender
Father, which word was cried before Joseph, Genesis 41.43.
Genesis 41. 4. And lastly, as he is her Schoolmasters, Teacher, Doctor, and thus
Rabboni; for his wisdom and knowledge, the hidden treasures thereof, Coloss.
2.3: (...). Ioh. 7.46.
Col. 2. And, never man spoke like this man: for by his powerful preaching,
Mary was converted. Thus Jesus, by his words, and by his special grace, came
and rested under her blessed Bower and Vine, the hallowed and consecrated
Tabernacle of her soul, as he does to all his holy Elect, (...), Revel. 7.15.
Revel. 7. he shall dwell, or take up his tabernacle in them: Ioh. 14.23.
(...), Ioh. 14.23. (...), 1 Ioh. 3.24.
1 Ioh. Ep. 3.24. So the 1 Ep. of S. John 4. the 12 and 15 verses: 1 Ioh. 4.12.
and 15
he shall make his abode and dwelling, with his Chosen. Again, - (...), He
will come in and sup with them, Revel. 3.20.
Revel. 3.20. I, and more then this, (...), he will wait at the table of
eternity on them, serve them, be their Minister, Luke 12.38.
their Servant, Luke 12. He will be a Servant unto his servants; not as Cham,
a servant of servants, Genesis 9.25.
Gen 9. But (as Gregory that Pope was styled) Seruus seruorum Dei: Polydor.
Virg. lib. 8 cap. 2. de Inven. re.
The servant of the servants of God.

And thus he is both Mary's and our Rabbi and Rabboni, our Master to teach us
all. He is a Prince and Master to the people. Esa. 55. Esa. 55.4.
Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. Ioh. 13.13.
Ioh. 13. I sat daily in the Temple teaching. Matthew. 26.55.
Matthew. 26. Teaching as one that had power and authority. Matthew. 7.29.
Matthew. 7.29. If any therefore want wisdom, let him ask it of God, of this
Rabboni, who is the wisdom of his Father, James 1.5. Cyprian of Tertullian.
who was ever wise.

Thus, Da Magistrum may rightly be spoke of this Rabboni. Thus S. Augustine in
that Tractate of the Master, S. Aug lib. de Magistro.
a Dialogue between himself and Adeodatus, where he teaches him the elements
of learning, for signs, syllables, words, at length in the close of that book
he concludes, that in vain he teaches his son Adeodatus, except he be
instructed and taught of the Lord. There is no Rabbi, or Master, to teach a man
true wisdom, but God, according to that in the Gospel, one is your Master,
Christ. Who, I say, was ever wise, Sieve latens in vtero, sieve vagiens in
praesepio: Sieve iam grandiusculus, interrogans Doctores in templo, non minus
sapientia fuit conceptus, quam natus, paruus quam magnus: As wise at the
cratch, as among the learned Doctors; as wise conceived, as being borne; great
in wisdom, as well when little, as great; as wise, when he was suckled with
Mary his mothers milk, as when he was of more maturity of years: They be the
words of eloquent S. Bernard; S. Bernard. 2. Homil. supra missus est.
Let not that place, says he, in the 2. of Luke, move us to think or speak
the contrary, Luke 2.52.
He grew in wisdom, and stature, and favor, with God and men. Which is to be
understood, says he, -- non secundum quod erat, sed secundum quod apparebat:
not as he was indeed, but as appeared to be. For which we may fitly say, as
S. Damascen of the Creation; Damascen. in libro de Trisagio.
(...). I wonder, and again I wonder, that these things should be so, and I
wonder again if these things were not so.

Sure it is, that years make not wise, as Anacreon speaks of one, Anacreon.
(...), His hairs were gray, but his soul was green: so, nor want of years
make men unwise: as Ignatius, Ignatius in Epistola ad Magnesianos.
the Alpha of the Fathers, has excellently set down in an Epistle: commending
unto the Church of Magnesium, that young Teacher, yet of rare and almost
vnparralleld worth, Damaeus, or Damas: Instancing a great wisdom to be in
Daniel, Histor. Susan. verse. 45.
detecting at twelve years of age, the unlawful lust and plot of the two
Seniours: In Samuel, who very young, 1 Samuel 2.
taxed old Eli, being ninety years of age, for winking at the wickedness and
outrage of his two ungracious sons, Hophni and Phineas: he but remissely
taxing them. In Solomon, 1 Reg. 3.
young, who decided the controversy of the two harlots. In Josiah, who at
eight years, ruined and burnt down the altars of Idolatry, and the Groves. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Thus Timothy did learn the Scriptures, (...), from a child. 1 Timothy 4.12.
And S. Paul says, Let no man contemn thy youth.

But a little for the School. The science or knowledge in Christ, Thomas de
Aquino.
which was in his soul, had not omniscience: if so, then the Creature were
equal with the Creator. For, for that day and that hour, Mark. 13.32. Matthew.
24.36. For this, see S. Ambrose de fide 5.7.

And futably, for the bloody sweat, and Angels comforting* in Hilar. 10. de
Trinit.


no man knows, no not the Angels of Heaven, nor the Son himself, save the
Father: though this particle [ the Son] be not in the 24 of S. Matthew.

Of that day the Son knows not. First, he has no commission to reveal it,
say some. Secondly, S. Thomas of Aquine, -- Dicitur nescire quia non facit
scire: He is said not to know, because he makes not us to know. So S.
Augustine, -- Nescit, scilicet vt alijs esset reuelaturus.

Christus s^mpiternali scientia ex part diuinitatis nouit omnia. See Bonauent
in Centiloquijs. cap. 29. There he shows five manners of knowledge to be in
Christ.
But the truest is, Christ has nesciency of this, according to his bare
humanity; to know this hour, is without the pale of humane capacity: And this
ought to be the bar, cancel and limit of our too scrutinous nature, which
often will assay to plummet the fathomlesse and bottomless sea of Gods most
secret and hidden actions, intentions, presciences, predestinations,
reprobations, determinations, and daily judgments: whereas we should say with
S. Ambrose, S. Ambr. de vocation. Gent. 5. Speaking of the penny, and the
Laborers in the vineyard.
-- divinely treating of these needless scrutinies, -- Tutum est nescire quod
tegitur, non intelligimus iudicantem, sed videmus operantem: Professed
ignorance is the best sapience for concealed mysteries: we cannot diue into
the depth of the Lords secret wisdom, in judging, yet we may plainly discern
him working.

Knowledge and wisdom in that Rabboni, In Christo integraliter permanenter. In
homine diminute transeunter. (...). Nazian.
Christ, was perfect and permanent, in man b^^ken and fleeting: as in Solomon
himself, who was said to be habituated with wisdom in one night; and who
had, as Nazianzene speaks, largeness of heart, more copious then the sand of
the seashore, yet he confesses of himself, that he was -- See the meaning
of this in Naz. Orat. de dogmate and Theologia. Prou. 30.2.
(...), more foolish then any man, and not to have the understanding of a man
in him, Prou. 30.2.

Diminutely, and by a defalcation, wisdom is in man, when there is no absolute
perfection, but there may be ever some obliquity, defect, or redundancy, seen
and found by serious disquisition, and so by this, this wisdom is compassed by
study and painful search: thus no mere man ever yet did reach unto the
eminency of wisdom a^^ knowledge in this life, not Solomon himself, nay nor
Adam, who far out-stripped Solomon in the knowledge of all creatures.

But to go a thought further: wisdom and knowledge may be in man, not only
in part, but at the breathing times of the Holy Ghost, who breaths where, and
when it lusts, even Integrally, by divine infusion, without admixtion of
error, as in Solomon, when he writ the books of Misthle, The books of
Proverbs, Canticles, and the Preacher.
Shir-ha-shirim, and Coheleth, and so in all the sacred Penmen of the
Scriptures, who were the Amanuenses, the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost. But
there is another Integrally, not only by divine infusion, but by inhabitation
and conjunction of Divinity, and this Integrall knowledge and wisdom is in
Christ, and thus in Christ dwells the fullness of wisdom (as the Godhead
dwells in him bodily) beyond the orb and reach of the wisest that ever lived:
yet because nothing works (as we say) beyond the actiuity of its own
sphere; Theodor. (...).
And, as Theodoret speaks, The beams of Divinity in Christ, were dimmed and
rebated, by that (...), That mantle of the flesh, as appeared in his bloody
sweat, his praying against that cup of passion. Luke 22.44. Math. 26.39. John
18.11.
Ioh. 18.11. and Matt. 26.39. and in that doleful cry, of - My God, my God,
why have, etc. therefore in a suitable manner, wisdom and knowledge in Christ,
had his cancels and lifts (as being not infinite) in regard of his humane
flesh, he being like unto us in all things, sin only excepted: and yet only
like in quality, not equality. And thus Christ knew not that day, and that
hour, though he were that Rabboni.

Rabboni. Mary knew this well, that one is your Master, and that is Christ. And
be not called Rabbi: it is Pharisaicall. And S. James: Be not called many
Masters: It is a blur and ineluible stain in the Pharisees, to affect the
prime seats in the Synagogues, and at Feasts, and to be called Rabbi, Math.
23.7.
Rabbi.

In the School -- aliud est -- Esse, vel fieri, Magistri. Aliud vocari,
Magistri. Aliud velle esse, and vocari, Magistri.


1. One thing to be a Master, Rabbi, or Doctor, and to be made one.

2. Another thing to be so vulgarly called Master, or Doctor.

3. And a third thing, to desire to be, and to be called Master.

The first two may be good, but the last is ill; and yet not simply ill: for
if any of eminent parts do desire and affect regiment, magistery, power,
authority, and degree competent for the managing of any place of eminency,
wherein the rule of wisdom is required, and be it the more to give grace and
countenance to his wisdom in that titular place, if he be sensible (without
elevation or haughtiness of spirit) of his own (yet vn-valued) worth, and
aiming at the future common good, in no wise at his own private profit, like
the Tyrant in Synaesius, Synaesius de Regno.
to say, (...), Thine is mine: He surely is not peccant in this, in thus
desiring Magistery and Rabbi ship; if, I say, the Iebusite-pride of heart be
extermined and banished out of his borders.

To desire Rabbi-ship, a degree or honor solely, is, as the Schole speaks, --
Appetere consequens sine Antecedente, As if an inferior ignorant person should
affect to make a leap with Elizeus, from the plow to be a Prophet; with Peter,
from being a Fisherman, to be a Fisher of men; with David, from the
sheepfold, following the Ewes great with young, to feed Jacob Gods Chosen, and
Israel his Inheritance. If he lay his leuel at sinister respects, as at
esteem, with tinseld Herod, to be heard and seen, and admired at, it is (...),
vainglory: if at gain, it is (...), love of lucre: if at ease, and rest, and
voluptuousness, and luxury, then is it (...), love of pleasure: Prou. 30.15.
Lagnalucath shette Banoth? Nay more: we have descryed the Horse-leech to have
three daughters; all of them the Limbs and Brats of Abaddon.

The sin lies three ways.

First, in desiring of honor, a Secondly, in so affecting honor, that we
refer and ascribe it not unto Gods honor: Aqui. ad Regem Cypri.
and all dependancy is from Superior Dominion. Thirdly, in not employing and
plating out that honor unto a public good.
S. James forbids to be called many Masters, that is to undergo the danger
and burden without cause, when there is no vrgency. Thus where there is a
competent number of Iusticiary Magistrates, for the managing of any peculiar
place, City, Commonwealth, a requisite number of Captains and Colonells, for
the conducting of a Camp; a sufficient number of Doctors, grave, wise,
learned, religious (having both Vrim and Thummim engraven on their breasts.) In
the Church of Jesus Christ, so many Mosesses and Aarons, Leaders to the Land of
promise. It is a fault to be desirous for honor and repute sake, that we our
selves should make a needless addition to that number, not considering this,
that to whom much is given, of him much shall be required. Rulers are not so
thin sown, that there is need of our growing up.

There was a definite number of Seventy Elders. Exodus 18.
A suitable Assembly and Company of Officers and Judges to aid Moses, by
Iethro, his father in laws advise, as a set multitude of the Athanatoi in
Herodotus: Herod. in Polyhymnia.
No infinity of Apostles, and of the Disciples of our Lord and Savior Jesus.

Vnicus est Rabbi vester, One is your Master, Christ: One chief, prime,
celestial Master, who teaches and is not taught himself, howsoever he
learned us obedience by that which he suffered: but there be many subordinate
Masters, who teach, and are themselue taught of God, of Angels, of men. As
there is one Moses, for matters of moment, of grand decision; but many selected
Elders, for causes of less importance, for triuiall occurrents.

This speech, of -- one, is your Master, denies not regulated Dominion,
Superiority, Rabbiship, as the Anabaptists, and Judas Galilaeus would have it;
from whom those Galilaeans were denominated, whose blood Pilate mixed with
their sacrifice. By the way, these Galilaeans were a kind of Catharists, who
followed the sect and decree of Judas the Galilaean: Josephus Iud. hist.
And his decree, as Josephus, in the last book of the Jewish Antiquity, See
Anastasius Bishop of Nice, in his Quest. upon the Script.
says, -- It had a great pretext and show of piety: for he auerred, that no
man ought to call any one Lord, either in honor or ciuility: whereupon many of
these Galilaeans Secters of him, rather then they would call Caesar Lord, did
undergo very grievous torments: And whiles they were in the midst of their
Mosaicall sacrifices, to which only they held themselves, abandoning and
abrogating all others, Pilate mixed their blood with their own sacrifice.

This speech -- one, is your Master, brings not in new Popedomes, new
Elderships, disanulling all other authority, and disabling all wiser Regiment,
leaving only Iothams bramble, to be anointed King. It denies not Kings
Supreme Governors, Counsailours, Lords, Bishops, the reverend Rabbis of the
Church, Judges, Magistrates, nor inferior Masters and Rabbis: It brings not
in the Rabbi of Romes primacy, as if thus, -- Vnicus est Rabbi Romanus: It
brings not in Viretus and Caluins Presbytery and new Papacy: (...), Jude 8
verse. (...), 2 Pet. 2 verse. They despise authority.
It brings not in Beza's Parity, no Hierarchy, but a Gauel-kinde among all the
Clergy: no vnmated purity, nay impurity. It is the base speech of Edom, Down
with it, down with it, even to the ground.

(...).
These, in the Scripture, are termed Whisperers, Raylers, Murmurers,
Malcontents for their own mean fortunes, Mockers, Makers of Sects, Schisms
and Dissentions, And as S. Paul, Romans 16.17. he first bids us (...), to look
about us, then (...), to avoid them. Now, I beseech you Brethren, mark them
diligently, Romans 16.17, 17.
which cause dissension and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
received, and avoid them: the reason is in the succeeding verse; For they that
are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and with
fair speech and flattering, deceive the hearts of the simple. These and such
like cannot rightly call with Mary, our Savior Jesus Rabboni.

Excellently Nazianzene, whose sweet lines I cannot forget, (...), The surfeit
of honey breeds and procures a vomit. Where a Prince is most gracious, benign,
flexible to good motions, loath to take forfeit of every offense, nay where he
grants a Toleration, if not of Indulgency, yet of Conniuency, there the
Schismaticke, there the turbulent male-contented spirit, (who is like
Quicksilver, ever tumbling up and down, till he be imprisoned within such
walls, as possibly he cannot eat through.) There the men of thy hand o Lord, the
sons of Belial, belk out and vomit their impostumations, their virulency
most, against Principality, Hierarchy, all Economy, and Authority. There the
Mintmaster of Hell bestirres him, the Powder-plotter, the God of Flies, -
Beelzebub, to cause those Flies that came flickering out of the bottomless
pit, that came humming out of Hells Larder, to seek to ouershade the Sun
with an Egyptian darkness; these Cymmerian Cyclopses with gun powder
barrells, which lurking under faggots, and billets, and bars of iron, like
close prisoners, should have broke their prison-wals, or have had a
Gaol-deliuery, by the match of a bloody Boute-feu (match-lesse for his villainy)
Faux, or Fax Infernalis, the Titio, the Firebrand of Hell, at one-sudden blow,
to have blown up all. But thanks be unto the Lord, who, with the bellows of
his breath, and fearful indignation has blown them all down to Hades, --
(...), Acts 1.25.
to Judas his own proper vault and place, to whom is reserved the mist of
darkness for ever. Thus the Diggers and Pioners for others, do become their
own Sextons, to dig their own graves, and are fallen into the same pit they
delved for others.

Thus Haman is hanged by the crag on Mardoche's gibbet: And thus those Stygian
Sheolits, that thought with the damp of their powder mine, to have put out all
the lustring and glorious Lights of Israel, to have huft up so high, the
Anointed Cherubes, the Cedars of Libanon, with all the sacred Sciences, the
goodly Chesnut-trees in the garden of God, the Flower of Nobility, the grave
Senatory, the uncorrupted Judges, the Reverend Ephod-wearers, the Chariots of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof, the wise Rabbis, nay Rabboni himself: some
of their hairy scalps, which God has wounded, are without honor, staked up
higher then ever they dreamed, (they dreaming of height of honor) their
brainelesse sculs are made gazing stocks to God, to Angels, and to Men: their
brains (which ever were at a dead low ebb for wisdom) are long ago dropped out
of their too fiery sockets, and have left a nasty noisome stench behind them.

So let thine enemies perish, Judge. 5.31.
o Lord; do unto all such as have ill will to Sion, Judge 7.
do unto them as unto the Midianites, Judge. 8.
as unto Sisera, and to Iabin at the river, that ancient river Kishon, Psalm.
83.9, 10, 11, 12.
which perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the earth: make them and
their Princes like Oreb and Zeb, Vide Psalm. 83. from the 9 verse to the end.
like Zebah and Zalmanah, [the four Kings of Midian] which say, Let us take
our selves the houses of God in possession, etc. And Lord protect and bless
the shield of this our Island, So are Princes, Psalm. 47.9.
our most gracious and Sovereign Lord the King, James the first of that name,
from all foreign invasion, and from all viperine and inbred domesticke
conspiracy and treason: smite through the loins of all his enemies, but on him
let his crown flourish, and the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, be
upon his sacred head, the thrice-noble Prince Charles.

Until the second coming of Shiloh our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and let
all loyal and true-hearted Subjects say, Amen.

And now let our streams of devotion and thanksgiving return unto the
fathomlesse Ocean of all mercies, from whence they were first derived and had
their flow. And sing with all devotion of soul, the 124 Psalm.
Thanks be unto the Lord, who has showed us marvelous great kindness in a
strong City, whose strength was from the Lord: O pray for the peace of our
Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, peace be within thy walls, and
plenteousnesse within thy Palaces: And blessed be Rabboni our Lord and Master,
the Lord God of Israel, world without end, and let all the people say, Amen,
Amen.

RABBONI.
Note here an admirable extract: Christ Jesus he first calls Mary, before Mary
can call him Rabboni. All our utterance, all our action, all our power and
ability proceeds from the sacred spirit, the blast to the organ pipe, the hand
that moves the golden Cymball, here we may cry Gelgel, o wheel: Ezech.
and (...), o profundity, the depth of the power of God, his ways are past
finding out, we love him because he loved us first, 1 Ioh. 4.19.
1 John 4. The spirit helps our infirmities, Romans 8.26.
Ro^. 8. Draw me, and we will run after thee, Cant. 1.3.
Cant. 1. First, there must be a drawing, then a running: Prayer is premised,
the action is performed, but Grace presupposed. No man (says Christ) comes to
me, John 6.44.
except the Father that sent me, (...), do draw him, yet not violenter, but
volenter, not haled by constraint, but readily led by a merciful manuduction.
Arise, o North, and come, o South, and blow upon my Garden, let my Beloved
(here she corrects her own style) come to his Garden, and taste of his
pleasances: first, she calls it Ganni, and then Ganno, Cant. 4.16.
my Garden, and then his Garden: As though all the fragrant flowers of Gods
graces in her, were of his plantation and setting.

So, work out your salvation with fear and trembling: and then immediately, as
reuersing and reclaiming his own error, he says, For it is God that works
in you both, (...), both to wi^^ and to effect.

First, in the Psalm, Seek ye my face: and then is ecchoed back, Thy face,
o Lord, will I seek. Esaias 40.6.
Esaias 40. The Spirit said, cry: and he answered, what shall I cry? The Holy
Spirit must first dictate, then can we make repetition: It gives us Hindes
feet be fore we can run, or so much as stand: Ezech. 1.2.
Ezech. 2. The Spirit says, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and in the next
verse, the Spirit set me upon my feet. Hashiuenu, Jehovah Eleca venashuna.
(...) Turn us, Lament. 5.21.
o Lord, and so shall we be turned.

First, there was a -- flauit Spiritus, then a -- fleuit Maria. The Spirit
first breathed, and then this blast begot the shower, Mary mourned. Rabboni
here first calls Mary, before Mary is able to cry Rabboni. Therefore, S. Aug
last words 18. chap. of the Soliloquies.
Da Domine quod iubes, and iube quod vis, Lord give us power to perform what
thou command, and then command what thou will.

O good Jesus, in the attracting odor of thy sweet ointments, we will run after
thee, for words, for works. For words, thou have the words of eternal life,
and never any man spoke like thee. For works, John* 7.46.
Thou did not reject the penitentiary Thief confessing; the woman of Canaan
imploring; the Adulteress deploring; nor the Evangelist at the receipt of
custom sitting and sinning; not the poor Publican suppliantly praying; not the
Disciple Peter reuolting; nay, nor thy very enemies smiting thee, scourging
thee, mocking thee, crowning thee, crucifying thee, with a -- Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do.

If I, o Lord, be poor and bankrupt in merit, having the palsy of spiritual
imbecility, my sinnewes resolved by surfeit of sin, the blindness of internal
ignorance, the bloody issue and flux of concupiscence, the deafness, and
dullness, and stupidity of heavenly understanding, if I cannot call thee
Rabboni, o then thou blessed Rabboni, the Total Sum of all my bliss, the
true Treasury and Exchequer it self of all my happiness; Lord enrich me with
thy mercies, give me a firm and steady hand to all holy actions, make with
thy spiritual spittle and clay, the scales of mine eyes to fall, that I may
see the wonders of thy Law, o thou bright Morning Star, thou Star of Jacob,
Lord lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death: O let me, poor wretch,
but touch the hem of thy wedding garment, thou blessed Bridegroom: Thou Son of
righteousness, touch my charmed ears with the finger of thine omnipotent
mercy, and cry but Ephthata, be thou opened, and I shall ever acknowledge,
that it was Digitus Dei, the hallowed finger of my God, that opened the door
of entrance into my soul, and so shall I hear of joy and gladness, that the
bones that thou have broken may rejoice; and so shall I be sure to hear the
sweet concent, the heavenly harmony, the new song of those blessed Saints,
these shrill-voyc'd Quiristers, in that Triumphant Church, in the new
Jerusalem, the Mother of us all: O call me, o Lord, as thou did the
Shulamite, Return, return, o Shulamite, return, return: O rouse me out of
my slumber, my dead sleep of sin, even by my name, so shall I call thee, o
Lord, with Mary, by thy sweet name, Rabboni, my Lord, my Master, my only Lord
and Savior.

Rabboni.
O Rabboni, o Lord God of Hoasts, who is like unto thee? Thou rulest the raging
of the sea, Psalm. 89.
and stillest the waves thereof, when they arise, the Heavens are thine, and the
earth is thine: thou have laid the foundation of the round world, and all that
is therein: Thou have created the North and the South, Tabor and Hermon shall
rejoice in thy name, o Rabboni: Thou that have filled the basket of my soul,
not with the broken meat of thine incomparable mercies only, (I being not
worthy to gather up the crumbs under thy bounteous table) but with thy better
Manna, the hidden Manna, even thy sacred self, the bread of life: And this
Manna have I hid in the golden pitcher, in the midst of the Arc of my true
and faithful heart (by celestial meditation and deeper contemplation) which
never shall be transported, or depart from thee, o Lord, unto Ashdod of the
Philistims, except it be to cause Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.3.
that Idolatrous God, to fall down upon his face, to break off his head, and
the palms of his hands. There will I coffin up, intomb, and inshrine my Lord,
Rabboni: Thou that gave me what thou did not owe to me, and forgauest
what I did owe to thee. O great is thy obligation, o my soul, wherein thou
stand bound for this, unto this thy Rabboni, thy Redeemer.

Shall I say, As Seneca lib. 8 Epist. 63. to Lucilius.
Vbicunque sum, mea sum, where ever I am, I am mine own? no, no, where ever I
am, thine, S Ambr. in Offic.
o sweet Jesus, I am: Tota sum tua, I am wholly thine, and will be
everlastingly. Ruth 1 16.
As Ruth unto Naomi, so I to thee: Entreat me not, o Lord, to leave thee, where
thou go, I will go, where thou dwell, I will dwell, where thou dyest, I
will dye, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and more also if
ought but death, nay if death it self part thee and me.

I have begun well to serve my Lord and Master, Rabboni, and so will I
persevere unto the end, I never will end ill: that holy and devout Father bids
me fly this, vt daemonium meridianum.

How have I, poor, wretched, silly soul, wept and lamented for thy loss? Now
will I weep no more: yes, but I will weep for joy: The ore-flowing Sea of thy
gracious favor, did first so enrich, and fill the cisterne of my heart, and so
followed with his pressing and pursuing weight, that it has caused the water
to ascend up to my head, the springhead, from whence, as out of Paradise, four
channels and streams of tears are happily derived, three streams of sad
sorrow, and but one of joy, and that one running with a brimmer eddie, then all
the other three. The first, for thy passion: the second, for my sin, the pully
of thy passion: the third, for thy absence, being dead and buried, and for thy
remove out of the Sepulcher, I deeming thy sacred body, to have been
unworthily pilfered away: the fourth, no stream of sorrow, but a shedding of
tears for exceeding joy, for enjoying once again thy blessed presence, and
having by thee my reconciliation assured me, and being of thee so lovingly
called by my name: No word of taxation to my soul, as some may dream and
descant, (though to thy immense glory, I cannot deny, but I much deserve it for
the Chenograph, the handwriting of sins, that was Item'd against me) but a
word of assured singular consolation.

Out of which this blessed balsame may be extracted: That if Mary were so much
delighted, and even transported with seeing her Savior here, and hearing him
speak but one sole word to her, in calling her Mary: Then sure in Heaven, both
she and we shall ten thousand times more rejoice there, to enjoy his presence,
in whose presence is all fullness of joy, and there to hear him speak in the
language of Canaan, much sweeter words of endless comfort to our souls, that
there by means of him (the river of the water of eternal life) shall bathe
and drench themselves in streams of bliss.

But list, I pray you, still to Mary.

O dear Lord, the love of my soul, what an invaluable loss is it to lose
thee here? O then what a lamentable loss have they that lose thine everlasting
presence, o thou heavenly Benjamin, thou Son of the right hand, sitting in
glory at the right hand of thy Father. I cannot be sated nor filled
sufficiently with the presence of my Lord Rabboni, nor with thinking and
meditating on thee. A heavenly dropsy has possessed my soul: the more I taste,
the more I thirst after thee; the Fountain of the Gardens: the Well of living
waters: and the Springs of Lebanon. I know what wisdom says, Ecclus. 24.24.
Ecclus. 24. they that eat me shall have more hunger, and they that drink of
me shall thirst the more.

O let me cling to thee everlastingly, my Rabboni, my Master, my Lord, my God,
the best and sweetest meeter, for Deus is Meus, my God, my Lord, my Master: In
whom Ego credo, I believe, for personal and particular faith must save.

O my dearly Beloved, in him that loved us most, our Lord and Savior Jesus.
Be no more, I beseech you, servants to Sin and Satan: 1 Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which
fight against the soul: especially in them that are in the bud and prime of
their age, who auricularly and justly may reveal and bewray unto the Great
Confessor of Heaven and earth, with S. Augustine in his youth, S. August. li.
2. confess.
that they do -- syluescere varijs and vmbro sis amoribus, that they lurk
with Adam, and are tapisht in the shady Thicket of diverse darling and minion
sins. For which they had need to cry with David, O remember not the sins and
offenses of my youth, Psalm 25.6.
but according to thy mercy think thou upon me (o Lord) for thy goodness.
Ephesians. 4.24.
O be ye renewed in your spirit, put ye on the new man, who after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness,

If you have been Retainers to Apollyon, the General of Gebenhinnom, of Hell
it self, if you have been Followers and Attendants unto many, nay, to any
Masters, save with Mary to Rabboni himself, o cast and rend off their
liueries, shake hands with their service, divorce your affections from this
cerus'd Iezabel-world, unto which you have been so long wedded, on which so
much enamoured. With Jacob the heavenly Pilgrim, pass over Iordane, the
troublesome waters of this wretched, doleful and wearisome life, wherein there
is no Road, no Harbor, no Port or Haven of bliss, but many Euroclydons, many
struggling blasts, and contrary-pointed gusts of all anxiety: and you shall eat
the true Passover, the right Paschall Lamb in Heaven: not with sour herbs
of sorrow, but with all solace and everlasting joy: Take nothing in your
journey with you, but your staff and scrip, abiuring all humane help, all
earthly means and perishing provision; better things are there provided for
you in your own Country: clamber up with that good old Patriarch, by the
ladder of blessed and sanctified thoughts, even to that Starry Temple (wherein
no dark and dismal night shall frown) whose Builder, and Maker, and eternal
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, is Rabboni himself.

Yea, with Elias, cast away the crimson mantle of thy flesh by martyrdom (if
so required) and soar up to the Habitations of the Highest, of him that is I
AM THAT I AM, in the fiery Chariot of all fervent and regulated zeal.
Theophrastus in charactere de Impur.
Tender no more service ever unto Satan, he is that (...) of Theophrastus, who
is wont to give to his Followers, insupportable great burdens, (...), and but
little meat: great sorrow of soul, and small comfort: or if any comfort at
all, it is no more but a seeming solace, mere Alchymie for pure metal,
glow-wormes fire for true warmth: foul Leah, 1 Samuel 19.13.
for fair Rachel: Michals image, and stuffing of the pillow with goats hair,
for David himself. But serve ye Rabboni, Jesus our Savior, who gives to his
Followers, his Servants, light burdens, and a plenteous table: for his yoke is
easy, Matthew. 11. (...). Matthew. 5.12. (...).
Matthew. 11. and his reward is great, a great reward in Heaven. Matthew. 5. As S.
Paul terms an everlasting weight of glory, and most excellent, -- (...), 2
Cor. 4.17.
2 Cor. 4.

Mesech and Kedar, of the posterity of Iaphe^ and Ismael.
O the cursed, damned, and deplored days wherein we live, and woe is me that
I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have my habitations in the tents of
Kedar: wherein the most, God knows, have sworn fealty and homage, and taken
the Oath of Allegiance unto Lucifer, Prince of utter darkness.

The Floodgates of sin are set open, the full springtide whereof flows in
our very channels.

The great Ship of the whole Universe leaketh, and drinks up all iniquity
like water: it needs much carining, especially for that soul insinuating
sin of Pride, no Nouice, no Puny, but an aged Sin: S. Bernard.
that subtle Evil, that secret Poison, a hidden Plague, the Grandmother of
Hypocrisy, the Parent of Envy, the Spawne and Source of all Impiety, the
Touch-wood of ill Concupiscence, the Canker and Rust of all Virtue, the Moth of
Sanctity, the Hood-winker of the Heart, the Begetter of all Maladies without
all Remedies, except it be by mere mercy: A Sin that now bears rule and
chief dominion.

Justin says of Ninus, son of Semiramis, that he did change his own sex
with his mother; for as his mother, for her mankeenesse, was more like a man
then a woman; so he, for his effeminatenesse, was more like a woman then a
man. Are not the days far worse, then those that were in Isay the Prophets
time? Isa. 3. Are not sexes altered? Contrary to that in Deuteronomy. 22.5. The woman
shall not wear what pertains to man, nor man put on the attire of women.
Contrary to that, 1 Cor. 11.6, 15. Lord bring us all to conformity and decency.

Irenaeus fragment. epist. ad Florinum.
The days were ill in Polycarpus his time, when as he cries, O bone Deus, in
quae me tempora reseruasti, vt ista patiar? O good God, to what sinful and
tainted times have thou reserved me, that I should be burdened with hearing
and seeing such things.

What he exclaimed against pernicious heresies broched in his days, we may
very well against all impiety.

The days I fear me, for them, and all other sins, now are grown far
worse.

S. Chrysostom powers out his complaint of that great City Antioch, S.
Chrys^stom. 40 Homel ad Pop. Antioch. in med. Homil. Q^od non oporteat lapsum
de seipso disperare.
saying, How many, I beseech you, think ye, of all this City, this spacious
City, shall be saved? It is (says he) a fearful thing to speak, yet with
grief of heart I must needs utter it, among so many millions there cannot a
hundred scarce be found, -- and de illis e^iam dubito; and I doubt of them too.
If in that City, so well tutoured and taught, by so worthy a Rabbi, such a Son
of Thunder, as Saint Chrysostom was, what shall become of other Countries,
Cities, Towns, Villages, Houses, the Sinks of all Impiety? Lord Jesus amend
all that is amiss, both in this populous City, and in us all, and call not our
sins unto account, for if thou Lord should look straightly what is done amiss,
who is able to abide it?

I wish the most, the greatest part of the multitude and fry of men, were not
of that impious and irreligious mind, Or Ratholdus: See Theodoricus de N^em. 3
de priuilegijs imperij

See also Gualter upon S. Luke has the same.

Rabod. Verstegan.


Raboldus the President and Prince of the Frizons was of, who coming to the
Font to be baptized, and so to embrace the Christian Faith, asked where all his
Ancestors were, that were dead: the answer being made, that they were all in
Hell, then says he, Thither will I go too.

Ah poor distressed and damned soul, unhappy Prince, who having one foot in
Christ Jesus his poor Fisher-boat, that carried naught, but holy fraught to
Heaven, plucked back his uncircumcised foot out of the Font, and stepped
desperately into the Wherry and Barge of Satan, so to be ferried into Mare
mortuum, the dead Sea and Lake of Hell, Tophet, Esaias 30. vlt.
the burning whereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord, as a river
of brimstone kindles it: From whence the Lord of his infinite mercy deliver us.

O ye holy and blessed Cherubims, that ever behold the Mercy-seat, ye that
are clad in Sables, Ermins, scarlet and purple robes, that sit at the feet of
so many learned Gamaliels, the great Expositours of the Law and Gospel too,
ye that feed on the myrrh-drops that fall from the lips of Solomon himself:
Nay, o all ye Holy and Elect of God, let me become even a Beggar for your
sakes, to beg on you for Christ Jesus sake, to consider what I say, and the
Lord Jesus grant you understanding in all things, have a care of Christ's coin,
that -- Moneta Dei, your own souls so dearly boght. Couch not with Issachar,
like an Ass between two burdens, cast off these hampers of Iniquity, that
heavy Zach. 5.7.
Talent of lead, as the Prophet Zachary terms sin. Be no more slaves to
Sathanas, Satah. Aposta. Nas. serp. Justin Martyr. in dialog. ad Tryphon. Ind.
that Apostaticall Serpent (for so his name implies) that Destroyer of your
souls. Serve Rabboni, our Lord and Master Christ, be true S. Christophers, as
Athanasius calls Believers, carry Christ Jesus, -- (...), In your hand, and in
your heart. In your hand, by outward profession: In your heart, by inward
persuasion, holy conversation, daily imitation, nay, by the sealing of this
your profession, by confession, by effusion of your own dearest heart-bloud, by
blessed Martyrdom, the Guerdoner of constant holy Confessors, which for a
piercing crown of thorns here, impalls and girts our head with the golden
wreath, the flowery garland of Immortality. For he that loses his life for my
sake (says Christ) and for the Gospels sake, he shall save it: if we taste
here of the bitter cup of his passion, we shall then quench our thirst, in the
full streams of his endless consolation. If we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him.

O let us all embrace and love this Rabboni, Jesus our Master, the Savior of
our souls. And let every one of us thus Apostrophize, in private retire unto
himself with Mary: Araris and Tygris, Ister and Isis, the bitter waters of
Marah, and the sweet and still waters of Siloam, shall sooner meet together,
Quam nostro Illius, labatur pectore vultus. Then mine ungrateful want of
memory, and my dearest Lord Rabboni. He is engraven and enameld in my soul, in
neuer-dying golden characters: Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus -- He, even
He, shall be my God for ever: to him will I sacrifice my heart, my truest
Holocaust, burnt with fire of due devotion. As Artemisia did Mausolus his heart,
who pounced and macerated it to poulder, after this her dear Husband was
deceased, and every day did eat it like salt, to season her repast withal,
saying with sobs and tears, that her own breast was the fittest and choysest
tomb to interre him in: so will I every day, or at least, as often as I can,
feed upon my sweet Savior, in the Eucharist: and bury him in the new
Sepulcher of my soul.

My love to him shall be like the Bow of Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.22.
that never turned back from wounding the enemies of my Lord.

If I forget thee, o Rabboni, o sweet Jesus, then let my right hand forget her
best cunning in apprehending the mercies and promises of my God, which are in
Jesus Christ, Yea and Amen: sure to come to pass: yea, let my Tongue, the
Timbrell, the sweet Cymball of thy praise, cleave in silence to the roof of
mine unhallowed mouth: If all memories do turn Apostata's, yet will I (o
Lord) never forget thee.

Though Israel play the Harlot, Hos. 4.15.
yet my little Judah shall never do so: Let the Impenitent Thief revile and
rail on Christ, Luk 23.
I will beg for a Memento, Lord remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom: Let those idolatrous Mamzers serve and worship other Gods, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
the Gods of the Ammonites, the Gods beyond the flood, I and my house will
serve the Lord Rabboni. Iosu. 24.15.


Let the ten Tribes follow Jeroboam son of Nebat, etc. offer incense to the
golden Calfe at Bethel and Gilgal, adore Dagon, bow down to Rimmon, and in
this, God be merciful unto them: I know what the Angel said unto S. John,
Revel. 19. (...), Revel. 19.10.
worship thou God: what Nabucadonosor said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach,
Dan. 3.28.
Mesach, and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and has delivered his
servants that put their trust in him: what S. Paul says, There is none other
God but one: 1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6.
For though there be that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or earth, as there
be many Gods and many Lords, (...).
yet unto us there is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are all things,
and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him, etc. one Lord, one Master, one Rabboni.

Of whose greatness and glorious Majesty, that -- (...), Damascen. in
Trisagio, e^ Cyrillo in lib. de spir. ad Hermeium quem non legi.
that astounding glorious vision, to be trembled at, not to be imagined, much
less imaged; I can say nothing at all, but as Nazianzene speaks, so will I,
Nazianz. in Apologetico.
-- (...). Victus sum, and me victum esse fateor: I am at a nonplus, and
ingenuously do confess I am at a nonplus. S. Ambros. de fide ad Arrian. cap.
6.
And with S. Ambrose, -- Hic est de quo cum dicitur, non potest dici. This is
he, of whom, when we have spoke all that we can of him, we have spoke
nothing at all of him. Neither Henoch translated; nor Elias carried up to
Heaven in a fiery Chariot; nor Paul rapt up into the third Heavens, who heard
things inutterable; nor Solomon, whose wisdom was as the sand of the
seashore, so much admired of the Queen of Saba; nor Moses, skild in all the
learning of the Egyptians; nor the Disciples who did receive the Holy Ghost in
a visible shape; nor the Cherubims and Seraphins, that daily do minister at
the high Altar; nor the whole Quire and Hierarchy of Heaven can diue into the
Essence of this God, either by their matutine or vespertine knowledge, to limb
forth rightly this Rabboni.

To conclude, with the woman of Samaria, Hydriam non habeo, (...): John 4.
I have no bucket, and if I had, the Well is too deep.

To this God, to this Jesus, to this Rabboni, I will everlastingly cleave unto:
As the soul of Jonathan was knit, and glued, and souldred unto David, he
loving him as his own soul, so shall ever mine unto this heavenly David, for
so the Holy Ghost terms him, Ezech. 37.24. Ose 3.5. Ezech. 34.23.
Ezech. 37.24. Jesus Christ, our Rabboni, was this David: for David was dead
long before Ezechiel prophesied.

Though I be cauteriz'd and seared with hot irons, my joints strappado'd, and
pulled, and rackt in sunder with wild Horses: my flesh nipt off with hot burning
pincers: mine eyes, the cazements of my soul, the lamps of my body, bored and
wombled out: Though I walk on hot burning coals barefoot, with Tiburcius, I
will say with him, I am videor mihimetipsi super rosas incedere: Now me thinks
I walk upon a bed of roses: Though with S. Agnes in S. Ambrose, I be cast into
the flaming furnace, I will cry with her, S. Ambrose Sermon. 91.
-- Ecce nunc rore coelesti perfusus, per Spiritum Sanctum, focus iuxta me
moritur, flamma diuiditur, and ardor incendij, etc. Now the raging flame is as
besprinckled with celestial deaw, by the Holy Ghost it is extinguished, etc.
It shall in no wise touch me; as indeed it did not, for they were to put her
otherwise to death.

Eusebius.
Though with Polycarpus, I be put to the sword, and first to be burned, I will
never cry, Domine Caesar, but Domine Rabboni.

Though with Ignatius, I be given up to be grinded in the jaws and tearing
teeth of savage beasts, as the Lesbian woman in Plutarch sang, Plutarchus in
symposi^.
so will I, (...) Grind mill grind, so that I may be made by kneading, mundus
panis Christo, Eusebius.
qui mihi panis est vitae: pure manchet for the table of the great King Christ
Jesus, who was, and is to me the Bread of life, and ever shall be. Ignatius in
Epistola ad Trallianos.
Opto ad Bestias pugnare, I do thirst and long to fight, and grapple with
wild beasts, be it at Ephesus, or elsewhere.

Though I see with Irenaeus on the two hills, The Collects of Francis
Feuardentius upon his life.
the idol of the Tyrant on one, and the Cross of our Lord Jesus on the other,
I will choose rather the ignominy and curse of this, then the greatest glory of
that.

Though with Cyprian, that holy Saint and happy Martyr, Sermon S Augustine. de S.
Cypr. martyr. in Secund. vol. Cypr. in fine.
I hear that decree of Galerius, Thacius Cyprianus gladio fodiatur: Now
Cyprian to the sword: I will answer, Amen o Lord, and Deo gratias, thanks be
to the Lord Jesus Christ,

Though I be pounc't and brayed in a mortar with iron pestles, as was
Anaxarchus the Philosopher, I will cry unto the Tyrant-Tormentour, to
Nicocreon, (...): Theodoret. in Sermon. de Martiribus.
Bray, bray the sachell of Anaxarchus his soul, [his body] Anaxarchus himself
thou never can bray.

Though with Vincentius I be rackt and torn with wild horses, I will with
courage cry -- Insurge o Daciane, etc. Bristle up thy self o Dacianus thou
Tyrant against me, and vomit out all thy virulency and bitterness of spirit,
thou shall see that I can do more who am tormented, then thou possibly can
do that do torment me.

Though with Jeremy I be sawne in pieces of Manasses my own Cosin-germane:
with Amos be killed with a wooden beam: be boiled as S. John should have
been in a hot caldron of scalding oil: broyled on a Grid-iron with S.
Laurance: my soul it self divorced from my trembling, panting and throbbing
limbs: I will never whiles I breath be divorced in my love to thee, since thy
love o Lord was never divorced from me.

I stand in awe of no torment whatsoever: for I know Wisdom 16. Wisd. 16.24.
The creature that serves thee which art the maker, is fierce in punishing the
unrighteous, but is easy and gentle to do good unto such as put their trust
in thee.

O Lord maile and arm us with heavenly and manly resolution to lay down our
dearest lives for thee: being well assured that although the Alabaster boxes of
our bodies be broken all to pieces for thee, the precious spikenard of our
souls, besides the anoyling of thee our sacred Head, (a sacrifice of our best
devotion) shall cast forth a redolent and sweet perfume over all the House, the
whole Universe, thy habitation and footstool, and be an incitation unto many,
to suffer martyrdom it self with all alacrity, and vndauntednesse of spirit,
for the confession of thy holy name, and withal shall strike thy heavenly
nostrils with all acceptable fragrancy, The sweet savor of rest.
like to that sweet smelling sacrifice of Noah, Genesis 8.21.
a savor of divine rest. And so (Lord) let this our due devotion be. Let this
erect another new Sabbath, a sacred memorial of thy rest from those dissoluing
works of Justice and Indignation.

And thus the sound of my little Saints-Bell is ended.

The Lord grant that this Bell may ring us All-In to glorify God in the great
Congregation, in this Church Militant, that so we may be glorified of God in
that Church Triumphant, in the new Jerusalem, the City of thrice-blessed
souls, where is our happy Incorporation, our right Infranchisement, our truest
Denization.

And now my breath and spirits are spent: but sure that is well spent which is
expended and laid out for the service of this great Rabboni: yet have I so much
spirit in-bosom'd in my humblest heart, by Gods Eternal Spirit, the right and
sole Incumbent in this Temple, or rather his unworthy Synagogue; that by it I
can (and so I Will wind up all) sing that sacred Hymn of Halliluiah here on
Earth (and so I hope I shall in Heaven) which those devout, and holy, and
euer-blessed Saints, with long white Robes, and Palms in their hands, do
caroll out, in that Heavenly Quire, to that Rabboni, our sweet Savior, in whom
all blessedness does hiue.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in
the Beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

