THE ENGLISH PHARISE, OR RELIGIOUS APE. Being the weeks work of a poor
unlearned professor of the Gospel of CHRIST, zealously and truly checking the
counterfeit professor, but open persecutor of Christ's true doctrine and
discipline.

2. TIM. 2. 7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things. By John Walker, dwelling at Leeds in York shire.

Printed Anno Dom. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND THAT MOST Worthy Governor William Greeneb^ry, Lord
Mayor of the City of York.
RIGHT HO:

AMONGST many worthy, and true Professors of the Gospel, I have presumed, and
emboldened my self to dedicate this little book unto your H^. view, and
although not worthy your acceptance, being not done scholler-like, yet for
that good will I bear unto the truth, and for the truths sake, I humbly
entreat your Honor to accept thereof, and howsoever it may seem distasteful
unto all disobedient and unsanctified spirits, which have, as Saint Jude says,
separated themselves, yet unto all faithful Christians which truly fight under
the banner of Jesus Christ, I know that such will not only accept my good
will, but likewise lovingly and thankfully be ready to embrace my poor
endeavors herein, seeing that I have kept my self, being guided by the Spirit
of God, in that sanctified place, of Christ's Vineyard alone, and yet for all
this I know that the malice and mischief of Satan is such, that from all
those haters of their brethren, who with hateful Esau, have separated
themselves, and contemned their birthright, I expect no better gratuitie at
their hands, then deadly hate and revenge: and my reason is this, because
Grapes cannot grow upon Thorns, nor Figs upon Thistles. If that kingly Prophet
DAVID had great cause to complain of his times, how that his enemies were
greatly multiplied, and his sorrows much increased: by how much more has our
most gracious King just cause to complain, seeing that Satan now works
after such a strange and most fearful manner, by his wicked instruments, as
the like was never heard nor seen from the beginning of the world until this
present time; of which times Saint Paul has truly prophesied, should be most
perilous, and that this is true, who is he that lives in our days and sees
not, that prophecy, the which our blessed Savior fore-tolde should come to
pass even hard before his coming to Judgment, how that it is now by the
children of disobedience most fearfully working amongst is, that is; how that
the Sun Mat. 24. 29.
should be darkened, and the Moon should lose her light, how that the Stars
should fall from Heaven, and the powers of heaven should be shaken. Again, who
is he that does but look Mat. 24. 21.
about him, and likewise sees not, how that those immediate tribulations, the
which our blessed Savior foretold, should come to pass, even hard before these
fearful signs, are now already finished, part of them in our late and
gracious Queens time of famous memory, and likewise the rest of these
tribulations being the greatest, in his Majesty's time, especially since his
Highness came amongst us? For who is he that knows not, how that bloody
Cain, that man of sin, would not have left one Abel alive, if that God himself
had not stood in the gap, for us? Now for these tribulations, I doubt not, but
that the very strengths of them are already past, and that this most fearful
plot of Gunpowder Treason, and what else was the very last shake of the glass.

These and such like persecutions and tribulations, have at all times, and in
all ages displayed themselves against the poor despised Church of CHRIST: but
of all those engines which Satan by his instruments has devised, was never
the like heard of as that fearful plot of Gunpowder, which they offered to
shake us withal, and yet behold, most worthy Sir, there is such a fearful
shaking by the children of disobedience, now amongst us, as for the time never
was, nor I hope never shall be, until the day of judgment, we have but yet
spoken of the shaking of our mortal bodies.

But behold, and ye shall see further, how that Satan by his sharpest and
most hot instruments, does now shake the very powers of heaven. For Jesus
Christ who now sits in heaven, having received all power from God his
Father, is so shaken at this present time, in his wounded members, that except
God of his infinite mercy unto his little Church, had appointed and ordained
our most gracious King, as aspecial means to hinder Satan in his progress
herein: I am verily persuaded, that having prevailed so far already as he
has done, that if hemight but be suffered to have his intent further, that
according to our blessed Saviors speech, no flesh should be saved: and
therefore for this cause, I most humbly crave upon my bended knees, that as
GOD by his mighty power and love unspeakable unto his church, has so often
stood in the gap against the power of Satan, and his most wicked instruments,
to deliver his Sacred Majesty from so many eminent dangers, that now at last
it would please his Grace, in some recompense of so many and vn-vtterable great
favors, received, to stand once more in the gap for him, then as we have had
always just cause, our comforts being increased, and our spirits further
emboldned, to cry still from the bottom of our hearts, with hearty tears of
repentance, unto the Lord of Hosts, that as he has so many several times
miraculously defended, and protected his Majesty: so it would please him still
for the great honor of his Name, and the great comfort and good of his Church,
to defend and protect him still under the shadow of his wings, and not only
himself, but likewise our most gracious Queen, with that most blessed and
hopeful Progeny, that it would so please him, to protect them all in safety
and peace, that neither the wild Bore of the Forest, nor Esau this most wicked
hunter, which hunteth cruelly within this English Pale, may ever prevail, or
take any further rooting herein: and here once again, let no man be offended,
that seeing this unnatural brother has not only broken that union, which
should be amongst Christ's members, and so fallen from Christ himself, but
does likewise daily withdraw infinite multitudes, by his life and doctrine, to
become deadly haters of their brethren, in so much that love and charity has
lost her sight: therefore still upon my bended knees, I most humbly crave, that
seeing the Lord of heaven and earth is by them so greatly dishonored, it would
please his sacred Majesty, to stop the passage of these violent Hunts-men,
which wilfully spoil and destroy the game: Then according to our blessed
Saviors speech, that last sign of the Son of Man immediately before his
last coming to Judgment, shall more clearly appear, amongst the clouds;
then shall there be such cause of rejoicing, as meeting Jesus Christ our
Redeemer, we shall rejoice with him for evermore.

Our blessed Savior says; He that is not with me, is against me, Mat. 12.
30. And Saint John says, There are many Antichris^s, whereby we know that it
is the last time, I. Ioh. 2. 18. and in the beginning of the next verse, he
says, They went from us, but they were not of us. Now if any would know, who
these specially are which are against CHRIST; and so as Saint John says,
become Antichrists: Saint Paul, Saint Peter, and Saint Jude, prophesying of
these last times, plainly describe, and have set them down by their qualities
and conditions, all agreeing as it were with one consent saying, that they are
spirits of disobedience, as appears in the thirteenth to the Romans and
second verse, and in the second of Peter, the second Chapter and the tenth
verse: And in Iudes Epistle the eighth Verse. Now Saint Jude goes on farther,
agreeing with Saint John's words, and says in the nineteenth verse, that they
have separated themselves; upon which words of these two blessed Apostles,
Saint John, and Saint Jude, I gather and find, that there is no sect under the
whole cope of heaven, which can so justly deserve the title of this severed
imputation, as this Sect now resident amongst us, commonly called Puritanes.
For although the Pope of Rome is not only a disobedient spirit, but likewise
deserves the highest room amongst the Antichrists, yet to say properly, he
is gone from us, would but prove an improper speech, because he never was of
us: now for this our elder brother, it may truly and properly be said, how
that he is gone from us, for agreeing in this word only in Christ, may truly
be said, that he was of us. Now the question is how and why he is gone from us,
but the question is needelesse. For who sees not how that vain glory and the
very darkness of his own conceit has so bewitched him, that as Saint Paul
says, he has but a show of godliness, denying the power thereof: 2. Tim. 3.
5. that as the dog who had the substance but in his mouth, seeing the shadow
in the water, snatched thereat, and solost both; even so has he done: for
having the substance no lowersettled then in his mouth, spying some outward
observations in that waterie air of his own conceit, has leaped thereat so
far from Christ, that according to the Prophet Esayes speech, who says, They
come near me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me, Esai. 29. 13. So that like hateful Esau, having sold
his birthright for mere vanity, Genesis 25. ^4. is now become such a disobedient
spirit, and so fleshly minded, as Saint Peter, and Saint Jude says, 2. Pet. 2.
10. that he is not afraid, to speak evil of dignities, and despise Dominion,
Jude the eight verse, who resisting power as Saint Paul says, resists the
ordinance ordained of God, Romans 13. 2. So that it may be gathered by these
blessed Apostles, and finding it true by woeful experience, that as Saint John,
and Saint Jude say, he being gone from us, in separating himself, is now
become such a sect, that who sees not, how that both by his life and doctrine,
he does nothing else, but break that union which ought to be betwixt the
members of Christ? so that it may most truly be said of him, and all the rest
of this sect especially, that according to S. Iudes words, They are become but
wandering Stars, Jude verse 13. being as our blessed Savior says, Stars
fallen from heaven, Mat. 24. 29. who resting themselves in their own
imaginations, may truly be said to fall from Christ. Who has by their
disobedient practice, and evil conversation darkened the Gospel, meant by the
Sun, and likewise smothered love meant by the Moon, who with their accusing
and condemning Judgments in their doctrine against the wounded members of
Christ, cause the very powers of Heaven to shake, This interpretation was
reueiled unto me by the Spirit of God: I am no Scholar at all, as your Honor
knows, and therefore not fit to diue into these secret mysteries: I am only a
poor man, but yet not destitute of Gods Spirit, even on whom that old proverb
is fallen,

None so w^e begone,
As first a man, and then none.
And therefore being in my private chamber, musing of the causes of the
sinfulness of this age, many things came into my mind, and amongst the rest,
I was induced to write, and yet not knowing what to write, the spirit suggested
these things unto me, the which I have presumed to offer unto your Honors
view; and although unworthy, to present such a weak thing unto your judicious
eye, yet for his cause who has emboldned me, I humbly entreat and crave your
honorable favor, but to cast your eye thereon, wherein nothing can be found,
but the instruments of Satan still prosecuting their own imaginations, in
persecuting the poor and despised members of JESUS CHRIST, who by their life
and doctrine Gods Name is so greatly dishonored, and love and charity so
smothered, that the Kingdom of Christ is hindered, both in particular, and in
general: but as that worthy Apostle Saint Paul faith, Their madness being now
evidently known unto all men, I hope they shall prevail no longer: 2. Tim. 3.
9. And thus may your Honor see, and the whole world perceive, how that God who
sits above, has already decreed, that in despite of Pope and Puritan, and
all the rest which withstand Jesus Christ and his Anointed, that his Majesty
who loves peace, shall by Gods protection live a peaceable time amongst us,
and as he has protected and delivered him from many dangers, will continue his
love unto him and his, and keep them safe under the shadow of his wings, and
hereafter will that God of peace carry him by his blessed Angels into
everlasting peace: unto which peace, God of his infinite mercy, bring both you
and yours, for his honor and blessed names sake. Amen.

I most humbly take my leave, and rest at your Honors command,

JOHN WALKER.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
GENTLE or ungentle Reader, I am to tell thee no strange thing, only to tell
thee of that which has been from the beginning, which is now at this present,
and which shall be unto the worlds end; how that as Esau hated his brother
Jacob in the beginning of the world, how that the Israel of God is hated still,
and that the members of Christ shall be hated, so long as the Sun and Moon
indureth. Faithful Christian, I was enboldened by the Spirit of G O D, to
write this little Book for thy good, it was intended chiefly for thy profit,
and so many as l^ve the peace of Sion. And whereas by Gods goodness, we are
living in the very latter end of the world, and left here by Gods providence,
as a very few Sheep amongst many Woolues, I have only, by the help of Gods
Spi^ it, set down unto thy view, not only what great danger thou art in, but
likewise let thee see, how that thou may escape the same. And although our
enemies are many in number, and at the first sight not easily discerned,
because they go in sheep clothing; therefore I have set down in plain and
few words, the difference of the Spirit of truth from the spirit of error,
whereby thou ma^st truly perceive the tree by his fruit: for he that has a
true and lively faith in Christ, is always ready to manifest the same by love
and charity unto the Brethren. Now for him that says, he has faith, and yet
wants this duty of love and charity, his faith is but a dead faith, and as
Saint James says, shall prevail nothing, Iam. 5. 14. and therefore he that
does not practice this second lesson of charity, let him be what he will,
and flatter himself never so much, he is no better then a breaker of that
union and fellowship, which ought to be amongst the true members of Christ;
and therefore as S. John says, such is gone from us, 1. John 2. 19. being, as
S. Jude says, separated, Jude 9. verse. Promising, as S. Peter says, liberty
unto themselves, 2. Pet. 2. 19. Having, as Saint Paul says, but a show of
godliness, denying the power thereof, 2. Tim. 3. 5. Therefore, says he, turn
away from such. And therefore faithful Christian, whose number is but small,
let me entreat thee, as thou tenderest thy own soul, to be very careful
and circumspect, to keep in this candle of love, especially unto thy brethren,
then shall thou have peace of conscience in this world, and everlasting peace
in the world to come: but defer no time, for our time is but very short, and
if thou profit any thing herein, give God praise, and thou have given me good
satisfaction: and thus unto all those that truly love the Gospel, the Lord
protect and guide with his grace. Amen.

Thine in Christ,

I. W.

THE ENGLISH PHARISE, OR RELIGIOUS APE.
PROTESTANT. GOOD morrow, brother.


Puritan. Good morrow.


PRO. Well met, good brother, but me think thou speak as taking some thing
offensiuely.


Puri. No truly, thou art but mistaken: it is our manner to return an answer
in few words, or none at all.


Pro. I did propound no question, and therefore did expect no answer, only
such salutation as thou receiuest, I expected no less back again.


Puri. The same which I received thou had again, only the word awanting I
owe unto none, but to such as are of the same opinion that Iam.


PRO. To know what opinion thou art of, I would gladly have some conference,
for I do persuade my self that thy religion is grounded more upon a singular
conceit, then approved by the Word of God.


Puri. That is not so, for we are ready to approve our Religion only by the
Word of God.


PRO. Why do thou then deny me to be thy brother, seeing that we are
brethren not only of one Nation, but likewise brethren in Christ.


Pu. We may be brethren of one Nation as we are, and both confess Christ, and
yet for all this not both true members of Christ.


PRO. Yet being brethren of one nation, and as it were twins of one womb, born
and dwelling together, and that by one and the same profession, both
acknowledge Christ; it shows great want of charity in the denying me to be
thy brother.


Puri. I do not absolutely deny thee to be my brother in Christ, because
thou only belecuest in him for salvation, but seeing thy life is not strict,
and being too familiar in frequenting company, I doc not take thee to be my
brother.


PRO. Thou do confess that I am thy brother in Christ, because I hope oncly
in him for salvation, but thou find fault with me, being too familiar in
frequenting company: I would gladly know thy reason wherein thou art
offended, seeing that my ordinary company is with such as do profess Christ
as we both do.


Puri. Although thy ordinary company is with such as do profess Christ as
we both do: yet sometimes I can epsy thee conuersing with a Papist, the
which I have with a deadly hate.


PRO. Why, do thou not hold it lawful to converse with an adversary?


Puri. I am so far from conuersing, that, as I said before, I hate and utterly
detest their company.


PRO. I pray thee let me ask thee a question, whether do thou think, that
only those of thy profession and life shall be sau^d?


Puri. Thou have made a very idle question, for I think no less.


PRO. I will then demand of thee another question, how is it possible that such
as are not of thy profession, should come to be converted, seeing that thou
refusest to converse?


Puri. I perceive that thou beginnest to cavil about questions: if thou
wouldeft have my company, thou must give them over.


PRO. I would be sorry to become offensive in the least degree, therefore I
pray thee let us have some further conference, and seeing that thou can not
abide to co^uerse with a Papist: yet because thou and I do agree in this word
only in Christ, I pray thee let us examine this faith by the word of God,
because Saint John says, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God or not, 1. Ioh. 4. 1.


Puri. Although I am contented that our doctrine shall be approved by the Word
of God: yet because I do persuade my self that thou art a favorer of the
Papists, therefore I make neither barrel better hearing, and therefore I hate
thee likewise as a member thereof.


PRO. Me think, brother, I find thee greatly out of charity; for although the
Papist be forth of the way, as I know he is, yet if my co^ferring be but to
bring him into the way again: I see no reason, why thou should become thus
offended; it too plainly appears that thou art much too blame.


Puri. Thou mistakes^ me, for my meaning is not that I altogether hate the
persons of men; I only dislike your company, and hate your conditions.


PRO. Brother, thou say that I mistake thee, but it will appear that thou
mistakest thy self: for suppose that thou art in the right way to heaven, and
I my self in the wrong: thou say thou love my person, and hate my
conditions. Now whether art thou bound in love to my person, to bring me into
the right way again, or rather bound to let me alone, hating my conditions?


Puri. I must of necessity let thee alone, for I know that there is no hope in
thee.


PRO. Brother, here appears but small charity, thy answer is too peremptory:
thou might have done much better, first, to have done the part of a friend in
some Christian reproof, the^ seem thus to disgrace me, as being void of hope,
thou have accused me without a cause; and therefore thy error, in my judgment,
is very great.


Puri. I pass not for thy judgment, therefore keep thy self satisfied, for
I am no cha^geling, as thou supposest, for what I have spoken thou know, but
what else, thou shall not, therefore rest thy self contented.


PRO. I am contented with any thing that is reasonable, but because thou do
wrongfully charge me to favor any religion, but that only which I profess; I
must tell thee, brother, before we part, seeing that thou art neither
conformable unto the Law of God nor man, I say, thou art no better then a
flourishing tree without fruit.


Puri. Wherein can thou prove me a flourishing tree without fruit, seeing
that I preach the Word of God very zealously, and lead my life very strictly?


PRO. I am able by the Spirit of God to reprove thee both in thy life and
doctrine.


Puri. As how?


PRO. In thy doctrine concerning thy rash judgments against the members of
Christ, and in thy disobedience against man, being the principal member
thereof. In a word, I am ready to reprehend thee for thy disobedience against
both God and man, according to our Savior Christ's own words, He that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that
sent me, Luke 10. 16.


Puri. I perceive that thou beginnest to be angry, but if I had better
remembered my self, I would have given thee no advantage of my words.


PRO. I look for no advantage in thy words: for denying in thy practice a
thing lawfully commanded, it matters not whether thou hold thy peace, or seem
to excuse it with thy tongue.


Puri. Wherein can thou disprooue me, for any thing lawfully commanded?


PRO. I can justly reprove thee in many things, but two or three shall be
sufficient to prove thee but a flourishing tree and a wandering star: first, thy
disobedience unto eccle siasticall government, which the Church of his Land
has commanded. Secondly, thy want of charity, having severed thy self from
Christ, in pronouncing rash and accusing judgments against his members.
Thirdly, thy contradiction against Christ, in the length of thy prayers, with
the manner, and likewise of thy behavior therein.


Puri. I had thought we might have conferred after another manner, but I
perceive now, that I have kept thee company but too long. Thou have promised to
go forward, therein thou may please thy self: for I am pleased to turn my
back.


PRO. Brother, thou have not deceived me, for as Solomon says, Ineuer took
thee for any other, but for such a one as scorns reproof, Prou. 9. 8. But
seeing that thou have so scornfully turned thy back, and separated thy self
without just cause, denying to have any more conference, wherein thou deseruest
justly to be reproved; I will not fail, by Gods assistance, to let the world
see, that thou art no better, as Saint Jude says, Then a whithered tree twice
dead, and fit to be plucked up by the roots, Jude 13. v.

Now, because thou shall take no exception wherein I may offer thee the least
wrong; I am ready to reprehend both thy life and doctrine, only by example in
the Scripture: and therefore let me entreat thy patience, if thou have any,
for the thing that I aim at, is thy conversion, and not thy destruction. And
as we are taught in the Word of God, to reprove either friend or foe, with the
words of meekness: even so, my elder brother, I am willing and ready to
reprehend thee only with the words of meekness and love, and although thou
do not think thy self unworthy of reprehension, because thou carriest thy
offenses behind thee, yet seeing that others do see that in thee which thou
can not perceive thy self, I have presumed to lay open unto the view of the
whole world, that a public offense deserves an open rebuke.


Loving and faithful Christian, I must tell thee before I go any further,
that whereas I was determined to go forward after a dialogue manner, thou see
here how that my elder brother has already prevented me; and therefore am
constrained to take another course, intending, by God^ permission, to go
forward wherein I have promised. The Spirit of God says, I have chosen the
foolisb things of this world, to confound the wise, and weak things to confound
the mighty. Loving Christian being no Scholar, thou must not expect that at
my hand^, which I have not, only my good will, wherein the Lord has enabled
me by his holy Spirit, that specially by his especial grace, I will freely
offer thee: but being not fit to ^iscourse of things at large, I will only
point at some heads, wherein thou may plainly perceive the Spirit of truth
from the spirit of error; and for this purpose thou must understand, that there
are in this land two sorts of teachers amongst us, the one sort is reformed,
and the other sort much deformed; the one sort does teach in Christ's Schole
with the words of meekness, the other seems to teach therein with the words
of accusing Judgments; the one is guided with the spirit of humility, the
other with the spirit of iniquity; the one with the spirit of obedience, the
other with the spirit of disobedience; the one teaches, and rests himself
in the schole of Christ, the other makes but a proud flourish therein, resting
himself in hi^ own conceit; in a word, the one has the Spirit of truth, and
the other but the spirit of error.

And first, against the spirit of error, our blessed Savior himself, Saint
Paul, Saint Peter, Saint John, and Saint Jude, with others, having prophesied
of these very last times, wherein we live, does tell us in plain words the
qualities and conditions of such false prophets as are now resident amongst us.
And now to our elder brother, to whom I must tell thee before I proceed, that
seeing it is a thing subject to flesh and blood, not only to pass over
offenses unto others from themselves, but likewise imputes many faul^s only to
one, which sometimes appertain unto diverse, herein does show it self great
indiscretion of judgment, as appears sometimes in quotation of our English
Bibles: for example S. Peter says in the^e words, and chiefly them which walk
after the flesh in the l^st of vncleann^sse, and d^spise gouernmen^, which are
bold, and stand in their own conceit, not fearing to speak evil of
dignities, 2. Pet. 2* 10 Herein I know, that the Church of Rome, justly and
worthily deserves this imputation. Now, who is so blind, and sees not, how
that thou likewise art not only fleshly minded, and despisest dominion, as S.
Jude says, but likewise agreeable unto Saint Paul's words, resistest the
ordinance ordained of God, Romans 13. 2. And to prove this further, because thou
art ready to take exception without cause, S. Peter speaking of the Ministry,
does seem to teach thee thy duty both to superior and inferior Magistrates:
his words are these: Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2. 13. And in the verse going before, he gives a reason
why the words are these, That they which speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, may by your obedience, which they shall see, glorify God in the day of
visitation: therefore, says he, submit your selves, 1. Pet. 2. 12.

This word ordinance, is quoted in some Bibles only of civil government: but
I appeal unto the judicial censure of the learned, whether that Caesar has
his whole right herein or not: I hope there is not any that has the Spirit of
God, but they will confess that our gracious King is as well supreme Head and
Governor over all causes Ecclesiastical, as Civil. Now this word ordinance
being guarded with these two words, all manner, I see no reason, in my
judgment, of any less importance then both spiritual and temporal: and I
think I have also the spirit of God. But now to the point: our gracious King
having commanded many things to be observed in this Church of England; and
yet, as Saint Paul says, nothing but that which is agreeable unto the Word of
God, being both decent and comely, I would very gladly know thy reason why thou
should show thy self thus disobedient. Solomon says, A divine sentence
shall be in the lips of the King: his mouth shall not transgress in
judgment, Prou. 16. 10. Brother, here thou stand in thy own conceit, and
think, that no King in the world is so wise as thy self: Ergo, thou will
refuse government, which does infer, that thou despisest the Governor. Will thou see a samiliar example by a plain comparison, how contrary thou art to
Christ's command, who says, Give unto Caesar, that which is Caesar's, Mat. 22.
21 Amongst the temporal Laws of this Land, it is commanded, that the poor
therein shall be k^pt and maintained within their several Parishes. Now some
sturdy beggars there be, which will not submit themselves unto this command,
but being guided by their own conceit, wander abroad, making themselves no
better then Rogues by the Statute: of which sort, Saint Paul says, If they
will not work, they must not eat, 2. These. 3. 10. Brother, what say thou of
this disobedient beggar? or how likest thou of Saint Paul's prescription of this
sturdy Rogues diet? or what do thou think of this example by thy self? Thou
can not deny how disobedient thou art unto the Laws and ordinances, which
our gracious King has command^d thee; and therefore as this sturdie beggar is
become a rogue by the statute of this land, so thou being a conceited
obstinate, have made thy self by the statute of God, no better, as S. Jude
says, then a wandering star, whose diet, without repentance, S. Paul has
likewise set down in the 13. to the Romans and 2. verse.

If thou be put to silence, as to be feared thou art not, then thou beginn^st
to cry out, as the conceited Jews did, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, Ier. 7. 4. Thou criest, the Lords anointed, Anointed of the Lord. Now
this is such a cry, as may become a wonder unto the world, who sees thee in
the very height of disobedience: shall a father command his child that thing
which he may very easily do without any danger at all? and shall this child
refuse his fathers command, and plead not worthy correction, because he is
his child? this thou will confess is very absurd: how can thou then excuse
thy self? do thou think that thy disobedience unto our gracious King being
contrary unto CHRIST himself, and his command, to plead the Lords anointed,
because thou preachest Christ; therefore worthy no correction nor punishment?
why this is too absurd: nay Brother, flatter not thy self, for before we part,
I fear me that thou will proou^ no better a Preacher, then, as Saint Paul
says, of envy and strife, Phi. 1. 15. Therefore be advised by the Prophet
Jeremy, Amend your ways and your works: and no doubt, as he says there, ye
may dwell in this place, Ier. 7. 3. Otherwise what may be expected, but a
casting away of your selves, as of the whole seed of Ephraim, Ier. 7. 15?

If our gracious King had denied us any fundamental point of Religion, (the
which thou will confess he does not) or decr^d any thing, which as the Prophet
Esaias says, had been grievous, in keeping back the poor from judgment, or
any such like things which wicked Kings do, Esai. 10 1, 2. then might thou
have had just cause to complain, and we al cause to lament. But seeing he is
so merciful, and so loving unto all his subjects, comma^ding nothing but that
which is agreeable unto the word of God: who art thou, and what a contradicted
spirit art thou of, that in stead of loyal duty and love, art become thus
disobedient unto so loving and gracious a King?

But alas, what have thou done? Have thou not with all those disobedient
spirits in the old Testament, transgressed most fearfully against both God and
good men? nay further, thou have swerued from the commandment of Christ:
Matthew. 22. 21. and as Saint Paul says, resisted the ordinance ordained of God*
Romans 13. 2. striving against principalities and powers, Titus 3. 1. speaking,
as S. Peter says, against dignities, 2. Peter 2. 10. despising dominion, lude
the 8. verse: boasting thy self, as Solomon says, before the King, Pro. 25.
6. in a word thou have in the very height of pride, transcended thy self above
all power, exalting thy selte above measure. And now what may be expected,
think thou, without a speedy and sudden repentance, but such a most
fearful fall for this thy disobedience; as Saint Jude has already
prescribed, even blackness and darkness for ever: Jude the 13. verse?

Brother, I will show thee such an ensample of obedience, that if there be but
one spark of grace in thee, thou will never deny to follow him: For behold our
blessed Savior himself, although a freeman from all Subsidies or Taxes, or
what else which was due unto Caesar, by strangers, yet, rather then he would
seem to disturb a common peace, or become an example of offense in the least
degree, he commanded Peter to cast his angle into the water, and the first
Fish, says he, thou take, open his mouth, wherein thou shall find a piece
of Silver of twenty pence, take it, and pay for me and thee, Mat. 17. 25, 26.
verses.

Thou see here how willing and ready our blessed Savior was in Obedience in
his own person; thou see him pay tribute unto Caesar, although a freeman;
nay, further, rather then he would become an ensample of the least offense,
thou may perceive him yielding unto a base Publican. Now if our Savior
Christ did not think that civil policy was taken away by the Gospel: what
may the whole world think of thee, in denving obedience, refusing but rites
and ceremonies, which are seemly in the Church, being lawfully commanded. I am
sorry to see thee mount thy self into this very height of pride: thou art
become little inferior unto those disobedient spirits, that for their pride 2.
Pet. 2. 4.
fell from Heaven to Hell. Thou have, as the Prophet D^uid says, banded and
io^ned thy self with the wicked of this world, against the Lord, and his
Anointed, Psalm. 2. 2. Nay, thou have done much more then I have yet spoken of:
For thou have (with Iannes 2. Tim. 3. 8.
and Iambres, not only withstood Mos^s in resisting the truet^ thy self. But
lik^ w^se by thy enchantments, have and do draw daily infinite of multitudes
unto thi^ thy wilful disobedi^nce, in so much, that thou have justly caused
our gracious King, not only to cry out with the Prophet Da^id; Lord, how are
they increased that t^ouble me! many are they that rise against me, Psalm. 3.
1. But likewise as justly caused him with the same Prophet to say: Woe is me,
that I Psalm. 120. verse 5.
am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have my habitation in the Tents of
Kedar. And thus thou have, by thy disobedient enchantments, caused such a
contention in this Land, that thou have justly deserved with Mesech and Kedar,
those Israelites, (which did degenerate from their godly Fathers, being
hateful and contemning the faithful) that most fearful Iron rod of Gods
wrath, to bruise thee in pieces suddenly.

I must tell thee, Brother (and I am sorry that thou have given me such just
cause to tell thee so) that if it were not for one crying sin which that
bloody and wandering Cain is branded in the forehead withal, I mean that most
monsterous Beast of Babylon, who denies the Offices of our Redeemer: I say,
and speak it from the Spirit of God, that thou art become so little inferior
in persecuting and murdering the souls of Christ's members; that thou have not
only pledged the Pope of ROME a full health of the dregs of your conceited
inventions, and false imaginations, but as thou have pledged him herein. I
fear me it will prove before we part, that thou have begun another half pot
to him again. And although thou do not run on with him in denial of some
fundamental points of Religion, yet I dare undertake, that thou resting thy
self in thy own conceit, denying but the circumstances and shadows thereof,
whose substances cannot be without, do more hurt by thy disobedience amongst
us herein, then he does, or can do, being so publicly known as he is. And
here as our Savior Christ says, Thou art but a blind guide, which strains out
a gnat, and swallows a Camel, Mat. 23. 24.

Thus, Brother, thou carriest this offense of disobedience upon thy back, and
therefore thou can not perceive it thy self. Now I have made bold, coming
behind thee, to take it off, and have laid the same) as thou now see)
before thy face: For which, if thou would so keep there, and cast it no more
behind thee, I shall be glad that it was my chance to remove the same.

But if thou rest thy self in thy own conceit, casting obedience from thee,
and so become a carrier still of thy offenses behind thee, then will thou
enforce me, to say with Solomon: That there is more hope in a very natural
fool, then of him that is conceited, Pro. 26. 12. ver. And this shall serve
for a taste of thy disobedience, and to let the world see, That as Saint Jude
says; Having separated thy self from the true members of Christ, thou art
become no better then a wandering Star, whose portion without repentance, is
blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13. verse.

And therefore, Brother, let me advise thee to learn a lesson of that Star
which guided the Wise men from the East Country, unto Bethlem, where our
blessed Savior Mat. 2. 9.
CHRIST was, and as that Star did stand still, when it came just over where the
Babe was, and so left them there: so thou who do rest thy self but in thy
own conceit, denying obedience unto supreme power, let it now be sufficient,
and too much, that thou have settled thy affections, in that East country of
thy own imaginations, where nothing can be found but Inchanters and
Sorcerers. And here I must leave thee, and turn my self unto those, of whom,
as Saint Paul says, I persuade my self better things, Heb 6 9. And thus,
faithful Christian, thou see what great danger the children of disobedience
have broughtthemselues into. Thou see that our elder brother, for his
disobedience, is counted no better in the judgment of Saint Jude, then a
wandering Star. Thou see what such have prescribed in the Scriptures for
their diet, after this life: S. Paul says, condemnation, Romans 13. 2. Saint
Peter, and Saint Jude says, blackness of darkness for ever. 2. Pet. 2. 17.
Jude the thirteenth Verse. Thou see these blessed Apostles so speaking
against these disobedient spirits, as worthy of these fearful judgments. And
in brief, thou see how truly these holy Apostles has prophesied of these
disobedient spirits, in these very last times. And again, thou see how
opposite these spirits are unto the obedience of our blessed Savior Christ
himself, who paid Tribute unto Caesar in his own person: who rather then he
would be an ensample of the least offense, although a freeman, yielded
himself unto a base Publican. And thus may all men see, the King of all Kings,
an ensample of obedience unto the whole world.

And yet behold, here thou see a disobedient spirit so full of
contradiction, that he will transcend above principalities and powers. But
faithful Christian, let this fearful example be such a special warning unto
thee, that thou keep thy self in all loyal obedience unto Princes
especially: and likewise let this example be a warning unto all sorts of
people, that they yield obedience unto whom soever it is due. As Children to
Parents, and Parents to their Children: Wives to their Husbands, and Husbands
to their Wives: Servants to their Masters, and Masters to their Servants, Col.
3. 18, 19, 20. And in a word, al in general to our most gracious King.

Now that we may the better perform these duties, let us take counsel of that
blessed Apostle St. Paul, who speaking against such disobedient spirits, says,
Turn away from such, 2. Tim. 3. 5.

And thus, faithful brother, thou see what danger our elder brother has
brought himself unto, in despising government.

It rests now in the second place, to let thee see his disobedience in his
doctrine, and as in brief thou see his disobedience against man, thou shall
likewise, by Gods assistance, see his disobedie^^e against both God and man,
who perseeuteth Christ in his members: both thou and I have felt the smart: but
faithful brother, I must leave thee for a while.

And now, brother, by Gods assistance, according to my promise, I am ready to
encounter with thee this second time. And whereas I have already reproved thee
for thy disobedience against man, not finding thee in this Combat to yield;
being provoked further, I am ready to manifest unto the whole world, how
contrary thou art to Christ and all good men, by thy disobedience in thy
Doctrine. Likewise showing the difference betwixt the Spirit of truth and the
spirit of error. But before I proceed, I am to meet with an objection, which
the whole world, who being against the truth, may propound, and that is where
the true Church of Christ is, and therefore to give satisfaction herein, the
world shall understand that both the true Church and the false is in this
little Island, called England: and as there are many false Churches in the
world, and but only one true: The world may likewise perceive, that as the
true Church of GOD is always accompanied, as Saint Paul says, with some
heresies for the better trial thereof, 1. Cor. 11. 19. So now especially is it
at this present time, for there are three sorts of Teachers amongst us, whereof
one of these is the true Church of Christ, and the other two with all the rest,
do but oppose themselves. Now of these two latter being both false, the one of
them does teach in private, the other does preach in public. Now for this
private teacher, it is needelesse to speak any thing of him, seeing that the
Church of God does know him sufficiently, how that he degrading Christ of his
Offices, challenges such prerogatives unto himself, as are only peculiar
unto Christ, and therefore no true member thereof.

And as this private teacher is a known enemy unto Jesus Christ: so likewise,
I am ready to prove by the Word of God, that thou, who restest in thy own
conceit, having separated thy self from thy brethren, being become a rash
accusing iudger of them, that thou art so far off from being either a
teacher, or a scholar, in the School of Christ, that thou art an enemy
thereunto, teaching only in the vanity of thy own imagination. And that this
is true, our blessed Savior, seeming to teach the whole world the way unto the
Kingdom of heaven, has erected unto the view of the whole world, a large free
School, wherein he teaches that whosoever would be a teacher, or a scholar
therein, must learn this lesson of meekness and lowliness, Matthew. 11. 29.
And lest his children should swerue or go astray from this his mild
Commandment: he gives a special warning in the sixth Chapter of Saint Lukes
Gospel, and thirty seventh verse, in these words: Judge not, that ye be not
judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven, Luke 6. 37.

Now there are diverse and sundry sorts of people, which do persuade
themselves, that they are true teachers in this school of Christ, which indeed
are not: and therefore to resolve a doubt which may either arise in the
^gnorant, or in such which do^ mis^ (...), a^ the Papi^ and diu^rs do. I will
therefore make plain one place of S^ripture, that the ignorant may not only
be better satisfied, but likewise, that their understandings may be more apt to
conceive of things afterward. And for this purpose, Saint John says, Try the
Spirits, whether they be of God, or not, 1. Ioh. 4. 1. and in the next verse
he says, Hereby shall ye know the Spirit of God: Every spirit which
confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, 1. Ioh. 4. 2.

Now here thou must take heed, how thou understand these words: if thou
take them literally, as the Papists do in the sixth Chapter of Saint John's
Gospel, concerning the Sacrament, then thou art in an error: for the^ not
only the Papists, but specially the Puritan, with diverse other sects, should
receive benefit by Christ's death; which being rightly understood, thou may
plainly perceive, that they have no right nor interest therein. For they that
degrade Christ of his offices, as the Papists do, or seem to to sever that
union betwixt Christ's members, as the Puritan does* do separate themselves,
both from Jesus Christ and h^s members. And therefore to clear this point,
before I proceed, the Prophet Esaias says: This people come near me with their
mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me, Esa.
29. 13 And our blessed Savior says) Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my
father which is in heaven, Mat. 7. 21. And to make this more plain, our
Savior Christ says further, Many will say unto me in that day, that is, the
day of Doom, Have we not prophesied by thy name, and by thy name cast out
devils, and by thy name done many great works? yet for all these outward
actions, wanting love and charity unto the members of Christ, thy answer shall
be, Depart from me, thou worker of iniquity, I know thee not, Mat. 7. 2 3. So
that we see by these proofs, that it is not an outward profession only, which
God requires, but likewise an answerable conversation. But now to the purpose.

And whereas thou perswadest thy self to be a Teacher in the Schole of
Christ, the world shall plainly see, that thou do but flatter thy self in thy
own imagination, being quite contrary minded to the true teachers therein. And
that this is true, I will first set down a true disciple, and a follower of
Christ, who according to our blessed Saviors command, approouing himself
both in his life and doctrine, teaches with the spirit of humility and
patience, as appears by that blessed Apostle Saint Paul, who speaking of
himself, and all true Teachers in this Schole of Christ, says in these words:
We give no occasion of offense, that our Ministry should not be repreh^nded,
2. Cor. 6. 3. but in all things we approve our selves, as the Ministers of
Christ, in much patience, 2. Cor. 6. 4. And lest others should mistake
themselves, who are to deal sometimes with such an adversary, as does oppose
himself against the truth, he likewise advises Timothy; To instruct such
with the words of meekenes: and he has set down a reason why; for per
adventure God may give them repentance, 2. Tim. 2. 25.

Now Brother, whether thou art a Teacher after this manner, or but a Teacher
after thine own conceit, I appeal unto such words as flow from thy fiery
spirit of accusing Judgments, and likewise from such fruit as does appear by
thy general doctrines: for pouring forth the Wine of Gods justice in such
fearful manner, against the wounded members of Christ as thou do,
reserving the oil of Gods mercies, without due consideration unto thy self:
what is this, but to feed thy own idle and most absurd conceit, making beams
in thy brothers eyes, and but motes in thy own?

Herein thou make thy self no better then a plain hypocrite, as appears
by our Savior Christ, saying in these words; Hypocrite, first cas^ out that
beam which is in thine own eye, and then shall thou see more clearly to cast
out the mote that is in thy brothers eye, Matthew. 7. 5. Here may thou see how
opposite thou art to Christ and his followers, but that, as Saint John says,
darkness has blinded thy eyes, 1. John 2. 11. Again, our bl^ssed Savior
says, Judge not, that ye be not judged, Mat. 7. 1. and Saint Paul as a true
disciple of Christ, does give a sufficient reason wh^ we should not judge of
others: For, says he, thou that iudgest others, thou condemnest thy self,
Romans 2. 1. Now how contrary thou art to Icsus Christ, and to his followers,
does appear by the fruits of thy doctrine, who by thy accusing and condemning
judgments, have not only caused many to fall from Christ unto desperation,
which is most fearful, but likewise for all the rest which take liking to the
same, which are infinite in multitudes, and are become such deadly haters of
their Brethren, even unto that height of sin, that they blush not to make
good their hateful minds by the Scripture, the place they allege, where David
by a Psalm. 139.
most prophetical spirit against the enemies of God being bloodthirsty men,
desired God not only to slay those wicked people, but h^e goes on further in
the sincerity of his heart as (prophesying of them, what should become of such,
saying) Do not I hate Psalm 139. 21, ^2.
them, O God, that hate thee? yes, O Lord, I hate them with ^n unfa^ed hatred.
This exposition of this place of scripture, which both thy self and those thy
followers do thus interpret, is hatched and fetched from the devil, and thy
deuillish conceit: for seeing thou can never prove thy self to be of that
Spirit which D^uid had, nor likewise can never prove us thy Brethren, to
deserve such imputation, which those manslaiers the (...) of God did; how
impudent and cruel art thou above measure, to censure and judge thus
uncharitably against the members of Jesus Christ? Again, many of thy followers
go further, and say, that of their own Parents, being Protestants, that they
are already damned, and that this is too true by woeful experience, many places
of this Land, with the place where Idwell, do manifest the same. That blessed
Apostle S. Paul says, Let your patient mind be known unto all men, the Lord
is at hand, Phil. 4. 5. But thou by a contrary spirit, say unto thy
followers, Let your hatred and malice be known unto all men; and therefore
thou have just cause to think that the Devil is at hand. This thy hatred has
so spread it self throughout the whole land, that it cannot be denied without
a brazen face: and that this is true, I can show thee an instance of experience
offered against my self: for taking occasion, being moved by the Spirit of
God, as now to write this little book, I writ my letter unto a principal man
of thy sect, and although reproouing him after a friendly manner, his rage was
so kindled thereat, that his answer was, that if he lived, he would revenge
it: but if he died, let GOD revenge it. Again, another of thy Sect standing
by, did give me such cruel and disgraceful words, that nothing did appear
but hatred and malice. And amongst the rest of his speeches, for writing that
Letter, he judged me worthy to die some sudden death. I have noted these
words, that the world may see what spirits the Devil does hatch in these very
last times: and likewise to let all men see how contrary thou and thy Sect are
unto Jesus Christ and his followers, who from the spirit of humility does
teach with patience, being so far off from revenge, that they are always
ready to forgive their enemies.

Saint Jude speaking against disobedient spirits of authority, says, That
their rage is such, that they foam out their own shame, Jude the thirteenth
verse. And that this is true of thy Sect, one of thy Brothers has already
spoken his malice against one of the chiefest pillars of this Land: and I will
tell thee how, taking exception against a poor man, but for a supposed fault,
got him bound over unto the Sessions, where his proof failed: but being not
satisfied, the poor man was troubled further, where thy brothers proof
failing the second time, to satisfy his revenge further, another Justice
warrant was sent for. Now the poor man being in the fire twice before, being
driven into great distress, he bethought him of a friend at London: therefore
he went trudging unto him, and made his case known: and being truly
perceived, appearing more malice the^ matter, his friend procured a Supersed^as
for him, upon bail given for his good behavior, as the usual manner is: so
that he took his leave, and came trudging home again: and he no sooner
approached, but intelligence was given, and needelesse to bid thy brother
prosecute; this warrant must presently be served.

But the Constable perceiving and seeing a Supersedeas, made it known.
Whereupon thy brothers rage being kindled, to please the pride of his humor,
writ his Letter unto the Justices Clarke after this manner.

Friend, whereas a warrant was directed from your Master, against such a one,
it will take no place, for he has gotten a Su^ersedeas: I think he has
been at the Pope, and gotten a Pardon for his sins past, and to come: And
that this is true, there is sufficient testimony to prove the same.

I have noted this. First, to discharge my conscience, who ought not to keep
such words secret. Secondly, that the world may perceive, how that pride and
vainglory with an inuetered malice, does so reign in the children of
disobedience, thatthey are ready likewise to burst forth into cursed speeches
against Principalities and Powers. O wick^d generation above measure! what may
be expected at thy hands, if thou should be suffered, and might but have
thy own will, that from thy disloyal disobedience, and rash accusing
Judgments, such fruits as these do spring? there does nothing appear in thee
but disobedience, rash accusing Judgments, hatred and malice, and cruel
revenge, and all against the poor members of Jesus Christ, whose number by thy
enchanted doctrine thou have so diminished, that those of thy hateful sect are
grown infinite in multitudes. Thou hinderest the fruits of the Gospel: Thou
causest the Ministry to be evil spoken of, thou resistest the truth, by
setting up an Idol of thy own imagination, thou art so deeply plunged in the
depth of thy own conceit, that as Solomon says, There is more hope in a fool
then in him that is conceited. Prou. 26. 12. Thouhast given us great cause to
complain, as Saint Paul did of Alexander the Copper-Smith, Thou have done us
much hurt. But as he said, I trust the Lord will reward thee thereafter. 2.
Tim. 4. 14. And yet for all this, although thou have caused Gods Name greatly to
be dishonored, and love and charity smothered, notwithstanding all this, thou
art still ready with those conceited Jews, who cried, The Temple of the Lord,
to excuse thy self and say, The Lords Anointed, the Lords Anointed. Now if it
were not, that the god of this world had bewitched thy thoughts, thou would
blnsh for shame to make such a cry amongst them, which know thee better then
thou know thy self.

Suppose thou could speak, as S. Paul says, with the tongue of men and Angels,
and have not love, thou art no better then sounding brass or a tinckling
Cimbal, 1. Cor. 13. 1. Thou say thou preachest Christ, it is true: And as
Saint Paul says, I rejoice thereat. But what of this, seeing that thou have
not only separated thy self, from the body of the Church, but likewise
want humility, patience, and charity, thou do no better then the same
Apostle says, Then preach Christ of envy and contention, Phil. 1. 15. If thou
would give us cause to rejoice with S. Paul, how that thou preachest Christ
as thou do: thou must get thy self to Virginia, or some other place where
Christ was never heard before, where (no doubt) their good works far exceed
thine: then would be just cause of rejoicing, where Gods Name would become
greatly more honored, and they, and we both, more comforted. But to stay here
like an unskillful Physicion amongst the wounded members of Christ, pouring in
the wine of Gods Judgments, reserving the oil of Gods mercies unto thy self,
I will undertake, whereas thou curest one soul, thou killest a thousand, so
that in stead of rejoicing, there is nothing to be expected from thee, but just
cause of great sorrow: and therefore, as Saint Paul says, We have good cause
to refuse thy company, 2. Tim. 3. 5.

Saint John says, If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses
us from all sin, I. Ioh. 1. 7.

Brother, thou beleeuest that the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, does
cleanse us from all sin. And thou can not deny, but that I believe the same.
Now a question may arise, wherein are we separated, and whether of us have
separated our selves? I have already showed the difference herein
sufficiently. For the tree is known by his fruit. But I will tell thee,
Brother, if that thou had looked as seriously, and stayed thy self in the
beginning of this verse, as thou have done in the latter end, thou might
better have perceived, not only who it is, that goes about to break this
union which is betwixt Christ and his Church, butlikewise who it is that does
separate themselves herein.

This Verse is sufficient to confute and confound both the Pope of Rome, and
thy self, the latter end is sufficient to confute him, and the fore-end
sufficient to confound thee: he has cut off himself in denying that the blood
of Christ does cleanse us from all sin: and thou have cut off thy self,
being separated from the fellowship of thy brethren, according to Saint John's
words, He that hates his brother, is in d^rkenesse, and walks in
da^kenesse, and knows not whither he goes, because that drakenesse has
blinded his eyes, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. (...).

I have sufficiently showed how that thou have not only separated thy self
from us, but likewise proved by the fruit of thy accusing Judgments, how that
both thou and thy followers are become deadly haters of thy brethren: and thus
the world may plainly see, how that by hating ofvs, thou art become, as Saint
Paul says, Only a lover of thy self, 2. Tim. 3. 2.

Our blessed Savior says, Blessed are the meek, far they shall inherit the
earth, Ma^th. 5. 5. Upon these words I gather, that thou art but an intruder in
thy calling, and live by the sweat of other men's brows: that as the
wandering and sturdy beggar does eat the bread of others: so thou being but a
wandering Star, and impatient, do eat the bread of thy brothers. Thou
preachest long Sermons, and often: therein I blame thee not: it is the manner
only that marres all: for in stead of that fiery Spirit of zeal and
sincerity of the heart to preach Christ in love and humility: thou preachest
Christ in accusing and condemning judgments with the fiery spirit of
iniquity. And here thou make the very powers of heaven to shake, Matthew.
24. 29.

But Saint Paul being of a contrary spirit, says, To the weak I become as
weak, that I may win the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might
win some, 1. Cor. 9. 22. Saint Paul here, to win men unto Christ, did not
respect these outward things of indifferency, but is content to observe all
times, and to eat and drink with all sorts of people, to win some unto God.
And for this end, our Savior Christ was content to debase himself, To
converse, and to eat and drink with Publicans and sinners, Luke 5. 29. But
thou, who scornest all company but those of thy own sect, Bindest heavy
burdens, and layest them on men's shoulders, but as for thy self, thou will not
move them with one of thy fingers, Matthew. 23. 4. Thou, like the proud Pharise,
preachest the Law very strictly: and thou seem in outward show to go before
us; and if we do not make an outward appearance as thou do, then presently
thou entrest into uncharitable judgment of condemnation; and yet who seeeth
not, how fleshly-minded thou art, both in thy words and deeds? and how thou
temptest God to lay a yoke on the Disciples necks, which neither our Fathers,
nor we, are able to bear, Acts 15. 10. Being contrary to Christ's words, who
says, My yoke is easy, and my burden light, Matthew. 11. 30.

Saint Paul says, Who art thou that iudgest thy brother? or why do thou set
thy brother at naught? we must all appear before the Judgment seat o^ Christ,
Romans 14. 10. Herein thou have caused us with Saint Paul, to bring thy name in
question, and to say, Who art thou? as though we knew thee not: but the truth
is, we know thee but too well, for we find thee altogether, as Saint Paul
says, Without natural affection, 2. Tim. 3. 3. But alas, what have thou done
in judging thus uncharitably? Thou have done no less then joined thy self
with the Pope of Rome, who is ready to judge all, but will be judged of none;
and therefore making thy self hayle fellow well met with him, thou have with
him and all the rest of the whole world, which do oppose themselves against
the LORD and his Anointed, yielded your selves so far unto the vanity of
your own imaginations, that ye wilfully have drowned your selves in the red
sea of Judgments.

And thus I have let thee see, first, thy disobedience: secondly, thy impatient
and accusing judgments, wherein the world may plainly perceive, how that
nothing does proceed, nor can be gathered from them, but contention, envy,
hatred, and such inuetered malice, that thereby thou have caused the Sun to
be darkened, the Moon to lose her light, and the very powers of heaven to
shake. In a word, thou have justly caused Gods most sacred name so greatly
dishonored, that without a very speedy and sudden repentance, thou shall have
for thy better satisfaction, as Saint Paul says, such a recompense of reward,
as is prescribed in these two words, Indignation and wrath, Romans 2. 8

Now Brother, concerning these thy most cruel judgments against the members
of Jesus Christ, which are now living, thou have not contained nor contented
thy self h^rein. For one of thy Sect, taking occasion in a public Sermon, to
speak of the young man in the Gospel, who came to our blessed Savior Christ,
to know what he might do to inherit eternal life, Mark. 10. 2^. He affirmed
before the company of many hundred persons, that this young man is a damned
soul in Hell. I know there was Hypocrisy found in him: and who can say, he
is free herein? But seeing that our blessed Savior, who answering an
objection of his Disciples, said, Although with, men it seem impossible, yet
with God no hing is impossible: and again, for those many good parts the which
Jesus Christ said, that he loved him for; I gather that he is in a far more
happy case, in my judgment, then thou, whosoever thou art that iudgest thus
uncharitably of him.

Again, in the same Sermon, the party being a mere stanger, it was d^manded
by a Churchwarden for his License; but what angry answer was returned, I have
omitted to set it down: only, to satisfy his own m^licious humor, and to
disgrace the Officer, he said, in a public speech, being in the Pulpit, that
he was a Cadauerous Knave: implying, that a Tinker, or a Peddler, might find
more favor, and have no such questions put upon them; and for want of matter,
he said, that God made all, but the Devil would have all: but herein he
equiuocated; for he meant all but those of his sect, and being too bold, and too
impudent for such a place, he said in a very peremptory passion, that if he
had spoken any thing which might seem prejudicial, the Law was open, his name
was known, and likewise where he dwelt: and in conclusion of all, without
exception, he said, that he cared for the face of no man.

Again, thy followers using their exercises after thy Sermons, in the Church,
some one of them stands up, to speak, and expostulate of things that have
been spoken before, and to the number of an hundred, or more, or less, do
attend him. Now, after thy Sermons, whatsoever is spoken, all are well pleased:
but if it chance, that a reformed Minister; nay, let it be the Bishop
himself, then the leaf must be turned over, to see, whether that Lots wife
looked back only in her head, or in her heart, or in both; and here they are
at odds, and cannot agree. These followers of thine are the silly ones of this
age: they are Buckes of the first head, they have very pregnant wits of
indiscretion, they think that none can be saved but such as use these their
outward observations. We know them when we meet them, for they have no good
morrow for us: but we know them better, when we bargain with them; for then
their sound horse proves lame. This feminine kind are very silly and loving
creatures, seeming very devout, although very ignorant: for after thy
afternoon Sermon, some Gentlewoman or other must in treat a Sermon after
supper. Now thou, who can preach without study, having no power to deny,
this devout company, with thy self, must meet, when all honest men in the
Town are in bed; and whatsoever thou or this company do, although a crime
very grievous, yet in thy own eye it seems good, and tolerable: but if thy
brother Protestant chance to get a fall of infirmity, this in thy sight proves
a present beam; and therefore thou say damnable. But whatsoever thou do,
in thy own sight it seems good: but whatsoever I do, in thy sight it is
naught. Now the reason is, as Saint John says, because darkness has blinded
thy eyes, 1. Ioh. 2. 11. These are children of thy own begetting; here is like
Priest like people. But will thou hear what comes of thy dark sermons? I
would not omit to tell it, although I take no pleasure therein. A Gentlewoman,
who seeming very devout, being one of the chiefest followers of that sex, and
whom no occasion might hinder to follow thee ten miles or more to hear thee
speak, thou could not quote the Scripture so fast, but she was ready to
look thereon; thus far was very commendable.

But behold what happened, this seeming devout Gentlewoma^ chanst to prove
with child: and when the time of her hour drew near, she acquainted some of
her kinswomen with it, who being ready to attend her, demanded whose the child
was; but she being not willing to return an answer, stayed her tongue so
long, in so much that her Kinswomen making an offer to depart, and leave the
duty of womanhood; she presently consest, that it was her eldest brothers; for
which I am very sorry to hear it, and I could wish, that it had never been.

Brother, I have not noted this in way of any disgrace; for such clewes will
wind themselves to their open shame: and although this sin be grievous, be it
far from me to enter into Judgment in the least degree. I leave it unto
Jesus Christ, who must judge both quick and dead; and therefore without a
speedy repentance, thou, who have most violently pulled this heavy rod of Gods
judgments forth of his own hands, which is only peculiar to himself, shall
one day hear this heavy sentence of, Go ye cursedinto everlasting judgments.
And thus may all men see, what fruits do come from thy dark doctrine, and
likewise from thy night-Sermons, and how that thou show thy self unto the
whole world, as Saint Paul says, To be but a creeper into men's houses,
leading silly women captive, which are laden with diverse sins, and many
lusts, 2. Ti. 3. 6. Thou would make all men believe, by a little s^eming
strict and outward observation, that thou art an innocent, and a harmless
man: but who is he that has but half an eye, and sees not, how that thy
purity is without charity, and thy demurity but impurity? nay who is so
blind, and sees not the still Sow eating all the draffe? Therefore as Saint
Paul says, He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
Gal. 6. 8.

I could speak much more by experience: but seeing that it is accomplished
already, which Saint Paul has prophesied long before, how that thy madness
is evidently known unto all men, 2. Tim. 3. 9. I will therefore give over,
where I might herein reprehend thee further, and turn my self unto those of
whom Saint Paul s^ith, I per swade my self better things, He. 6. 9. and after
some friendly exhortation with them, I purpose to encounter with thee once
again, but farewell for a while.

And now, faithful brother in Christ, according to my promise, and that little
measure of knowledge which God has lent me, I have first showed thee the
difference of the spirit of error from the Spirit of truth, by the child of
disobedience. Secondly, I have likewise showed thee the difference of the
spirit of error from the Spirit of truth by his doctrine, and such fruits ^s
come thereof, how that he being so deeply conceited in his own imaginations,
that he is no Teacher nor Scholar at all in the schole of Christ: for pouring
in the wine of God^ justice into the wounded members of Christ, reserving the
oil of Gods mercies unto himself, he is so far from a cunning Physician, that
in stead of curing, he does no less then kill the soul. Again, thou see him
so highly conceited in himself, that as Saint John says, He is gone from us,
having lost the fellowship of the Brethren, being, as S. Jude says, so
separated, that as Saint Paul affirms, He is only become a lover of
himself, 2. Ti. 3. 2. So that it plainly appears, that from his doctrine and
life does nothing proceed, but envy and strife, Phil. 1. 15.

Thou see likewise, how that these his followers do rest themselves so much
in their outward observations, that forgetting wherein they are trulyiustified,
do run into uncharitable judgments with all others that do not follow their
exercises: for which I do not condemn them for their outward appearances,
only in the manner thereof they mar all. And yet mistake me not: for who is
so ignorant, that knows not, that the meetings of these multitudes to become
public speakers in the Church, are against the prescript rule and Canon both
of God and man? Now he that uses these and much more, and either affi^th with
his tongue, or thinks in his heart, respecting more the outward action it
self, then those inward graces, which might proceed therefrom, he is no
better then a plain hypocrite; and therefore according to our Savior Christ's
own words, Poor despised Publicans and sinners shall go before him into the
kingdom of heaven: for he that exalts himself, shall be brought low, and
he that humbles himself, shall be exalted, Luke 18. 14. For our Savior
Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: Luke 5. 32.
Again, thou see them by their outward behavior, as though there were no
deceit to be found in them: and yet thou know as well as I can tell thee,
that their purity is such, that it will not permit them to speak when they
meet us: and thou likewise know, that under a color and show of fine words
in their bargains, no sect under the cope of heaven so ready to deceive, as
they are: in a word, they are so opposite from the example of Christ, and all
holy m^n of God, that there is nothing to be found in them, nor without them,
but an inward Idoll-god of their own imagination, with an outward show of
holiness in their life and conversation.

And thus thou see the very bottom and height of these conceited ones, how
ready they are to judge others, and justify themselves. And here loving
brother, we may learn a good lesson, that seeing that flesh and blood is so
apt and ready to receive and entertain these inward Idoll-imaginations, let it
be our special care, to avoid and prevent, wherein soever we may be
withdrawn from Jesus Christ; and that we may the better prevent these, and
perform such duties which God requires at our hands, let us specially be
careful of this general point, that we neuerset our affections on this world,
nor on any thing that is therein, but only in the death and passion of our
Redeemer Jesus Christ, wherein only true love consists. And as Saint Paul
says, to count all things but loss and dross to be found in him, Phil. 3. 8
let him who has bought us at so dear a price, never be forgotten, let us
love him chiefly in the first place, and in the second, let our love, as Saint
Paul says, appear unto al men, but especially unto the true members of lesus
Christ: then shall this Jesus, eue^ his blood, cleanse us from all sin. Loving
brother, when I writ these words, remembering the small number of faithful
Christians, I could not refrain to shead tears for thee. Now upon the reading
th^reof, if it please God to grant thee his grace in such measure, that thou
can shead tears for thy sins, then shall my sorrows be lessened, and my
comforts greatly increased; then shall thou be happy here, and ten thousand
times more happy in the world to come, in which world I trust to meet thee,
where we shall praise God more fully. And here I must leave thee for a while:
for I have something more to say to our elder brother. Farewell in Christ.

Brother, coming behind thee, it was my chance to spy two motes upon thy
Cloak, and because thou could not see them thy self, I took occasion with
a sufficient rubber to rub them off: but finding thy cloak to be of Linsey and
Wolsey, then I knew that I had spent my labor in vain: for more pains I
took, more rough became thy garment: yet expecting some gratuitie, I followed
thee into thy house, where we were no sooner entered, but presently thou wentst
up into thy chamber: and whereas I hoped for something, thou stayedst so long,
that my hopes were almost past: but now thou art come, what have thou for me?


Puri. Truly, I have nothing for thee, only this, if that my prayers will do
thee any good, thou art welcome: For as S James says; The prayer of the
faithful avails much, Iam. 5. 16.


Pro. Brother, thou say well: but me think thy prayers are too long for my
weak stomach: For when thou wast in thy chamber, I could have wished thy
prayers shorter. For being both hungry and thirsty, yet no body offered me
so much as a drink: and to tell thee truly, I find my weak stomach by thy
long prayer, not a whit better satisfied.


Pur. What do thou find fault with me for my long prayers?


Pro. Brother, thou harpest all upon one string: if thou could play upon that
other string, named charity, as well as thou do upon that long string of
prayer, I could better endure the length thereof. But seeing that charity is
so cold in thee, it is a question, whether thy long prayer can prevail with
God, either to do thy self or me any good, being not accompanied with
charity.


Puri. I have talked with thee but too long: for thou art so full of charity,
and so little respective unto my prayer, that I am no more company for thee.


Pro. Stay, Brother, it is not I that is so much against thee; it is he, whose
shoo-latchet, as Saint John says, we are not worthy to unloose, Ioh. 1. 27.


It is he whom thou have opposed thy self against, both in thy disobedience to
man, and likewise in thy rash judgments against both God and Man. And as I
have in love reprehended thy errors in these two: so likewise I am ready by
Gods assistance to reprove thee in thy prayer, wherein thou deseruest. And first
for the length of thy prayer. Secondly, thy behauior when thou prayest with a
touch likewise of thy behauior at the receipt of the Sacrament. And for this
purpose, our blessed Savior, lest his Disciples should imitate the Heathen in
their idle repetitions: he gives them a prescription and form of prayer,
giving them a special warning to direct and frame all their prayers after the
manner of the prayer, Mat. 8. 9. And hereupon I gather, that all long prayers
are absolutely for bidden. For seeing that al things concerning both body and
soul, are contained within this short compass of these six petitions, I
conclude that all our prayers must of necessity, if we will follow Christ's
direction, be made both pythic and short. And how soever I am not able to
reason the case with a Scholar, because I am no Scholar my self: yet the
Spirit of God tells me against the greatest scholars in the world, that he
is out of Christ's school, whosoever he be that does reason to the contrary;
of which sort, how soever they may seem to please themselves, it is a
sufficient argument, that such neither love Christ, nor his prayer.

And to make my resolution good, I am ready to approve it by such two
sufficient witnesses, that if thy eyes be not darkened still, thou will
confess the same.

My first proof is Christ himself, who draws a reason from Gods
omnipotency, in these words: For your Father knows whereof ye have need,
before ye ask of him, Math. 6. 8.

My second proof is Solomon in these words: Be not rash with thy mouth, nor
let thy heart be hasty to utter a thing before God: for God is in the bea^ens,
and thou art on the earth, therefore let thy words be few: Eccles. 5. 1. These
two examples, who for wisdom was never any comparable, these iumpe both in
one reason, being drawn from Gods omnipotency. Now the question is, whether
that thou will rest thy self still in thy own conceit, as thou have done, or
thou will yield thy self unto these 2. examples: I dare undertake that for any
prayer thou make before thy Sermons, divide the same into 4. parts, and as
much and more may be contained in one part, as is in all the rest.

Again, for thy followers likewise: al their prayers with their families in
private, and all their prayers at their meetings in public, with their thanks
before and after meat, (though these taste very Heathenish) yet rather, then
either thou or they will direct your prayers after the Lords Prayer, or seem
to taste thereof; you are so far from any love, or liking thereunto: that your
conceited noses being so glued unto that Indian and most stinking weed of
your own imaginations, that ye have utterly refused to taste of that most
sweet flower which grows in the garden of God.

If one should ask thee this question, why thou do not knit up thy prayer
before thy Sermons, with the Lords Prayer: It may truly be answered, by the
words going before, that it is, because thou neither love Christ, nor his
Prayer: and yet if it chance, that thou do repeat the same, as seldom thou
do, all that hear thee, may very well perceive, that the sweetness thereof
has no good relish, in thy own conceit: for running it so fast over, as
though thou were counting to twenty, does argue that thou neither take love
or liking thereunto: and therefore mark well what I say, thou, who refusest
the counsel of Jesus Christ, and wilt not be advised by his followers,
resisting the Spirit of grace offered thee, shall one day, without a speedy
repentance, so taste and drink of that poisoned cup of thy own conceit, that
very deservedly, and most worthy thereof, thou shall be excluded both from
Jesus Christ, and his members for evermore.

Now because that the world shall better perceive, how contrary thy thoughts
and conceited imaginations are, unto the true meaning of the Lords Prayer, I
will, according to that little measure of knowledge, explain the same, in as
brief a manner as I can: And first what is meant by hallowed be thy Name: that
is, to desire with the inward affection of the heart, that God alone may have
all honor and glory unto himself: but thou, who restest in thy own conceit,
attributest honor unto thy self: herein thou art a thief, in robbing God of
his glory.

Again, Thy Kingdom come: that is, to desire with the inward affection of the
heart, that God would so rule and reign, both in our inward affections, and
outward actions, as that neither Satan, nor our own corruptions, may rule or
domineere against us, desiring further, that he would hasten his coming to
Judgment, because his Name is so greatly dishonored. Now seeing that thou
refusest to desire this in thy heart, which God greatly requires, or using to
pass it over sometimes so slightly as thou do: it is no marvel, that thou
art enchanted by Satan, to follow the vain imaginations of thy own heart.
Therefore thou can not say, and say truly, Hasten thy Kingdom.

Again, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven: That is, to desire that
our wills and affections may be framed according to Gods will: and as the
Angels in heaven are always ready in a heavenly obedience, to do Gods will,
both readily, willingly, and gladly: Even so should we always be ready in
obedience, whereunto God does command us, imitating the Angels, willingly,
gladly, and readily. Now how far off thou art from submitting thy will and
affection unto Gods will, does appear in thy disobedience against
Principalities and Powers. And again, how sarre thou art off from the example
of the blessed Angels, appears by the fruits both of thy life and doctrine,
so that thy will and affections are so contrary unto Gods will, that they are
only linked unto the imagination of thy own heart.

Again, Give us this day our daily bread: that is, to desire all things
convenient, both for body and soul. Herein thou have made thy self unworthy
to partake of the least of Gods benefits, yet although the wicked flourish for
a time, and that the dearest of Gods children many times do want these outward
blessings, yet it pleases God so to enrich them with his inward graces, that
outward wa^ts never trouble their minds at all.

Now thou, who art so disobedient both unto God and man, being but an intruder
in thy calling, have tied thy self in a double bond, as unworthy to partake of
these outward blessings, and resting thy self in thine own imaginations, thou
have deprived thy self of the inward graces. And forgive us our trespasses, as
we forgive them that trespass against us.

Whereas we desire here to have our offenses forgiven us with a condition: who
knows not that all those, who are accompanied with a patient Spirit of
adoption, that they are so far off from the least shadow of revenge, that
they are always ready, and willing to forgive their utter enemies?

But how contrary. minded thou art herein, I might appeal unto thy own
conscience, if thou had any: but seeing thou have none, the world may judge
what spirit thou art of, as appears before, concerning a Letter written unto
one of the chief of thy sect. For which how greatly I was troubled, and
likewise what it cost my purse, I omit to set down, because I expect no better
requital at any of your hands, until such time, as the wisest in your own
conceit can prove, that grapes may grow upon thorns, and figgs upon thistles.

Again, And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from all evil. Here
we desire that God would not suffer Satan and our natural corruptions, to
tempt us above our strength: and because out greatest strength is too weak to
resist, we desire in the second place so to assist us, that by his special
power he would deliver us from all evil.

Now whereas thou have refused to pray unto God in Christ, in this most perfect
prayer, it is no marvel that God in his just judgment has given thee over
unto Satan, and thy own corruptions, letting thee swim in that sinful sea
of thy own imaginations. And thus may the world see how contrary thou art to
Jesus Christ, and his prayer, refusing the God of light, betaking thy self to
an Idol god of darkness.

Our blessed Savior Christ says, And when thou prayest, be not like the
Hypocrite, for they love to stand and pray in the Synagogues, Matthew. 6. 5. and
Saint Paul says, praving for the Ephesians, I bow my knees unto the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 14.

Now, as thou have showed thy self a contradicted spirit against both God and
good men: so now especially, lest the world should not take more full notice of
thy folly, thou have gotten thy self into the very height of shame: and as
thy deformed conditions of disobedience have burst out of thy in ward parts: so
now at last thou show likewise what a deformed creature thou art, in thy
outward parts; for, when other are at their prayers, upon their knees, thou and
thy followers stand up like May-poles amongst us, as though ye had no knees at
all.

Now, how true this is, it cannot be denied, for both thy self, and infinite
multitudes of thy followers, in all places of this Land, do manifest the same.
And as this is true in thy public prayers in the Church where specially it is
forbidden: so likewise at the receiving of the Sacrament: and although Jesus
Christ be as truly there, by the eye of faith, after a spiritual manner, as
though we did behold him, and touch him as Saint Thomas did: yet thou, who
neither fear God, nor reuerencest man, as thou have showed thy self a
deformed fellow from the beginning, do not blush to stand, in receiving this
holy Sacrament, when others are upon their knees. Now if the Officers of the
Church come to reprove these thy followers, because they are an offense unto
their brethren, then must their usurping guide say, Sir, let them alone: and
thus are almost all the places of this Land abused with this disobedient Sect;
and that this is true, woeful experience does manifest the same.

If I should ask thee this question, why thou will not pray kneeling? thou will answer me, It is not because thou think it unlawful: but thy reason
is, that thou can pray with as good a devotion standing, as I can do
kneeling. I do not deny, but that one may pray standing, going, riding,
sitting, or lying. But whereas our Savior Christ commands, that we should not
stand praying in the Synagogues or Churches: Why will thou, having convenient
room, not yield thy self unto Christ's command? I did once make answer for
thee before, and because thou have no good reason for thy self, I will second
an answer for thee once again.

Because thou would make the world believe, that thou art better then thy
neighbors in show of thy outward actions, therefore thou have separated thy
self from others, and rather then the world should not take notice, that thou
art singular (as Solomon says of such) in thy own eyes still, Prou. 16. 2.
Thou now stand straight up, when others are kneeling, that all men may now
behold, that thou art but a plain Hypocrite.

Again, for thy behavior both at thy first sitting down in the Church, and
likewise at thy appearance in the Pulpit, thou art so far from submitting thy
self unto God, that without either private prayer, or seeming to sing with us;
there thou stand looking about th^e, as though thou were come from that
Indian Country, whose prai^rs thou imitat^st. Now seeing thou do but
intrude thy self, prefuming too boldly into that place of sanctity, if thou will neither pray nor sing with us, cover thy face, or come there no more, and
bewail these sinful times wherein we live, as being the principal instrument
for Satan thereof, and be sure of this one thing, that ifthou do not feel a
touch for thy sins, upon the sight hereof, thou may persuade thy self,
that thou art in a most fearful and lamentable case: and be advised how thou
presumest into that holy place any more: for assure thy self, that Christ,
whom thou have so grievously offended in his members, will one day, and that
very shortly, without present repentance, require their blood at thy hands,
and will avenge their cause in that place, where all Hypocrites shall have
their portion, which burns with fire and brimstone for ever.

One thing more I remember, which I would not willingly have omitted: how that
a reformed Minister submitting himself at his approach into the Pulpit, as his
manner is, one of thy chiefest followers, being a Ringleader of this crew, most
shamefully burst forth into a scornful laughter, This is one of thy brood,
that being hatched under such a Cockatrice, no better fruit can come thereof.

Now, seeing that all thy outward actions are but flourisht like painted
sepulchers, and that from all thy actions both inward and outward, nothing does
proceed but envy and strife, pride, and vainglory, hatred and malice, and
most cruel revenge: why do thou not begin to tremble and quake for fear,
seeing that the axe is already laid to the root of the tree, and that every
tree which brings not soorth good fruit, must be hewne down, and cast into
the fire, Mat. 7. 19?

Our blessed Savior says, He that is not with me, is against me, Ma. 12. 30

Now who is he that sees not, how that thou opposest thy self against Christ;
and therefore as Saint John says, an Antichrist, of whom it is said, That
there are many gone out into the world, whereby we know, that it is the last
time, I. John 2. 18.

Again, who knows not, that thou art a star fallen from heaven, who by thy
accusing judgments, in condemning both the quick and the dead, seeming to
pull that peculiar rod forth of Gods own hands, who therewith having
condemned the members of Jesus Christ, makes the very powers of heaven to
shake, Mat. 24. 29?

And again, who sees not, that by the frui^s of thy life and doctrine, thou
have caused the Sun to be darkened, and the Moon to lose her light, the
Ministry of the Gospel to be be e^ill spoken of, and love and charity to
be smothered? And who is he that does but look about* and sees not how that
thou with the Pope of Rome, are those two special false prophets which go in
sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves, Mat. 7. 15. Whose qualities
and conditions, Saint Paul has plainly described in the 2. Epistle of
Timothy, and 3. Chapter; from the first verse unto the 9. verse: of whom our
Savior Christ has Matthew. 7. 10
taught us, that, by these fruits we know thee. And thus the whole World may
plainly see, how thou have separated thy self from the body of the Church; and
therefore have brought thy self into a most fearful and lamentable case: and
yet to advise thee to turn unto repentance, I fear me it is in vain, because
Solomon faith, There is more hope in a fool, then of him that is conceited,
Pr. 26. 12. And therefore it matters not to tell thee, how thou have offended
God, in denying obedience unto supreme power, contrary to the Word of God, Mat.
22. 21. Romans 13. 1. 2. Peter 2. 10. Titus. 3. 1. Jude 8. verse.

It matters not to tell thee how thou have offended God in thy accusing and
condemning judgments, Mat. 7. 1. Luke 6. 37 contrary to the Word of God, To.
2. 1. Romans 14 10. 1. Cor. 4. 3.

It matters not to tell thee, how contrary thou art to Christ in making al thy
prayers, and likewise how wilfully thou refusest the Lords prayer, Matthew. 6.
7. Mat. 6. 9.

It matters not to tell thee, how contrary thou art to Christ's command, in
receiving the Sacrament, and likewise to pray in the Church standing, Mat. 6.
5. Ephesians. 3. 14.

It matters not to tell thee, how that with Esau, thou deadly hate us, Genes.
27. 41.

And likewise to tell thee, how that like Esau, thou have sold thy birthright
for mere vanity, Genes. 25. 34

It matters not to tell thee, how thou have separated thy self from us, 1.
John 2. 19. Jude, verse. 19.

It matters not to tell thee, how thou art become a false prophet, in judging
the young man in the Gospel, Mar. 10. 17

It matters not to tell thee, that thou art become a false Christ, and a false
prophet, in opposing thy self, both against Christ and his Word, Mat. 24. 24.
Mark. 13. 22. 1. John 2. 18. 1. Peter 2. 1. Jude, verse. 4. Revel. 22. 19.

It matters not to tell thee, how contrary thou art to the Word of God in
auenging thy self, Mat. 5. 39. Luke 6. 29. To. 12. 19. 1. Cor. 6. 7.

For thou will not only deny, wherein I have in every particular justly
charged thee: but thou will with Pilate, take water, and wash thy hands, and
plead innocence unto the whole world, and yet this plea will no more prevail
with thee, then it did with him. For as he pronounced sentence of judgment
against Jesus Christ, the head of the Church, delivering him up unto the hie
Priest to be crucified: so have thou brought his members unto the bar of Gods
justice, and having pronounced sentence of judgment already against them, it
shows how willing thou art to offer us unto that high Priest, the Pope of
Rome, to murder us: and here may the whole world perceive Jesus Christ in his
members, hanging be^wixt two thieves. And now at last, who is he that lives in
these days, and does not lament to behold, how that Religion, even in those
which do profess Christ, is now become nothing else but a plain cloak, or a
cover for sin? for is it not too manifest, that some one of the chiefest of
thy sect, meeting a Countriman in his travel by mere chance, took occasion
for some by-respect, to have some conference with him: but his name being
demanded, he did not only peremptorily deny himself, but likewise altered his
name, in so much that some other countrymen, being of good note and fashion, who
know him better, then he knows himself, being sorry to hear a man of his
coat, and their Countriman so shamefully to deny himself, demanded further
where he dwelt? but his answer being frivolous as before, said, Every where,
where our King has any land. Now if this, to deny a man's own self, and his
country, and to alter his name, be not such equivocation, as all of your sect
do hold damnable in a Papist, I refer my self unto your own judgments in
your several doctrines. Nay, I would know what sin there is which the
chiefest of thy sect will not commit, if so be that he can but get so much as
one fig tree leaf to cover his shame. I will not say, how worthily any of
thy sect do deserve that woe, the which the Prophet Micah says they shall
have; Who by violence do keep and maintain the inheritance from the right
owners thereof. I rather wish from the bottom of my heart as a friend, that if
any such be guilty in this kind, that not only present restitution be made,
but likewise to get them forth of that place, who so unconscionably remain
therein. For assure himself, whatsoever he be, and howsoever by quillits and
tricks, great boastes may be made thereof; yet certainly, without all doubt,
at that tribunal seat of Christ, such uncertainties shall bear no plea at
all: for better things, then these shall be (...) of that hye court of
conscience; and therefore let me advise thee, whosoever thou art, to make thy
self such friends here, as Jesus Christ may become thy friend elsewhere: for
according to our blessed Saviors sp^eches, With Mark. 4. 24.
what measure soever we measure here, the like shall be measured to us
again. Does any man truly measure a thing but by a line, except it be such
which stand in their own conceit, as most of thy Sect do? Saint Paul says,
in the person of all Gods children, that we (...) ^ot number or compare our
selves, with such who praise themselves, 2. Cor. 10. 12. For (says he) to
praise a man's own self, the children of God, not going without the line of
Gods Word, rejoice in no such things. 2. Cor. 10. 13. Therefore seeing that
most of thy Sect are so ready to boast and compare your selves before others,
it may be required, and very necessary for thee to show, what Towns or
Countries ye have won unto the Lord. But for thy answer herein, it is
needless. For being too apparent, that such Trees cannot possibly bring forth
any good fruit, what can it prevail thee to have an Angels tongue, and a
Devils heart? thou art no better then a post in the crosse-way, that rots it
self to direct others. To speak well, and doeill, is to build up heaven with
the voice, and hell with the conversation: and therefore seeing that thy words
and thy deeds do not agree together, I may truly compare thee unto such a
Soldier, which at the table could make fine talk of wars: who when he came
into the field to fight, was neither valiant nor expert: and therefore seeing
that all thy actions both inward and outward, being not guided by the line of
Gods Word, but by thy own conceit: no marvel that they prove, as Saint Jude
says, but spots in your feasts of charity, which being without all fear,
feed but your selves, being clouds without water, carried about with winds,
corrupt trees without fruit, twice dead and plucked up by the roo^s, Jude 12.
verse. Even of whom Saint Paul says, For these things whose minds and
cogitations being unsanctified, the wrath of God is fallen upon you, being the
children of disobedience, Col. 3. 6. And therefore to give thee a Title of an
English Pharise, or but an imitator of Religion, all such which truly perceive
any thing, may plainly see, that I have done thee no wrong at al. And now at
last, because thou art conceited in thy self; Of such Solomon says, there is
no hope, having joined thy self with the Pope of Rome, in your false
imaginations, wherein ye think that ye do God good service: I must of
necessity, seeing that the god of this world has thus darkened your
understandings, leave you at your study of vanities, to ponder upon these
places of Scripture underwritten.

Jude 12. verse latter end. 2. Pet. 17. latter end. Romans 13. 2. latter end,
Luke 13. 27. latter end. Mat. 7. 2. Romans 2. 1. 1. Cor. 4. 5.

For I must turn my self unto such, of whom as Saint Paul says, I persuade
my self better things, Heb. 6. 9 And who have not thus learned Christ, Ephesians.
4. 20. which being taught by him, walk as the truth is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.
21. being renewed in the Spirit of their minds, Ephesians. 4. 23. walk so as they
have Jesus Christ for an example, who having put off that old man of sin, are
now become so sanctified in their lives and conuersations, that being clothed
with that glorious garment and robes of righteousness, do walk worthy of their
calling in true holiness of life.

And now, faithful Brethren in Christ, of whom I wish as to my own soul,
seeing that this our elder brother does so rest himself in this word, only in
Christ, that neglecting such duties required at his hands, runs into all
manner of sin: Let it be your special care, and such a warning unto you,
that you never cherish or har bour any one sin at all, and that not any one
sin may seem pleasing in your eyes: strive and endeavor against all sin. For
without holiness no man shall see the Lord. And again, seeing that Christ
does command us, not only to believe in him: but to love one another, 1. Ioh.
3. 23. Let it not be, as Saint John says, in word and in tongue only, but in
deed and in truth, 1. John 3. 18. For he that has this worlds goods, and
sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him, 1. Ioh. 3. 17. Therefore I humbly entreat you,
in the bowels and compassion of Jesus Christ, as you tender your own souls,
that ye walk worthy of your vocation whereunto ye are called, with all
humbleness of mind, in meekenes, with long suffering, supporting one another
through love, always endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond
of peace, having your lamps, with those five wise Virgins, so furnished with
the oil of Gods graces, that our blessed Savior, at his general appearance,
may have just cause to say: Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the
Kingdom prepared for you, before the foundations of the world, Mat. 25. 34.
For when I was an hungered, ye gave me meat; I thirsted, and ye gave me
drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me; I was naked, and ye clothed me; I
was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me, Mat.
25. 35, 36. Now enter into your masters joy, unto the society of that blessed
company of Angels, and Archangels, and all holy men and women, and children
departed, there to remain in everlasting comforts, for evermore.

And here, my faithful Brethren, I trust in Christ Jesus, that we shall meet
there very shortly, to sing with that holy company, everlasting praise to the
whole Trinity, to God the Father, who has created us, to God the Son, who
has redeemed us, and to God the holy Ghost our comforter, who has, and does
sanctify us, to whom be endless praise for ever and ever. And now at last,
that this glorious Kingdom may be increased, let me entreat you once again
to join with me in our continual prayers, in often remembrance unto this holy
Trinity, that this little number, which being the sign of the Son of man, may
be so advanced now hard before hiscomming, that these thick clouds of
iniquity being dispersed, it may appear more clear unto the view of the
whole world.

And that this may be the better and sooner effected, I most humbly desire the
Lord of Hosts, from the very bottom of my heart, with hearty tears of
humility, upon my bended knees, that it would please him of his infinite
mercy, so to grace our most gracious and reverend Bishops of this Land, that
they all in general, both in word and deed, may be so ready to stop the
passage of these mystie clouds of darkness, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ
being the true light, may show it self like the bright morning Star, now at
his last coming to judgment. And again, grant, dear Father, for thy honor
and blessed names sake, unto our most gracious and reverend Bishops of this
Land, with all reformed Ministers of the same, such a powerful spirit of
humility, that they being able to beat down these transcende^t spirits of
iniquity, thy glory shining more clearly, the power of sin and Satan may be
darkened speedily, and that these most sinful times may have a speedy end, I
humbly desire with thy servant John in the Revelation; Come Lord, come Lord
Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

To the Puritan.
THy disobedience it does reach in height above the skies:
Thy hie conceit does please thee well, and therein thou art wise.
Disdain within thy heart does dwell, fraught with revenge an dire:
Thy words burst out in judgments as hot as any fire. (deep,
With singular eye thou do espy: great beams in others sight,
And therein do thy self much boast, with railing words of might.
Leave off for shame, thou have disgrast thy self in open view:
The Scripture does reveal thee plain, and therefore is most true.
Thy prayers long do please thee well, against the Word of Christ:
In him thou will not rest alone, by Satan thou art tiste.
Thou will stand up in thy conceit, in begging for thy need:
Without remembrance where thou art, in full hope for to speed.
But he that does behold thy face, whose face thou do not fear,
Will send thee away to thy disgrace, where want shall be thy cheer.
Where t^ou must stay, and then subthy self in thra'l to dwell: (mit
Where nothing is, but fearefullcries, in that deep pit of hell.
Thus having climde in thy conceit, in height above thy reach:
And with misconstring of the same, the Scriptures for to search,
Thy height of pride has brought thee for want of penitent speed: (low,
Wherein thou have thy self disgrast, thy humors for to feed.
To all.
A word, or two, in general, to whom these verses here.
Do not forget, but keep in mind, always God to fear:
Let not conceit withdraw your minds, from that pure Word of God:
For if ye do, ye shall sure taste of his most heavy rod.
To all true Christians.
And now at last, a word or two, unto my brethren dear,
Who honor God, and love his Word, his holy name to fear.
Go on with speed and courage great, your time it is but short,
And show your selves in love and each others to exhort. (peace,
Then he that bought us dear, will and meet us in the clouds, (come,
With Angels bright, full clear in to call us forth of mouldes. (sight,
Then will Christ say, Come blessed and stay on my right hand; (mine,
Ye loved me well, ye sed the poor, and here now ye shall stand.
Where we shall reign for evermore, his glory for to see,
Who has redeemed us from our sins, and now has set us free:
To him be praise: let us give thanks, in honor of his name:
Then happy we, but cursed he, that does refuse the same.
A Prayer before meat.
MOst loving Father, grant us, we humbly beseech thee, such patient spirits of
humility, that our bodies and souls being truly sanctified and fed by thy
heavenly graces, may be so freed, from that erroneous spirit of disobedience,
and false accusations, that living here in thy fear, we may hereafter depart
in thy favor, and that for thy Son Christ Jesus sake.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after meat.
MOst merciful Father, we yield thee hearty thanks, for feeding our mortal
bodies, with these thy good creatures: Lord, continue thy blessings unto us
still, and so free our hearts from that high conceit of vain glory, that our
bodies and souls being continually sanctified by thy powerful spirit of
humility, may still live in thy favor, and hereafter depart in thy favor,
for thy blessed names sake. Amen.

LOrd protect our most gracious King and Queen, and that hopeful progeny,
from the cruel rage of Satan, and all his wicked instruments, and grant, we
most humbly beseech thee, that his Highness, and his, continuing in a godly
fear, may live to praise thy most holy name, until the coming again of
Jesus Christ, and that for his own names sake,

Amen.
To know a Puritan from a true Christian.
IF any desire to know, what a Puritan is, look in the second Epistle of
Saint Paul to Timothy, the third Chapter, from the first verse unto the ninth
verse, and there ye may plainly perceive the qualities and conditions both of
him and the Pope of Rome, with all others of those Antichrists, the which have
banded themselves against the Lord and his Anointed: and although that they
have gotten themselves painted names: yet Saint Paul tells us, and we must
believe him, That they are mad men out of their wits, whose madness (says
he) is now evident unto all men, 9. verse.

Here may the whole world perceive all such, which have and do persecute
Christ Jesus in his members; especially, those two monstrous heads, the which
do so cunningly labor in sheep clothing, the Pope and the Puritan.

Now, if any desire to see Jesus Christ in his members, which is the true
Church of God, look from the ninth verse, unto the end of the Chapter, and
there ye may behold the true sign of the Son of Man, where ye may perceive,
all the elect faces of Gods children in that spiritual glass of immortality:
especially, his Evangelical face, of whom it may truly be said, That he has
known the Scriptures of a child, I mean, our most gracious King, whom the
Lord of his infinite mercy for his honor, and the good of his Church, does by
his unsearchable providence, now protect amongst us; therefore most blessed he,
and his, who shall dwell in everlasting peace, and never die.

Farewell unto the whole world.
FINIS.

