A Sermon PreaCHED AT PAVLS Cross by John Walsal, one of the Preachers of
Christ his Church in Canter^urie. 5. October. 1578.

And published at the earnest request of certain godly Londoners and others.

Neither is he that planteth, any thing, neither he that waters, but God that
gives increase. 1. Cor. 3. 7. AT LONDON. Printed for G. Bishop.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, virtuous, and his very good Lady, the Lady ANNE
BACON, John Walsall heartily wishes mercy and peace from God our father, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ.
THIS my present attempt and enterprise, will, perhaps minister unto the reader
double cause of admiration, the one, by reason of the publishing, the other in
the respect of the dedication of this simple and plain discourse. Touching the
first, albeit I may justly depose, and call God to witness that this sermon is
thus imprinted and made common, not by any vain desire of mine, or terrene
purpose in me, but at the importune suite of diverse godly men both of ye City
where it was preached, and of the Country where I inhabit: yet I am enforced
openly to acknowledge that it is my bounden duty of my self, without request,
every way to seek the glory of my God, by exhorting privately, by preaching
publicly, by writing generally, to the very vttermoste of my power and
ability. Howbeit, I am here constrained humbly to bewraye mine own
infirmities, with hearty prayer for greater strength. For mine own simplicity
and want of profounde knowledge, the abundance of most learned volumes daily
set out, together with consideration of many curious heads and carping
tongues, these so prevailed with my flesh, as neither I could, of my self, be
moved, nor by the importunity of others, for a good space, induced, to
publishe this treatise. But at length my weakness was somewhat strengthened,
and I persuaded, not only by the reasons of men, whom I have good cause
greatly to reverence: but also by the holy spirit of GOD, to collect this
Sermon out of my notes, and send it abroad, to the end, that, as by uttering
thereof it pleased the LORD GOD mercifully to touch the hearts of some: so, by
writing and imprinting thereof, it may like the same Lord as graciously to
touch the hearts of many. So that my only drift and purpose herein, is to
seek the glory of our good God, by attempting, as he has inhabled me, to
reclaim the wicked, to confirm the godly, to convert the deceived, to
encourage the converted, that, as God has created all, offered salvation to
al, and nourished us all, so through his son our Savior CHRIST, he may be
glorified by us al.

This glory of our God ought to be of so precious and dear accounte with us,
that we should direct whatsoever good thing we have to the advancement of
his glory. This is not the doctrine of carnal man, but of that most
excellent doctor. JESUS CHRIST, and of his holy Apostle S. Paul. Christ the
master says, First seek the kingdom Mar. 6. 33.
of God and his righteousness, etc: And Paul the servant, speaking of the
Lord God, tells us, that, Of him, through him, and for him, are all things,
and therefore Romans 11. ^6.
adds, to him be glory for ever: Amen. These and many the like scriptures
teach us that we are created, redeemed, sanctified, and preserved, yea, that
all ye Lords blessings so without measure daily powered upon us, tend to this
end that his most glorious name may be continually extolled by us. Both Moses
Exo. 32. 32. Romans 9. 3.
and Paul were so zealous for this glory, as they preferred the same to their
own salvation. But alas, such is the miserable condition of the world, that few
are found willing to take any little pain, or to sustain the short
displeasure even of the vilest men, thereby to show their longing desire of
God his glory. Men, of all sorts, are made so drunken with their own vain
glory, and in such manner bend them selves to maintain that ignominious and
shameful glory, as in the mean time, the glory of God is cared for,
accounted of, and longed for, but of very few, and as it were, of an
handful, in respect of the huge multitude of so innumerable people. From this
most impure and deadly impoysoned fountain of vain glory issues the
Papists glorious opinion of their meritorious works, their proud conceit of
man's righteousness, their bloody arguments against justification by faith,
their obstinate defenses of most gross impieties, their daily coining of new
counterfeit miracles for the underpropping of their now falling kingdom. From
this filthy puddle of vain glory springs the contemptuous disdayning of
ouermanie to submit their stiff necks to the sweet and easy yoke of
Christ. Hence it is that the very Angels of GOD his Church, and true
ministers of his word are sternly frowned upon, injuriously thrust to the
walls, and handled irreverently, unless with Popish dirige, they will sing,
Placebo: and as the Jews willed Esaias, speak Placentia: and with the Terentian
Gnato. Esaias. 30. 10.
ait, aio: negat, nego: that is to say: unless they will with Judas betray
their master Christ, and frame them selves to feed the sinful humors of
carnal men, by wilful neglecting the severe commandments of Almighty God.
Hence it is, that, if contempt of true religion, lothing of Christ's holy
Gospel, countenauncing of the wicked, cormeranting of earthly things, carnal
talk, vain delectations, horrible blasphemy, pride in apparel, epicurisme
in diet, deceit in bargaining, unchristian conversation, if these, and the
like enormities be reproved, and the terrible judgments of God denounced
against them, vain glory will then be inflamed and set on fire with
revenging anger, and at daggers drawing with such preachers. Thus I might
proceed to prove that vain glory does every way so abound, as the
advancement of God his glory is lamentably neglected.

Oh, that man had regenerate eyes to look thoroughly upon, and deeply into
himself, he should then well perceive that no glory, but all shame is due to
him: he should then be compelled to confess, that whatsoever good thing he
has of the body or mind, the Lord God has there with adorned him, that he
the author thereof might be glorified with and for the same. Saint Paul to
extinguish and quench out man's greedy thirst of vain glory demands of man
this question, What have thou that 1. Cor 4. 7.
thou have not received? To the same end that universal speech of Saint James
James. 1. 17
may be fitly applied. Every good giving and every perfect gift is from above
etc.

Wherein the holy ghost teaches that all the good things we enjoy, either
temporal, or spiritual, they have streamed from the everlasting founteine of
God his unspeakable liberality, that for and with the same we should magnify
and praise his most glorious name. The Lord therefore in mercy grant, that
every man, in his several vocation, may so heartily bend all his affections,
gifts, wealth, wisdom, worship, honor, or what soever the Lord has blessed
him withal, to the magnifying of him our most gracious and loving father, that
every one of us may with a good conscience and truly say with holy David, Not
unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name Psalm. 155. 1.
give the glory, etc. And with Saint Paul, God forbid that I should glory or
rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto Galat. 6. 14.
the world.

Think not (right Christian Lady) that these words are uttered so much to
instruct you, as to inform the reader of this letter unto you. For by good
experience I have comfortably found both in the right honorable my very good
Lord your wise and loving house band, and in your good Ladyship, his Godly and
obedient espouse, such care of Gods glory in aduauncing true religion, in
demeaning your selves in the educatio^ of your children, in governing your
family, in countenauncing of virtue and learning, in cherishing the poor and
needy, as I might deservedly be deemed unwise, if I had not observed it:
careless, if I did not remember it: unthankful, if upon offered occasion, I
would not testify it. But thanked be the king of eternal glory, this your
care of GOD his glory is so universally known to the whole realm, and so
joyfully acknowledge of ye Godly therein, that I need not produce my self for
an experienced witness of the same. Wherefore to conclude this branch, I will
heartily offer up mine incessant prayers to the Lord God, in the name of his
son our savior CHRIST, that both you, and all Christians, may daily and
continually grow not only into such contempt of vain glory, and al vain
things: but also into such love and longing of his true glory, and all
heavenly things, as, in these evil days, ye may have the sure testimony of
your own consciences, that you have zealously sought GOD his glory, and in the
end, through Christ, be made partakers of his eternal glory.

As this care of Gods glory has drawn others to desire, and me to publish
this sermon, which I trust, will prevent the uncharitable suspicio^s of some,
and stay the rash tongues of others: so, me thinks, I am to be blamed neither
by you, nor of any other for dedicating the same to your Ladishippe. For,
notwithstanding nothing be therein taught, which you have not long ago learned,
and nothing in such manner delivered by me, but has been and may be much
bettered by others: yet your Ladyship, by perusing things already learned,
shall not be altogether unprofitably occupied, and at the least this my fact
shall make some outward show of mine inward hearty thanksgiving for the
benefits bestowed upon, and the trust reposed in me your humble and faithful
servant.

And when I considered, that by my Lord and your La. I was first called from
the university to teach your two sons, (and those such children, as for the
true fear of God, zealous affection to his word, obedience to their parents,
reverence to their superiors, humility to their inferiors, love to their
instructour, I never knew any excel them) and also that by the same means I
was likewise first called from teaching of children, to enstruct men, verily I
could not but dedicate the first fruits of these my so general labors to
some of that house, whence I was first sent out to be a poor labourer in the
Lords great harvest. You shall here find no profounde learning, no exquisite
art, no curious eloquence, to delight your learned ears: but find you shall
the simple truth now imprinted as it was then uttered, to comfort your
Christian heart. And I am thoroughly persuaded, that as I have the sure warrant
of Gods express word for confirmation of the truth herein contained: so the
holy spirit of God will in such wise affect you with a like and love thereof,
that he will compel your heart to think, and your tongue to say, Amen: Yea, and
to confess, that, albeit a sinful man was the homely vtterer, yet the holy
Ghost is the undoubted author of the same.

Now least the portall should be as great as the house, and the preface as
long as the treatise, I will conclude and cease from further troubling you.
But, I trust, not to surcease from hearty praying the Lord God so to deuor the
hearts of your good La. of your children and whole family with the holy fire of
his heavenly spirit, that ye may dwell in his court, and be satisfied with the
pleasure of Psalm. 65. 4.
his house, even of his holy temple: that the Psalm. 69. 9.
zeal of the Lords house may eat ye up: that with good consciences and
joyful spirits, ye may truly say, o Lord, I have loved the habitacion of thy
house, and the Psalm. 26. 8.
place where thine honor dwells: Finally, that ye may be of that bright
heavenly wheat, which shall be gathered into the celestial garner by the
Lord Jesus, who, for ever, mightily protect, and mercifully preserve you.

At Easeling by Feuersham in the County of Kent.

Your Lad. hearty Orator, and humble servant. John walsall.

A SERMON preached at Paul's Cross by John Walsall, one of the preachers of
Christ's Church in CANTERBVRIE, the fifte of October. 1578.
Acts. 3. 22 For Moses said unto the Fathers, the Lord your God shall raise
up unto you a Prophet, of your brethren, like unto me: ye shall hear him in
all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you. 23 For it shall be that every
person which shall not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed out of the
people.
IF (right honorable, worshipful, and well-beloved in Three things comme^d this
scripture.
our savior Jesus Christ) either the principal cause and author of this
scripture, or the instruments and second causes uttering the same, or the
matters therein comprehended, if all, or any of these be duly considered of
us, we shall find this present text to be of very great authority, and
fully replenished with heavenly profit and comfort. Our custom and manner is
carefully to respect the author both of words spoken, and deeds done: and as
he is learned or ignorant, wise or foolish, well affected or evil disposed,
so we commonly receive or reject what soever proceeds from him: for the most
part still measuring, in temporal things, the matter by the man. I say in
temporal things, because in matters spiritual, not so much the men that
speak, as the matters spoken, are to be regarded: according to that of our
Savior. The Matthew. 23. 2. 3
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses ch^^^. Al therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do: but after their works do not: for they say and
do not. But the author of this scripture is of such learning, wisdom,
holiness, as we may safely, and are commanded straightly, not alone to credit
and believe his words, but also to conform and fashion our selves after his
works. For as of all the sacred Canonical Scriptures, so, of this now in
hand, the holy Ghost, that spirit of truth, that comforter John. 15. 26. Romans
8 14. The holy ghost author of the Canonical Scriptures. Act. 28. 25. 2. Tim.
3. 16.
of the elect, that director of the faithful i^ the cause and author. To this
and Paul in the last of the Acts, says Well spoke the holy ghost by Esaias
the Prophet, unto our Fathers etc. Again, the whole scripture is given by
inspiratio^ of God. etc. Peter also in his second epistle and first cha.
utters these words. Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but
holy men of God spoke 2. Pet. 1. 21.
as they were moved by the holy Ghost. In like manner the words spoken at the
giving out of the law, may truly be understood of the whole body of all the
holy scripture: to wit, God spoke all Exodus 20. 1.
these words. Thus it is apparent and manifest of what reverend and holy
account both this, and all the sacred scripture ought to be, and with what
hearty obedience we are to yield ourselves and stoup down unto it, since the
holy ghost is author of the same.

If we likewise respect the instruments, whereby this scripture, as by certain
second causes and means, has been delivered to us, the excellency thereof
will The present scripture uttered by Moses, Stephan, and Peter.
also comfortably and plainly apeare. For it is uttered by three excellent
ministers and servants of the Lord, by Moses the governor of Israel, by
Stephan the martyr, and by the Apostle S. Peter.

Moses as we read in the book called Moses. Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
Deuteronomie, and, as these two, Stephan and Peter do witness, was the first
speaker of this divine sentice, and that by the inspiration and direction of
the holy Ghost: the occasion whereof is also put down in that place of
Deuteronomie, and consists in these two branches. First, Moses forbids the
Israelites Against our Popish witches.
to follow the impious manners of ye heathen people, in using witcheraft,
sorceries, charming, soothsaying, in observing times and the fleeing of birds:
in making recourse unto, and asking counsel of spirits and the dead:
pronouncing all these abominable unto the Lord, and the cause why the Lord
has rooted out those nations, which were infected and defiled with these
superstitious and damnable vanities. In the other branch Moses charge the
Israelites to demean themselves with all duetifull and true hearted obedience
toward ye Lord their God, saying, Thou Deuteronomy. 18. 13.
shall be upright therefore with the lord thy God: thereby signifying, that, if
we will have the lord to be our God, his mercies continued, his vengeance
deteyned, we must then not play the lame ^reeples, and hypocritical halters by
Hypocrisy and halting condemned.
making a mingle mangle and hodgepoge of true religion, and vile superstition:
but we must go uprightly, and become unfeigned detestoures of al impiety and
superstition, and hearty zealous worshippers of the Lord, according to that
religion and worship, which the Lord him self has prescribed and commanded
in his word. So that the drift of Moses by this scripture, is to induce and
persuade the children of Israel, and all true Christians, not to depend upon
the vile and vain illusions either of satan, or of his wicked We must depend
upon, and yield our selves wholly unto the word of God.
instruments, but to yield themselves to the word of God, and that with true,
ha^^ie, and through obodience. If ye Israelits had objected to Moses, yt the
word of God was intricat and hard, Prophets to interpret the same were few,
and An objection.
that Moses and all the prophets should be taken from them by death, and so
the word of God could be no such sure staff for them to trust and lean
unto, Moses, in this my text, does skilfully, and to their and our great
comfort, answer this objection, saying: The lord An answer of the same.
your God shall raise up unto you a Prophet, etc, meaning that the Lord will
never suffer his Church to be utterly destitute of true Prophets and faithful
interpreters of his word.

The second instrument, whereby the holy Ghost has uttered this scripture,
the second by mine order, is Stephan Stephan.
the Martyr. For Stephan in his notable Sermon sealed with his blood and death,
laboring to win the Jews unto Christ, and to pull them from their Act. 7. 2.
etc.
superstitious observation of Moses law, he makes rehearsal of Moses whole
history, as, of his birth, of his casting out, of his taking up, and
nourishing by Pharao his daughter, of his care over afflicted Israel, his
killing of the Egyptian, his fleeing into the land of Madian, of the Angels
appearing unto him in a flame of fire, of the Lords sending him into Egypt, of
the wonders done by his hand in the land of Egypt. Lest the Jews should be
too superstitiously wedded to Moses, and thereby hindered from embracing Christ,
Stephan proceeds, and substancially proves, that, even this their Moses,
whom they so love, obey, maintain and cleave to, even Moses and the law, teach
and point unto Christ.
that he in the law, and by his office endeavored to conduct and guide them
unto Christ. This, says Stepha^, is that Moses, which said, unto the children
Acts. 7. 3
of Israel, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, etc. By which
words it is evident that Moses would not have the Jews obstinatly tied to him
for ever, but did prophecy and foretell of Jesus Christ the Prince and head of
all the prophets, the very mark whereunto Moses, the law, and all the
Prophets were directed: by whom a new ministry, to wit, the Preaching of
the Gospel, should be published for the free remission of sins.

Last of all this scripture is used by the Apostle S. Peter in this third of
the Peter. Acts. 3. 22. 23
Acts: Peter and John having in the name of Christ, that is say, by the virtue
and Christ's name.
power of Christ, restoared him that was borne lame, unto his lims: the people
in woondering wise, ran unto Peter and John, accou^ting them the workers of
this miraculous eure. Herevppon, Peter took direct occasion to make an
excellent sermon, wherein he openly Peter's sincere humility.
and with all humility acknowledges that this lame creeple was healed, not by
their cunning, power, and holiness, but by the virtue of Jesus Christ: he also
vpbraideth them with the villainies done to Christ, setting before their eyes
their betraying him, their denying of him the holy one and the Just, and desire
of a murderer to be given unto Peter's sharp reproving and sweet comforting
the Jews.
them: their killinge of the Lord of life. After he had thus pierced their
hearts with recital of this barbarons cruelty, the rather to reclame and
bring them to some deep and sweet feeling both of their own sins, and of
God his mercies in Christ, he shows that he is not persuaded they did these
things wittingly, willingly, and of a set malicious purpose: but tells them,
that, after this manner, the Lord God performed that, which was long before
spoken by the Prophets. And therefore Peter exhorts them unto repentance,
True repentance flees unto Christ.
and to turn unto the Lord, which cannot be done unless they apprehend and
catch hold upon Jesus Christ the promised and performed savior, and that
with the strong hand of a lively faith. This doctrine was strange and odious
to the Jews, who thought Moses and Christ so repugnant, and the law and the
Gospel so contrary, as, if they had embraced Christ and his Gospel, An
objection.
they would by and by have reputed and taken themselves for horrible
schismatiques and backsliders from Moses and the law. Peter wisely preuenteth
this An answer of the same.
objection, by citinge this my present text out of Deuteronomie, from the
very mouth and law of Moses. By which testimony so produced, Peter does
not only declare his reverend opinion conceived of Moses, but also firmlie
proves that his doctrine The embracing of Christ is no transgressio^ of the
law.
does not dissent from Moses and the law, since both Moses and the law do, in
these words prophecy of Christ which was then to come, and command obedience
to be yielded unto him at his coming, and that upon pain of eternal ruin
and destruction. As hitherto ye have briefly heard of this scriptures
excellency, in respect, first of the holy Ghost being author, and then of
Moses, Peter, and Stephan vtterers of the same: so now (Christ willing) I will,
in more ample manner discover the dignity and worthiness thereof, by reason of
the matters therein comprehended.

The whole matter does generally concern the raising up of a Prophet: The
matter of this text.
out of which general head there plainly grow these four particular and
especial branches.

1 First, By whom, and for whom, this Prophet shall be raised up.

2 Secondly, what manner of Prophet this shall be.

3 Thirdly, The attentive ear and hearty obedience which must be yielded to
this prophet.

4 Fourthly, The Punishment allotted to such as will not so hear and obey this
Prophet.

The Lord your God shall raise up unto you a prophet.

It is not unknown (right Christian The raiser up of this Prophet.
audience and dearly beloved in our Savior Christ) but universally known,
received and believed of all true Christians, that, as the Lord Ephe. 1. 4.
GOD, before the foundations of the world were laid, did, in his exceeding
rich mercy, elect and choose The members of the church fore appointed.
unto salvation a certain number of mankind, whereof his Church should
consist and stand, so the same our heavenly father determined in his good time,
and at his good pleasure, to call those his elect and chosen people unto the
true knowledge and comfortable feeling of his son Jesus Christ, that so they
might be justified by faith in him, and afterward glorified with him. Thus
much Saint Paul teaches us in this short sentence, Whom he predestinate, Romans
8. 30.
them also he called, and whom he The preching of the word the mean to call
the elect.
called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he glorified.
For a mean, whereby these so elected might be called into the body and bosom
of the Church: the Lord has mercifully given, and mightily preserved his holy
word, wherein his will is revealed, Gods will is the perfect rule of
righteousness.
which his will, is the very perfect rule of righteousness, whereby the
children of God are to frame and square out the whole course of all their life,
as well for true religion and the right worshipping of him: as also for their
conversation and dealing in the world. To the end this will of God thus
contained in his word, might be manifested and made known both to the elect,
for their calling unto Christ: and also to the reprobate for their iuster
condemnation, to this end the Lord has in his Church ordained a ministry of
his word and will, and that by the means of men, to whom severe commandment
is given to show the people their transgressions, to admonish The office of
Christ's ministers.
the wicked of his way, to teach and baptize all nations, to preach the word
instantly, in season and out of Esa. 58. 1. Ezech. 33. 8. Math. 28 19. 2. Tim.
4. 2. Tit. 1. 9.
season: to exhort with wholesome doctrine, to improve them that say against
it. And Moses, in this place cited by Peter, assures us, that, as God, has of
his mercy, once set an instructing ministry in his Church: so with the same
he will ever bless his Church, so long as it shall be militaunt and
warfaring upon the earth, and therefore stand in need of ministers. For A
comfortable assurance of true ministers of the word.
whereas Moses says, The Lord your God shall raise up unto you a Prophet, He
does us to understand that God will continually stir up such as shall
diligently instruct his people in ye true knowledge of his holy word. So that
this first entrance into our present text, teaches that the Ministry is no
man's ordinance, but the Lords institution. To confirm this, many strong and
The minististery ordained by God.
substanciall testimonies may be produced out of the sacred scriptures. For
that Commission Marc. 16. Go ye into Mark 26. 15.
all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. Those words of
Christ to the disciples, As my father sent me, so John. 20. 21.
send I you, that speech of Paul, how shall they preach, except they be
sent? that rehersall of ecclesiastical functions Romans 10. 15.
which Paul makes, that charge Ephesians. 4. 11.
given by our savior, Wherefore pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would
Math. 9. 83.
thrust out laborers into his harvest: those seven stars in the right hand of
Christ: Apo. 1. 16. 20
do not al and every one of these places strongly prove that the ministry of
the word and sacraments is no fancy of man, no invention of flesh and
blood, no alone politic order for the government of the common wealth, but
the very holy ordinance of the Lord our God? Hence therefore spring these
considerations touching the ministry, to wit.

The reverend care to be used in the Election and creation of ministers.
The conscience and ability of such as desire the ministry.
The account and estimation of the ministry.
If the Lord God be the author of the ministry, then what men, of whatsoever
What care is to be used in the election of ministers.
countenance in the universal world, shall once dare with unwashed hands, that
is to say, of corrupt affection, to elect or admit any to the ministry,
which the word of God allows not to be ministers, and many times not to be
so much as Christians? If I hastened not to other matter, I might in this
place discover the Romish Clergy, and show both how the holy ordinance and
institution of the ministry is by them profaned, and how miserably they have
seduced the Lord his people: when as all The popish Clergy no true ministers of
Christ
their Priests are horrible Idolatours, and in most of them is found neither
ability, nor will either to instruct and feed their flocks, or to explane
and open their own Idolatrous service, or to make any reckening of a right
faith, and therefore I may justly wipe that greazed generation out of the
number of god his true ministers. For in ye ministers of god it is necessarily
required, that, as Paul writes to Titus, they hold fast that faithful word
according to Tit. 1. 9.
doctrine, and be also able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and to convince
them that say against it. Since the Romish Clergy are so far of from
embracing, believing, following, and teaching this faithful word, that they
oppose and set them selves against it, with all their might and main, profane
it, corrupt it, burn it, take on, and rage with fire and sword against it,
how then can they be accounted in the number of true ministers? It may be that
some will think to meet with me by and by, and to beat me An objection
against some of our ministers.
with mine own rod: obiecting, that, if none be true and good ministers,
but such as are able and willing soundly, without halting: sincerely, without
corruption: valiauntly, without fear to deliver the whole will of God
contained in his word, unto his people, then we shall find in these days of
ours, and in this our own Church many, that are no good ministers.

It were a strange and lamentable Answer to the same.
case, if in this age of our Church, such gross imperfections should be
found: and if such be found, verily, rather tears are to be shed, and
prayers powered out for speedy reformation: then any long answer made in this
place to that former objection. But this I must needs say, that, as in the
beginning when ye abolishing of popery was attempted, flesh and blood might
have Some causes of a maimed ministry in the beginning
pretended some reasons for the placing of unmeet ministers, namely, that the
number of Popish sacrificers to be displaced, was great: the number of learned
ministers to succeed them, was small: the Universities were infected: as man
might have coulorablie pretented these causes of a raw ministry in that
beginning: So I know no express word of God, no sound authority of any
writer, no good reason which can be now yielded for the continuance No cause of
the continuance thereof.
and increase of the same: especially in this longing of the people to be
taught, in this staruing of souls with want of teaching, in this comfortable
abundance Causes to the contrary.
of able ministers which both the Universities may, and are willing yearly
to send out into the Lords great harvest. Let us all therefore, as many as
wish for the perfect beauty of Sion, heartily pray the Lord so thoroughly to
devour the hearts of all placed in authority with his gracious spirit, that
both in making ministers, and in bestowing livings appointed for ministers, the
glory of God, the profit of the church, the institution and description of
ministers contained in his word, may always be carefully and obediently
resoected.

Me thinks I see by his outward countenance, that some Romanistes heart is
inwardly cheared with this my speech of our ministers. But soft a No cause why
any papist should rejoice at the former speech of some of our ministers.
while, look before ye leap, and be not merry without cause. For, blessed
be God, England has at this time good and great cause spiritually to
rejoice, and heartily to bless and praise the Lord for the goodly store of
godly, learned, wise, and painful ministers, wherewith Our joyful plenty of
good ministers.
he, in his rich mercy, thath so blessed us, as our forefathers, albeit, no
doubt, they often wished, yet they seldom, or never enjoyed the like. And this
I may boldly say, and prove it substantially, that the meanest of all our
ministers, though unable to preach, are notwithstanding such, as for their true
religion, Our simplest ministers better then the best (if any be good) of the
popish clergy
right worshipping of God, zealous affection to the Gospel, prayinge for and
with their congregations in a known language, only to the Lord, and their
wishing well, and seeking, as they can, to do good in their charges, etc. may
justly be preferred to the learned, to the wisest, and deuoutest of all that
Romish rabble of sacrificing priests.

As ye have heard that the Lord God being author of the ministry,
therefore great care must be had in opening The conscience and ability of such
as desire the ministry.
the doors of the ministry, that none, upon any carnal respect, be thereunto
admitted: so this consideration, that the Lord is the raiser up of Prophets,
the ordeiner of ministers, the sender forth of preachers, ought so to prevail
in the heart of every private true Christian man, that he should make choice
rather to beg his bread, and abide any hard estate in the world, then, being
vnfite for that function, to intrude himself into the same, either for a last
refuge, or for ease, or for profit, or any other unchristian considerations.

It is said in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 5. 4.
No man takes honor to himself, but he that is called of GOD, etc. It is
then Gods calling that makes the office and entering into the same, lawefull.
Whosoever therefore takes No man can assure himself that he is a true
minister, unless he be called of God
on him the office of a minister, without this inward calling of god, cannot
have ye sure testimony of a good conscience y^ he is a true minister. And how
shall any man assure himself that the Lord has called him, to take the charge
of his people to guide his flock, to break unto their souls the bread of
life, unless he find that the same Lord has mercifully adorned and
beautified him with such How a minister shall know if he be called of God.
graces, as are requisite and necessary for a minister of the word: to wit,
sound knowledge of the word, ability sincerely to teach it, strongly to
maintain the truth, valiauntly to convince error, and to apply this word
with profit and discretion?

This consideration of these notes and marks, whereby the Lords calling of
any man to the ministry may be discerned, will, I trust, teach men to hold
themselves thankefully contented with their own vocations, and not to leap of
from their stalles, and out of their shoppes and trades into the ministry, to
the offense of the godly, the What grievous offenses ignorant ministers give.
hardening of the wicked, the contempt of the word, and displeasure of the
LORD our GOD, which is the author of the ministry.

Here, according to promise I would speak of the dignity and excellency
of Christ his true ministers, but that the same is so often and so plainly
mentioned in the holy word of God, as no diligent reader or hearer of the The
dignity of true ministers is manifest, by.
word, can be ignorant of the same. The names whereby they are called, the
office to them enjoined, the person they represent: all these every one of
these, and diverse other respects to the same end, do plainly certify us of
their high, holy and excellent function.

They are called the salt of the earth, Their names. Mat. 5. 13. 14. 1. Cor 5 1.
the light of the world, the ministers of Christ, disposers of the secrets
of God, preachers of the word, stars, 2. Tim. 4. 2. Apo. 1. 16. 20.
Angels.

Their office is to season and poulder the hearts of the elect with the sweet
savor of Jesus Christ their savior, to Their office.
be means to illuminate and lighten our dark understanding by a sincere
interpretation of the word, to minister the Gospel and sacraments of Christ,
to receive light from Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness, and to conueigh
the same to us for the guiding of our steps: to carry, like trusty
Ambassadors, and faithful messengers, the Lord his will and pleasure to his
servant. They represent ye very person of the Lord Jesus, as is evident by
The person they represent Mat. 10. 40. Luc. 10. 16.
his own words, He that receives you receives me: and again, He yt hears
you, hears me: and he that dispiseth you, disspiseth me, etc. These few,
but yet great things spoken of the worthynesse of Christ his ministers, are,
I trust, sufficient to bring them out of that contempt whereunto they are
grown The contempt of godly ministers.
by the malice of Satan, by the wicked practices of his instruments, and by
the horrible unthankfulness of the world.

THE SECOND PART.
AS ye have heard in the first part What manner of Prophet this is.
that the Lord shall raise up this prophet, whereby has been declared, that,
not carnal man, but the immortal and everliving God is author of the
ministry, so in the second place we are to consider what manner of Prophet
the Lord shall raise up: our text says.

A Prophet of your brethren, like to me.

We read in the holy scriptures of Three kinds of prophets. Marlor. loc.
com.
three sorts and kinds of Prophets. The first are such, as were
extraordinarily stirred up by the LORD, and used to ask counsel of the
Lord for the comfort of the Church in her great extremities. These Prophets
were called Seers, of whom it is spoken in the Seers.
first book of the Cronicles, as of God, David's Seer: and of Samuel the
Seer. 1. Cor. 21. 9. 26. 28.
The second sort were also extraordinarily sent by the Lord too interpret
Interpreters of the law.
the law of God, when the priests ceased, such were Isay? Jeremy, etc. The
third kind of Prophets are such as the Lord has blessed with ability To
prophecy.
and gifts to enterprete and apply the holy scriptures: so that to
prophecy, Preachers of the word.
or to be a Prophet in this last sense, is to open the word of GOD by a
sound, diligent, plain, and faithful interpretation, and to apply the same
both for the ingendring, increase, and confirmation of faith: and also for the
reformation and amendment of life, such, as some think were the Prophets
Acts. 13. 1.
at Antiochia, spoken of in the thirteenth of the Acts. In this sense all true
preachers are prophets. Thus likewise Pro. 29. 18.
I take Salomons saying, Where The necessity of Preaching.
Prophecy fails, the people perish, that is, where there is not a faithful
ministry, a true and diligent interpretation, a through application of the
word, there the people by heaps, run headlong into utter destruction.

To this end, and in this meaning does Moses utter these words, The Lord
your God shall raise up unto you a Prophet, signifying a continual ministry
of the word for inlarginge the kingdom, and building up the church of Christ.

Howbeit both Stephan in the seventh, and Peter in the third of the Acts,
do so use the testimony of Moses, Stephan and Peter aplie this text chefly to
Christ.
that they do more particularly restreigne the same unto our Savior Christ.
For their purpose is to persuade the Jews, that to hearken unto, and believe
in Christ, is not repugnante and contrary to the Law of Moses, because Moses
him self speaking of Christ, says, A Prophet shall the Lord etc. There is
no contrariety between my first interpretation of this prophet for all the
ministry, and This prophet imports Christ and all his ministers.
my thus understanding of Christ by this Prophet. For as this Prophet does
generally importe the whole number of true ministers, prophets, and preachers:
so it has also Christ the mark of all true ministers
an especial relation unto Jesus Christ, the head and prince, the butte and
mark, the scope and end of all the true ministry, which ever was, is
presently, or shall be hereafter upon the whole face of the earth. Behold here
then the comfortable signification, and importaunte The comfortable sign of
this prophet.
nature of this prophet, even that Jesus Christ, by his might and mercy,
shall ever be with his Church: and that, from time to time the Lord will
raise up and send out true ministers for his Church. This alone consideration
and knowledge is fully fraught with singular comfort. If we call to our
remembrance that an household with The woeful estate of the Church wanting true
ministers.
out a steward, waxes disordered: that scholars wanting an instructour,
cannot be learned: that a ship destitute of a guide is unlikely to be
preserved: we shall then easily perceive, and clearly see the most lamentable
estate of the Church when it is deprived of true ministers, which are ye Lords
stewards, to 1. Cor. 4. 1. Mat. 28. 19.
dispose his secrets: the Lords scholmasters to teach his people: the Lords
vnderguides to direct his flock of Sheep in John 10. 16.
to the sheepefold of Jesus Christ. The faithful among all other griefs,
reckon this for one of the greatest, we see not our sagnes, there is not one
Prophet Psalm. 74. 9.
more. But, although for our sins, ingratitude, contempt, and disobedience,
the Lord, in his displeasure, does often take away his word, and ministers,
in such sort, as the world many times judges the word utterly abandoned, and
the ministers thereof altogether destroyed: yet, even in those times of hott
afflictions, the Lord has continually raised up true prophets and preachers,
God leaves not his church destitute of ministers in persecution.
to his true hearted Israelites, whereof this City has often had most
comfortable trial and experience. Therefore, let us faithfully hold in our
hearts as a sure ground, and infallible principle for ever, that, if we will be
diligent hearers, faithful believers, and obedient practizers of his word,
The Lord our God shall raise up a Prophet unto us, that is, will still
mercifully bless us with the presence of Jesus Christ, and with sincere,
learned, painful, discreet, and godly interpreters and ministers of his word.

Moses proceeds in the description of this Prophet, and says.

of your brethren, like to me.

Ye have already heard that Moses speaks these words in general manner
respecting both Christ and his ministers, but that Peter does more
particularly apply them unto Christ, and therefore it behooves me to speak of
the same words.

First, as they generally concern the whole ministry.
The^ as they especially touch Christ.
To preserve and keep ye Israelites, and in them, all Christians, from being
How these words concern the whole ministry.
defiled with the impious manners of the gentiles, and to make them for ever
wholly cleave to ye word of God, Moses has promised a continual opening of ye
word, and will of god therein comprised. The people might have said to Moses,
peradventure An objection
thy meaning is, yt the Lord himself will teach us in his own person. But this
we can in no wise brook. For, we found his majesty so glorious, his The
majesty of God.
voice so terrible, his words so pearcing, at the giving out of the law upon
Deuteronomy. 19. 18.
mount Sinai, that we looked for present Deu 20. 18. 1^
death; and therefore prayed that we might no more hear the Lord speak unto
us in his own person. Moses, to take away this fear, tells them that An
answer to that objection.
this prophet shall be of their own brethren; that is, of their own stock,
blood, and kindred: and like to him, that is, a man as he is, in company with
the^ as he is, teaching them as familiarly, as plainly, as mildely, as
lovingly, as he does. Hence we are taught yt as it is The goodness of God in
teaching us by our brethren.
a great benifit to be rightly instructed in the will and way of the Lord: so
the Lord has dealt graciously with us, in that he teachech us not in his
glorious majesty, to confound us: but in his great mercy, to save us: not
fearfully, by thundering, lightening, and tempests to afraie us, but by men of
our own country, of our own nature, of our own acquaintance, to encourage aad
allure us. How this speech touches Christ.


Now, to understand this speech of Christ (as Stephan and Peter do) it must be
thus construed, that Christ, touching Genesis 22. 18.
his humane nature, should descend from the stock of Abraham, and be borne
among the Jews. And therefore there was no cause at al why the Jews should
either fear or despise Christ, since by birth he should be their own
countrieman, and in familiar, and loving instruction, like to Moses. But this
Christ's likeness to Moses must Christ not so like Moses, but that he far
passes Moses.
not be so taken, as if in Christ there could be found nothing more
excellent then was in Moses. For, Moses was but a man, Christ, God and man:
Moses was a man subject to sin, Christ is a man free from sin: Moses was
but a servant, Christ is the Lord and Master. But Christ and Moses Wherein
Christ's likeness to Moses does stand.
are herein like, because they were both Prophets and interpreters of God his
will to his people, and because Moses was a lively figure of Christ, as may
appear by a brief comparison made between Christ and Moses. Moses, being in
credit in king Pharaho his house, chose rather to suffer afflictions with his
brethren the Israelites, then to live in Exodus 2. 11.
ease and estimation in the Court of Pharaho: Our savior Christ, being in the
glorious heavens, the second person Luke. 2. 11. 12
in Trinity, had such compassion on our most miserable estate, that he
descended and came down into this vale of myserie for the accomplishment of
our redemption. Moses was unkindly Nu. 12. 1 14 2
entreated of his brethren the Jews, Christ coming among his own, was John.
1. 11.
not received. Moses delivered Israel Exodus 14. 27.
from Egypt, and drowned Pharaho and his host in the red sea: Christ
raunsomed us from spiritual Egypt, which is Col. 1. 13. 2. 15.
hell: and from spiritual Pharaho, which is the devil. Moses fed the
Israelites Exodus 16. 15.
with Manna from heaven: Christ nourishes us with his body and blood. Math. 26
26.
Moses told the people so much of the The scripture contains all things
necessary to our salvation. Luc. 16. 29. Ephe 2 20. 2. Tim 3. 15.
Lords will as was needeful for them to know: Christ has left written in the
sacred volume of the holy canonical scriptures, whatsoever is necessary to our
salvation. I might continue this comparion, but thus much is sufficient to
show the reason of Moses speech: and thus we percieue how these words ^
Prophet of your brethren like to me, may well be understood both of all the
ministry in general, and of our savior Christ especially, and of each and
of both, to our very great comfort, and encouragement to become careful and
effectual hearers of Christ and his ministers.

The third part.
Ye shall hear him in all things what soever he shall say unto you.

THe former scripture before handled, has certified us that God shall stir up
this prophet, and that he is therefore author of the ministry: and also that
by this Prophet, Jesus Christ, and, in him, all his true ministers are
understood. Now these words containing What ear and obedience must be given
to this Prophet.
the third part, do us to understand of the ear which must be given, and the
obedience which must be yielded to this Prophet, Ye shall hear him in all things
etc. yt is to say, ye shall with all obedience conform your selves to his
doctrine. Here Peter proves that Moses attemted not to tie the Jews unto the
law for ever, but that the office of Moses and the Law was to bring them unto
Christ. So Paul writing unto the Galathians, says: The law was our
Scholemaister, to bring us unto Christ, Gala. 3. 24. 25
that we might be made righteous by faith: but after this faith is come, we are no longer under a Scholemaister. Whereby The office of the Law is to bring
us unto Christ.
it is plain that the law can claim no longer right in us, or rule over
us, after it has once brought us unto our savior Jesus Christ. The scholar
is in subjection to his scholemaister, till he become learned, and then he is
set at liberty. In like manner the law has performed the office thereunto
appointed, when by it we have learned to see and know, and acknowledge our
infirmities, corruption, sinfulnes, unrighteousness, and to fly unto Christ to
be justified by faith in him Since this Christ, which is the mark whereat the
law shoots, and the iustifier of the unrighteous, since he is come, Peter, out
of the law, exhorts the Jews, and us al, to hear him with hearty
obedience. Yea, the glorious voice of almighty God Christ our alone
Scholemaster.
sounding from heaven, appoints this the only Messiah to be our only
scholemaster, and us to be his only scholars, saying, This is that my beloved
son, in whom I am well pleased: hear him. Math. 17. 5.


Here we must make a distinction Two sorts of hearing.
of hearing Christ and his word. There is one kind of hearing which is only
external and outward, when as the alone sound and voice of the gospel
occupies the ears of man, but enters Hearing that is only external to
damnation. Esa. 6. 9. Math. 13. 14.
not into the heart, there to take good and comfortable effect. Of this hearing
Esai speaks in the 6. chapter, which our savior cites in the 13. of
Matthew, By hearing ye shall hear, and not understand: Where the Prophet, in
the person and name of the Lord God manaceth ye wicked, that, through their own
malice their hearts shall be so hardened, as they shall only hear the outward
sound of the word to their condemnation: but it shall not sweetly touch
their hearts for their conversion and salvation. Such hearers were traitorous
Judas, the obstinate Pharisees, the malicious wicked 2. Cor. 2. 16.
ones, to whom the preaching of the gospel is the savor of death unto death.

But, an other kind of hearing there is, which has always accompanying
Faithful hearing to salvation.
it, and inseparably joined to it, faith in believing that which is heard, and
obedience in following that which is heard and believed. This hearing Moses
understands by saying, Ye shall hear him in all things, etc. This hearing
the voice from heaven signifies, giving to hear him. This hearing our Savior
Mat. 17. 5.
means, He that is of God, hears John. 8. 47.
Gods words: and in an other place, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me. Thus Abraham John. 10. 27.
with faith and obedience heard the Lords calling, when as he departed Gene.
12. 4.
out of his country. Gene. the xii. circumcised himself Genesis the xvii.
Gene. 17. 24.
and offered up his only son Isaac, as is recorded in the xxii. of Genesis.
Gene. 22. 10.


Thus the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all the faithful heard Christ and
his word when as neither pennury and lack of necessaries, neither hatred and
malice of men, neither policies and fetches of Satan, neither torments and
cruelties of Tyrants, neither loss of life, and death it self could make
them fall away from Jesus Christ their General and captain. It is written that
Zeusis so artificially painted a cluster of grapes, that the birds flew to it,
and picked at it, supposing it had been a true natural cluster. These silie
poor birds were much deceived: for they found but painted grapes. Verily,
whosoever shall hear the word of God in this last sense of hearing, and after
the example of these hearers thus lively discribed by the holy Ghost, they
shall find that those were, and themselves are no peinted and counterfeit
hearers, but very true and effectual hearers of this prophet Christ and his
holy gospel. They shall never deceive their own selves, as did the birds, and
the vain hearers do, but shall be blessed in their deed. These hearers hear
not Christ Ia. 1. 22. 25.
and his word after their own fancy and liking, but in whatsoever he says
unto the^, as Peter here teaches out of Moses. From the premises and matters
before A conclusion inferred upon the description o^ true hearers.
spoken concerning true hearers of the word, there grows this conclusion: If
none be true, fruitful, and profitable hearers of the word, either to their
own comfort and commodity, or to God his honor and glory, but such, as
hear with faith to believe in Christ, and his word, and with obedience to
follow Christ and his word, then both idolatrous Papists, and carnal
protestants (I will not once name Atheistes) are quit and clean excluded out
of the number of true, right, and Christian hearers. That Papists hear not
Christ, and his ministers in this sense of hearing, Papists are not true
hearers of Christ's Gospel.
that is, that they do not conform their religion according to the doctrine
contained in, and delivered unto them out of the word of God, this is a matter
so manifest, as all the faithful do lamentably and with grief of heart
behold the same. And, to give themselves (if any be present) some taste
thereof, I will here join battle and encounter with them, using that only
sentence vtterred by our savior in the sourth of John for the weapon, whereby
I am sure, and I trust the greatest number present, This alone sentence
confuteth and co^foundeth all popery.
will confess, that their whole religion or rather superstition, is wounded at
the heart, and stricken quite dead. For Christ in that place, talking with the
woman of Samaria, tells her ye God is a spirit, and they that worship him,
John. 4. 25.
must worship him in spirit and truth. If we either look on the whole body
of their religion in gross, or dismember and rippe the same into pieces, and
behold Romish Religion.
every member, every joint, every sinewe, every vein, every artery,
every muscle thereof, we shall be enforced to confess, that, among them,
there is no worshipping of God in spirit and truth, but that all their
worship A view of popery in general.
and religion is corporal, external, and ceremonial. Whosoever shall with
judgment indifferently view their Mere ceremonial.
Religion, shall, in deed, perceive it to be nothing else but an apishe and
counterfeite imitation of the ceremonial law. Hence they fetch their alters,
candlestickes, Sensours, Perfumes, garments, Oblations, festival days,
solemn feasts, difference of times, observation of meats, purifications,
sacrifices, An Apish imitation of the ceremonial law.
and a number of the like nature. But as in all these and the residue, they
have no savor of spirit and truth agreeable either to gods nature discribed,
or to the doctrine of the Gospel delivered by Christ: so, in their following of
the law, they do shamfully halte. To give ye an instance, they celebrate
their mass at the Altar, but Christ ministered his last supper at a table. I
Mar. 14 18.
cannot deny but the law Ceremonial does command Altars: howbeit such
Altars as shall be neither of hewed Exo. 20. 25. 26
stone, nor have any steps there unto belonging. But the Romish Altars are of
hewn stowne, and have steps, as is apparent in their Sinagogues: and A
transgressi-of the law ceremonial.
as appears by steps yet remaining in many of our Temples, whereby either
longing for that heathenish superstition, or at the least, cold affection to
Altar steps in our Temples.
advance true religion, is undoubtedly signified. But, admit their whole
religion were fully, in every point, correspondent and answerable to the law
ceremonial, what else should that be, but a full and flat denial of
Christ's The through observation of the Ceremonial law, is a through denial of
Christ
death and passion, and of all the merits of the same? This is most
substancially proved by our savior Christ, and by his servant Paul. Christ
in that former scripture before cited, says that God is a spirit, and
therefore they yt worship John. 4. 25.
him, must worship him in spirit and truth. In that place Spirit and truth are
opposed and set against the ceremonies of the law, and the words of Christ so
uttered to the woman of Samaria, The effectual signification of those words
Spirit and truth.
importe thus much: Before the incarnation of me the then promised, and now
performed savior, ye worshipped God in shadows, in figures, in ceremonies,
in sacrifices: but I being now come, who am the body of those shadows, the
truth of those figures, the substance of those sacrifices, the matter of those
ceremonies, now that external worship cease, and ye must now worship God
only in spirit and truth Here Paul says in his Epistle to the Ephesians
the second chapter, He, that is Christ, is our peace, which has Ephe. 2. 14.
made of both one, and has broken the stop of the partition wall: in
abrogating through his flesh, the hatred, that is, the law of co^mandementes,
which stands in ordinances etc. Again, writing unto the Collossians, he has
the same in effect Colloss. 2. 14.
and meaning. By both these places we are taught that Christ, by his death
Christ's death ended and abrogated the Ceremonial law.
and passion, has abrogated and taken away the whole law of ceremonies: that
place also in the last to the Hebrews is very notable to this end and purpose,
We have an Altar, whereof they have no Heb. 13. 10.
authority to eat, which serve in the Tabernacle. Whereby it is concluded,
that such as yet dwell in ceremonies of the law (much more of men's devising)
are strangers from Jesus Christ, who, by his one sacrifice of his own body,
once offered for all, has cancelled the obligation Obseruers of the Ceremonial
law. cut themselu^ from Christ.
and handwriting of the ceremonial law which was against us. By these and ye
like testimonies of holy scripture, we see that such as worship God either
after the ceremonial law of God, or after the ceremonial devises of men, do
thereby deny the force of Christ's death, yea they deny yt Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh. Of such me^ S. Ioh. speaks in his first epistle, Every spirit
yt confesses not Jesus Christ to be come in ye flesh, is not of god: but this
is the spirit of Antichrist, etc. I refer the nearer application of this
sentence to their own consciences, praying the lord to give them grace
effectually to see, co^fortably to feel, and faith fully to acknowledge ye Lord
Jesus, together with ye mighty force of his most effectual death and passion.
Pliny in the Plin. li. 8. not. histor. cap. 27.
eight book of his natural history reports, ye Swallows use to make the
blind and soar eyes of their young ones to see, by rubbing the same wc an herb
called Celandine, so named, some say, of Celandine.
the swallows first finders, and such users thereof: some say, quia confert
caelestia dona, because it has heavenly virtues. The papists eyes are very
sore and blind, The papists eyes sore and blind.
they cannot abide to look upon Jesus Christ the glorious son of God thus
brightly shining amongst us. The Lord in his mercy give the^ his heavenly
Celandine, I mean his holy spirit, yt therewith their blind eyes may be
opened, their dark understanding lightened, A view of the principal members of
their and our religion together. Only God to be worshipped. Deu. 10. 20. 6 19.
Mat. 4. 10 Only God to be prayed unto Psalm. 50. 15. Mat. 6. 9. We must pray
with the heart. Esa. 29. 13. Mat. 15. 8. 1. Cor. 14. 15. Faith only justifies.
Genesis 15. 6. Hab. 2. 4. Romans 5. 1. Gal. 2. 16. Two Sacraments. Mat. 28. 19. Mat.
26. 26. The sacraments must be administered accorping to christ's institution. 1.
Cor. 11. 23
their hard hearts mollified and softened. If as in gross we have viewed the
whole body of their religion, so now we look upon the same by piece meal,
shall we therein find any spirit and truth? shall we not find it altogether
deuoid of spirit and truth, and wholly corporal, carnal, and earthly?
Spirit and truth will have the Lord God alone worshipped and served: they
worship and serve Saints, creatures, Relics, boots, buskins, nails, etc.
Spirit and truth will have God alone to be prayed unto: they pray to Saints,
to creatures, to Images, to stocks and stones. Spirit and truth will have
our prayers proceed from an understanding heart: they teach and charge the
people to pray in a strange and unknown language. Spirit and truth will have
us freely justified by faith in Christ, they join man's merits purchasers with
the precious blood of Christ. Spirit and truth will have but two Sacraments,
to wit Baptism, and the Lords supper: they add to these two, five more of
their own coining, and so will have seven sacraments. Spirit and truth
wills us simply to administer the Sacraments according to the Lords holy
institution: they have added, altered, deminished, augmented, as them selves
lusted. To baptism they have added oil, cream, spittle, crossings, baptizing
by women, baptizing before the birth of the child, a tying of salvation unto
baptism. To the Lord his supper they have added, Altars, candlestickes,
Tapers, pixe, Transubstantiation, Adoration, reseruatio^, circumgestation and
carrying about of the Sacrament. etc. Spirit and truth wills us to hear
christ In all things whatsoever he shall say Christ must be h^rd in all things.
Deuteronomy 18 22. Mat. 17 5. The holy scripture contains al things necessary to
salvation. Deu. 4. 6. Lu. 1^ 29. etc.
unto us, Whereby we are thoroughly assured that all things necessarily required
unto our salvation are contained in the sacred scriptures: but they ground upon
reuelatio^s, apparitions, unwritten verities, lying miracles, and most absurd
fables. Thus I might (right well-beloved in the Lord) examine the huge monstrous
mass of all their religion, and nether in it al generally, nor in any
particular part thereof find any spirit and truth, but only that, which is
earthly, corporal, carnal and fleshly. If it be replied that the papists are
learned men, ancient men, wise men, and of long experience, An objection that
the Papists are learned. etc.
and yt therefore it is marvel they should so grossly be deceived, that whereas god
being a spirit, and therefore will be worshipped in spirit and truth, they have
yet in all their service and worship no spirit and truth. The scribes and
Pharisees were as Answer to the same.
ancient, wise, learned, and expert as the papists, and yet they persecuted and
crucified Christ, and with all violence opposed and set themselves against his
gospel. In the eleventh of Matthew. Christ breaks out into these words, I give
thee thanks, O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise Mat. 11. 25.
and men of understanding, and have opened them to babes. It is so, O father,
because thy good pleasure was such. This our heavenly Scholemaster here
teaches yt true religion, right knowledge of the word, and a thorough feeling
of Christ, are not tied to the Universities, to great Doctors, to gray heads,
but that the Lord God bestows these good gifts freely, in what place soever,
at what time soever, and upon whom soever Joan. ^ 8.
he pleases.

And, verily, as the Scribes and Pharisees framed to themselves certain devices
to keep them from Christ, as that he was but the son of a carpenter, kept
company with sinners, abounded not with worldly iolitie in princely manner,
Mat. 13. 55. Mar. 2. 16
so, for all the world, do our Papists devise means to hinder them from coming
unto the same Christ. We cannot, say they, away with his new doctrine, The
fond arguments of ignorant deceived souls.
(for so they sclanderously call the ancient truth of God his word) all is
new plain Dunstable, the service is in the vulgar tongue, every body may
understand it, the edifying of the soul is now altogether cared for, there is
now A lively and true picture of the Popish masking religion.
in our Church no pleasing and delighting of our outward se^ces. In our mass
time (the very name whereof comfort our heart) our service was in a learned
language, it was not understood of the common sort, we prayed to the
blessed Saints in heaven, we kneeled to trim painted images, our churches were
gaily decked, there was ringing, Can ye here find any spirit and truth?
singing, se^cing, piping, glittering copes, silver Censours, golden Crosses,
mitred fathers, encloistred brethren, religious Sisters, Christening of belles,
hollowing of fontes, creeping to the cross, offering of eggs, sprinkling of
holy water, dealing of holy bred, auriculer confession, good sport on Alhallon
night, lighting of tapers, making merry, going on pilgrimage, pardoning of sin
for a little money, we lived as we lusted, Priests were good fellows,
adultery The belly reasons of carnal and senseless people.
was borne withal, bread was bigger, ale was stronger, beef more plentiful,
troutes fatter and better, all things cheaper, xxiiij. eggs for a penie. Now
all these ar gone, every child can now understand the service, Images are
forbidden, Foul faults I promise you
God is now worshipped in spirit and truth, every body is now skillful But
Christened ye were in the name of the Father etc. and therefore tied not to the
mass, but to the worshipping of God.
in the scriptures, the knowledge of the Catechism, and ability to yield an
account of our faith is looked for and commanded. We were borne and christened
in the Mass time, our forefathers were of that stamp, we will none of this new
doctrine. Even so the Jews, when they were delivered from Idolatry, and
restored unto the true knowledge and worship of God, many of them misliking
that estate (as Jeremy witnesses) cried out against him in this manner. We
will not hear the word that Ier. 44. 16.
thou speak unto us in the name of the Lord, but we will do every thing
that shall proceed from our own mouth, as to burn incense to the queen of
heaven, to offer up drink offerings unto her as both we have done, and our
fathers, and our kings and princes in the City of Judah, and in the streates of
Jerusalem: For then had we plenty of victualles, and were well, and felt none
evil. etc.

These, dear brethren, these are the reasons which stop many Papists ears
from hearkening to this Prophet Jesus Christ. Ye hear and see the vanity of
these reasons, and how far they are from any reason. They need no
co^futation, very children have them in derision, and laugh them to scorn.

Chrisostom most notably compares the gentiles or heathen people to children,
which comparison will serve now very fitly, if, in steed of his heathen men,
we understand our heathenish papists. Says Chrisostom, Vt pueri nullius
vtilitatis curam suscipiunt. etc. As children have no regard of any profit,
so the gentiles are desirous to play continually, Chrisost. in. 1 Cor. Hom. 4.
and they lie flat upon the ground, and are in love with base things. When
we often talk of necessary matters, children understand not our talk, but
fall a laughing: Even so the gentiles, when we speak of the kingdom of
Chrysostom proves the Gentiles to be children.
heaven, they do nothing but laugh. And as out of a childs mouth there
issues much spitle, which now and then marreth both meat and drink: so the
words, which come out of the gentiles mouths, are vain and vile: and, if
thou set needful food before the^, they vex thee with cursed speches, and
wish it to be taken from the^. Children, moreover, when they see a thief go
into ye house, and steal away the furniture thereof, they do not only not
revenge, but they smile and look pleasa^tly on him: but if you take away their
suckling box, or rattle, or any such like childishe babble, then they take that
heavily, they are grieved, they tear them selves, they stamp upon the
pauement. So do the gentiles, when they see the devil steal away all they
have, both their inheritance, or liuelihod, and what soever things are
necessary for their souls health, they laugh, and, as if he were their
friend, they go out to meet him. But if any man lay hand upon their
possessions, riches, and such like things, then they mourn, and pull
themselves a pieces. This, as I told ye, is golden mouthed Chrisostoms
excellent comparison, wherein he notably proves ye heathen men to be children
and babes, when as they made such great reckoning of vain transitory things,
and yet resisted and contemned Christ Jesus. If ye The more then childish folly
of our Popish babes.
understand our ungentle Papists for his gentiles, ye shall, as it were in a
glass, clearly behold the mad and more then childish folly of our
Romanistes, who so esteem their Crosses, Altars, banners, holy water, Copes,
Images, and such like superstitious toys, as, in the mean time, they make
none account of worshipping God in spirit and truth, or to hear Christ and his
gospel fruitfully: and therefore the conclusion is direct and true, That
Papists are not true hearers of the word of God.

Now, touching carnal protestants That carnal protestants are no true
hearers of the word.
to prove them no true hears of god his word, is a matter of no great
difficulty and hardness, but may easily be accomplished and brought to pass
by the former description of true and effectual hearers. For in true hearers
two things are necessarily required, the The word cannot be effectually heard
without faith and obedience Obedience the fruit of faith.
one, faith in believing: the other, obedience in following. Faith is the tree,
obedience is the fruit whereby faith may be discerned and known. Let us
therefore by obedience (as it were by an especial good blood hound) trace out
the faith of these carnal professors: and so shall we find in them no sound
faith, but a pretended faith: no lively iustifiing faith, but a dead condemned
faith, whereof S. James speaks in the second Iam. 2. 20.
chapter of his epistle.

Obedience is an hearty submission, What obedience is.
and through conformation of our selves to that which the Lord our God has
prescribed in ye holy scripturs, either for the worship and service of him, or
for our behavior toward men. If we look for this obedience, when, or how
shall we find it in these manner of men? For one sort of these men will go no
further One sort of counterfeit Christians described.
in religion, then they may live in all worlds, please every prince, serve
every turn, and sustain neither loss nor lack, nor any kind of trouble or
displeasure. If these good fellows meet with Papists, they resist not: if
with Atheistes, they strive not: if with temporizers and seruers of time, their
humors are fed: if with zealous and true Christians, they become key cold,
and yet hollow pretenders of love and good will to the Gospel. These honest
men can wc the Camelio^ tra^sforme themselves into every color: with their
breath they These apply themselves to live in all worlds, save in the world
to come.
can (as is in ye fable) make warm their hands, and make cold their pottage.
And, although by reason of the state and time present, they will be accounted
protestants: yet, if ye mark it, they cherish none, trust none, keep
company and delight heartely in none, but such as are notorious and known
Papists. Aesope felleth a pretty tale of an husband man, who seeing his
cornefeld spoiled with Geese and Cranes, did therefore set a snare for them,
and at length took them both, and a storke with them. The storke fearing death
vehementely, and like an Orator The storke taken in ill company, sussteineth
like punishment with them.
pleaded her own cause, declaringe her innocence, her excellency above other
birds, her singular care over her aged parents, and upon these
considerations, prayed to be set at liberty. The husbandman more regarding his
loss of corn, then the Storkes glorious words, said unto her, As I have
taken the in evil company, so thou shall also die with them. In like manner,
when the Lord Jesus, that heavenly husbandman, shall call these carnal The
state of such as are companions with professed enemies of Christ.
wretches to an account for their treading under feet and spoiling the holy
seed of his eternal word continually cast out and sown among the^, for their
drawing the yoke with infidels, and joining with the sworn enemies of the
Gospel, let them be assured, that no wordly pollilicie, no humane reason, no
fine device, no forged excuse shall be accepted: but as they have kept company
with those wicked ones most offensiuely: so, without speedy repentance, they
shall perish with them everlastingly. The good prophet and noble King David,
knowing what a great let and hinderaunce the company of the wicked is, and how
it entiseth men from the zealous and hearty serving of the Lord, does with
great zeal, and in most vehement manner break out into these words, Away from
me, ye wicked, for I will keep the David's detestatio^ of wicked company Psa.
119. 115.
commandments of my God. And being taught by the holy Ghost what a good
provocation it is to godliness, to be always conversant and familier with the
faithful and godly, the same David in most joyful manner, utters these
words in the sixteenth Psalm, All my delight is upon the Saints that David's
hearty delight in go^d company. Psalm. 16. 3.
are in the earth, and such as excel in virtue. But the world does now take a
contrary course. For the Saints of God are not esteemed, their company not
regarded, the name of saints is derided The world is drowned with the carnal
love of vain companions.
and laughed to scorn. All delight is reposed in Italianate heads,
discoursing tongues, and merry conceited companions. Epicures, tossepottes,
riotous persons, leude talkers, these grow now a days, unto great credit.
But true Christians carefully endeavoring to show themselves conformable to
their profession of Christ, are nothing, or very little, and a very few,
esteemed and set by. But this is not to be woondered at: No meruell if gods
children be contemned when his word is so despised.
for the very word of God and the true preaching thereof is now so contemned
and despised, so crossed, and maliciously and of set purpose over wharted, that
every vain fiddler, and vagabound Piper Dancing in many places more esteemed
then preaching.
in the country does carry away the unthankful people, even upon the Lord
his holy Saboth days, and other times dedicated to his service, and that from
ye hearing of Gods holy word and worshipping of him, unto The effects of the
commonly used dancinges.
carnal, unchristian, and filthy dauncinges, the very nource of carnal talk,
of horrible blasphemy, of damnable fornication, of pride, of theft, of
disobedience to God, to prince, to parents, to all superious. The filthiness of
this usual dancing moved the ancient fathers often The ancient fathers
sharp inuectiues against dancing.
and sharply to inueigh against it in their days, but what would they have
done, if they had lived in this present age? Chrysostom says, vbi saltus
lasciuus, ibi diabolus certe adest, where Chrisost. in Mat. 14. homil. ^9.
wanton dancing is used, there the devil is certainly present. And in the same
homily, they that dance now a days, desire not that John should be headed,
but ye souls of such as are in their company should be destroyed. Likewise
Augustine upon the third psalm says, Obserua diem Sabbati, no^ carnaliter,
etc. that Augustine in Psalm. 3.
is, keep the Saboth day, not carnally, not with Iewishe vanities, which
abuse and profane their rest, and make it a cause of lendenesse. Again, says
Augustine, speaking of the rest upon the Saboth day, Non dico vt delitteris,
quemadmodum Iudaei solent. Melius est enim toto die fodere, quam saltare die
Sabbati, my meaning is not (says Augustine) that thou should spend the
Saboth day vainly, as the Jews use to do. For it is better to dig and
delue all the day, then to dance upon the Saboth day. If we had grace, that
one example of the murdering of innocent John Baptist, Mat. 14. 6. 10
by occasion of wanton dancing, might set before our eyes how dangerous a
matter it is to frequent the common dancing places. And how straightly the holy
Mortification and newness of life commanded. Romans 6. a. 4. 2. Cor 4. 10. Gal.
5. 16. Mat. 5. 28. Mat. 12. 36. Ephe. 5. 11.
ghost does command mortification, subduing of our wanton affections,
holiness in thought, words, works, eyes, tongues, generally and
particularly, this ye have learned by the often hearing and readinge of the
scriptures: and therefore ye cannot be ignorant, but must needs know and
confess how unseemly, how unchristianlike, how displeasant to God, and
offensive to good men the accustomed dancing of men and women upon the days
before named is, yea, and that their manner of dancing may very well and truly
Aug. ad frat. in Eremo. Ier. 33.
be called (as Augustine calls it) a flattering Devil, a sweet poison, a
sinful pleasure, or a pleasant sin. And so far are thoy from hope to
reformo this deformed dancing, as we lamentably see Vanity better countenanced
then verity.
many placed in authority to like well thereof, and rather maintain
irreligious dancers, then esteem and hearken unto the just complaint of godly
preachers, which openly in sermons, privately by supplications, and every way
have labored for the suppressing of this notable cause of many mischeuous
inconveniences. It is deeply laid to our charge, that we speak against al
manner of recreations. And yet it is well We are unjustly accused to dislike
all recreations.
known that we like and use recreations. In deed we say this, that both we,
and all that fear the Lord, must not alone in earnest and weighty affairs,
but also in our very sportes and mirth, and pastimes, seek the glory of god,
by endeavoring to put of the old man of 1. Cor. 10. 31.
sin, and to show forth lively fruits of true regeneration: that
whatsoever we say or do, it may thereby appear Mat. 3. 11.
we have been baptized as with water, so likewise with the holy ghost and fire,
What it is to be baptized with fire and the holy Ghost.
that is inwardly and effectually: whereof they can never truly and comfortably
assure themselves, which let loose the bridle of their affections, and, as it
were, sell their bodies and souls to riotous, unchaste, and ungodly dancing,
and such other carnal delights, so horribly frequented by the common sort of
people in many places of this Realm, to the frustrating of our labors, the
hinderance of the gospel, the increase of wickedness, and therefore to the
great joy of Satan and all his adherents. The Lord, in mercy, give such A
most needful prayer.
strength and courage to all magistrates, that setting a side friendship, respect
of gain, care to be popular, and all earthly considerations, they may
thoroughly and friendly join their temporal sword with the word of God,
which is the sword of the spirit, for the cutting Ephe. 6. 17.
down of what soever things shall be found any manner of impediment and let
to the enlarging of Christ's kingdom. And the same Lord turn the froward The
damnable disposition and occupation of many Godless people.
hearts of many people, that whereas now they bend themselves to nothing so
much, as to erect and set up vanities, and to vex, molest, and grieve the
hearts, and discredit, slander, and stain the names even of their learned
and godly teachers: they may speedily show hearty repentance, and become
obedient hearers and followers of God and his word. And as in the country
minstrels thus seduce and bewitch the people, so it has been said (I trust it
be reformed) that Plaiers about London.
vain plaiers have had about this city of London far greater audience, then
true preachers. This universal lothing of Christ's holy gospel does
prognosticate a famine, not of bread and water that is, not of corporal food:
but (as the Prophet says) a famine of hearing the word of the Lord. It
would pearce Amos. 8. 11.
through our hearts with intolerable grief to feel our selves, and see our
children perish with want of bodily sustenance. This was the miserable
condition What the lothing of Gods word does foretell.
and estate of the wicked Jews at the final destruction of that most famous
Jerusalem. Then the Parents saw the pitiful famine and staruing of their
children, the children of their Parents, one, of an other. Almost all The
famine at the destruction of Jerusalem.
things they laid hands upon (though most unnatural) they used as meat. The
tender hearted mother spared not with her own hands to slay her own innocent
Joseph. de bello Iudaico lib. 7. Cap. 8.
and natural child, and with his vnpleasa^t flesh, to nourish her famishing
body, and to stay her unreasonable hungry appetite. Verily, this is a
sorrowful narratio^. But another manner of grief shall the famine of God his
word bring with The effect of the spiritual famine of god his word.
it: when as, by means thereof many fathers and mothers with their children,
many masters with their servant, many governors with their people, shall
pine away, and perish everlastingly with the eternal death of body and soul.

This will be a doleful dance, and to this end (without hearty and present
A doleful dance.
amendment) the usual contemptuous dancing, the despising of the Gospel,
the sinful delights, the disordred life of the ungodly, the profanatio^ of
holy days, the love of playing, the lothing and hatred of preaching, will
bring our happy and golden days, if God be not very merciful to us. Thus
have ye heard that, in these first sort of carnal Protestants, there can be
found no obedience, and therefore no lively faith, and so consequently, they are
no fruitful hearers of the word.

Another sort of lip prefessours are zealous in religion, fervently bente
against Another kind of carnal Christians.
popery, great talkers of ye scripture, pretenders of much honesty: but yet
among them ye shall find unmerciful usurers, covetous oppressors, extreme
dealers in worldly things, insatiable cormorantes, filthy Epicures: Fig
treers with leaves only.
these men will use fair words, but have foul hearts, they will swear, and
yet lie: they make a show of simplicity, and for all that, are full of
deceit: they can These means are gluttony, tippling, vile company, vain talk.
etc.
talk of mortification, and yet use means (as it were with bellows) to blow
up and kindle the fire of carnal conversation. The case of these men are most
miserable. Better they had never known The miserable estate of these men.
the word of God. Better they had never been borne. Better a millstone had been
hanged about their necks then so to have offended Christ's little ones. Their
own knowledge of the word, and yet disobedience to the word pronounces
sentence of just condemnation against them. These are such as Christ speaks
Math. 7. 21.
of, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom. etc. These are foolish lookers into Iam. 1. 22.
the glass of God his word: hearers only, deceiving their own selves. These
are clouds without water, carried about Jude. 12.
of winds, corrupt trees and without fruit; These are chafe which the Psalm,
1 4.
wind drives away. Yea, that chafe, which Christ will burn with
unquenchable Mat. 3. 12.
fire. These are fig trees which Mat. 21. 19.
bear leaves only, and no fruit, and therefore unable to endure ye presence of
christ, In the second book of Samuel it is written that King David sent some
of 2. Sam. 10. 2 3. 4, etc.
his servants to comfort Hanun king of the Ammonites lamenting for his fathers
death. But Hanun, persuaded by Evil counsel.
his noble men, that David's servants came rather as espialles, then as
comforters, he used them most villanously: he shaued off the half of their
beardes, Ingratitude.
cut of their garments in the middle, even to their buttockes, and sent them
away. These carnal hearers, both these sorts, and all other the like, they
offer more villainy to themselves, then Hanun did to David's servants. For
that done to David's men, was but temporal, this they do to them selves, is
eternal: the half of their berds were shaven of, these do what they can to
What vilanies all carnal hearers do to themselves.
raze their whole names out of the book of life: they had but part of their
bodily garments defaced, these seek to make themselves utterly naked and
destitute of Christ's righteousness, that spiritual garment, which covers
the sins of the faithful: they were sent out of the presence but of an unjust
and earthly prince: these shall woefully depart from the sight of Christ that
righteous and heavenly King.

For, as it is said in the last part concerning the punishment which shall
be executed upon all disobedient hearers.

33. Every person which shall not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed The
fourth and last part.
out of the people.

O miserable men which thus unkindly and unthankfully refuse to hear, and The
punishment of disobedient and carnal hearers
come unto this Jesus Christ, which calls them, bountifully, by benefits:
lovingly, by promises: sharply, by threatninges: generally, together:
particularly, Ephesians. 2. 5. 6. 7.
a sunder: by signs, from Math. 11. 28.
Heaven: by monsters, upon earth: by Matthew. 21. 43. Christ his manner of
calling us.
punishing, justly: by pardoning, mercifully: by his word, continually. And
yet these wicked men make greater reckoning of buying farms, of trying Oxen,
of marying, wives, of their very hogs, and vilest things, yea, of their Lu.
14. 18. etc.
carnal affections, and vainest delectations, Math. 8. 34.
then of salvation offered unto them by Jesus Christ. Wherefore, behold the
price of their disobedience, they shall be destroyed, or rooted out of the
people: everlasting destruction remains as a most bitter cup for them to
drink off.

Mark this, ye obstinate Papists, An exhortation to papists
which, like the deaf adder, stop your ears against the charmer, charm he
never so wisely. Mark this, ye carnal Psalm ^8. 4. To vain protestants.
hearers and talkers of the word, which make the gospel a cloak for your
iniquities, and outwardly profess it without any inward feeling of it, or
outward co^forming of your selves unto it. Oh, repent, repent, and betimes To
both papists and counterfeit Christians.
repent, least Jesus Christ, which now offers himself to be your loving
Savior, least he, I say, come as a terrible, but yet a most righteous judge,
and allot utter darkness for your inheritance, and command ye to depart into
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his Math 25. 41.
angels: which is here signified by these words, shall be destroyed out of
the people.

The ordinary allowaunce of time, I perceive, is spent: and therefore I must,
contrary to my purpose, omit many things, whereof I determined to speak in
this last part. Only I will, in brief manner, call unto your good
remembrance, the sum and effect of that which has been now spoken, and so
conclude this my plain discourse.

Ye have heard (good Christians) in the first part, that the Lord God shall
Rehersall of the premises.
raise up this Prophet, and therefore, that the Lord is author of the
ministers of his holy word and sacraments. In this place ye had delivered to
your good considerations these three things concerning ecclesiastical
ministers, The care to be used in the election and appointing ministers: The
conscience and ability of ministers: The dignity and worthiness of such
ministers.

In the second part it was declared what manner of Prophet was vnderdanded
by this Prophet. To this end three sorts of Prophets were mentioned, and it
was concluded that this prophet represents all such, as have been, are, and
shall be blessed with ability and gifts faithfully and diligently to
interpret, and fruitefully and effectually to apply his holy word. Here ye
were certified, as also in the first part, that this prophet does signify both
Christ, and all the true ministers of his word: and also, that God, of his
mercy and goodness, will never leave his Church millitant here upon ye earth,
altogether destitute of sincere preachers of his word: by which word the Church
must be directed and governed.

Thirdly, I showed what obedient ear must be given to this prophet, Ye shall
hear him in all things. etc. Upon occasion directly offered by these words I
spoke of two kinds of hearing the word of God, the one outward and
unprofitable, the other inward and effectual. To this latter kind of hearing
ye were done to understand that faith and obedience are requisite and
necessary, and that for want of this faith and obedience, neither Papists,
nor car-carnall Protestants can be justly reckened in the number of true
hearers.

And therefore (as was noted in the last member) all these vain hearers, of
what sort soever they be, shall be severely punished, and that with an
everlasting punishment, they shall be destroyed out of the people.

Now (dearly beloved in the Lord) since all hearers of the holy word of God are
What is to be done when we have heard the word preached.
either vain and fruitless hearers to their condemnation: or true and
fruitful hearers to their salvation: it therefore behooves us when we have
heard the word, to enter into our own consciences, How we shall know whether
we hear it profitably, or otherwise.
and straightly examine our selves how we have heard the same. If we hear it
only outwardly, for fear, for favor, for fashion, if we in this glass do
behold the deformities of our bodies and souls, and be careless to reform
them: if we hear usury, oppression, The effect of vain hearing.
insatiable greediness of worldly things, Pride, Epicurisme, wicked company,
blasphemy, contempt of gods word, disobedience to his laws, adultery,
fornication, Idolatry, superstition, papestry, witcheraft, charming, idleness
in our several vocations, malice toward our brethren, deceitful dealing, if
we hear these and other vices condemned to hell fire by the word of God, and
yet use them, delight in them, and let them be still familiarly acquainted with
us, verily, verily, then this woeful and lamentable case must of necessity
follow, we deceive our own selves, we are disobedient hearers, our faith (...)
dead faith, our house builded upon the sands, the fall thereof shall be great,
ye left hand is alloted, eternal torments appointed. The effect of fruitful
hearing. Ia. 2. 18. etc. Matthew. 7 24. Matthew. 25. 33. Marc. 3. 35.


But, if we hear with faith to believe, and obedience to follow, then,
behold, our most joyful estate, our faith is lively, and justifies: our
house is steadfast, and stands: the right hand shall be our place, joy shall be
out portion: we shall be blessed, we shall be the spiritual kinsfolk of our
savior, the kingdom of heaven, the fullness of glory shall be given unto us
through our Lord Jesus Christ the king of glory, to whom with his father,
and the holy ghost, three persons and one immortal, invisible, and almighty
God let us yield all honor, power, glory, and dominion both now and for
ever. Amen.

Ephe. 5. 17. Be not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton for George Bishop.


