MARTINE MAR-SIXTVS. A second reply against the defensory and Apology of
Sixtus the fifth late Pope of Rome, defending the execrable fact of the Iacobine
Friar, upon the person of Henry the third, late King of France, to be both
commendable, admirable, and meritorious.

Wherein the said Apology is faithfully translated, directly answered, and
fully satisfied.

Let God be Judge betwixt thee and me. Genes. 16. AT LONDON Printed for Thomas
Woodcock, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of
the black Bear. 1591.

To the right Worshipful and virtuous Gentleman, Master Edmund Bowyar Esquier,
the Author hereof wishes peace and wealth, with abundance of all spiritual
felicity.
WHen the Grecians in a great solemnity presented to Phillip of Macedon many
goodly gifts, a poor Painter stepped in among the rest, and offered up the
counterfeit of himself in a table, beside which were portrayed out many jewels
and pearls, and rings; over each whereof was inscribed; Vellem and hoc; J
protest it sir unfeignedly your late kindenes, your courteous offer has so
overcome me, as I must needs present somewhat, and because that in so great
variety as the world affords my slender ability ca^ shape out nothing worth
the giving, I have assaid to gratulate you with a shadow, assuring you that if
there be any thing more worthy your Worships acceptance Vellem and hoc;
nevertheless because I hope that at a Painters hand a picture will be accepted,
and that there is a Decorum in it that every man should present a taste of his
own trade, I thought good to offer up to your Worship this short treatise,
the fruits of a scholars study, which if it shall please you to read over, J
have obtained a piece of mine end: Loath J was to display my self to the
world, but for that J hope to dance under a mask, and bluster out like the
wind, which though every man hears, yet none can in sight descrie, J was
content for once to become odious, that is, to speak in print, that such as
use to carpe at they know not what, may for once likewise condemn they know
not whom, and yet I do not so accuse the readers, as if all writers were
faultles, for why? We live in a printing age, wherein there is no man either
so vainly, or factiously, or filthily disposed, but there are crept out of all
sorts vnauthorized authors, to fill and fit his humor, and if a man's devotion
serve him not to go to the Church of GOD, he need but repair to a Stationers
shop and read a sermon of the devils: I loath to speak it, every rednosed
rimester is an author, every drunken man's dream is a book, and he whose
talent of little wit is hardly worth a farthing, yet lays about him so
outragiously, as if all Helicon had run through his pen, in a word, scarce a
cat can look out of a gutter, but out starts a half penny Chronicler, and
presently A propper new ballet of a strange sight is endited: What publishing
of frivolous and scurrilous Prognostications? as if Will Summers were again
revived: what counterfeiting and cogging of prodigious and fabulous monsters?
as if they labored to exceed the Poet in his Metamorphosis; what lascivious,
dishonest, and amorous discourses, such as Augustus in a heathen common wealth
could never tolerate? and yet they shame not to subscribe, By a graduate in
Cambridge; In Artibus Magister; as if men should judge of the fruits of Art by
the rags and parings of wit, and endite the Universities, as not only
accessory to their vanity, but nurses of bawdry; we would the world should
know, that howsoever those places have power to create a Master of Arts, yet
the art of love is none of the seven; and be it true that Honos alit arts,
yet small honor is it to be honored for such arts, nor shall he carry the price
that seasoneth his profit with such a sweet; It is the complaint of our age,
that men are wanton and sick of wit, with which (as with a loathsome potion in
the stomach) they are never well till all be out. They are the Pharisees of our
time, they write al, and speak al, and do al, vt audiantur ab hominibus; or to
tell a plain truth plainly, it is with our hackney authors, as with
Oyster-wiues, they care not how sweetly, but how loudely they cry, and coming
abroad, they are received as unsavory wares, men are feign to stop their noses,
and cry; Fie upon this wit; thus affecting to be famous, they become
notorious, that it may be said of them as of the Sophisters at Athens: dum
volunt haberi celebriter docti innotescunt insigniter asinini, and when with
shame they see their folly, they are feign to put on a mourning garment, and
cry, Farewell. Jf any man be of a dainty and curious ear, J shall desire him
to repair to those authors; every man has not a Perle-mint, a Fish-mint, nor
a Bird-mint in his brain, all are not licensed to create new stones, new
Fowls, new Serpents, to coin new creatures; for my self, J know J shall be
eloquent enough, I shall be an Orator good enough if J can persuade, which to be
the end and purpose of my heart, he knows who knows my heart: if your
Worship shall demand why J published this pamphlet under the name of Martine,
I must tell you, because I purposed for once to play the Martine: if you ask
what Martine is, I must desire you to Etymologize, and you shall pick his
nature out of his name, the first syllable whereof implying of it self to Mar,
and being he added with a Tine, the murdering end of a forke, it must needs be
that Mar-tine being truly spelled and put together, signifies such a one as
galleth and pricketh men to death, but this difference is between the great
Martine and my self, that whereas he most unnaturally laid siege against his
native soil, and spent his powder upon his own country walls, J have picked
me out a foreign adversary, a common enemy to play upon, whom the great
sheapheard of the sheep, as a capital consumer and wolf in his flock, shall
in his good time confound and destroy. Amen.

Your Worships in all duty. R.W.

The Oration of Sixtus the V. as it was uttered in the consistory at Rome.
Anno. 1589. September II.
COnsidering in my mind both often and earnestly, and bending my thoughts to
muse upon those things, which by the providence of GOD are lately come to
pass: me thinks I may rightly usurp that saying of the Prophet Abacuk, Abac.
1.5.
A work is done in your days which no man will believe when it shall be
reported. The King of France is done to death by the hands of a Monk, for unto
this it fitly may be applied, albeit the Prophet spoke properly of another
thing, A loud lie, for neither spoke Abacuk of the incarnation, nor Paul of
the resurrection, but both of strange and incredible plagues ensuing.
namely, of the incarnation of our Lord, which exceeds all wonders and
maruailes whatsoever, even as the Apostle Paul does most truly refer the
very same words to the resurrection of Christ: when the Prophet speaks of a
work, he will not be understood of any vulgar or ordinary matter, but of some
rare, some famous and memorable exploite, as where it is said of the creation
of the world, The heavens are the works of thy hands; and again, the seventh
day he rested from all the works which he had made: but where he says, It
is done, it is usual in Scripture to understand such a thing as falls not
out by blind chance, by hap hazard, by fortune, or at all auentures, but by
the express will, providence, disposition and government of God: as when our
Savior says, Ioh. 14.14.
Ye shall do the works which J do, and greater then these shall ye do,
and many such like places in holy Scripture, but where he says it was already
done, he speaks after the manner of other Prophets, who for the certainty of
the event, are wont to foretell of things to come, as if they were already
past; for the Philosophers say that things past are in nature of necessity,
things present in a state of now being, and things to come to be merely
contingent, that is their judgment; in regard of which necessity, the
Prophet Esa foretelling a long time before of the death of Christ, said even as
after it was said again, he was lead as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a
Lamb before the shearer, Acts. 8.32.
he opened not his mouth; And such a thing is this, whereof we now entreat;
this which has happened in these our days, a work famous, memorable, and
almost incredible, a work not wrought without the special providence and
government of the almighty; a Monk has slain a King, A sweet note.
not a painted King, one figured out upon a piece of paper or upon a wall, but
the King of France, in the middle of his army, being hedged in with his camp
and guard on every side, which in deed is such a work, and so brought about
as no man will believe it when it shall be reported, and the posterity perhaps
will repute it for a fable.

That a King should dye or should be slain, men are easily induced to think
it, but that he should thus be cut off, the world will hardly believe it; as
that Christ should be borne of a woman, we do easily acknowledge it, but if ye
add further that he was borne of a Virgin, my humane wit cannot subscribe unto
it; likewise that Christ should dye it is as easily believed, but being dead to
rise again (because that to a natural habit once wholly lost, there is no
retiring back again) in the reach of man's capacity it is impossible, and by
consequence incredible; that a man out of his sleep, out of his sickness, out
of a sown, or of an ecstasy should recover himself again (for that in the
course of nature such things are usual) in humane reason we accord unto it,
but a dead man to rise again in the judgment of the flesh, it seemed so
incredible, that when Paul made mention thereof amongst the Athenian
Philosophers, they vpbraided him as a setter forth of strange Gods, and other
(as Luke reports) laughed at him, and said, we will hear thee about this
matter again: therefore in such things as are not wont to fall out according
to the custom of nature and common course of the world, Acts. 17.32.
the Prophet says that no man will believe when report shall be made, but yet
when we remember Gods omnipotent power, and captiuate our understandings to the
obedience which is through faith, and to the will of Christ we are brought to
believe, for by this means that which naturally was incredible is become
credible, therefore I which according to man do not believe that Christ was
borne of a Virgin, yet when it is further added, that it was done by the
working of the holy Ghost, above the compass of nature, I do verily assent and
give credence to it; and when it is said that Christ rose again from the dead,
according to man's wit, I cannot yield unto it; but when it is said again that
it was done by a divine nature which was in him, then do I most assuredly
believe it. In like manner, albeit according to the wisdom of the flesh and
man's understanding, it be incredible or at least very improbable, that so
mighty a Prince in the midst of his camp, so guarded with such an armed
troop, should be slaughtered by the hands of one poor silly Friar, yet when
I call to mind on the other side, the most heinous misdemeanour of the King,
the particular providence of the Almighty ruling in this action, and how
strangely and wonderfully God executed his most just decree against him, then
do I verily and steadfastly believe it; for why? Yes, some of it is to be
referred to the devil.
We may not refer so notable and strange a work to any other cause, then to
the especial providence of God (as we understand, that some there be who
ascribe it to other ordinary causes, to fortune and chance, or some such like
accidentary event) but they which narrowly look into the course of the whole
proceedings, may clearly see how many things were brought about, which without
the special supply of a divine assistance, could never be achieved of any
man. And certainly we may not think that God does loosely govern the state
of Kings and Kingdoms, and other so excellent and weighty affairs; there are
in the holy stories of the bible examples of this kind, to none whereof we can
assign any other author then God, but there is none, wherein more clearly
shines the superior working of God then this which now we have in hand. We
read that Eleazar to the end he might destroy the persecuting King and enemy
of Gods people, did put himself in danger of inevitable death, When as
beholding in the conflict one Elephant more conspicuous then the rest, Maccab.
6.43.44.45.
upon which the King was like to be, he rushed violently amidst the route of
the enemies, and making way on both sides came to the beast, gat under him, and
slew him with his sword, which in the fall fell down upon him, and crushed him
to death; and hear for zeal, for valor of mind, and for the issue of the
thing attempted, we find some resemblance and equality, but for the rest no
one thing comparable. Eleazar was a professed Soldier, trained up in arms and
in the field, one purposely picked out for the battle, and as it often falls
out enraged with boldness and fury of mind, whereas our Monk was never brought
up in such broils and martial encounters, but by his trade of life so
abhorring from blood, that happily he could scarce endure to see himself let
blood; he knew before both his manner of death and place of burial, as that
more like one swallowed up into the bowels, then pressed down by the fall of
the beast he should be intombed in his own spoils: but this man was to look
for both death and tortures more bitter than death, such as he could not
dream of, and little doubted he to lie unburied: besides many other points of
difference that are between them. And well known likewise is the famous story
of the holy woman Judith, Judith. 8.32.
who to set free her own besieged city and people of God, took in hand an
enterprise (God doubtless directing her thereunto) about the killing of
Holofernes, then general of the enemies forces, and in the end she did effect
it: in which attempt albeit there are both many and manifest tokens of a
superior direction, yet in the death of this King, and deliverance of the city
of Paris, we may see far greater arguments of Gods providence, in as much as
in the judgment of man, it was more difficult and impossible than that, for
that holy woman opened her purpose to some of the governors, and in their
presence, and by their sufferance passed through both the gates and guard of
the city, so that she could not be in danger of any search or inquisition,
which during the time of assault, is wont to be so straight, A woman may pass
where a sly cannot, exempli gratia, into the Popes bed chamber.
that scarce a fly may pass by unexamined: but being amongst the enemies,
through whose tents and several wards she must needs pass, after some
trial and examination, for that she was a woman, and had about her neither
letters nor weapons, from whence might grow any suspicion, and rendering very
probable reasons of her coming to the camp, of her flight and departure from
her country men, she was licensed to pass without any let, so that as well
for those causes, as for her sex and excellent beauty, she might be admitted
into the presence of so unchaste a governor, upon whom being intoxicate with
wine, she might easily wreake her purpose. This did she, but ours a man of
holy orders did both assay and bring about a work of more weight, full of more
encombrances, and wrapped in with so great difficulties and dangers on every
side, as it could be accomplished by no wisdom, nor humane policy, neither by
any other means but by the manifest appointment and assistance of God: it was
requisite that letters of commendation should be procured from them of the
contrary faction, it was necessary that he should pass out by that gate of
the city, which lead unto the enemies camp, which doubtless was so warded in
that troublesome time of the siege, that nothing was unsuspected, neither was
any man suffered to pass to and fro, but after a most straight inquiry what
letters he conveyed, what news he carried, what business, what weapons he had:
but he (a wondrous thing) passed through the watches without all examination,
and that with letters of credence to the enemy, which if the citizens had
intercepted, without all repriuall or further judgment he had surely dyed:
this was an evident argument of Gods providence; but a greater wonder was that,
that the same man soon after without all examination passed through the camp
of the enemies likewise, through the sentinells and several watches of the
Soldiers, and through the guard which was next the body of the King, and in a
word, through the whole army, which for the most part was compact of
heretics, he himself being a man of holy orders, and clad in a Friars weed,
which in the eyes of such men was so odious, that in the places adjoining to
Paris, which a little before they had surprised whatsoever Monks they took,
they either slaughtered, or else most cruelly entreated; Judith was a woman,
therefore no whit hated, and yet often examined, neither carried she ought
about her which might endanger her, but this man was a Monk, and therefore
detested, and came very suspiciously with a knife provided for the feate, and
that not closed up in a sheath (which had been more excusable) but altogether
naked and hid in his sleeue, which had they bolted out, The Pope speaks as if
the Friar were still alive.
there had been no way but present execution: these are al so manifest tokens
of Gods especial providence, as no exception can be taken against them, nor
could it otherwise be but that God even blinded the eyes of the enemies least
they should discrie him, for as before we said, I wonder where they were borne
which so ascribe them.
albeit some there be who unjustly ascribe these things to chance and fortune,
we notwithstanding cannot be persuaded to refer them to any cause but to the
will of God, nor truly should I otherwise think, but that I have subdued mine
understanding to obedience in Christ, who after so wonderful a manner,
provided both to set at liberty the city of Paris, which then we understood
to be many ways in great perplexity and distress, as also to avenge the most
heinous misdeedes of the King, and to take him out of the world, by so unhappy
and reproachful a death: and truly we did heretofore with some grief, foretell
that it would in time fall out, that as he was the last of his house, so was he
like to come to some strange and shameful end, which not only the Cardinals
of Ioyeuse, of Lenoncort, and Paris, but the Ambassador likewise, which then
was liedger with us can well avouch I spoke, for why, we call not the dead, but
men alive to witness of our words, which all of them full well remember:
notwithstanding, howsoever we are now enforced to plead against this haples
King, we do in no wise touch the Kingdom and royal state of France, which
as we have heretofore, so still hereafter we will prosecute with all fatherly
affection and honorable regard, but this we have spoken of the kings person
only, whose unfortunate end has deprived him of all those rites, which this
holy seat, the mother of all the faithful, and specially of christian
Princes, is wont to perform to Emperors and Kings after their decease, which
for him likewise we had solemnised, but that the Scripture in such a case
does flatly forbid us. 1. Iho. 5.16.
There is (says Saint John) a sin unto death, J say not for that that any
man shall pray, which may be understood either of the sin it self, Mark
here a profound subtilty.
as if he should say, for that sin, or else for the remission of that sin I
will not that any man should pray, because it is unpardonable; or that which
sorteth to the same end, for that man who commits a sin unto death, I will
not that any man should pray, of which kind likewise our Savior Christ in
Matthew makes mention, Matt. 12.32
that to him which sins against the holy Ghost, there is no remission either
in this world, or in the world to come, where he makes three sorts of sin,
against the Father, against the Son, and against the holy Ghost, the two
former are not so grievous but pardonable, but the third is not to be forgiven:
al which difference (as the schoolmen out of the Scriptures deliver it)
arises out of the diversity of the properties, which are severally ascribed
to the several persons of the trinity: for albeit as there is the same
essence, so there is the same power, wisdom and goodness of all the persons (as
we learn out of the creed of Athanasius, when he says the father is
omnipotent, the Son omnipotent, and the holy Ghost omnipotent) yet by way of
attribution unto the Father is ascribed power, to the Son wisdom, and to the
holy Ghost love, each whereof as they are called properties are so proper to
every person, as they cannot be put upon another, and by the contraries of
these properties, we come to know the difference and weight of sin; the
contrary to power (which is the attribute of the Father) is weakness, so that
whatsoever we commit through infirmity and weakness of our nature, may be said
to be committed against the Father: the contrary of wisdom is ignorance,
through which when a man offends, he is said to offend against the Son, so
that those sins which are committed either through man's frailty or ignorance,
may easily obtain a pardon: but the third which is love, O Caput logicum, I
never knew before that love and ingratitude were contraries.
the property of the holy Ghost has for his contrary ingratitude, a most
hateful sin, whereby it comes to pass, that man does not acknowledge
Gods love and benefits toward him, but forgets, despises, and grows in
hatred of them, and so at length becomes obstinat and impenitent, and this
way men offend more grievously and dangerously toward God, then by ignorance or
infirmity: therefore these are called sins against the holy Ghost, which
because they are not so often and so easily forgiven, and not without a greater
measure of grace, they are reckoned in a sort unpardonable, when as
notwithstanding only by reason of man's impenitence, they are absolutely and
simply unpardonable; for whatsoever is committed in this life, though it be
against the holy Ghost, yet by a timely repentance it may be blotted out, but
he that perseuereth unto the end, leaves no place for grace and mercy, and for
such an offense, or for a man so offending, the Apostle would not that after
his death we should pray. And now for that unto our great grief, we are given
to understand that the foresaid King dyed thus impenitent, as namely, amidst a
knot of heretics (for of such people he had mustered out an army) and likewise
for that upon his deathbed, he bequeathed the succession of his Kingdom to
Nauarra, a pronounced and excommunicate heretic, and even at the last point
and gasp, he coniured both him and such like as were about him, to take
vengeance of those whom he suspected to be the authors of his death: for these
and such like manifest tokens of impenitencie, our pleasure is that there shall
no dead man's rites be solemnised for him, not for that we do in any sort
prejudice the secret judgment and mercy of God toward him, who was able
according to his good pleasure, even at the very breathing out of his soul, to
turn his heart and have mercy upon him, but this we speak according to that
which came into the outward appearance. Our most bountiful Savior, grant that
others being admonished by this fearful example of Gods justice, may return
into the way of life, and that which he has thus in mercy begun, let him in
great kindness continue and accomplish, as we hope he will, that we may yield
unto him immortal thanks, for delivering his Church from so great mischieues
and dangers.

Dixit insipiens.

And having thus definitely spoken, he dismissed the Consistory with a
blessing.

O terque quaterque beati.

MARTINE MAR-SIXTVS.
This foul defense a Frenchman late defied,
And wisely wrote his censure of the same:
His censure pleased; yet one of Rome replied,
A homeborne Judge could not the cause defame,
The French were parciall for their Henry's sake;
Why then (quoth he) twere good some stranger spoke.
With that they spied, and calde, and causd me stay,
And for I seemd a stranger in their ey,
I must be judge twixt France and Rome they say,
And will (quoth I) nor can I judge awry;
Sixtus was Pope, and popish was your King,
I both dislike, list how I like the thing.
A reply against the former Apology.
COnsidering in my mind both often and earnestly, and bending my thoughts to
muse upon those things, which by the instinct of Satan are lately come to
light, me thinks I may rightly inuert that saying of the Prophet Abacuk: A
word is spoken in our days which no man will believe that it should be
uttered. The King of France is done to death by the hands of a Monk; a deed
profane and irreligious: but yet I speak of a sin exceeding that, the deed
is remitted, excused, defended, commended, extolled, and that by the mouth of
the Pope; hear O heavens, and hearken O inhabitants of the earth, whether such
a thing has bin in your days, or yet in the days of your fathers: When I
call to mind the fact of the Monk, I detest and abhor him; but when I hear
the voice of the Pope, as one that had seen a monster I stand in a maze and
wonder at him: and surely good cause there is to wonder. I thought it had been
incident to man only to commit sin, but to commend sin I judged it proper
only to ye devil: Mat. 24.12.
therefore Satan auaunt: but these are the latter days, and iniquity must
needs abound. Was it not enough to disturb the common peace, to alienate the
hearts of the Commons, to stir up a restles and factious Rebel, to muster
out a league of mutinous and riotous conspirators, to discountenance and
ouerbeare a lawful King, to weaken, to disauthorize, and last of al most
furiously to murder him, but presently they which stand in the gate must laugh
at it, the drunkards make songs of it, and thou thy self Sixtus like a
parasite upon a stage applaudest unto it, factum pol optime, there, there, so
should it go: but accursed be they which rejoice in iniquity, Esa. 5.20.
and woe be to them which call evil good. Notwithstanding, howsoever the
Apology of so hateful a fact were execrable, yet if it had bin undertaken but
by some smooth tongd Jesuit or petty Priest, or had but one Friar clawed
another, I could in some sort have suppressed my grief with silence: for what
is it that has thus incited me a forrainer to the country, a stranger to the
cause (save as it generally concerns the whole Church) what is it (I say)
that thus has pricked me forth to so austere a censure and contradiction, but
for that I find the fact excused where specially it ought to have been
condemned, for that I find it commended where it ought to have been severely
punished, for that no meaner man then Sixtus himself, the Archpriest and
Prelate of the Romish Sinagogue, the Uicegerent of Christ, the porter of
heaven, the Supporter of all Christendom has undertaken so damnable a
defense. This is it (I say) which has made me a confuter, which how well I
have performed, or whether I have performed it or no it mattereth not, I have
sufficiently confuted whatsoever I have but published or barely translated, nor
needs an ill favored face a Poet to stand by and rhyme upon it, it self at a
bare sight will show it self: and let me speak it without offense, in a case
so weighty and grievous, from a person so learned and famous, I have not heard
a more artles and slight defense, wherein if you look for proofs it is dry
and barren; if for style, it is harsh, unpleasant and untrimmed; if for method,
confused and independent; if for matter, loose and impertinent, Stultorum plena
sunt omnia; not a wise word in a whole Oration: and yet sometimes I hear him
discoursing like a grave Divine profoundly; sometime flourishing like an Orator
with Tropes and figures bravely: sometime as one inspired with a prophetical
spirit divinely: sometime me thinks I hear the ghost of Aquinas very
scholastically: sometime one quoting Scriptures learnedly, and at the shutting
up of all, one praying like a Saint devoutly: but the devil had Scripture,
Caiphas did prophecy, and Judas made many a prayer; but what is that to come
near to God with thy lips, give me thy heart. Pro. 23.26.


In the front and entrance of this painted process to stir up the minds of
the hearers not so much to attention as to admiration, a place in Abacuk (to
use but his own phrase) is usurped, A work is done in your days, which no
man will credit when it shall be reported. The application whereof if it
poynted to the impossibility of the work, in the sequel of this discourse I
will make it plain that it was both false and frivolous, and to compare it with
the incomprehensible mystery of Christ's incarnation, I tell thee (Sixtus) it
was blasphemous: but if thou did only respect the rarenes, the foulenes, and
deformity of the work, then might thou justly say, A work is done in our
days, and who will believe our report? Such a barbarous murder committed upon
the sacred person of a Prince, Scythians and Cannibals will hardly believe it,
and the posterity perhaps will repute it for a fable: and so in regard of that
detestation, which every man at the first hearing will conceive, I grant it
was a work incredible: but when I call to mind on the other side, and
consider the Authors of the work, when I hear that the rebellious and
bloud-thirstie Leaguers had contrived it, that Sixtus himself the high Priest
of Rome had dispensed for it, and that a murtherous and wretchles Iacobine did
perform it, then all is credible and probable enough, we are easily drawn to
believe it. And surely I see nothing therein but as in a matter of ordinary
event, nothing so exceeding the reach of man's capacity, nothing so declining
from the common course of nature and of the world, for which you should compare
it with the incarnation and resurrection of Christ, and in every leaf to cry
out, A work is done in our days, and who will believe our report? Nay rather
who will not believe it? It is no strange or unusual thing to see your hands
distayned with blood, your laws are written in blood, your rising up in arms
it is for blood, your courts of Inquisition are for blood you muse, you
meditate, you hunger and thirst for naught but blood; or if that add any
wonder to the work, or make it more incredible that it was wrought in the
blood of a King, yet for that the assiduity of every thing takes away the
admiration, I cease to wonder at that to; indeed the elder adges did so admire
and reverence the person of a King, that but to touch the Lords anointed was
irreligious and profane; 2. Sam. 1.14
but see the calamity of our times, wherein there is nothing more usually
thought of, with less remorse attempted, or with more boldness atteyned then
the slaughter of Kings and Princes; it beseems not the Sea of Rome to shoot
at every shrub, they have learned to aim at fayrer marks, they I say, whose
practical and pragnatical heads, can speculate of nothing else but Kings and
Kingdoms, to dispose, depose, to place, and displace, what men, or by what
means they like or list, and as easily they proceed to practice upon a
Prince, as upon the head of a meaner man; the bleeding wounds of Orange and
Conde yet crying for vengeance from Heaven, can witness well that these
practices are no nouelty, or if they list but recount the sundry and
successeles attempts, against the Crown and person of our Sovereign
Elizabeth, they must sound a retrait, and cease for shame to cry, A work is
done in our days, past belief, impossible, incredible; but what is it then
that makes this work so incredible, so strange and wonderful? was it, for
that it was achieved by a Monk? Indeed it was a work unfitting that
profession, but neither was it in regard of nature impossible, neither in
regard of their common practice strange or improbable; for why? His access
being as free (as it was too free) his mind being as malicious, and his tool
as sharp as another man's, I see no reason why he might not strike as deep a
stroke; and yet no rule in nature violate; but neither was it so strange or
unwonted, but that your devilish practices do daily pattern and match it; who
was it that tempered and presented an empoysoned cup to John King of England,
but Simon of Swinstead a Cistercian Monk, of the order of the Bernardines? Who
made away young Charles, the Son of Phillip now King of Spain: but the
accursed Friars of the order of Saint Iherome? For how would they spare to suck
the blood of the Son, who imposed it as a penance upon the Father, to suffer
a vein in his body be cut, to void out a little heretic blood? Or tell me
else, how often of late your predecessors and your self, have hallowed the hands
of Priests and Jesuits to offer violence, and most irreverently to rampe upon
the person of our Queen? why therefore (Sixtus) albeit the work were odious
and accursed, yet was there neither wonder nor nouelty in it, only this was
rare and wonderful to hear, that Sixtus should be a patron and defender of it.

But let us proceed and come to his narration: A Monk (says Sixtus) has
slain a King: Make room good people, hear comes a figure; A Monk has
slain a King, not a painted King, where note that Kings are of two sorts,
either painted Kings, or living Kings: not one figured out upon a piece of
paper, or upon a wall, where we learn again to our great comfort, that Kings
are painted two ways, either upon a piece of paper, or upon a wall, but he
has slain the King of France, in the middle of his army, hedged in, and
guarded on every side. Claudite iam riuos, sat dixit; And bravely was it spoken,
but alack that such a figure should have such luck. This figure in rethorick
we call a Preoccupation, the special use and grace whereof is to prevent an
objection, and yet not every one, but such as justly might arise, or else to
prevent a false understanding of our words, and yet not every one, but such as
the hearer might easily fall into, as when the Lord by the mouth of Amos had
said, I will send a famine into the land, Amos. 8.11
least the people should grossly understand him of a bodily famine, as easily
they might, he adds further, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water,
but of hearing the word of the Lord: but was ever man so fantastical, as when
Sixtus had said, A Monk has slain a King, presently to conceive of a piece
of paper, or of an Image, or of a picture upon a wall? But these are your
popelike Apologies, with frivolous trifles and toys impertinent to delude our
patience, to abuse our expectation. And yet when I call to mind again the
Author of this Apology, and considering it was his holiness which wrote it, I
cannot say it was altogether needles, for well we understand your rage and
fury to be such, that many times when ye cannot wreake your selves upon the
man, ye coape and encounter with his shadow, ye practice upon his picture; we
know it (Sixtus) we know it well whose monuments ye have mangled, whose
pictures ye have martyred, whose Sepulchers ye have defaced, whose bones ye
have burnt, even like a fearce and angry dog, which because he either cannot
or dare not set upon the man, for very madness bites upon a stone: and happily
in such a heat your Monk might have crucified the picture of his King, or else
at unawares he might have spoiled the Image or sacred Idol of some deceased
Prince; for Images are men, and Idols are a kind of people to. A stranger
travailing sometime to Rome, and seeing their Churches, and houses and
streates, and every corner full of Images, reported at his return that Rome
had two sorts of people, Men and Images; and so in regard of these double
senses that preoccupation was not altogether amiss, A Monk has slain a
King, not painted or pictured upon a wall, but the King of France, in the
middle of his army.

But let us descend unto the proofs of this Apology, the arguments whereof
for that they be entangled one within another, we will for our better
proceeding reduce into order, and prosecute them as severally and distinctly as
we can. In every place is urged and much ado is made about the providence of
God, the often enforcing whereof to what conclusion it directly tends, I do
ingenuously confess it, I cannot see, but what it should prove and has in
charge to prove it self expressly shows. It was a work memorable (says
Sixtus) and never wrought without the special providence of the almighty. And
again, We may not refer so notable and strange a work to any other cause,
then to the special providence of God. And again, These are all so manifest
tokens of Gods especial providence, as no exception can be taken against them.
Et vitulo tu dignus: Why (Sixtus) is any man so godless to deny the providence
of God even in those actions which are of the lowest and lightest account? I
had thought that his providence had extended it self even to Sparrowes, Luke
16.6.7
and that not a hair had fallen from our heads but by his providence: and who
knows not that his eye does so behold the mountains, that not a moate
escapes his sight, and that his care is so great over the greatest things,
that it is no whit less over the least, only Sixtus (I will not say denies
it) but in a sort calls it into question. When the Scripture speaks of a
thing done (says Sixtus) it uses to understand not such a thing as is said to
fall out by chance, by haphazard, or at adventure, but that which falls out by
the express will, providence, disposition, and government of God. Where we are
to note that some things fall out by chance, and at adventure, and some by the
will and providence of God. Thus to serve our turns God shall govern when we
lift, and when we lift Fortune shall be a God, Tefacimus fortuna deam, and
providence shall be tied to those actions which we please to grace and worship
with a wonder: O times and manners, a Turk would not have said so much, an
Atheist could have said no more. But come we to the point: It was not done
without the special providence and disposition of God; how then? I hope the
act is not thereby justified: for if it be, then let Judas triumph as a Saint
in heaven, because his treachery was by providence, because the Prophet said
before in the person of Christ, that he which did eat bread with him had lift
up his heel against him. Psalm. 41.9.
Then let Sixtus call a Consistory, and publish his Apology in defense of
those disturbers, against whom Saint Jude inueyed, Iud. 4.
because they were appointed by providence, and were ordained of old unto that
condemnation. Indeed if God did wink at the wickedness of sinners, as
neither regarding nor disposing, nor foreseeing their abominations, I should
conclude with Sixtus, that whersoeuer there were any print of his providence,
the action might immediately be justified and commended, but well I see his
finger moving, and his providence to have a sway and direction even in the
course of things unlawful. Shall there be (says Amos) an evil in a city,
Amos. 5.6.
and the Lord has not done it? not charging God to be a principal agent and
author of evil things: for God is not the author of evil, but only to be a
permitter: and so as unless he permit, the devil himself can do nothing. But
ye will say that Amos speaks not of evil works, but of evil plagues, and
so God may be a principal author. But then God says in another place, I have
hardened Pharaoes heart: Exodus 10.1.
that is, I have by providence permitted the devil to harden it: so did he by
providence deliver up his son into the hands of Pilate, and so did he put
the life of a worthy and lawful King into the hands of a base and butcherly
Friar. But what of this? I grant these actions in regard of Gods secret
counsel were most just and lawful: and yet in respect of the authors who had
no right or reason to execute them, I say they were injurious and unnatural.
Therefore listen (Sixtus) and learn of me to draw an argument from Gods
providence. When I see that God by the hands and ministry of men has wrought
some strange and wonderful work, I presently conclude, that in regard of him
the work was just, because even so it was his good will and pleasure: but for
the ministers and instruments of the work, except I see that they had right to
do it, that their end was honest and lawful in it, and that they proceeded by
no indirect means unto it, I am not bound to justify or commend them: for
then were every thief and murderer acquit at the bar, because he had to
plead that whatsoever he did was ordered by providence: and so the providence
of God shall not only serve for a stale to justify all villainies already
committed, but to further and help out whatsoever we shall conceive or
contriue hereafter.

But lift a while: It was not only done (says he) by the providence and
appointment, but by the assistance of God: blasphemous as thou art, I blush to
hear thee: was it not enough to defend a bold and shameless murderer, but must
thou also bring in God as accessarie and assistant to the fact? I grant that
GOD permitted him: but how shall I know, or whence do thou gather that his
helping hand was present with him? Did thou see the spirit of God descending
down upon him? Thou lie (Sixtus) we saw when Iuppiter in a shower of gold
assayed, and proved, and pierced him, with whom it was as easy to sink
through a Friars cowle, as through the tyles of a fenced and guarded tower.
Indeed it was a spirit that moved him, but such a one as moved Judas to
betray Christ; not the spirit descending in the shape of a Dove, for that
spirit induces to meekenes, and not to murder: Math. 3.16.
neither was it the spirit which sat upon the Apostles in the shape of cloven
tongues; Act. 2.3.
for that spirit did so appear to point out a Churchman his weapon, and to
show that he might strike with no weapon save with the tongue: Mat. 26.52.
and if it happened that Peter should draw out his sword (as the Monk did his
knife) then presently a voice was pronounced, put up thy sword into thy sheath:
but that could take no hold of the Monk (says Sixtus) for his knife was
without a sheath: In a word, it was no celestial inspiration, it was not the
abundance of the spirit, but the spirt of abundance which moved him, the only
argument which persuaded Judas, we will give thee thirty pieces of silver,
Mat. 26.11.
and he delivered them the man: for how should we think that he was stirred
up to this act by any secret instinct and zeal of conscience, in whose life
did never appear any spark of conscience or religion, but all as an undevout
and unordered Atheist; for humane Sciences or divine speculation nothing was in
him admirable, nothing commendable, nay nothing vulgar, but as a most rude and
unlettered idiot, inferior to the lowest of that monastical society; for
life and conversation (I shame to tell it) what was he but a most impure and
lecherous Satyr? how often was he traced and found, and fetched out of the Stews?
how was he publicly chastised for his unchastity? And to show that at the
first he was enforst to that profession, how often did he assay to deliver
himself by flight, even as it were repenting his former vow, groaning under
the burden of his profession, and still crying, Cupio dissolui, I desire to
become a new man, looking always back to the lay man's life as Lots wife did
to Sodom, and in a manner wishing he had been turned into a pillar of Salt
when he was first made a Friar, and yet this Monk, this Friar Clement was the
man, the man I say unto so foul a work instructed, inspired, nay assisted by
God.

But guess again and tell me, how know ye that God was assistant to the
work? Because forsooth he had so promised to set at liberty the city of
Paris, and to make ye beholden to him, and to yield him immortal thanks for
delivering the Church from so great dangers. But soft a while, your Church is
not yet delivered, nor yet is Paris set at liberty; nay never was it in such
misery: but were all as well as ye wish, yet see I no reason why GOD should be
drawn in as accessory to the murder of the King, considering that no act is
justified by the success. And certainly I can not see what cause ye have to
boast of success, or of any great deliverance by his death, since whose death
all your forces have been forceles, your attempts and intentations fruitles,
and whatsoever ye have taken in hand it goes backward: so far was God from
furthering you in the murder, that even for the murder he has scourged and
afflicted you ever since; which undoubtedly if he had furthered, as intending
by it to work out your deliverance and release (as vainly ye boast) then never
had he installed Nauarra, a professed enemy to your practices and proceedings:
but your misery was there but begun where ye thought it had been ended;
bethink with your selves, how ye are now become defenders, who before that
murder were the only assailants and besiedgers: consider how often ye are now
inforst and driven into holes, whose uncontrolled rebellions and tumultuous
assemblies, all France before was hardly able to hold: consider since that
time how many thousands of ye have been slaughtered, how your Nobility has
declined, your Catholic towns have revolted and recoyled: remember since that
time the successful attempts of the King against you, his victory at Diepe,
his Ashwednesday triumph, his entering into the Suburbs at Paris, the conquests
obtained in the countries of Vendosme, of Mayenne, and almost all Normandy:
remember if ye can with shame, the shameful retreit of Parma, the glorious
recovery of Corbeil, which after it was with 18, Cannons the space of five
long weeks battered, besiedged, and in the end surrendered, yet was it in a
trice regayned and repossessed by the King; I may not speak of half. Remember
how but yesterday were wrested from your hands the towns of Louuiers, of
Noyan, of Mont-morillon, and Chiuigny: remember how since that murder your
capital Priests and Cardinals, sworn liedgemen to the Apostolic sea, have
united and knit themselves against you; as namely, the Cardinal d' Gondi, the
Cardinal of Armignac, the Cardinal of Lenoncourt, with the young Cardinal d'
Vendome, brother to the late Prince of Conde: remember how of late your great
God Pan, Gregory the 14. now sweying the Scepter, and sitting upon the Papal
seat is debard and excommunicate from all Apostolical jurisdiction, and how
in his stead a Primate in France is created, how his Bulls were burnt, how his
Legate Laudriano by a bitter summon was cited to appearance; which things no
doubt are strange and unheard of, and portend to Babylon some speedy ruin and
desolation. Thus God delivers Paris, releaseth your Church, furthereth your
attempts, and favors your murders.

You tell us a long tale of Judith and Eleazar, out of which examples you
streine and strive to bring some matter of commendation to your Monk: and
albeit I will not utterly condemn so great adventures undertaken for the
Church; yet could I have wished in Judith an honester means of proceeding: and
truth to say, I see in Eleazar neither means nor purpose honest. Why a woman
in the Church defense might not hazard her person, I see no reason to
countermaund it; but neither do I see what warrant she had, to put her fame,
her good name and honesty upon such a venture, which she ought to have tendered
as dearly as the whole Church: we may not do the least evil to procure the
greatest good; and might Judith then a modest and religious Matrone in the
Church behalf demean her self so unhonestly? might she trick out her self
so inticingly, or compose her countenance wantonly? might she paint out her
face, set out her hair, and strumpetlike mask out in a lawne or linen weed
to stir up the concupiscence of a lewd and incontinent leacher? 2. Kin. 9.30.
I say that Iezabel could do no more to Iehu: and why she should not stand
answerable for his sin whom she had tempted unto sin, let Sixtus tell if he
can: beside all this, I speak not of her odious flattering, her cunning
dissembling, her lewd lying to insinuate and incroach into the bosom of
Holofernes, as though that to a lawful act we might proceed by flattering,
dissembling and lying, by hook or crook, by all unlawful means, and so we
creep in it mattereth not, whether it be by the door or by the window: but
he that enters not in by the door is a thief and a robber: Ioh. 10.1.
and what though God gave success and prospered the attempt? that hallowed not
the means; for so did he save the babes of the Israelites by the dissembling
of the Midwiues, Exodus 1.19.
and yet was not their lie justified. But come we to the fact of Eleazar, and
see what a perfect pattern it is for a Monk and murderer to work by: Eleazar
adventured his life to hazard the life of Antiochus; but would to God he had
but barely adventured it: it is one thing for a man to put himself upon an
uncertain hazard, but another thing to cast himself desperately into danger of
inevitable death; which how it can be done, and the party so proceeding not
taynted with ye guilt of his own death, I profess I know not, I desire to be
instructed. But let not Sixtus tell me of Samson, pulling down a house upon
his own head, we know what spirit it was that moved him to it; another
doubtless then that which moved Eleazar; for why? your text bewrayes it to be
the spirit of vaynglorie, and says, Maca. 6.44.
he ieoparded himself to deliver his people and get himself a perpetual name:
A speech undoubtedly so disagreeing from the spirit of humility, as when I
read it me thinks I hear the voice of Ajax, of Hector, or Achilles: and
howsoever I could have borne it in a Pagan, in Eleazar it was intolerable: for
what could be uttered more heathnish or profane? What more derogatory from the
glory of God, unless he had affected the deity and throne of God; for glory
belongs to him, and his glory he will not give to another. Isa. 42.8.
The Saints of God are always commended in the Scripture, for that they never
sought to be commended, but though they had brought to pass matters of great
and memorable atchieuement, Psalm. 115.1.
yet always they cried, not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give
the glory. When David undertook to encounter with Golias, he protested of
himself that he had no other end then that all the world might know that
Israel had a God. 1. Sam. 17.46.
But see the difference; when Eleazar undertook to overthrow Antiochus, the
author of that Scripture says, his end and purpose was to magnify himself,
that all the world and aftertimes might know, that Israel had an Eleazar, unto
which end howsoever he might successefully arrive, yet he could not but
unlawfully aspire: for wisely the heathen Philosophers teach us, that honor is
a good thing if it be not sought for: and Christian philosophy teaches the
same, that when it comes unlooked for it is the blessing of God; but being
ambitiously aimed at, he does but nicke-name it that calls it not vaynglorie.
Thus have we noted in Judith an end commendable, but means indirect; but in
Eleazar we can commend neither end nor means as lawful: for neither may a man
hang himself to pleasure his friends, neither pleasure his friends to get
himself a name: and yet these examples are cited to appear as honest
witnesses to commend the fact of a murdering parricide. But notwithstanding,
howsoever there were in them defects and corruptions to blemish and make them
appear dishonest, yet in this are more and far more grievous: for compare
them together, and see what inequality is between them. For first, neither
did Judith nor Eleazar lay vyolent hands upon their own Prince, as did this
sauadge Monk upon the person of Henry his Sovereign Lord and Liege: neither
of them (I say) distayned their hands with the blood of him to whom they had
sworn any fealty or obedience; neither was Eleazar to Antiochus, nor Judith
to Holofernes, but as to a stranger, and not so only but as to a professed
enemy, whom in the time of open hostility, for the benefit of our King and
Country, we not only may, but must, and by discipline of war are bound to
endamage and annoy. Thus see I not what matter here was either to provoke the
Monk to so bloody an execution, or else to help out Sixtus with his profane
Apology. Secondly, as they did execute their wrath upon strange and foreign
Princes, enemies to their state and country, so likewise upon the enemies of
God and of his truth. For well we know that Antiochus did abrogate the
circumcision, burnt the books of the law, erected Altars of abomination, and
compelled the people to offer up Swines flesh and unclean Sacrifices upon
them: and what was the quarrel of Holofernes but a matter of religion? because
the people refused to adore and reverence Nabuchadnezzar as a God: from which
so grievous inforcements and charging of their consciences, who would not
ieopard his life to release and set free his country? But neither had your
holiness nor that shaueling Friar any such cause of grieuance, as might
exasperate and inrage him to such cruelty. For why, a Monk has slain a
King, not a strange or foreign King, not a sworn or vowed enemy, not a King
of a contrary worship or devotion, but he has slain his own King,
rightfully reigning, meekely ruling, and wisely governing, a King of his own
disposition, profession, religion; without pity cruelly, without conscience
wickedly, without cause unjustly. Ah Sixtus, no marvel is it though ye seek
to drench your swords in the blood of protestant Princes, when ye spare not
your nearest and dearest friends: full well ye knew that Henry was a bird of
your own brooding, a Catholic of your own Church: full well ye knew that he
had both faithfully served you, and studiously endeavored to please you, when
as (God knows) he little regarded to please his Creator, and could ye not
wink at some few offenses, but must ye needs proceed to such rigor and
extremity? O pride and tyranny intolerable: how better were it to serve a
Turk or Pagan, then to bear a burden in your yoke, from whose rage and
fury (when ye list to be furious) neither King, nor kindred, nor love, nor
respect of religion can privilege or defend.

But Sixtus happily will say, he did not compare them for the honesty, but
only for the difficulty and wonderment of the work: and certainly for ought I
see he stands not much upon the honesty thereof: enough it is for him to
wonder at the boldness of the adventure, for no other commendation he gives to
his Monk, then a man might well afford to a ryotous and desperate ruffen.
Therefore, since it cannot be proved to be so honest, let us try what
courage and valor, what difficulties and wonders abounded in it, that it
should be not only compared, but preferred above the hardy adventures of
Judith and Eleazar, in regard of whom, a base and ruffenly Friar is not only
joined to sustain the comparison as a competent match or corriuall, but most
highly magnified as exceeding matchles and supereminent: for so says Sixtus,
that albeit for zeal and valor of mind, and for the issue of the thing
attempted, there were some resemblance or equality between them, yet for the
rest there was no one thing comparable. But wonderfully has his holiness
ouershot himself: for let us suppose those examples to be as Canonical as
some would they were, and see then not only to the persons themselves
compared, but unto the spirit of GOD how foul an indignity is offered: when
the holy Ghost in Scripture proposes to our view some famous example as a
pattern of imitation, it lightly commends such a one as no president of
antiquity before, neither of the posterity to come shall be able to afford
the like: as, who can either raise up from the memory of the dead, or summon
out an example from men alive to match with Iobe in patience, with Moses in
meekenes, with Abraham in faith, with David in courage, with Samson in might?
And if Sixtus having searched through the Scripture for some rare example and
mirror of magnanimity, did pick out and choose Eleazar for the best, I would
know what warrant his worship had in a Cloister of Monks, a nest of Friars,
in a den of Devils to show a better: but what did Friar Clement so renowned
or aduentrous that Eleazar came so short of him? If ye mark but the manner of
proceeding and passing forward to the work, Eleazar did far surpass him:
for let Sixtus be judge and tell me whether he did more desperately adventure
himself, which to break into the middle of an Army had no other way but as a
known and open enemy through ranks and millions of men to make passage with
his sword, or he who as a supposed friend came sneaking in a Friars weed
unarmed, vnharnest, unweaponed, with a fauning look, with a letter of
passeport in his hand, with a string of Beads at his side, with a Crucifixe
at his breast, with all habiliments of his profession, so as no matter of
suspicion, of fear, of doubt was ministered to endanger him, I would know of
Sixtus who did adventure most. Yea but (says he) Eleazar was a professed
Soldier, trained up in arms and in the field, whereas our Monk was never
brought up in such broils, and therefore in him it was more admirable
whatsoever was achieved. I answer again, that as he was a Soldier, so his
attempt was more martial and Souldierlike, so was it executed without all
color in the form and person of a Soldier bravely, by dint of sword
undauntedly, in the broad and open field valiantly: and who can admire a close
and privy murderer, whose practices are so abhorring both from humanity, as
nature detesteth them for abominable, and courage condemns them as arguments
of undoubted cowardice, and certainly I see not what manhood is required to
slaughter a man in his Chamber, which every base and timorous mind may
accomplish, yea even he which cannot endure to see himself let blood, for unto
such kind of revenge no man for shame proceeds, but he who in great faintnes
and weakness of mind, continually meditateth of flight and escape: yea but
says Sixtus again, Eleazar knew both his manner of death and place of
burial: why therefore should I think that his attempt was more courageous,
for where the hope of life is less, the adventure and courage undoubtedly is
more, but he knew so certainly of his death, that he could likewise divine of
his grave; but hardly I brook to hear of so foul an untruth, that your
Friar was so sore afraid of certain death, and uncertain torments, for why,
your factors and agents in the cause, had provided a double medicine to salve
that fear, for so wisely they wrought to provoke this parricide to resolve
upon execution, that notwithstanding the adventure in sight were perilous, yet
both in regard of that policy which they had at home contrived, as also of the
furtherance and assistance which in the camp of the King they expected, there
was a double comfort ministered; at home they had so provided, that so many
within the walls of Paris, as were either known, or suspected to be by nere
affinity allied, or by affection carried to favor either the King or any his
ayders and associates, that so many should be apprehended, and laid up as
pledges and hostages, for the safe return of the Friar, which doubtless would
so bridle the fury of the Kings friends, that notwithstanding himself before
were murdered, yet to ransom the lives and liberties of their friends, they
would be content to dismiss the Friar and send him back to Paris: again they
persuaded him, that in the Kings own camp there was abunda^t hope of present
assistance to be supplied, for if it so fell out that the King were dispatched,
then so many of his train as secretly favored the League would be present, and
at hand to assist him, but the contrary part would be so amazed at the sudden
alteration, that every man would rather apply his wits how to save himself,
then to execute revenge upon the malefactor, and so our brother Clement could
not choose but escape: this most infallibly is the truth, this was the
persuading and proceeding with the Friar, who in a fools paradise, and
conceit of a certain return, tanquam asinus ad caedem, went forward to his
work, which howsoever it succeeded unluckily, yet out of doubt better fortune
was expected, in regard of which expectation, I affirm that there was neither
imminent danger, nor certain fear: therefore could not the adventure be so
ventrous, that Captain Eleazar with Friar Clement should change a corselet to
put on a cowle.

But as we have compared him with Eleazar, let us join and match him with
Judith; I speak not of a matrimonial conjunction, for Clement was a votary,
never wedded to a wife, never furnished with any part of a family, save only a
few children, but I speak of a joining in comparison, for what though
comparisons be odious, yet Eleazar must go down, and Judith must stoop to
advance a bloody Friar to the skies; therefore as his holiness had commended
Eleazar, so does he likewise extol Judith, but both to that end that Clement
might be superextolled, and commended above them both, for both men were
inferior to him, and many women have come under him. But see how Sixtus
extenuateth the fact of Judith, which before he had so highly magnified, and
all to enlarge the honor of a Monk; Judith was a woman, and therefore more
gracious, therefore for her sex and excellent beauty, might she be more
easily admitted into the presence of Holofernes; I smile to think how Sixtus
tickleth at the remembrance of Judith, but who would not break out and laugh,
to see how he beats himself with his own weapon, for if a Friar were
therefore to be commended above a Soldier, if Clement above Eleazar, for that
being a man of peace, and never trained up to the field, he had ventured as far
as a professed Soldier, then doubtless by the same reason was Judith to be
preferred before Clement, for that being a woman, and therefore by nature more
timorous, she attempted as much and more than he; yea but consider that as
she was a woman, so she was fair, and as her sex on the one side did dispose
her to fear, so her beauty on the other side made her secure; yea Sixtus, we
consider it very well, and know that in Rome the argument is forcible; full
well we know that your Lateran palace was never so surely locked, but a woman
at midnight might boldly and freely have access. I let pass to speak of John
the twelft and mistress Rainera, of Pope Sergius and his Morozia: I come to the
matter, wherein against the beauty of Judith, I do oppose the profession of
Clement, for never was woman more welcome to Holofernes, then Monks and Friars
were to Henry. Ah silly man, I rue to speak it, his devotion was fantastical,
his affection was over foolish to them, and longer doubtless had he lived, if
he had never loved, nor reposed any confidence in them, and that those caitifs
knew full well, for which most in humanely they repayed him that il; therefore I
say there was no cause why a Friar might not as securely adventure himself
into the host of the King, as did Judith into the tents of Holofernes:
therefore consequently there was no cause why his exploite should be extold
above hers, as far more difficult and impossible; but what do we speak of
difficulties? Sixtus says it was full of wonders, for after that letters of
commendation from them of the contrary faction were feigned, which he falsely
says were procured, see what a wonder fell out: Friar Clement passed out by
that gate of the city which lead unto the enemies camp: O wonderful, as if
he should have said, he went but two miles when he might have gone ten, he
took the nearest way, when he might have gone the farthest way about, whereas
he might have passed out at a back or pofierne gate, and so might have gone
from thence to Rome, from Rome to Jericho, from Jericho to Vrsa mayor, from
thence to Tyburne, from Tyburne to the devil, and from him with a dispensation
to the camp of the King: yet he (I say) took the nearest way, even passing
out by that gate of the city, which lead unto the enemies camp: Monstrum
horrendum, I think there was never such a wonder: why Sixtus do thou wonder
that he went not the farthest way about? Or that he went to the camp about
such a work, his feet being naturally so swift to shed blood? Or do thou
wonder that through that gate especially he should pass without examination,
I should rather have wondered if any had been so bold to examine him,
considering that they who set him about the work were not so unwise, but to
take order for his safe conduct out of the city, and so there was as free
passage for him out of Paris, as there was for Judith out of Bethulia; but see,
see, here comes another wonder; he did not only pass through the gates of
the city, but also through the camp of the enemies, through the several
watches and sentinells, and through the guard which was next the body of the
King; how say ye by this? Was not this a terrible wonder? His holiness
meruaileth that the Friar was so freely received in the enemies camp, that he
was not examined, that he was not killed, as though no man should look upon a
Friar, but presently he should draw out his dagger and slabbe him: I answer
his holiness again, that happily those watchmen and warders did not see him,
perhaps he went invisible: When the first dag was discharged at the Prince of
Orange, a priest in Antwerp had suborned a base scullian for the feate, to
whom very charily he delivered a stone of great value, affirming that while
he had it about him, he could not choose but go invisible, yea though he
were in the Princes chamber; I know not whether your Friar had such a stone or
no; but suppose he had not, yet coming as an intelligencer for the camp,
with letters of credence from the friends of the King, in a Friars weed
peaceably, with all counterfeit submission friendly, I know not why he should
not be as easily admitted into the Kings own pauilion, as Judith was into the
tent of Holofernes; but this thing in Judith was wonderful, which his holiness
never considered, that notwithstanding she adventured her self as far as
she did, yet unpolluted, unhurt, untouched, she returned home safe and alive
again, and if it had so fallen out with Clement, that after the murder
committed he had handsomely escaped and come away, then had it been somewhat,
then had it been a wonder: but see the hard hap, when it came to the issue,
when it stood upon the making or marring, either to prove a wonder or no
wonder, why then the miracle was marred, the Monk was slain: O that men would
therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare what wonders are done
among the sons of men. But lift again, me thinks I hear Balaams ass
speaking, the Pope is become a Prophet, and to commend this impious act, he
alleges a prophecy of his own, conspiring with the end and fall of the
King, we did heretofore with some grief foretell that he was like to come to
some strange and shameful end: how can we now but accept his censure upon the
fact, who did so divinely prophecy and foretell of the fact: but will ye not
believe that his holiness did so prophecy? Will ye require our witnesses? Will ye
put us to our proofs? Why then we call to witness the Cardinals of Ioyeuse, of
Paris, and of Lenoncort. Ah Sixtus, thou can not so deceive us; the signs
are many, the proofs are too pregnant against you; your self foretold his end:
we believe it, for well might you divine of his death, whose death your self
had contrived, and yet be no more a Prophet, then a Judge which sits upon
the bench, and says, this thief shall dye to morrow, not because he sees it
by divination, but because it is in his hand to acquit or condemn him, and so.
I may justly say, that Sixtus did not Prophecy but threaten: for if eury
prediction should make a Prophet, then should the devil be a great one, who
beholding the necessary concurrence of the causes, does many times foretell
aright of the effects; in this order (Sixtus) and in no other did thou
Prophecy: I apeale to thine own conscience, when the first relation of the
Guize his death was made, when the first news were brought, did thou not
then vow thy self to avenge it? Did thou not afterward contriue the means
to work it? Did thou not encourage the Leaguers to it? Did thou not promise
a perpetual pardon to him that should attempt it? And being now done, have
thou not endited a sweet Apology for it? And yet who now is Sixtus? Whom
shall men say that he is? Is he not Elias, or some one of the Prophets? But not
he alone, but many other did thus Prophecy, among whom let Gregory himself be
one, who as he now succeeds Sixtus in his seat, so did he exceed him in the
murder, for which by a French Cardinal, his holiness is now notoriously
appealed; Thus treachery and murder is impaled with a triple crown; thus
traitors and murderers sit in Peter's chair: beside, we are to note that he did
not only and barely Prophecy it, but with some grief and feeling of his
fall: alas poor Sixtus, how forely his heart was grieved? But shall we pity
him then, or shall we rather disdain and detest him? Foul hipocrite and
Crocodile as thou art, could thou weep for him, when as thou did intend so
mortally against him? Full well thou might have redressed that grief, if
thou had been truly aggrieued; but as Absolon feasted Ammon, and Judas
kissed Christ, so did thou lament his fall; for if thou did indeed lament
it, what moved thee to endite so triumphing an Apology upon it, and to erect a
Trophe, where greater cause was to write an Epitaph? Why did thou debar him
from all dirges, masses, and trentalls, from al dead man's rites and funeral
solemnities? Did the fear of the loss so afflict thee, and could the loss be
so pleasing to thee? Fie Sixtus, fie, dissemble not with the world, thy
hypocrisy is too manifest, thou did not prophecy, thou wast not aggrieued,
nor can thou so easily bleare our eyes.

Having thus foolishly mooted and declamed of thine own prophetical spirit,
thou preparest at length by a personal inuectiue to disgordge thy gall against
the King, by the impeachment and defamation of whose honor thou addressest thy
self to convince the execution done upon him for just and warrantable, His
great offenses, his shameful death, his final impenitencie: but albeit I must
in part confess some of these as true, yet I loath to see thee raking in the
dust of a dead man's bones, whose sins if they ought to be buried in silence,
much less should they be misreported and maliciously amplified. We confess
the offenses of the King were grievous, and heinous, and of necessity we must
confess what all the world so evidently saw, because the sins of Kings and
Princes cannot be unseen; neither can a city be hid that is set upon a hill:
but nevertheless, we do not acknowledge those for sins in wreake and
revenge whereof this direful tragedy was performed. For shall we say his
Majesty did offend in executing justice upon that recreant Guize, a furious
and braynsicke rebel, together with Lodwicke his brother then Cardinal of
Lorraine? As though a King may not correct the misdemeanour of his subjects,
but an Italian Priest shall step out to countermaund and control it: but how
had the Guize then misdemeaned himself, or wherein had he passed beyond his
bounds? Ah God, is that now called in question? Or shall we now begin to
endite him, at whose boldness and rebellion all Kings in Christendom for these
twenty years have stood amazed? whom neither reverence of authority, nor
fear of laws, nor law of nature could keep within his bounds. But let that
go, we speak of later attempts, even of the treachery which then he
intended against the King when he was apprehended and murdered, which
undoubtedly he had effected, had not his brother Charles d' Maine opened and
disclosed it before. Yea, but suppose the Guize had offended, yet was it
tyranny without formal and judicial process of law preceding to fall to
execution. Indeed ( Sixtus) it is true when delay is void of danger: but if a
route of thieves have so beset my way as I must either immediately slay, or be
immediately slain, I hope there is no law against me if in that distress I
neglect the trial of law, and work out my deliverance with my sword: for
that is a law which we have not learned, not received, not heard, but a law
which we have sucked out of our mothers breasts, in which we were not informed,
but bred; not instructed, but inspired; not by discipline composed, but by
nature prepared, that no honest way of defending our life and state should be
left untried; and shall we then condemn the speedy execution upon the Guize
and Lodwicke his brother for dishonest, which could not be one day deferred
without indaungering the life and dignity of the King? No (Sixtus) no, we
confess the offenses of the King were grievous, yet this was no offense: but
if we list endite him, we could vbrayd and charge him with matters of greater
moment, which albeit we are loath and grieve to do, yet in regard of that
Antichristian tyranny which in his life he practiced, and for which he was
punished in his death we may not be over silent, and so much the less for that
we would provoke ye to repentance, least as ye have exceeded him in his sin,
so ye receive a greater measure of judgment.

When in his life time we called to mind how sorely and bitterly he did
afflict the Church, how freely he suffered the confederates of the League to
assault and insult upon them, and how often himself had personally unsheathed
his sword against them, we could not expect but that though God winked for a
time, yet in time he would manifest his judgments on him, and when the fulness
of time was expired it fell out as we feared: for so soon as in his last
Parliament holden at Bloys, he had most wickedly vaunted of his victories
against the Church, and boastingly reported what harm and scath he had done
them (which was in deed the fulness of his sin) this vengeance immediately fell
upon him, even as Sixtus himself (a strange thing to consider) within less
then a year after his Apology and triumphing in so notorious a murder, was
dispatched and taken out of the world: beside, we could report how he secretly
encouraged the Leaguers to effusion of blood, how himself was up in arms
before the walls of Rochel, and that for no other cause but for the Gospel:
and that which never will be wiped out, how at that notable occision and famous
slaughter, surnamed the great massacre, being but a stripling boy he bathed
and embrued his hands with innocent blood, which doubtless has since been so
well repayed upon the heads of the murderers, as few of them consorted in the
work whom God did not after mark out with some notable judgment, in so much
as even the Catholics themselves have observed that most of them came to evil
ends: some of them being afterward endited, convicted, and hanged up for
malefactors: others desperately murdering and hanging themselves, and they who
were enriched by the spoil dying so beggarly, so miserable and poor, as not a
penny was left to buy a halter: but for the^ who were the slaughter-masters and
ringleaders of that riot, it is plain and manifest how God has plagued and
scourged them, considering how the Guize himself was pricked and stabd to
death, the Duke of Ioyeuse was slain in the battle at Coutraz, the late King
Henry murdered with an infectious knife, and Charles the 9. his brother (as
some say) poisoned, or dyed as others report of a flux of blood, which at his
mouth, his ears, and nostrils, yea at every passage both upward and downward
issued from him, even as it were vomitting out in his death the blood which in
his life he had so egerly sucked: and certainly God plagued the house of
Valoys, for that of four brethren, whereof three successively reigned, no seed
was left to sit upon the throne: I speak not of the Marshall d' Retz, of
Catharine d' Medices Queen Mother and monster of France, nor many other more,
whose deaths albeit they were suspected, yet for that they were doubted I leave
them as matters of uncertainty. But wonderful it is to consider, how
manifestly God always avenged himself upon the Leaguers and other French
persecuters: During the rage and fury against the Saints which were in
Prouence, in Merindol and Cabriers, which was soon after the year 1530. how
did God note out the chief persecuters with some apparent and memorable
judgment? The Lord of Reuest high President of ye Parliament at Aix ran mad
and dyed, Lewis d' Vain was drowned in the river of Durance, Bartholomeus
Cassaneus was stricken with a sodayn death, Miniers Lord of Opede being not able
to void it was burnt with his own urine, and with much impatience and
blasphemy consumed away, Ihon de Roma a Iacobine Monk and chief Inquisitor
in this persecution rotted piece meal, and dyed in such stench, as being dead
men were feign with a hook to dregge him into a ditch: Soon after all this
succeeded Henry the second King of France, a grievous oppressor of the Church,
who advancing himself at the Turney, was stricken with a spear into the brain
and dyed: after him succeeded Francis the second, who after one years reign
and little more, was taken away by an Impostume in the head. I speak not of
Francis the old Duke of Guize, who was slain by Poltrat with a dag before
Orleans, neither of the Marshall of Saint Andrews who dyed before Dreux, nor
of the Constable of France who was slain at Paris, nor speak I of the late
Cardinal of Lorraine shamefully strangled with a cord, nor of Francis of
Valoys, whom some report to have dyed of a venereous contagion; others gather
by the arraignement of the Lord of Salceede that he was subtly and secretly
made away: but as they were professed enemies and persecuters of the Church, so
were they scourged for their cruelty: and what shall befall the remainder,
since of so cursed a crew so many still remain, I cannot, I dare not
prophecy: but sure I am that God is just, and will not tolerate so foul
offenders to triumph in impunitie.

Nevertheless, what I have said, to this end have I said it, that all the
world might see that they were not the offenses you dream of, for which GOD
delivered up this King to so open a judgment, not for reciding or falling away
from you, but rather for cleaving too fast unto you, for that foolish and
indulgent love he carried toward you, and for his mortal hate against ye
Church and Saints of God, whom as with other he persecuted, so with other he
perished: so that whatsoever his offenses were, we all confess he was a
grievous offender. But how then? shall Peter's successor therefore say to a
Monk, as the holy Ghost sometime said to Peter, Arise and kill? Was there no
choice, no discretion, no difference to be made? Act. 10.13.
Hark (Sixtus) a Poet can teach thee wit: Etsi ego indignus qui haec patiar tu
tamen indignus qui faceres: Every man is not meet to execute justice upon
every offender: suppose thy father had deserved death, yet art thou an unfit
man to appeal him, but more unfit to be his executioner. What if Saul
deserved to be deprived of his kingdom, yet was not every private man to lay
unhallowed hands upon him: and grant we that Henry had heynously offended,
will it therefore in reason follow that every miscreant Monk shall dare to
pray upon him? Saint Paul could not bear it that a Bishop or man of a
spiritual profession should be a striker, and may he be a murderer? Nay, your
selves deliver up to the secular authority, 1. Tim. 3.3.
who^ before ye have for heresy endited and condemned, to show that ye may
pollute your hands with no blood, no not of most capital transgressors, and
may ye bath your hands in innocent blood? We know he had highly offended the
Majesty of GOD, but in regard of you we dare avouch him innocent. But suppose
he had as deeply offended you; the positive laws give this favor to an
offender, that notwithstanding he has been already arraigned, endited,
condemned, and at the place of execution stand ready to be executed, yet he
that shall offer violence to slay him, shall stand as liable to law as if he
had slain another man. Is there such favor affoorded to an offender after
judgment, and may ye murder him whom ye never condemned, never convinced,
never accused? It was requisite that before your rigorous and deadly execution,
ye should depose and deprive him from al kingly titles and authority; did ye
ever so deprive him? It was expedient that before that deprivation ye should
first excommunicate him, for while he was a member of the Church he must needs
be the head of his kingdom; did ye ever excommunicate him? Before ye could
proceed to the Ecclesiastical censure against him, ye should first have
convinced him as worthy of it; did ye ever so convince him? Where was he
conuented? when was it pleaded? who were the witnesses? what were the crimes
objected against him? Forsooth he refused to assist the quarrel of the League:
a shameful untruth; he only prevented the practices against his person,
which were colored by the quarrel of the League. Yea but he caused the Guize
be slain who was ye Champion of the Church: good reason there was to do it,
because the Champion of the Church had converted his forces which were bestowed
for the Church defense, to maintain and uphold a civil quarrel, as namely
the subversion of the king, and inthroning himself in the kingdom: beside all
this, I speak not of that foul indignity which he offered the King when he
forced him out of Paris, such a presumptuous and traiterous deed as could not
be punished with less then death: but howsoever the King had trespassed, yet
being a King he ought to be solemnly endited, and not secretly bought and
sold: his cause should be formally heard, and not closely smothered; his
judgment should be publicly notified, and not in a corner contrived; and his
person should be arrested, not murdered.

Notwithstanding, since God in his secret counsel had so decreed it, let us
bear it as we ought, and lay the fault of so foul a murder where in right
and equity we ought. You did foretell it that he was like to come to some
strange and shameful end: but whose was the shame? a riotous ruffen has beset
the way, an innocent is intrapped, his money is taken, his life lost, his body
shamefully ma^gled, say foolish Apologizer; whose is the shame? Is this a
proof to approve the murder of a King? Suppose ye tower of Silo had fallen
upon his head, is he therefore a greater sinner? I tell ye no; have thou not read
it that al things come alike to all, and that the same condition is to the just
and to the wicked, and that many times the wicked live in prosperity and dye in
peace, that their horn is exalted as the Cedar in Lebanon, as Tabor among the
mountains, when just and upright men are as a bottle parcht in the smoke,
when such as Job ly scraping upon a dunghill; did not Pilate sit upon the
bench, when Christ stood at the bar? were not the Apostles martyred, the
Prophets murdered, the savior of the world crucified? All cut off by strange
and shameful ends; yet no man can convince either him for a Sinner, or them
for malefactors, and why then should Henry so dying be adjudged to die a
reprobate? Ah Sixtus, now do thou speak as Antichrist, now do thou
usurp the sword and seat of Christ: art thou already come to judge the quick
and dead? Is there no remission for his sin, no pardon to be expected, no
prayers to be powered, no hope but hell? Uile murderers, how delight ye in
blood, not content to kill the body, but to adiudge the soul; did ye see his
soul descending to the lower parts? did ye hear him desperately crying, my
sin is greater then I am able to bear? Did ye hear God pronounce the
sentence upon him; depart accursed? but where then is Sixtus, and where is
Clement, if Henry be in hell? full well ye teach us to despair of your selves,
who endeavor to rob us of so rich a hope: but rather had I ye should burn me
for an heretic at a stake, then enroll me for a Saint in your Calender:
uncharitable and unchristian wretches, condemning for reprobates unto
everlasting death, whose names God has written in the book of life, and
canonizing for martirs, whom Turks and Pagans would detest as murderers: but
what ground had Sixtus to charge him with final impenitency? Who ever saw so
deep into his soul? Who knew what sobbes, what groaning, what secret grief
might harbor in his heart? But neither did he sorrow so in silence, as no
sign of repentance was left behind: in the presence of the standers by (who
with watery eyes beheld him) he made an humble confession of his faith, powered
out his prayers to God, received the Sacrament, confessed himself to a Friar,
desired pardon for his sin, besought God if it might be, to lengthen his
days, that for his life past, he might make some amends: see, see, what
signs of impenitencie, what tokens of distrust are here? After that,
bethinking what might become of his people, he bequeathed them into the hands
of Nauarra, whom he specially charged to be careful over them: yea but he
cried for vengeance upon the authors of his death, even a little before his
death: So cried David upon his death-head against Ioab and Shimei, 1. Kin. 2.5 8
charging his Son Solomon, that for the offenses they had committed against
him, he should not suffer them to go to their graves in peace, and yet was
David never charged with impenitence, as Henry is for the same reason; ye might
first have inquired whether it were in his hands to pardon them or no, for
David doubtless if he could have pardoned Ioab or Shimei, had never exclamed for
vengeance on them, but it lay not in his power to pardon them: such offenses as
are committed against our private state, or particular person, we may and must
forgive them, yea though they be seventy seven times committed, but an
indignity offered to the person of a King, touches even God himself, because
they represent the majesty of God, for which God graceth them with a title of
his own, Psalm. 82.6.
I have said it, ye are Gods: therefore in reason, the remission of such
offenses must be resigned up only to God; could not David pardon Shimei, which
had but barely railed on him, and must Henry either pardon a crew of damnable
conspirators, which so profanely murdered him, or must he be adjudged to dye
impenitent? But how know ye he did not pardon them? Because he coniured
Nauarra, and such as stood about him, to take vengeance of those whom he
surmised to be the authors of his death: yea so he might, and yet pardon them
to, for when Christ says, forgive, his meaning is not that every notorious
offender, should be acquit from outward censure of law, for that were to
pervert justice, and to overthrow all civil discipline; but to forgive him, is
to entreat God for him, that his body being punished to the example of other,
his soul at the great judgment might be saved: and certainly if he might
punish a traitor in his life, I see no reason why he might not as well do it
at the point of death, for why, the time cannot alter the nature of the action,
but if it were injustice to remit him before, he could not with equity pardon
him then; therefore well might he say to Nauarra as David said to Solomon:
Suffer not those murderers to go to their grave in peace, and yet be
translated to Heaven as David was, whereof we nothing doubt, but though his
sins were as red as scarlet, and his hands all steyned with the blood of
Martyrs, yet through the abundant grace of him, who forgave unto Paul those
many afflictions he said upon the Church, we assure our selves that mercy is
showed unto him, and all is washed away as white as snow: yea but what will ye
say, if beside all this he bequeathed the succession of his Kingdom to
Nauarra, a pronounced and excommunicate heretic, must we not then say he dyed
in his sin? Yea there is your grief, that is it that galleth you: but why
should Nauarra be excluded, or what should defeat him of his lawful
inheritance? Because forsooth, ye had proclaimed him for an heretic, and
thrown out a thunderbolt against him; we know ye did, and well we remember how
your chief agent the Guize, being suborned and set on for the work, went
about by an assembly of the estates holden at Bloys, to cause him to be
publicly declared, as incapable of al temporal inheritance and succession in
France, we know ye expelled and cast him out: but what says Saint Gregory,
saepe qui for as mittitur intus est, and foris est qui intus retinetur: it may
fall out that Jonas shall be cast out of the Ship, when Cham shall be reserved
in the Arc, and yet neither the Arc retaining the one shall make him a member
of the Church, nor shall the Sea swallowing up the other, exclude him from the
presence of God: the Pope is like a waspe, no sooner angry, but out comes a
sting, which being out is like a fools dagger, rattling and snapping without an
edge, and though sometime their censure has been forcible, yet in these
degenerate times, since their first defection and apostasy, they have stood in
the holy place as idols, keys they have and open not, stings they have and
prick not: the Pope did sometime excommunicate the Florentines, when the
lawyers notwithstanding pronounced his excommunication void; and if your
censure against Nauarra were as just as it was famous, why did ye not then
satisfy the challenge, which both he and the Prince of Conde demanded at your
hands, whereas immediately after the sentence of excommunication passed out
against them, they called for a general counsel of christian Princes and
Prelates, wherein they promised themselves in person to debate, and that hand
to hand against your holiness, whether the sentence so passed out against them
were lawful, and upon lawful causes pronounced, which challenge as it was
published to the whole world, so was it fastened upon your palace gate in
Rome, and yet after so foul a refusal, and shunning of trial ye shame not
still to cry out, a pronounced heretic, an excommunicate heretic; indeed we
must confess ye have offered him trial, but such as neither the true Church
does willingly incline to, neither truth it self will be decided by, when
the word fails ye fall to the sword; how often have ye since that time
provoked him? Since the year 1586. five several armies have ye brought into
the field against him: three in Guyen and Poictu, and two in Daulphin and
Auergne: I speak not of the battle at Coutraz, 1587. nor of the sundry
inrodes and incursions, wherewith since his first inuesting with the Crown, ye
have forreyed out against him; thus ye try out the truth, defend your faith,
and maintain your cause: but good God, how have thou delivered him from their
hands, even as a bird escaping out of the snare of the fowler? When there was
for number no equality, for humane power no proportion, when nothing was left
to increase any expectation or hope of victory, then did thou cause him to
triumph over their tyranny, as David treading upon the carkas of Golias; which
extraordinary favor of God, if it were but ordinarily considered, it would
turn the fury of a number into loyalty and obedience, and teach them to know,
that even the angels in heaven are up in arms to guard him, against whom they
have carried arms so long; but God has blinded their eyes, that they should
not see: I speak it to your shame, ye frantic and unbridled Frenchmen: whom
have ye thus mortally pursued? Whom do ye as yet with daily endeavor
persecute? The world is witness that France never bred such a flower: would ye
have a martial Knight? why then behold Nauarra, behold him (I say) after 20.
years trouble, (the siege of Troy twice told) still conquering and suruiuing,
valiant in arms, patient in labors, merciful in victories, politic,
successful, aduentrous, a perfect soldier at all points; search but your
Chronicles, and tell me, if Charles the great were ever greater; would ye have
a perfect and accomplished gentleman? why the^ behold him, whose princely
comportment and behavior, staineth all Spanish Magnificoes, all Italian
Machiauellists whatsoever, a man deeply instructed, ciuily nurtured, royally
descended, honestly disposed, a man affable without dissimulation, wise without
subtilty, religious without hypocrisy, meek, liberal, modest, and every way a
Gentleman; but would ye have a catholic? then stay a while, put up your
swords, and he will prove himself a catholic, let but a synod be assembled, a
counsel called, let both parts speak, and the world shall soon see who is a
catholic; in a word, will ye have a King? then look upon Nauarra; to you I
speak you rebellious Leaguers, which band your selves together against the
Lord and his anointed, which eat up Gods people as bread, and chop them in
pieces as flesh for the Caldron; to thee I speak thou great Leuiathan, thou
that dwell in Lebanon, and make thy nest in the Cedars, ye are the men
which trouble Israel: but behold the time is at hand wherein God will bring
again the captivity of Sion, and deliver his Church as a brand taken out of
the fire: your sin is now at the height, your desolation draws near: alas,
the great city Babylon, the mighty city: Babel must come down and sit in
the dust, the daughter Babel must sit upon the ground. Did Charles of Burbon
lay siedge to Rome? did he sack your city? and cause your Pope to be led as a
prisoner? Take heed of Henry of Burbon; the house belike is fatal: beside, I
tell ye it is ominous that the conductor of your League the Duke of Guize was
slain upon Nauarraes birthday, men will shrewdly think that the coming in of
Nauarra will be the casting out of the Guize, and take up a byword (I fear
me) Vbi Nauarrenus incipit Guisij desinunt: as if the exaltation of ye house of
Burbon should be the ruin of Romish Leaguers and of Rome, which God in his
good time will accomplish: And though he stay a while, yet sure we are he
sleeps not: and though as yet their abominations defile the Temple of God,
yet a time shall come when their idolatry shall be rooted out, when thorns
and thistles shall grow upon their Altars, then shall Sion appear in perfect
beauty, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, and terrible as an army with
banners; which God for his Son sake, for his mercies sake, for his Churches
sake speedily accomplish: come Lord Jesus, come quickly, O Lord make no long
tarying.

In despite of Antichrist. FINIS.

