A NEW, AND MERRY Prognostication: Devised, After the final fashion

Made and written for this present year,
By four witty Doctors as shall appear,
Spendall, Wh^ball and Doctor Dews (...)
With them Will Summer takes his place,
They have consulted all in deed,
To solace them, that this shall reed.


AT LONDON Printed by Edward All-de, and are to be sold by John Tapp at his
Shop at Saint Magnus Corner* 1623

A Prognostication.
OF Hoball, Spendall, Will Summer, and Dews-ace,
I studying in my sickness space:
Did peruse their skill made of Astronomy,
Of which hereafter follows the certainty.
As well of every season this year,
As all other likelies that are like to appear.
In reading of this memory,
Omit to judge the certainty.
Herein we have nothing resited,
But as by learned proof united.
Devised is this merry Toy,
Even for to make some merry joy.
Reporting what shall hap this year,
Not often wont so to appear.
Except some strange Astronomy,
Like this may hap as diversely.
The Author to the Reader.
A True and perfect Prognostication,
For the year of Christ's incarnation.
Sixteen hundred twenty and three so true,
The old year is gone when there comes a new.
Made by four Doctors of great reputation,
Which altogether have had consultation:
In proving their cunning of very great skill,
To tell you of Planets both good and ill.
And to show of the signs as near as they can,
Of dearth and of plenty, of news, and what than?
Yet peradventure, ere the year come about,
Some of them may chance, without any doubt.
The first and principallest Master of all,
Is named the learned Sir Doctor Hoball.
The second of them, where so ever he came,
Was Sir John Spendall so called by name.
The third has to name, good Doctor Dews-ace,
The excellentest Doctor that ever was.
The fourth and last, is Will Summer in deed,
A very good man, and proved at need.
The Preface.
BEcause it becomes not Daucocke fools.
Newly start up in Choplogicke Schools,
To take upon them, the Knowledge mystical,
Of our high Science Astrologicall.
And to Prognosticate this and that,
As though they sat, in God Almighties lap:
We commit the matter, to some other man,
That is better learned, then we by Saint Anne.
To such as in Astronomy have good skill,
For natural fools, will be fools still:
But all things be here declared and told,
To hear it again, you may be bold.
It is written behind secundam Lucam,
In the torn leaf, Capitulo nusquam,
Therefore what I say on warrantise,
You shall find all true, or otherwise.
This work have we, with good deliberation,
Studied the rather for man's recreation:
Therefore I will tell you, of this Prognostication,
How and in what manner, he takes his operation.
This Prognostication, uprightly said,
Is to deem things, before they be made:
By Constellation and Astrouomy,
Of Planets and Stars fixed in the sky.
Because therein we know our part,
As very studious in that goodly Art:
Secret with God, familiar above,
And to our Brethren of very perfect love.
We have compast this Prognostication,
That does extend to every other Nation:
Yet wish we good and ever shall,
Unto this Real me and in especial,
The native Country and breeder of our blood,
Does cause us still to wish it more good:
But certainly this is sure for ever,
Which shall last, three days after never.
Yet is it not Euangely* nor Bible,
Nor other thing impossible:
And when you have the matter examined,
If ye believe it not, ye shall not be damned,
W. W.
Concerning the Eclipse.
PErusing the old and ancient Doctors,
I speak neither of Pedlers nor Proctors:
This year shall be a kind of Eclips,
Because the Carters do occupy Whips.
Yet an aspect there shall be that men shall sure dye,
The Deaf shall not hear, nor the Blind see:
But when it shall be in all or in part,
If I can tell, I beshrew my heart.
Albeit in some place it may be total,
For they that are stark blind shall not see at all.
Yet for all that by Albumazare:
My Lord Majors Horse is not John Cooks Mare.
But, what is John Cooks Mare e're the warse,
If ye take up her tail and kiss her ( -)
This Aspect I tell you does signify plain
That the 9.th of April it may chance to rain:
And therefore Shrouetide does also show,
That by the cold of the air it is like to Snow.
So that many shall wish and also desire,
To warm them if they could get any Fire.
For Aries and Taurus have hurt their knees,
With the push of their Horns, in the midst of the Skies.
And Virgo waxt wanton for joy of Gemini,
Swearing and staring, that she incontinently,
Will married be to the man in the Moon:
Without delay, the next day afternoon.
Then Sagitarius, with his bow bent:
Thought in his anger, to make some shent,
Drew forth a shaft, and shor so near the mark,
That he gave the end of February such a yarke,
So that he was glad, to leap over one,
For else if he had stood, thousands had bin gone,
And thus by the discord and disdain,
That is among them, we fiude it plain.
Whereby we note, many great wonders,
That may hap this year, by tempest and Thunders*
Yet shall not fires be great this year:
By reason that Billets and Coals be so dear.
Notwithstanding, I intend as near as I can:
To tell you of things that shall hap now and than,
Which surely yet, ere the year have his race,
Ye shall see some of them hap and take place.
By this ye may see, the change of the Moon:
Shall change before, after, or just at Noone.
As for other Conjunctions they shall be,
Even when it pleases the Trinity.
Of the four Quarters of the Year.
NOW if we may be so bold with the Carters,
This year doubtless shall have four Quarters.
Prime time, Summer, Harvest, and Winter,
And thereto has granted Master John Spinter.
We find by the calculation of the Sphaere:
That you shall have four Terms this year.
Two in Winter, and two in Summer,
Wherein many honest men have great comber.
If our divination seem not worth a straw:
Then ask our Masters, the men at the Law.
Which had rather hear of Westminster Hall:
Then to read the Pistles of Saint Paul.
These Quarters in deed, shall make such variety:
Some Drunken men, wot not where they be.
As for the Weather, it shall be mutable,
And Women's minds much variable.
Winter cold, and Summer hot:
Sometimes it shall rain, and sometimes not.
Sometimes Snow, except great marvel:
Sometimes Mist, and sometimes Hail.
Yea, and the Planets shall cause such weather,
That it shall shine, and rain altogether:
But where, and when, and how it shall be,
In what part and Coast of each Country:
By Taurus and Pisces, I find it perfectly,
When it comes you shall know as well as I.
Of the Spring.
YEt in some part of the Spring season,
Folks will make pottage, as I think with Peason
Whereupon Virgo, as Clerks do find:
Shall be much given, to Thunder and wind.
One reason is, which Doctors do mark well,
Milk shall not be so dear as Muskadell.
Venus shall have so strong a regiment,
That some shall need to be shriuen in Lent.
Notwithstanding I feel, some Doctors do vary
Upon this Text, Nihil argent marie.
How if that April had hapt in May,
Ostlers should make but small bottles of Hay.
Also it had been a hot year for Bees,
For then had the Moon been like a green Cheese.
Of Summer.
AFter the Springtime Summer comes in,
And long before Winter it does begin.
This year they say it will begin in June,
Then shall they go barefoot, that do lack shoone.
Be it moist or dry, it proceeds of the air,
But if it be not soul it shall be fair.
In Summer the Sun such heat shall give,
That none may take up water with a Sieve.
Yet if the Moon keep her course aright:
The Sun with us shall not shine at midnight.
For Mars is rough, and Venus is mild,
And therefore an old Knave is no Child.
When the Sun and Moon are in Conjunction,
Hard hearted folks shall want compunction.
But when the Sun is in opposition,
Many shall be full of bad condition,
Diverse of the Planets are inclined to heat,
Men shall not be cold as long as they sweat.
For diverse Planets reigns in this place and that,
Which I would tell you, if I knew where or what.
And though Cancer be crooked, yet as I ween,
In most parts Summer shall be green.
But considering the heat, some will not shrink,
To spend the most part of their thrist in drink,
For Cancer and Leo by my Calculation,
Be great signs of inebriation.
Of Harvest.
SVch as play good husbands in the Prime,
I trust shall have Corn in Harvest time.
There shall be more Corn I put you out of doubt,
Vnthresht, and growing the Fields throughout:
Then all the Bakers in London have
In their possession, so God me save.
There shall be such plenty, thanks be to God,
Of Corn and Straw full many a lode:
That all the men which be living this day,
(In London) shall not eat it I say.
But if Palm Sunday should fall in Harvest,
Then were a black Sheep a perilous beast.
Therefore Aquarius must take some pain:
Still in the Firmament to remain.
For if it should chance the Skies to fall,
We should have Larkes, the Devil and all.
Wherefore both by reason and by Law:
A sore scabd tail, is shrewd to claw.
And by Libra I find, that about Harvest:
The Suns going down, shall be in the West.
And as you may say, on Ptolomeus mouth:
That the North Pole, is not in the S outh,
And by Mars it appears, I may tell you:
That an Ape is no Owl, nor an Ox a Cow.
So when the Cat is gone, the Mouse may go play:
And if they did not well, I pray God we may.
Of Winter.
WHen Summer and Autumn are both gone,
Then will the Winter be here anon:
So do I think, ye are like to find,
In this Winter some rain, some snow, and some wind.
For such is the conjecture of Doctors old,
How that naked people, are like to be a cold:
But Ptolome of all men, has good opinion,
That roasted Mutton is good meat with an Onion.
Yet as Libra and Scorpio does pass,
All-Hallowtide shall be after Michaelmasse.
Well nigh five weeks master John Spooner,
Has made it sure, it shall be no sooner.
So when Scorpio has once begun,
It may fortune to Snow, ere the Winter be don.
And when Sol is entered into Capricorn,
I doubt not, but some Children shall be borne,
Most maruailously, with guts in their wombes,
And most of them all, shall have two thumbes:
For if the Sextile proceed and reliqua,
Then take heed of seque altra,
But say Prolomeus what him lust,
You shall find it true, dirt is no dust.
How be it, all may not have their wills,
For the Moon is higher then Maluerne hills*
Yet by reason of the strong effect,
Of Saturn and Mars, in their trine Aspect.
Many a blast shall blow, of full sower wind,
For both men and women have holes behind:
How be it, that is not so great a matter,
For men when they piss, must needs make water.
So that to conclude, of the whole year,
There be four Quarters in the fallow Dear.
As Michaelmas, Christmas, and our Lady in Lent,
And welcome home at Midsommer. A year well spent.
Of the twelve Months.
AS Astronomers do conclude and say,
In the reckoning the Night with the Day:
Though there were xij. Months in the year before.
Yet this year shall have twice six, no more.
And every Month contains four Weeks,
Because in Lent they make pottage with Leekes.
By the house of Saturn which I have cast,
I told you before, that yesterday is past.
And whether it chance to shine or to rain,
It is too late to call yesterday again.
This year shall be some mystes in the Skies,
And Raisins sometimes shall be in Minced Pyes,
Also come it late or come it soon:
Every Month once shall change the Moon.
By Mars and Mercury sometime I find,
That there must be great store of wind:
For men and women when they have well dinde,
Shall have no power to hold fast behind.
The blast shall be boisterous, big and outrageous:
Whereby the air must needs be contagious,
And except God work by his great grace,
The wind shall not always stand still in one place.
Sometimes the blasts shall be pretty and soft:
And sometimes of force they shall come aloft.
But if the blasts break out beyond the brinke,
The clouds cannot be cleansed but the air must stink.
But some at me might have great wonder,
Why I declare nothing of thunder.
Of Hail, of Fire, of Lightning and Clouds,
Of great tempest and raging floods.
Ye shall perceive and understand:
That it may hap to Thunder in the low land.
Such claps, that he that by the way goes,
Shall be constrained to stop his nose.
And in some places, shall be such Hail,
That the Colliers horse may lack his tail.
Some Doctors think, great fires shall not be,
And I am of that opinion truly.
My reason is, that fuel and Cole,
Is not so lightly given by dole.
Yet the weather may hap to be so warm,
That a good fire cannot do any harm.
Yet the fire may be so hot in some house,
That some shall be burnt with a Winchester Goose.
As touching Lightning, who will wish worse,
Of all mischiefs then an empty Purse.
Which where it dwells, is so light of thought,
That he that lacks money shall go for naught:
And touching tempests, it shall not be behind,
The Weather-cocke of Paul's, had his nose in the wind.
Mariners and Wherrie-men, that row on the Thames,
Shall not be able to save them from the Sun beams.
Thieves shall not be angry, when the Dog barks:
If the Element fall, we shall lack no Larkes:
Such shall be the tempest in many places,
That men for debt, dare not show their faces.
By Venus and Virgo, it appears plain,
That envious persons, shall be full of disdain:
Great trees shall fall down out of doubt,
If they be hewn down, or plucked up by the root.
Corn shall not be reaped, but where it is sown,
Hay is no Hay, except it be mowne:
Flowers on the earth, and fruit on the trees,
Geese, Capons, Duckes, Hens nor Bees.
The tempest this year, may chance not bite*
If wives keep their Chickens from the Kite:
But now the nature, of each month to show,
In a general rule, here shall ye know.
Sometime perchance the wind shall blow.
Sometime it shall be calm and still, I trow:
Sometime the Sun shine, rain, hail and snow,
And sometime in the Air, perchance a rainbowe.
Sometime a cloud or mist, sometime clear air,
Sometime foul weather, and sometime fair:
In every month of the year throughout,
One or other of these, shall happen out of doubt.
Saving I gather, by one sign or other,
Little Snow or none shall fall at Midsommer:
Saving also this year Capricorn,
Bids some folks to beware the horn:
For if Mars and Taurus in one circle meet,
The Moon may hap to shine in Watling street.
Then the Cock crew, and then it was day,
The Bullock broke loose, and the rope ran away.
Of dearth and scarcity.
BY the operation of them before said,
The diligent working of the stars well wayed:
This year shall be plenty, and good cheap of Flies,
Of trifles for women, of gaudes and of lies.
Also great plenty of hunger and cold,
Nakedness, weariness, small thrift of old:
Harbourlesse, Idleness, Pride and Niceness,
Shall be seen in many, that use much preciseness.
Little work, loss of time, scoffing and mocking:
Plenty of quarrelling, and of Gamesters flocking;
Purse-picking, robbing, murder and hanging:
Debt and slow payment, pledging and selling:
Little trust, ill will, usury and pilling:
With dispossessing, briberie and polling,
Shall reign this year in every quarter:
He shall know more, that comes hereafter,
Also by the enticement, and working of Satan,
This year shall be scarceness, deny this who can,
The want of good living, grace and mercy,
Of love and true faith, of peace and of pity.
Of friendship, of joy, of truth and of concords:
Of neighborhood, wealth of good works in Landlords:
Of visiting the sick, the prisoner and lame,
The blind, deaf and dumb, and the Lepers by name:
Of fatherless and strangers, small hospitality,
Of alms, of good counsel, of justice and equality:
Of newness of life, and reconciliation,
Of holiness, forgiving, and restoration:
Of righteousness, and the true serving of God,
I doubt all virtues, and these are all odd.
Money with many, this year shall be dainty,
But they shall lack nothing, that have great plenty.
Therefore who so has spent their thrift in waste,
By the course of stars, they shall have leave to fast.
For Jupiter shows in the ascendent,
That naught is left, when all is spent:
Yet is not that much against Ptolomea,
That there shall be store of water in the Sea.
And I find by Ptolomeus Almegests,
That many love well to go to good feasts:
But such as can get, neither bread nor meat,
Shall be full hungry, when they would feign eat.
Yet some through hunger, shall not look so pale,
But others shall look as red with good Ale:
Now because rich men have store of money,
Gall is not all thing so sweet as Honey.
Good sayings and doings shall be dear,
For charity is laid up, till another year:
And if it be true, that I have heard told,
Malice is fervent, and charity cold.
But there shall be plenty, I dare well say,
Of showers in April, and flowers in May:
Yet Libra in her Equilibri pendent,
Shows, that for default of Argent,
Many will be slack to pay their rent,
Wherefore of their Landlords they shall be shent:
Some-where there shall be so hot roast,
That such as come late, must kiss the post.
And some-wher e shall be such plenty of Fish,
That some shall be feign to lick the dish:
Priests of their Tithes, shall be loath to want,
And Latin among them, shall be very scant.
For scarce one among ten on a cluster,
Shall be able to conster their Pater noster.
Such as have enough, shall have more still,
And such as naught have, shall want their will.
As for Corn and victual, I put no doubt,
Shall be plenty and good, all England throughout:
Except the great Snudges cause a dearth,
For never was there fairer seen on earth.
And because that Fishmongers pare their Fish,
Ye shall have of Gubbins a plentiful dish.
Fruit enough scant, ye shall have this year,
That is to say, Plums, Apples and Pear.
Walnuts, small Nuts of all sorts,
Because Boys will have them, for their comforts:
Corn shall be scant, if that it lack price,
And Cattle shall be dear, if the Market arise.
Because greediness with many does grudge,
Never ruled with reason, like a covetous Saudge:
Not caring if thousands do perish with pain,
So all things proceed, to his own private gain.
Beef, Mutton, Veale, Capon, and Coney,
This year get ye none, except ye have money:
All other things shall be at the same price,
Except only Cats, Rats and Mice.
Ye shall have plenty of Brawne and of Sowce,
For every good Tailor shall kill a great Lowse.
Though Monks and Friars be not in Cloisters,
Yet may there be at Belingsgate plenty of Oysters.
In Lent shall be larges of red Herrings and Sprats,
But without money ye get neither Caps nor Hats.
So shall be Mackrels and Playse, if the wind serve,
Soon set and sharp teeth, both they quickly carue:
This year shall youth love Apples and Pears,
So shall some love to go together by the ears:
Which is by reason, the Doctors strongly admit,
That fools this year shall have but little wit:
Yet fools have good fortune, I cannot deny,
Though they have no more wit then they occupy,
And though Quails this year be very dainty,
Yet it is to be thought, we shall have Woodcocks plenty:
And rifer then either Capon or Goose,
For some shall have Woodcocks at home in their house.
Wherefore I say some shall want, and some have,
And all because some will spend, and some will save.
But he that has all thing, nothing shall lack,
And he that has nothing, shall go to wrack:
In the heat of Summer, many shall think,
That Claret wine with Borage, is a cup of good drink.
Reapers and Rakers, of Corn and of Hay,
Shall have but little to do, between this and May:
In Harvest poor men may chance to lack Sithes,
But this year Priests must have plenty of Tithes.
Of the Complexions.
OF Complexions truly to speak,
Some be strong, and some be weak:
Some be in a mean, between them both,
Some to do well, are very loath.
Some men that shall be brought up in Schools,
Shall in conclusion be stark fools:
For Saturn, Mercury, Sol and Venus,
Jupiter, Pisces, and Aquarius:
Declare by several constellations,
That naughty knaves will use naughty fashions:
If any of the stars break their old rate,
Then God give you good morrow at Algate.
If cholloricke this year will not be irefull,
Hasty, ambicious, and desirefull:
Then shall the complexion Melancholic,
Never be disposed to be frantic.
Nor the Sanguine lusty, joyous and pleasant,
But the Phlegmatic, active, fresh and pregnant:
This year through celestial influence,
A good half groat shall be worth two pence.
One thing there is that makes me sad,
All cunning Cutpurses shall be stark mad:
This year their Science shall sore decay,
And all their liberties taken away.
For where they were wont to be burnt in the hand,
Being taken now, they must be hanged.
Fools this year shall not be wise,
But yet fair Maidens will be nice:
Wives to their husbands shall be obedient,
In all things that do themselves content.
Nor will give them an ill word without doubt,
At leastwise if their tongues be cut out:
Otherwise of the matter I take no charge,
For Ptolomie speaks of stars at large.
Of sickness and diseases.
THis year, such as be sick in deed,
Of good Physicians shall have need:
Therefore of all aspects, let folks take heed,
For many shall drink, more then they shall bleed,
And some through Mercury without doubt,
Shall lie in Newgate, that would feign be out.
And most part of folks shall have such qualmes,
That very few shall lust to give any alms:
Some shall wish to have again that they have spent,
Few this year with poverty will be content:
Yet this disease is like to reign so sore,
That Beggars shall go from door to door:
Some wanting money, shall both ban and curse,
That the devil has room to dance in their purse:
Such as can the Cards and Dice well handle,
When their money is lost, may hold the Candle.
Some shall be driven through ache in their heads,
To lie on Benches, for lack of beds.
This Summer ensuing shall reign such a disease,
That many shall not sleep in their beds for Fleas.
Many shall be sick, and brought so bare,
They shall grope in their purses, and find nothing there:
Some do believe that in one month or other,
One man will not stick to deceive his brother.
Such a common disease in Town and City,
Shall reign this year, the more is the pity:
That some shall be brought solowe and down,
They shall not be able to change a crown.
Other shall sing such a woeful note,
They shall not be able to change a groat:
Yet shall some of them be out-craked,
But for their clothes they might go naked.
For many that dwell in a poor Cottage,
For lack of meat, would eat good Pottage:
And all is by reason that this year,
All things shall be cheap, but money shall be dear.
Butchers shall have great pain and grief,
Because they cannot sell dearer their Biefe:
Which makes many for lack of brawne and mustard,
To abhor the eating of Tart and Custard.
Some say it is by reason of the Moon,
Many shall sup their Pottage, for lack of a spoone,
Others say, because the signs be in such heat,
The people would fare well, if they could get meat.
Some shall say truth, and some shall go by guess:
And other some shall go to bed supperlesse.
After their first sleep, they shall be stricken with hunger,
They would refuse neither Capon or Cunger.
Some ere they be wise, will needs be wed,
And some wives shall lead their Mates drunk to bed:
Other some shall be so sore aghast,
They shall be feign for lack of meat to fast.
Some shall fast, and some shall pray,
And some surely cannot tell what to say.
Some shall be up, and some shall be down,
Some shall dwell in the Country, and some in the Town.
Some shall have an horrible cold,
That with other men's wives they will be bold.
This year shall be many builders,
So shall some father, other men's childers:
In some place there shall be some folk,
That with their wives kindness their shoulders shall smoke,
Remedy none, but patience perforce,
The gray Mare sometime is the better Horse,
As for the Frenzy, Pockes, Iaunders and Piles,
Many shall have sore Kibes in their heels:
Little money, less meat, nakedness and such,
Is thought by the Doctors, shall reign too much.
The Gout, the Gravel, and the green sickness,
The Morphew, the Measels, and other madness:
As aches and Agues, and all other disease,
Shall reign no more, then God does please,
This year in Rome shall be great moan,
That Monks and Friars, in England shall be none:
And the Papists they shall sigh and groan,
That Gogmagog their Grandsire thus is gone.
Souls in Purgatory shall marvel much,
Why Pardons do not better keep touch:
They shall fear least Lobcock their Pope be dead,
For lack of his Bulls, under Wax and Lead.
Jesus Christi Amen
Aue Italia de malo pena,
Papa noster qui es in Roma,
Malo diciter tuum nomen.
Some wives with Agues shall shake so sore,
That their husbands are like to smart therefore:
And some wives for the Eclipse that last was,
Will make their husbands heads ring to Mass.
Scholars also shall have sheepe-biters looks,
With taking surfeit at their books:
Maidens also if they chance to do ill,
Will say it was against their will.
But Venus will never let them alone,
Until she have brought them in case to groan:
Therefore Libra (when women look sickly)
Must way the matter somewhat likely.
For Aries, Taurus, and Capricorn,
Will make them cry alas, that ever they were borne.
Likewise through small wit, and feeble brain,
This year strange and wild sickness shall reign.
Among the people that is phrenzie,
This disease shall be in the head perdie:
Another sickness goes therewith among,
Called quick Palsy, that visits the tongue:
And the property of this Palsy is such,
It makes the tongue to shake and wagge much.
To babble, to prattle, to flout, and such like,
The body thereby is made hanging ripe:
As far as I understand by this Art,
It shall reign in women for the most part.
Many that ouer-night have drunk over deep,
Shall be so dry after their first sleep:
That in the morning as soon as they be up,
They will get between the wall and the cup.
Some shall have so great a desire,
That they shall be cold for lack of fire.
Some in their Kitchen shall have such smoke,
That their eyes shall water of their Wives stroke:
As for other sickness, that God does send,
When it pleases him, shall both begin and end.
Of Peace and War.
COncerning Peace, ye shall understand,
It shall be kept, by Sea and by Land:
Between those bodies, that now be dead
And them yet alive, shall strive for no bread.
Also it shall rain this year I do trust
With all quiet people, whose living is just.
As touching Wars, contention and strife,
This year indeed shall be very rife.
The greatest Combat that is like to be,
Is betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit truly:
This battle so sore, shall be fought indeed,
That hard it will be, to know who shall speed.
Another there is, much like to the same,
Betwixt the ungodly, in living past shame:
This battle and strife, shall rise by three,
By Envy, Jealousy, and ill Husbandry.
These be the Captains, that shall cause the fighting
Brawling, quarrelling, scratching and biting:
But in the end, by Satan the Devil,
Women shall have the victory with the foul evil.
Of Inundations and Floods.
YE shall understand, by Covetous devise,
Water shall break their bounds and arise
Into many Ale-fats, and Beere-fats indeed,
Besides Tons and Tubs, and Barrels for need.
And into Milke-pots, Creame-pots, and other,
Wine-pots nor pottage-pots, shall escape neither,
Except good Conscience put in his foot,
We may curse Covetous, to the heart root.
We are like to have, this year for a truth,
Small drink and watery, which is great ruth:
Thin Milk, thin Cream, and thin pottage thereto,
If all Books agree, as some other do.
The rain in like manner, shall keep him aloft,
The wind is not able, to bid him soft:
So that there shall rain, in very great routs,
Many Beggars, and Bawdes, Sluts, Slouins, and Louts,
Whoores, Thieues and sluggerds, proud Parrats and pyes,
With a sort of fine shrewes, or else the book lies.
Beside the twenty five orders of Knaves,
Rogues and Ruffians, and paliardly slaves.
Of them that be borne under the Planets.
But now to treat of the Planets seven,
I find not by them, what is done in Heaven:
The most that I know, of them in this case,
Is, that they never stand still in one place.
But under them many mad things be wrought,
And God above knows, every man's thought.
By Aquarius I find this year,
Brewers shall put too much liquor in their Beer:
And Vintners also will not swerue in fine,
For mingling and mixing, water amongst Wine:
Covetous men shall be in such a fury,
That he that lacks money, can not be merry.
Which shall engender, such a burning heat,
That many shall covet things, they cannot get:
Usurers shall be in such a rage,
That old people shall dote for age.
Therefore when the Sun is in Capricorn,
Then shall not the Euentide be the Morn:
But when into Aries, entered is the Moon,
Then just at midday, shall be high Noone:
Whereby it appears, as a plain matter,
Most men thinks, wine is better then water:
But the four winds never agreed worse,
For except each body shut well his Purse.
One shall not before blow such a blast,
But another behind shall blow out as fast:
Thus Touch la maine and fait a bon chere,
When ye are gone, then are ye not here.
Now that ye may know them in especial,
We will speak of them in general.
Of the Saturnistes.


Where Saturnus is chief dominator,
No fool this year shall be a good Orator.
Mercury combust, shows a cause why:
A fool he was borne, and a fool he shall dye.
It should seem also by Ptolomeus text:
Such as dye this year, shall not dye the next.
For the Conjunction of Luna and Sol,
Will make in England many a drunken noll.
If Venus to Mercury make her aspect,
Many sick folk will be infect.
That people shall dote for age that be old,
And such as be burned, shall not die for cold:
But whether the people do better or worse,
Saturn I suppose, will keep his own course.
And he would men should rather ride then go,
But I say hasty men shall never want woe:
For if that all men did use for to ride,
It should greatly hinder Graues-end tide.
If the Sun be up. men shall see it shine,
In all quarters, except they be blind:
And although that Clouds do cover his beats,
Yet may Oyster-boates come upon Thames.
Of the Iouistes.


BEcause of Jupiter, it does appear,
That each man would gladly prosper this year:
But Saturn and Pisces declares again,
That some shall attempt, many things in vain.
Churchmen shall prosper and have good luck,
Because they are willing to go to their book,
Whose good devotion shall be so seruent,
They shall have no power, to refuse preferment.
Bishops and Prelates shall do very well,
If they take pains to preach the Gospel.
And if they truly declare the letter,
I trust they shall prosper much the better,
As for Archdeacon, Provost and Deane:
Will take fat Benefices rather then lean.
But as for other Priests every one,
Will take three Benefices rather then none.
Saving that Aries puts out of doubt,
That such as can get none, must go without.
And after they have this life once forsake,
They will no more worldly promotion take.
Judges, and Lawyers, and other Officers,
Shall do as they have done other years:
Except they feed them with gold and groates,
The men of Law shall have sore throats.
And their tongues I warrant you, shall be lame,
Wherefore Libra must your matter frame.
Of the Marcialists.
MARS is the God of battle and strife:
That does he feel, that has a cursed wife.
Therefore good Warriers that to the field do go,
Shall give or take blows, if they come thereto.
They shall not shrink for wind and rain,
But for the Princes cause gladly take pain,
To do their King and Country good,
They will be ready to spend their heart blood.
Scholars with their Masters will make many a fray
But the Boys will bear the stripes away.
I find by the aspect of Mars and Virgo,
Some Dames shall work their Maidens woe.
For Sol and Luna shall shine so bright,
That they shall find faults both day and night.
And Saturn in his sircle shows plain,
That Maids ere they mend one fault will make twain,
Great death of Innocents Mars does intend,
That never did speak ill word or offend.
Which is to declare without long preambles,
I do remit you to the Shambles.
Of the Solistes.
ALL matters that are wrought under the Sun,
Shall end the better if they be well begun.
For the Sun this year by Gods might and grace
Shall shine and give light in many a place.
The day shall be longer, if men be in heal:
In Summer, then in Winter by a great deal.
Yet Albumazar says full like a Clarke,
When the Sun is gone down, it will be dark.
The blind men this year by help of the Moon,
Shall see as well at midnight as at noone.
Kings, Princes, and Lords of might,
This year shall see the Sun give light.
Except the Clouds cover his beams,
Or else it shall shine in all Christian Realms.
Of the Children of Venus.
VEnus in the Eclips declares news:
That few honest women shall dwell in the Stews.
Therefore who this year loves in have,
May hap to repent, ere the year be past.
For Venus and Sol are inclined to heat:
So Stockfish is not toothsome except it be beat.
Crafty men this year shall be very subtle,
And so shall many women be frail and brittle.
Lovers shall burn in heat for Larkes,
But one thing shall happen whosoever marks.
That men in many places if they hit rightly,
Shall fall in favor with some women quickly.
And women shall love more then their bellies will hold,
But hot love this year will be soon cold.
The children of Venus shall prosper but little,
Because that Lazars shall be in the Spittle.
Some children of Venus shall burn in such love,
For every hand they will have a fit Glove.
Some will love more then a thousand fold,
And some if they might have more they would.
Yet some by Venus promoted shall be,
To have a room at three cranes in the Vintree.
And because some folk love so hot,
Fools bolts this year will be soon shot.
Of the Marcurialistes.
Mercury is patron of buyers and sellers:
Pillars, Bribers, liars and Tale-tellers.
Some shall be no gladder, tales to bear:
Then other shall be to give them care.
But such as can use the same thing well:
Shall surely to Heaven if they escape Hell.
Advocates, Orators, Proctors and Scribes,
Shall be sore tempted to take bribes.
Albeit the Eclipse past declares plain,
Where ye suspect them of one they will take twain.
Physicians this year great cures shall have,
And such shall escape as pleases God to save.
Surgeons, Poticaries, and other such:
Shall gain by selling little for much.
For some of them will sell for a pound,
That cost them naught but taking from the ground.
Men shall sell wares at sundry prices:
And some Grocers I think shall sell Spices.
Mercers shall utter Satin, and other silk,
Bucause the Wives of I slington sell Milk.
And because therewith they make Furmenty.
Lice with Beggars shall not be dainty.
And because they make their Cheese with Curdes,
Women this year will be full of words:
Painters this year (if they lift) may go play,
Women can paint and make themselves gay.
Caruers, Goldsmithes, Taylers and Glasiers,
Broderers, Painters, Writers and deuisers:
By force of Mercury in the last Eclipsall,
Shall this year be very fantastical.
Advocates, as Sergeants at the Law,
Shall say nothing for love nor for awe.
Except they be waged for Silver and Gold,
They will for sake neither new nor old.
In each other Science I dare well say,
Many will be doing speed as they may.
Of the Lunatistes.
BEcause the Moon is moist and cold,
They that dye young, shall never be old.
Some men this year, shall sail into Spain
And some perchance, never return again.
The Eclips in this case, puts out of doubt:
That some fresh beggars will play banckrout.
They that spend great sommes shall be at great cost:
And Neptune shall cause some Ships to be lost.
As touching the Eclips past we cannot see,
How an Owl should a Nightingale be.
Therefore we will not our brains break,
Of things we know not any more to speak.
For though our learning be not small,
Yet we Prognosticators know not all.
Wherefore with us no rare thing it is,
Now and then to lie and say amiss.
I find by the Moon and the seven Stars,
That Porters in London shall lack no Carres.
They that be Lunaticke shall be in a mad case,
And they that be unthrifty shall sure want grace.
In nights by Moonshine men shall go aright,
If they lack not their limbs, nor their eyesight.
Martiners shall be lucky to sail into all-Lands,
If their Ships chance not, to stick in the sands.
The Moon as no marvel shall seem very green,
To them that the Moon before has not seen.
Some shall go drunk to bed, before the Moon be up,
And some shall not love to drink of a dry Cup.
Messengers wits shall be so far spent,
They sometimes shall forget wherefore they be sent.
If madmen this year be as mad as Hearts,
Then madmen shall surely play mad-mens parts.
To declare any further the Eclips of the Moon,
We can do no more then we have done.
The fashions of us Prognosticators ever was,
To speak of some things that never come to pass,
Therefore when you shall our falsehood espy,
Do no more but give us a little leave to lie.
Of Earthquakes and Thunder.
THis year because some unthrifts lack grace,
A marvelous thing is a wondrous case.
If Venus do reign, except great wonder,
Some Maids will be afraid of Thunder.
For if such a toy come in their heads,
They will lie on the ground for lack of beds.
Also now and then, for Mars and Venus sake,
In some Countries may happen an Earthquake.
This year shall befall a wondrous case,
Saint Stephens day shall fall in Christmas.
And except the greater have be made,
Newyeares day shall keep his old trade.
Then shall rich men have presents and gifts:
Where the poor shall be put to their old shifts.
Wherefore this year take heed to your Bees,
For Pears and Apples shall grow on Trees.
The Moon when it has made a course,
Shall change ere Forty days ye pass.
Or else we shall be all the worse,
That are already in an evil case:
If your intent be spiritual,
Begin to flatter and lie apace.
The Court of Rome I have heard say,
Is not corrupt with Simony:
But if that men list to assay;
There is nothing too dear for money.
Of Benefices shall fall this year,
In many places and not to be sold:
But I am sure they shall be dear,
And changed for no worse then gold.
Certain Bishops in commandment,
Shall counsel Priests to leave their sin:
Men shall marvel what they meant,
And say that they did first begin.
Pheachers of Gods Laws,
Shall rebuke our negligence:
We shall say they be Dawes,
What auailes such audience?
These fat Monckes, and rich Abbeys,
Men shall make of them great wonder:
But when good Housekeeping decays,
How many men shall sterue for hunger?
Friars and Nuns shall join in one,
It is no marvel what I say:
For it is hard to live alone,
If they can find another way.
Of Abstinence we must speak a little,
And of Obedience (Nihil:)
For Chastity has lost her style,
And Virtue driven to exile.
Now of the Temporal I say,
A Stella Cometa shall reign:
And cause them wander every day,
And know not how to ease the pain.
Mars menaceth great debate,
If Venus bring this geere to pass:
I have not seen such sudden hate,
Where so much love before time was.
There is like to be maruailes,
Who lives shall see the same:
But if you ask, I know not yet,
It is good to be out of blame.
Poor folk that have nothing,
God shall give them leave to fast:
As I find by writing,
Because they have spent much in wast.
Physicians great Cures shall have,
And wisely look them upon:
For gold and silver they will men save,
But very few shall escape or none.
Pothicaries shall be very rich,
By Sirrups, Oils, and Confections:
And cause poor men to pay too much,
For that, that shall cause infections.
All Handy-crafts I tell you sure,
Shall counterfeit, and mar it clean:
That was before good to endure,
Shall now be scantly worth a Bean.
May dens shall be very nice,
But secretly if I shall speak:
The greater part shall all be vice,
It is a purpose hard to break.
VViues shall be obedient,
As any VVaspe I dare well say:
And never easy to content,
Except their tongues be cut away.
And because some on the Sea have had loss,
This year shall be Sermons at Paul's Cross.
And if it happen the Curlue to be a Quail,
Then shall the green Mare have a blew tail.
Many great works shall be taken in hand,
In Italy and each other land.
And women therein shall take great pain,
As much for pleasure as for gain.
Yea many gorgious and gallant Girls,
And lusty women set with Pearls.
Shall put their body in a readiness,
To labor in vile business,
They shall desire above all things,
That they might be men's underlings.
But because men cut their meat with knives,
Some shall have much a-doe to rule their wives.
For Saturn and Venus such course have taken,
That most part of women shall be shrew shaken,
Yet for that good Housewiues do spin Flax,
Many this year shall shite worse then wax.
And because the singing men divide their notes,
Many a good Horse shall be fed with Oats.
And what though a Noble be worth xx groates,
Yet every man shall not have two coats.
Black cloth this year shall be so dear,
Throughout all England, as shall appear,
That as you walk through every street,
You shall be sure not to meet
Two women clothed in a gown,
Of color black, or color brown,
Although sick folks heads do ache,
Yet you shall see few dead men quake.
Some shall be sick never the latter,
With biles and botches, and there rises the matter.
But whose eyes will serve him to look so hie,
In a clear night, shall see stars in the sky.
Of Kings and Princes.
What Kings and Princes shall do this year,
By process of things, it shall appear:
If we could tell, it were much marvel,
For with none of them, we are of counsel.
But our assured trust and confidence is,
That nothing in this Realm shall be amiss:
What else they shall do this year, we cannot tell,
For in Gods secrets, we were never seen so well.
This Realm we trust, shall prosper and flourish,
As well as wit can devise, our hearts to nourish:
In hope hereof, all true English men,
With whole heart and mind, hereto say Amen*
To declare any further of their inclination,
The nature, quality and operation:
That the planets, signs, virtues, and of the Element,
Are most inclined to this year present.
We are not able further to say,
But we beseech all men, fervently to pray:
That all things may abound in the Commonwealth,
And at our last ending, everlasting health.
A Song.
Kyrieeleyson sing we, now merrily every one, that honest mirth, is more worth,
Then Silver, Gold, or precious Stone, taking thought who list, for I will
take none.
ALL ye which be here*
Unto us now draw near:
Drink good Wine Ale, and Beer,
Care not though Malt be dear.
Learn this lesson at me first,
He that drinks well shall never dye for thirst.
Kyrieeleyson sing we, etc.
He that will not be glad,
We count him worse then mad:
As long lives a merry lad,
As he that will be sad.
A light heart is the best Jewel,
As Holy writ does plainly tell.
He is a Churl by kind,
That loves no mirth to find:
And Death shall stop his wind,
For all his subtle mind.
Mark well and you shall see,
That a Churl by kind will never be free.
Beggars love brawling,
And wretches love wrawling:
Cowards love lawling,
And grutchers still hawling.
But they that love their honesty,
Will spend their money neighbourly.
Therefore fill Glass and Cup,
And drink them friendly up:
Drink not a Niggards sup,
Care not for worldly mucke.
For this is true and ever shall,
The longest liver shall have all.
Therefore we count him wise,
That will not make it nice:
As soon as he does rise,
To take his Ale with Spice.
As Ginger is wholesome and good,
So good liquor nourishes the blood.
Once again fill the Pot,
And drink we at the Let:
And he that makes the shot,
Without a full good Pot.
Be he never so dear a friend,
Let him pay for all and there an end.
FINIS.

