THE PRESENT ESTATE OF SPAIN, OR A true relation of some remarkable things
touching the Court, and Government of Spain, with a Catalogue of all the
Nobility, with their Revenues.

Composed by James Wadsworth, Gent. Late Pensioner to his Majesty of Spain,
and nominated his Captain in Flanders.

Imprinted at London by A. M. for Ambrose Ritherdon, at his Shop, at the sign
of the Bull head in Pauls-Church-Yard. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the NOBILITY, and GENTRY of ENGLAND, addicted to
History, or Travail.
IT is not the worth of the Book, that has made me presume so far, as to
dedicate it to Your Honors service, supposing it a work, worthy of Your
patronage: for it is Your strong defense that can ouersway the calumnious
obloquies of detractors, as also the worlds malignitie, so as it may take no
injury. That has made me beseech you, to shadow it under your wings, not
esteeming the value of the thing, but the good mind, and meaning of the giver,
who is willing to do as Eschines did to Socrates, who having nothing meet to
gratify him withal, gave even himself, whom you shall always find ready,

Your devoted Servant, JAMES WADSVVORTH.

The Index.
A Relation of all the Dukes Grandes of Spain. Page 1. The Grandes of Italy.
p. 11. Marquesses Grandes of Spain. p. 14. Earls Grandes of Spain. p. 15.
Marquesses of Spain which are not Grandes. p. 16. Earls of Spain which are
not Grandes. p. 22. The high Counstables of Spain. p. 30. The Admiralls of
Spain. p. 30. The Lords Lieutenants of Spain. p. 31. Vicounts of Spain. p.
32. Archbishops and Bishops of Spain. p. 33. Knights of the Noble Order of the
Golden-Fleece in Spain. p. 39. Knights of the Order of Saint James in Spain.
p. 40. Knights of the Order of Calatraua. p. 42. Knights of the Order of
Alcantara. p. 43. Knights of the Order of Christ in Portugal. p. 44. Knights
of the Order of Montesa in Valentia. p. 45. Knights of the Order of Saint John.
p. 45. A Scedule of the Offices of which the King of Spain allows his Privy
Council to dispose of as in their own Donation. p. 46. His Ambassadors
abroad. p. 48. Councels of Spain. p. 49. Privileges of the Nobility of
Spain. p. 5^. Privileges of the Constables of Spain. p. 54. The Order which
the King of Spain observes in his Chapel, and the government thereof. p. 56.
The State of the King and Queen at Meals. p. 60. The Order and manner of the
Kings and Queens going abroad in their Coach. p. 65. The Manner of the Kings
riding forth on Horseback, to any Public Acts. p. 67. A Scedule of the
Parish Churches, and Monasteries of Friars in Madrid. p. 69. Certain other
special brief Observations concerning the King and State of Spain. p. 71.
The Kings audience to Ambassadors. p. 72. The Demeanor of the Spaniards in
these times. p. 73. The King of Spaynes Revenues, and his forces at Sea and
Land. p. 75. Cities in Spain. p. 80. Ports and Circuit. p. 82. The
Brasse-Coynes. p. 84.
Errata.
Page 2. line 25. read GAcasa for Gacara. Barrameda for Barameda.

Page 5. line 26. read Velascos for Vecascos.

Page 8. line 22. read Pentaranda for Peniferanda.

Page no. read ^elues for Lelues.

For other faults I int^eat the Reader to correct.

A RELATION OF ALL THE DVKES, GRANdes of Spain, Marquesses, Earls, Knights of
several Orders, together with the Archbishops, and Bishops, their several
Titles, Dignities, Offices, Privileges and yearly Revenues.
ATedious preamble or a prolix exordium is oftentimes rather offensive, then
any way delectable to the Reader: therefore to avoid occasion of distaste in
this kind, I will briefly betake my self to the relation of those
particulars which shall in due order present themselves to the Readers view and
aspect, and first.

Of the Dukes Grandes of Spain.
THe first is the Duke of San Lucar the Mayor, or of Alpechin, Earl of
Oliuares, Lord high Steward to his Majesty of Spain, Sumiller du Corpse, or
chief Squire to his body; the said Office belongs to the house of Burgundy,
of which the King himself is chief. The said Dukes Mansion or dwelling house
is in Civil, his estate and revenues are in Andalusia, A Duccate is five
shillings sixepence of our money.
valued at sixescore thousand Ducats a year, besides offices. He is lineally
descended from the house of the Guzmanes, whose son in law (the Marquis of
Torall) is head of the said house, and also one of the Grandes of Spain, and
master of the Kings horse.

This said Marquis of Torall his ancestors did always heretofore refuse all
offices, and places of dignity in Court, being expressly forbidden by their
progenitors success^iely, holding and accounting it an indignity to their Noble
pedigree; this being their motto in their scutcheons. Reyes de nos, y nos node
Reyes, (Kings come from us, we not from Kings) His house or mansion of
antiquity, is in the Kingdom of Leon; his revenues, in former times were not
above eight thousand, but now valued at sixty four thousand Ducats a year
beside offices.

The Duke of Medina Sidonia, Marquis of San Lucar of Basrameda, of Cacara in
Africa, and Earl of Niebla his house and estate are in the Kingdom of
Civil, his yearly revenues with his fishing of Tunnie, are valued at three
hundred thousand Ducats a year. He is one of the prime branches of the house
and family of Gusmanes.

This Duke (being once enstalled in his Dukedom) frequents not the Kings
Court, but lives in Courtlike state within his own precinct at San Lucar of
Barrameda: his Father was General of the Fleet, Anno Dom. 1588. The son of
this great Duke (by virtue of a dispensation from the Pope) has married his
Aunt, both by father and mother, and it is doubtful, whether her beauty or
riches had greatest power in this unnatural conjunction.

The Duke of Medina Caeli, Marquis of Cogolludo, Earl of the port of Saint
Mary: Is chief of the family of Cerdas: his Mansion or dwelling house is in
Cogolludo: his estate in the Kingdom of Toledo, and Civil; and by estimation
worth four and forty thousand Ducats a year.

This Duke is of the blood Royal of Castilla, and lays claim to the Kingdom
of Castilla, and his accustomed manner is every year upon Twelfeday to deliver
a petition to his Majesty by right of privilege in that behalf, which
petition the King favorably receives, and withal answers in these words, Nos
lo oymos, We hear you: and so referres it to the Council royal where it
cease for the present without any further proceedings in this Case.

The Duke of Lerma, Marquis of Deniae, Earl of Ampudia, Lord of the house of
Sandubal, and Rojas; His houses and Mansions are in Lerma and Denia, his estate
and reuennewes in Castilla and Valentia, and are worth two hundred and
threescore thousand Ducats a year.

This said Duke and his eldest son, (the Duke of Vceda,) Heir apparent to
the Dukedom aforesaid, are both dead and the Duke of Cea (grandchild to the
Duke of Lerma aforesaid, and Lord Lieutenant of Castilla, enjoys all the
aforesaid estate which (with his own) amounts to three hundred and forty
thousand Ducats a year.

The said Lerma, perceiving himself disfauoured by the King, procured a
Cardinals hat for his own safety.

And the said Dukes favorite, Marquis of Siete, Yglesias, Don Rodrigo Calderon
(Captain of his Majesty's Guard) being attainted of high Treason; (according
to the accustomed manner of Spain, for execution of such malefactors) had his
throat cut in the open Market place at Madrid, and all his goods confiscated to
the King: amounting to the sum of three millions of Ducats, or rather more.
Moreover his children and successors of his Lineage were proclaimed ignoble, and
never afterward hereditarie to the aforesaid demeanes.

This Marquis as he was going to the place of execution, had one going before
him with a Bell and a dish in his hand, begging Money for Masses to be said for
his soul; saying these words. Doc good for the Soul of this man, who the
other day was so rich, and now in so poor and lamentable estate.

The Duke of Feria, Marquis of Safra, Earl of Villa Alba, Chief of the family
of Feigueroas; his house is in Safra, his estate in Estremadura, his rents are
fifty thousand Ducats a year.

This Dukes Grandmother was of the house of the Dormars, here in England, and
a Lady of Honor to Queen Mary, who was married to King Philip, the second of
Spain, and the said Lady was married to this Dukes Grandfather, at that same
time and so went over into Spain.

The Duke of Infantado, Marquis of Cenete and Santillana, Earl of Saldana,
Lord of the Royalty of Mansanares, Chief of the house of Mendosas; his Mansion
or dwelling house is in the City called Guadalaxara, and his estate lies in
the Kingdom of Toledo, and the mountains of old Castilla: his rents are a
hundred thousand Ducats a year.

The old Duke is dead and now the young heir enioyes the Dukedom, being some
twenty years of age, this is one of the prime Dukes of Spain.

The Duke of Frias, Marquis of Berlanga, Earl of Haro, and Lord of the house
of the seven Infantes of Lara, Constable of Castilla, and Justice Mayor of
Spain: He is Chief of the House of Velascos: His house is in the City
Burgos, and his estate in old Castilla, in the mountains of Biscay, and the
Hills of Soria, His rents are fourscore thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Medina Riosecco Marquis of Modica, Earl of Melgar, Vicount
Cabrera, in Catalunia and Esterlin; Admiral of Castilla, and chief of the
house of Enriques. His Mansion or dwelling house is in Vallodolid, and his
estate in the province of Campos, Catalunia; and Sicilia, his rents are
sixescore thousand Ducats a year.

This Duke of Alba, riding a hawking in the mountains of Toledo, by Salamanca
discovered a Valley amongst the Hills, inhabited by heathenish people, called
Patuecos and before not known which Valley was given to him by the King, about
twenty years since, and these people did adore the Sunne-rising.
The Duke of Alba and Guesca, Marquis of Cori^, Earl of Saluatierra, Vicount of
Saldices, and Lord of Valde Corneja, of the family of the Toledos, Counstable
of Navarre by inheritance, his Mansions or dwelling houses are in Salamanca,
and Alba: and his estate in old Castilla, Navarre and Andalusia: His rents are
a hundred thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Alcada, (of the house of Gansules, Marquis of Tarifa, Earl of
Hornos, Lieutenant or Lord president of Andalusia, and Lord chief Notarie of
the same. He is chief of the family of Riueras, His Mansion or dwelling house
is in the City of Civil, and his estate in the same Kingdom; His rents are
fourscore thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Alburquerque, Marquis of Guelma, and Culiar, Earl of Ledesma,
Chief of the family of the Cueuas. His house is in Culiar, and his estate in
old Castilla, His rents are fifty thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Escalona, Marquis of Villena, Earl of Santistc^an, Lord Garganta,
Chief of the family of Pachecos, His houses are in Toledo and Escaloni^, and
his estate in the Province of the M^ncha in the Kingdom of Tolledo. His rents
are worth a hundred thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Osuna, Marquis of Penafiel, Earl of Vrenia, head of the family of
Girones, Lord chief Notarie of Castilla: His house is in Osuna, his estate in
Andolusia and old Castilla: His rents are fourscore thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Arcos, Marquis of Cades and Lara, Earl of Marchena, chief of the
family of the Ponces of Leon: His house in Seuill, and his estate in the said
Kingdom; His rents are fifty thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Bei^r, Marquis Gibraleon, Earl of Benalcasar* Chief of the house
of the Sunigas and Soto Mayor* His Mansion or dwelling house is in Seuill, and
his estate in the said Kingdom: His rents are threescore and ten thousand
Ducats a year, this Duke is of the blood Royal.

The Duke of Gandia, Marquis of Lombay, Earl of Oliba, head of the family of
the Borjas: His house is in Valentia, and his estate in the same Kingdom: his
rents are fifty thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Cesa, Balna and Soma, Marquis of Poca, Earl of Cabra, Palamos,
and Oliueto, Vicount of Disnacar, Admiral of Naples; High Constable of the
Castle of Ferxo: He is head of the house of Cordobas; His Mansion or chief
dwelling house, is in Cordoba, and his estate in the Kingdom of Naples, and
Catalunia. His rents are sixescore thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Maqueda and Naxera Marquis of Elche, Earl of Valentia and
Triuinio, chief of the house of the Manrriques de lara, and Cardenas. His
houses are in Toledo, and Naxera: and his estate in the Kingdom of Leon and
Estremadura: his rents are fourscore and ten thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Segorbe and Cardona, Marquis of Comares, Lord of Lucena, Earl of
Pradas, Constable of Arragon, head of the Arragones and Cardonas; of the blood
Royal of Arragon: His house is in Valentia, his estate in the said Kingdom
Catalunia and Andalusia: His rents are sixescore thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke Peniaranda, Marquis of Banesia, Earl of Miranda, chief of the
family of the Auellanedas, and likewise allied unto the house of S^niga, his
house is in Peniaranda, and his estate in old Castilla: His rents are yearly
forty thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Yjar, his house is in Saragosa, and his estate in Arragon; his
rents are twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Villa Hermosa, Earl of Ribagosa, of the lineage of Arragones, his
house is in Saragosa, and his estate in Arragon: His rents are four and twenty
thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Beraguas, Marquis of Iamayca, Admiral of the Indies, allied to
the house of Toledo: his house is in Saragosa: and his estate in Arragon, and
the Indies, estimated to be worth thirty thousand Ducats a year besides his
Admiralls place, which is worth twenty thousand Ducats a year more.

The Duke of Pastrana, Prince of Eboli, of the house and family of Siluas in
Portugal: this house is in Pastrana; his estate in the Province of Alcarria,
his revenues are worth forty thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Villa Franca, is of the house of Tolledo, but being not desirous
to retain the title of a Duke, assigns it to his son, and is only contented
with the name Don Pedro of Toledo. His son is Duke of Fernandina, Marquis of
Villa Franca, Prince of Montalban* and Earl of Peniramiro.

This Don Pedro, was he that was taken Prisoner coming for England, in the
year 1588. and his son did lately take Saint Christophers Island. Their
Mansions or chief dwelling houses are in Toledo and Villa Franca: and their
estates in Naples and Galisia, valued at sixecore thousand Ducats a year.

The revenues of the Nobil^tie were greater in substance until Philip, the
third banished the Moriscoes out of Spain, which Moriscoes were the most
industrious people in Spain, and by reason of their banishment the Kingdom is
much dispeopled they being in number above a hundred thousand.
All these are Dukes Grandees in Spain, and hold their privileges and
dignities successively by inheritance, and so do the Constables and Admirals,
within the King of Spaynes dominions.

Now for their estates and yearly revenues, none of them can sell, but may (if
necessity and occasion require) Morgage the same for the payments of their
debts (by yearly portions) till satisfaction be made, and then the right
owner, or his suruiuing heir, must repossesse the same without any impediment
or contradiction.

Another observation Concerning these Grandees is, that none of them must be
married without the Kings leave and license: which if they do obtain, and are
married, their espoused Ladies must not loose their virginity within six miles
of the Kings Court, the first night after they are Married.

Furthermore no Grandee, Nobleman or Gentleman of worth, may be arrested for
debt, but must pay their debts as the abouesaid Grandees.

Neitheir can any stranger be arrested for debt if he can but produce two
witnesses, that will be deposed and take their oath, that he is descended from
the loins of Gentle-parents in his native Country. Also no Soldiers can be
billeted upon any of the Nobility, nor Gentry of Spain.

The Grandees of Italy which may at their own pleasure be covered before the
King.
THe Duke of Paliano, Prince of Sonino, Counstable of Naples; of the house and
lineage of Colona Romana: His mansion or dwelling house is in Rome, his estate
and revenues are in the adjacent borders called Campana Roma, and are valued
at a hundred thousand Ducats a year.

Marquis Spinola, This Marquis is Commander mayor of the Knights of Santiago in
Castilla: (...) of the Counsel of state and war.
chief Campmaster of the armies in Flaunders and General in the Palatinate;
Now governor of Millain: General of the King of Spaynes forces there, Knight
of the Noble order of the Golden Fleece: his house is at Gen^ua, some estate of
land he has in Spain, but his gre^test revenues are in money; by relation
two or three millions; but not certainly know^n. His son for the reward of
his ser^ice at the Palatinate, was made a Cardinal commonly called Cardinal
Spinola.

The Duke of Braciano, Lord of the house of Vrc^^^ Romana His house is in Rome;
his estate in the aforesaid ^ampana Roma^ia and Tuscana: and is worth
fourscore thousand Ducats a year.

The Prince of Bisiniano, had a fair estate and many titles, but now all are
come to nothing but a bare title; although he was heretofore head of the house
of Saint Seberina: he is called by the name of Don Tiberio Carasa.

The Prince of Malfeta, of the house of Gonsaga, graund Iusticer of Naples,
Earl of Guastala, and Campo Bassa: his house is in Guastala; his estate in
Naples and Lombardie: his rents are seventy thousand Ducats a year.

The Prince of Melsi, of the house of Oria, great Protonotario or Pronotarie of
Naples; His house is at Genoua, and his estate lies in the Kingdom of Naples:
His rents are two hundred thousand Ducats a year.

The Prince of Asinly, Lord of the house of Leyba; his house is at Naples, and
his estate in the said Kingdom: His rents are forty thousand Ducats a year.

The Duke of Montalto, Prince of Paterno, is of the family of Moncada and
Arragon: His house is at Palermo, and his estate lies in the Kingdoms of
Naples and Scicilie: his rents are a hundred and forty thousand Ducats a
year.

The Duke of Terra noua, Prince of Gastelbitrano, is of the house and family of
Zallauia and Arragon, his house is at Palermo, and his estate in the Kingdom
of Scicilie: His rents are seventy thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Pescara and Vasto, is of the house and family of A^alus, his
house is at Naples, and his estate in the same kingdom: his rents are thirty
thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Sexto, of the family of Spinola, his house is at Genoua, his
estate in the Kingdom of Naples: his rents are seventy thousand Ducats a
year.

The Duke of Monteleon, is of the house and family of Pinatelo, his house is in
the City of Naples, and his estate in the same Kingdom and Calabria: his rents
are forty thousand Ducats a year.

The Prince of Castillon, of the house and family of Gonsaga, his house is at
Castillon, and his estate in Lombardie: his rents are twenty thousand Ducats a
year.

The Duke of Salmoneta, is of the family of Gaetana, his house is in Rome, and
his estate near thereunto adjoining, his rents are thirty thousand Ducats a
year.

The Prince of Butera, is of the House of Brangifort, His house is in Palermo,
and his estate not far distant from it: his rents are fourscore thousand
Ducats a year.

The Prince of Sulmona, is of the house of Burgense; His house is at Rome, and
his estate in the Kingdom of Naples, his rents are twenty thousand Ducats a
year.

Marquesses Grandes of Spain.
THe Marquis of Astorga, Earl of Trastamara and Santa Maria, of the house of
Villa Lobos, head of the lineage of Osorios, he has his house in Astorga, and
his estate in the kingdom of Leon, and in the Province of Campos: his rents
are forty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Aguilar, Earl of Casteneda, is of the house of Manrriques of
Lara: his house is in Aguilar, his estate in Leon; and his rents are four and
thirty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Mondesar, Earl of Tendilla, of the lineage of Mendosas; his
house is in Mondesar and his estate in the Province of Alcarria: his rents are
thirty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Pliego, is of the house of Aguilar, he holds his mansion or
dwelling house in Cordoba, and his estate is in Alcarria and Andal^si^, his
rents are a hundred thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Veles and Molina Adolantado, or Lieutenant of Murcia, is of the
house of Fajardos; His house and his estate are in Murcia, and his rents are
six and forty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Santa Cruz or the Holy-Crosse, is of the house of Bacan: His
Mansion or dwelling house is in the Viso, his estate in Andalusia: and his
rents are thirty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Velada, of the lineage and house of Toledo and Auila, His house
is in Auila, his estate in the Kingdom of Toledo: his rents are thirty
thousand Ducats a year.

Of the Earls Grandes of Spain.
THe Earl of Benauente, Duke of Villaon, Earl of Luna and Mayorga. He is of
the house of Pimentele and holds his mansion or dwelling house in Valladel^d;
his estate is in Campos in the Kingdom of Estremadura: and his rents are a
hundred thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Lemus and Andrada Marquis of Sarria, Earl of Villalba of the
house of the Castres: His mansion or dwelling house is in Monforte Delemus, his
estate in Galisia: His rents are fifty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Oropesa, and Deloptosa Marquis Garandilla Lord of Cebolla: he is
of the house and lineage of Toledo, His Mansion or chief dwelling house is in
Oropesa, his estate lies in the Kingdom, of Toledo, His rents are seventy
thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Albadelista is of the lineage of the Enriques* His mansion house
is in Camora, and his estate in old Castilla, His rents are thirty thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Altamira, is of the house and lineage of Moscoso: his mansion or
dwelling house is in Altamira: his estate in Galisia, his rents two and twenty
thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Monterry, is of the house of Sunigas, his house is in Salamanca,
his estate in Galisia, his rents are thirty thousand Ducats a year.

Marquesses of Spain, which are not Grandees.
This Marquis was lately made a Grand^
THe Marquis of Ayamonte, of the lineage of Sunigas, and Soto Mayor; his house
and estate are in Civil: and his rents six and twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Tauara, of the house of Pimenteles, his house is in Valladolid;
his estate in old Castilla: and his rents sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Carpio Earl of Armuz of the house of Haro; his mansion or
dwelling house is in Carmona: his estate in Andalusia, and his rents are four
and twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Camarasa, Earl of Ricla, of the house of Cobos; his house is
in Valladolid, and estate in Arragon: and his rents are five and forty
thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Cortes, of the lineage and house of Toledo, his house is in
Cortes, his estate is in Navarra* his rents are fifteen thousand Ducats a
year.

The Marquis of Montemayor, of the lineage and stock of Silhas, he has his
house in Monte-mayor; his estate in the Kingdom of Toledo, and his rents are
eighteen thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Montesclaros of the lineage of Mendosas he holds his chief
house for residencie in Guadalaxara: his estate lies in the Province of
Alcarria, and his rents are sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Nauas, Earl of Risco, is of the house and lineage of Auilas,
he has his mansion or chief dwelling house in Auila, and his estate is in
Aquella Comarca: his rents are six and twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Stepa, of the centurions of Genoua, has his house in Civil,
and his estate in the same Kingdom: his rents are fifty thousand Ducats a
year.

The Marquis of Caracena, of the lineage of Carillos and Toledo; holds his house
in Caracena, and his estate in Castilla: his rents are sixeteene thousand
Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Malpica, of the lineage of the Riveras, holds his house in
Madrid, and his estate in the Kingdom of Toledo: his rents are forty thousand
Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Ladrada, of the lineage and house of Cuebas, holds his house in
Ladrada, and his estate in the Kingdom of Murcia: His rents are twelve
thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis Caniete, of the lineage and house of Mendosas; holds his house in
Cuenca, and his estate in Aquella Comarra: his rents are thirty four thousand
Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Falces, of the house of Peralta, has his Mansion house in
Mansilla, and his estate in Nauarra: his rents are eight thousand Ducats a
year.

The Marquis of Aytona, of the house of Moneada and Cardona; holds his chief
mansion in Valentia, and his estate in the said Kingdom, his rents are thirty
thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Delualle, of the house and family of Fernan cortes, his house
is in Mesico, in the West Indies, and his estate lies in Noua Hispania, new
Spain, his rents are seventy thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Fromista, of the lineage of Enrriques; his house is in Fromista*
his estate in Campos; His rents are ten thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Cerralbo, of the house of Toledo, and Pachecos, has his
mansion house in Cerralbo, and his estate in old Castilla: his rents are ten
thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Ardales and Algaua, of the house of Guzmanes, has his house
and estate in Seuill: and his rents are thirty fix thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of P^obera, of the house of Sandas, has his mansion house in
Salamanca, and his estate in old Castilla, his rents are six thousand Ducats
a year.

The Marquis of Veteta, of the house of Cardenas his house is in Lerena, and
his estate in Estremadora: his rents are fifte^ne thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Alcanisas, of the house of Manrriques and Almansas; has his
house in Alcanises, and his estate in old Castilla: his rents are fifteen
thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Auila-Fuente, of the house of Cunigat, has his house in
Auila-Fuente, and his estate in old Castilla* his rents are eighteen thousand
Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Mota, of the house of V^^oas, has his house and estate in
Toro, and his rents are sixteen thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Villa Manrriques, of the house of Sunig^s, his whole estate is
in old Castilla: and his rents are twelve thousand Ducats a year,

The Marquis of Lansarote, Lord of Fuerte-Ventura, of the house of Roj^as and
Herreras his house and estate are in the Canarias: his rents six thousand
Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Aum^n, of the house of Velascos and Herrer^^, has his house in
Aunion, and his estate in Castilla, his rents are two and twenty thousand
Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Guadalcazar, of the house of Cordouas, has both his house and
estate in Andalusia: and his rents are ten thousand Ducats a year.

Late Ambassador in England lately dead.
The Marquis of Ynojosa, of the lineage of the Mendosas, has his house in
Madrid, and his estate in Gastilla: and his rents are twenty thousand Ducats a
year.

The Marquis of Villar, of the lineage of Pimenteles and Suniga, has his house
and estate in Gast^lla: and his rents are six and twenty thousand Ducats a
year.

The Marquis of Iodar, of the house of Carana jales, he has his house in
Iodar, and his estate in Andalusias: his rents are ten thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Salinas, of the house of Velascos, has his house in Madrid,
and his estate in the Indies: his rents are fifty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of the Valles, of the house Acunia, has his house and estate in
old Castilla, and his rents are sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Flores de Auila, of the house of Cunigas, has his house in
Salamanca, and his estate in old Castilla: his rents are eight thousand Ducats
a year.

The Marquis of Pobar, of the house of Auilas and Guzmanes, has his house and
estate in Andalusia* and his rents are sixteen thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Pardos, of the house of Cerdas, has his house in Toledo, his
estate in Castilla, and his rents are thirty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Mirabel, of the house of Auilas, has his house in Placencia,
and his estate in Placencia: his rents are fourteen thousand Ducats a a
year.

The Marquis of Guardia, of the house of Meijas, his house is in Guardia, and
his estate in Andalusia: his rents are thirty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Almacan, Earl of Monteagudo, has his house in Almacan, and
his estate in old Castilla: his rents are thirty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Moya of the house of Pachecos, and Lord of the houses of the
Soid* has his house in Valentia, and his estate in Cuenca: his rents are
sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Fuente, of the house of Sandobal, has his whole estate in
Andalusia: and his rents are ten thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Laguna, of the house of Cerdas, has his whole estate in Leon;
and his rents are twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis Calanda, of the house of Alasones, in Arragon: his rents are four
thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Nauarres, This Marquis is now a Grande and the chief of the
order of Montessa.
of the house of Borjas, has his house and estate in Valentia: and his rents
are twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Almenara, Earl of Cocentana, his house and estate are in
Valentia and Castilla: his rents are twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Villamicar, of the house of Rojas, and Sandobal, his rents are
twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Loriana, his house is in Auila, and his estate in Castilla, and
his rents are worth ten thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Orani, of the lineage of Silu^^, his whole estate is in Cardena,
and his rents are ten thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Tabara, of the house of Pimenteles, has his house in
Valladolid, and his estate in Castilla: his rents are worth sixeteene thousand
Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Ielbes, of the house of Pimenteles, his whole estate is in
Castilla* and his rents are twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Malagon, Earl of Villa Lonso, of the house of Vlloas, his
house is in Zero, and his estate in Castilla* his rents are six and thirty
thousand Ducats a year.

The Earls of Spain, which are Grandes.
THe Earl of Salinas and Ribadeo, Duke of Villa, Franca, of the lineage of
Silbas: has his house in Madrid, and his estate in Galicia, Vizcaya and
Naples: his rentes are thirty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Aguilar, Lord of Cameros, of the house of Arelanos: has his
house in Aguilar, his estate in Rioja, and his rents are fifteen thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl Aranda, of the house of Burrcas, has his house in Saragosa, and his
estate in Aragon: his rents are thirty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Almenara, in Valentia, his rents are six thousand Ducats a
year.

The Earl of Alcaudete, of the house of Cordouas, has his house in Alcaudete,
and his estate in the Kingdom of Cordoua: his rents are eighteen thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Alba^da, of the house of Milanes, in Valentia, his rents are six
thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Aymon, of the house of Cordouas and Leon, has his house in
Cordoua, and his estate in Granada: his rentes are six thousand Ducats a
year.

The Earl of Debelchite, of the house of Ysares, has his house in Valentia,
and his estate in Arragon: his rents are eight thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Castellar, head of the house of Sahabedras, his house and estate
are in Seuill: and his rents are sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Castro, of the house of Mendosas, has his house in Castro, and
his estate in old Castilla: his rents are twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Cifuentes, of the house of Siluas, has his house in Toledo, and
his estate in Alcarria: his rents are eight thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Chi^chion, head of the house of Bouadillas, has his house and
estate in Tolledo: and his rents are forty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Corunina, of the house of Mendosas, has his house in
Guadalaxara, and his estate in Alcarria: his rents are ten thousand Ducats a
year.

The Earl of Fuensalida, Marquis of Val^arrota, of the house of Ayalas, he
has his house in Toledo, and his estate in that Kingdom Estremadura and
Andalusia, his rents are seventy thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Gelbes, of the house of Portugals, has his house in Seuill, and
his estate in Castilla: his rents are ten thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Gomera of Ayales, Suares, and Castilla, his house and estate are
in the Canaries: his rents are fourteen thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Guirra, of the house of Pachecos and Castillas, has his house
and estate in new Castilla: his rents are six thousand Ducats a year.

Or chief post Master.
The Earl of Villamediana, of the house of Tarsis, Correo Mayor. Has his house
in Valladolid, his estate in Andalusia, and his rents are fourscore thousand
Ducats a year with his office.

The Earl of Fuentes, of the house of Heredias, his house is in Caragosa, and
his estate in Arragon, his rents are eight thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Medillen of the house of Portocarreros, has his house in
Medillen, and his estate in Estremadura: his rents are thirty thousand Ducats
a year.

The Earl of Ciruela, of the house of Velascos has his house in Rea, his
estate in old Castilla, and Andalucia: his rents are fourteen thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Morata, of the house of Lunas, has his house in Caragosa, his
estate in Arragon: his rents are eight thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Casarubios of the house of Chazones, has his house and estate in
Toledo: and his rents are sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Onate, of the house of Guebaras, has his house in Onate, and his
estate in Guipuzcoa: his rents are eighteen thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Puebl^, of Maestre, of the house of Cordonas, his house is in
Lerena, and his estate in Estremadura: his rents are sixteen thousand Ducats
a year.

The Earl of Orgaz of the house of Ayalas and Mendosas, has his house in
San-tollala and his estate in the kingdom of Toledo and Vizcaya: his rents are
eighteen thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Palma, of the house of Portocarreros has his house in Hecija,
and his estate in the Kingdom of Cordeba: his rents are fourteen thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Pliego, of the house of Carrillos, has his house in Guadalaxara,
and his estate in Cuenca, his rents are eight thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Punio en rostro, of the house of Arias, has his house in Madrid,
and his estate in the Kingdom of Toledo: his rents are twenty thousand Ducats
a year.

The Earl of Paredes, of the house of Manrriques, has his house in Paredes,
and his estate in old Castilla: his rents are sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Salazar, of the house of Relascos, has his whole estate in old
Castilla; and his rents are twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Ribadabia, of the house of Mendosas, has his house in
Valladolid, and his estate in Galicia: his rents are ten thousand Ducats a
year.

The Earl of Sastago, of the house of Arragon, has his house in Caragosa, and
his estate in Arragon: his rents are sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Santisteuan, chief of the house of Venauides, has his house in
Vbeda, and his estate in Gaen: his rents are fifteen thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Galues, of the house of Cerda^, has his house and his estate in
Galicia: and his rents are six thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Varajas, head of the house of Sapatas, has his house in Madrid,
and his estate in Aquella-Comarca: his rents are thirty thousand Ducats a
year.

The Earl of Nieua, of the house of Enrriquez, has his house in Nieua, and
his estate in old Castilla: his rentes are twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Ayamor and Fernandina, Duke of Villa Real in the Kingdom of
Naples: and of the house of Diaquez: has his house and his estate in Vizcaya:
and his rents are twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Lodosa, of the house of Mendozas and Nauarros, has his whole
estate in Nauarra: and his rents are nine thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Cantillana, of the house of Vicentelos, has his house in Ceuill,
and his estate in Andalusia: and his rents are twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Aninober, of the house of Leyuas, has his mansion or chief
dwelling house in Toledo, and his estate in old Castilla: his rents are eight
thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Castrillo, of the house of Abellanedas, has his house in Aranda,
and his estate in old Castilla: and his rents are ten thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Villa-nueua of Anuedo, of the house of Vlloas, has his whole
estate in old Castilla: and his rents are eight thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Arcos, of the house of Figueroas and Mendosa, has his whose
estate in that Kingdoms of Toledo and Andalusia, his rents are twenty thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Puebla and Montalban, of the house of Tells and Girones, has
his house in Puebla, and his estate in Toledo: his rents are twenty thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Baylen, of the house of Ponces of Leon, has his house in Baylen,
and his estate in Andalusia: his rents are twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Osor^^, of the house of Manrriques, has his house in Osorno, and
his estate in old Castilla: his rents are sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Graxal, of the house of Vegas, has his house in Graxal, and his
estate in Campos: his rents are twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Villamor, of the house of Albarados, has his house in Madrid,
and his estate in Castilla: his rents are two and twenty thousand Ducats a
year.

The Earl of Villauor, of the house of Guzmanes, has his house and estate in
Castilla: and his rents are twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Villaflor of the house of Enriques, has his whole estate in
Castilla: and his rents are eight thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Fuenti-duenia of the house of Lunas, has his house in
Fuenti-duenia, and his estate in old Castilla: his rents are twelve thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Fuensaldana, of the house of Viueros and Lunas, has his house in
Valladolid: and his estate in old Castilla: his rents are ten thousand Ducats
a year.

The Earl is now a Grande of Spain.
The Earl of Mayalden, Prince of Esquilache, of the house of Borjas, has his
whole estate in the Kingdom of Naples: and his rents are thirty thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Fuente elsauco of the house of Dezas, has his house and estate
in Toro: and his rents are twelve thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Salba-tierra of the house of Ayalas and Sarmientos; has his
whole estate in Galicia: and his rents are sixeteene thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Villa-alba of the house of Ayalas, has his house and estate in
Toledo: and his rents are twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Gondomar, of the house of Sarmientos and Acunia: has his house
and estate in Galicia, and his rents are nine thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Penaranda, of the house Bracamonte; has his house in Penaranda,
and his estate in old Castilla, his rents are eight thousand Ducats a year.

The Earl of Villa-longa, of the house of Franquesa; has his house in
Villa-longa, and his estate in old Castilla; his rents are six thousand
Ducats a year.

The Earl of Villar, of the house of Torres, and Portugal: has his house in
Ia^n, and his estate in the same Province: his rents are nine thousand Ducats
a year.

The Constables of Spain.
1. THE Constable of Castilla, the Duke of Frias. 2. The Constable of Arragon,
the Duke of Cardona. 3. The Constable of Nauarra, the Duke of Alba. 4. The
Constable of Naples, Earl of Paliano.
The certainty of their means, in respect of their offices and privileges is
not known and therefore cannot well be truly determined; but they are
thought to exceed the Admiralls in all respects both of Dignities, Privileges
and revenues of their offices.

The Admiralls of Spain.
THe Duke of Medina of Rioseco, Admiral of Castilla, his revenues of office
are five and twenty thousand Ducats a year.

2. The brother to the Duke of Infantado, Bishop of Siguen^a, is Admiral of
Aragon, his office is valued at eighteen thousand Ducats a year.

3 The Admiral of Valentia, his estate and revenues by office are valued at
sixteen thousand Ducats a year.

4 The Duke of Beraguas, Admiral of the Indies, his estate and revenues by
office are valued at twenty thousand Ducats a year.

The Lords Lieutenants or Presidents of Spain, commonly called Adelantados.
1. THe Duke of Lerma and Zea Adelantado, or Lord Lieutenant of Castilla, his
revenues of office are worth six thousand Ducats a year.

2. The Duke of Alcala-Adelantado of Andalusia, his office is valued at eight
thousand Ducats a year.

The Marquis of Velez-Adelantado of Murcia, his office is worth seven thousand
Ducats a year.

The Cardinal and Arch bishop of Toledo-Adalantado of Cacorla, his revenues
are included in his Arch-Bishoppricke, as appertaining to the same.

The Adelantado of Galicia, his revenues by office are six thousand Ducats a
year.

The Prince of Asculi, Adelantado of Canuria his place by office is valued at
four thousand Ducats a year.

Vicountes of Spain and the value of their Lordships, of which they are
Vicounts.
OF Toriza, at four thousand Ducats a year. Of Peralta, at four thousand
Ducats a year. Of Rosa, and Earl of Aranda, at six thousand Ducats a
year. Of Sol, Vicount of Castros, at eight thousand Ducats a year. Of
Disnajar, and Duke of Sesar, at eight thousand Ducats a year.
Archbishops and Bishops of Spain, and their yearly Demeanes.
FIrst, the Infanto Don Ferdinando; third brother to the King of Spain, is
Cardinal of Toledo, Primate and Metropolitan of all Spain, and next unto the
Pope, thought to be the greatest Prelate in all Christendom for wealth and
Dignities: insomuch that his Revenues are thought to be worth not so little,
as four hundred thousand Ducats a year.

Don Alphonso, in his time of reigning did Conquer Toledo, with the sword from
the Moors, in the year 1083, and was the first King that established this
A^ch-Bishoprick, in this great state and estate; and since his time, it has
been much enriched by the large bounty of Kings and many Noble men of Spain,
insomuch that now besides the Primacie, and Chauncery of Castilla; it has
been in great Credit and authority throughout all Europe, and is served with
fourteen Dignities and Channons, with Prebends: Fifty Portionists and other
extraordinary Channons, besides Chaplains, Priests, Clearks, Chaunters, and
other Officers that have stipends or fees, at the least six hundred. Besides
it is exceeding rich in Plate.

The Archbishop of Seuill, his estate is valued at a hundred thousand Ducats a
year.
Of Sant-Iago, at fourscore thousand Ducats a year. Of Valentia at fifty
thousand Ducats a year. Of Granada, at seven and twenty thousand Ducats a
year. Of Burgos, at forty thousand Ducats a year. Of Saragosa, at thirty
thousand Ducats a year. Of Taragona, at five and thirty thousand Ducats a
year.
Bishops within the Precincts and Jurisdiction of Toledo, Their yearly
Revenues.
THE Bishop of Guenca is worth in estate fifty thousand Ducats a yea^e.

Of Siguenta, at fifty thousand Ducats a year. Of Osma, at thirty thousand
Ducats a year. Of Cordoba, at forty thousand Ducats a year. Of Iaen, at
twenty thousand Ducats a year. Of Segou^a, at six and twenty thousand
Ducats a year. Of Auila, at four and twenty thousand Ducats a year.
Of Seuill.
THe Bishop of Malaga, his estate is worth thirty thousand Ducats a year.

Of Cadiz, at fifteen thousand Ducats a year. Of Canar^a, at twelve thousand
Ducats a year.
Of Granada.
THE Bishop of Almeria, is worth six thousand Ducats a year.

Of Guadix, at eight thousand Ducats a year.
Of Valentia.
THe Bishop of Cartagena, is worth ten thousand Ducats a year.

Of Origuela, at eight thousand Ducats a year. Of Segorbe, at ten thousand
Ducats a year. Of Balbastro, at six thousand Ducats a year.
Of Burgos.
THe Bishop of Caloborra, is worth twenty thousand Ducats a year.

Of Palentia, at sixeteene thousand Ducats a year. Of Pamplona, at thirty
thousand Ducats a year.
Bishops within the Precincts and Jurisdiction of San-Diago, Their yearly
Revenues.
THE Bishop of Coria, is worth four and twenty thousand Ducats a year.

Of Astorga, at twelve thousand Ducats a year. Of Samora, at twenty thousand
Ducats a year. Of Salamanca, at twenty thousand Ducats a year. Of Oriense,
at eight thousand Ducats a year. Of Tuy, at four thousand Ducats a year.
Of Vadajoz, at six thousand Ducats a year. Of Lugo, at eight thousand
Ducats a year. Of Ciudad-Rodrigo, at twelve thousand Ducats a year.
Of Taragona.
THe Bishop of Lerida, is worth ten thousand Ducats a year.

Of Tortosa, at fourteen thousand Ducats a year. Of Barcelona, at eight
thousand Ducats a year. Of Girona, at twelve thousand Ducats a year. Of
Vrgel, at seven thousand Ducats a year. Of Viqui, at five thousand Ducats a
year.
Of Caragosa.
THe Bishop of Taragona, is worth six thousand Ducats a year.

Of Iaca, at eight thousand Ducats a year. Of Guesca, at ten thousand Ducats
a year. Of Valuastro, at nine thousand Ducats a year. Of Albacarin, at six
thousand Ducats a year.
These following are exempted and free of themselves.
THe Bishop of Leon, is worth fourteen thousand Ducats a year.

Of Obiedo, four and twenty thousand Ducats a year. Of Vallodelid, at
fourteen thousand Ducats a year.
The Bishoppricke of Placentia although it fall vacant in the Popes month of
Election, yet not withstanding it is at the Kings disposure: where ye are to
note that the King of Spain, and the Pope, do divide the year b^tweene them
by Monthly course, for the donation of Bishoppricks and other Spiritual
livings: but yet this of all the rest is excepted to be only in the Kings
gift, although it happen to fall void in the Popes month.

Now upon the election of any Bishop, either by the King or the Pope, the said
Bishop must enter into bond to pay such yearly pensions as he shall be
appointed by the King or the Pope, which of themsoeuer give his Bishoppricke.

These Pensions do most commonly amount unto a third part of the Bishops
yearly revenues, and must be paid to such persons as they shall think fitting
to receive the same.

These Pensioners must be apparrelled in black, and unmarried, and so must
continue: some of them are of Gentle birth, and education, and must ^e well
disposed to Pie^y, and Religion, upon which approbation they are admitted.

Knights of the Noble Order of the Golden-Fleece.
PHilip, Duke of Burgundy, and Earl of Flaunders, was the first Institutor of
this order, in the tenth year of his Dukedom, upon an oath which he had taken
to wage war with the Infidells of Siria, and to conquer Jury.

This said order had (for Patron and Protector) Saint Andrew; and the
remembrance of this Order was and is to be solemnized for the space of three
days together once every year.

The first day of which solemnity the Knights of that order were to be
apparelled with Scarlet, or red colored Robes, in token that Heaven is
purchased by effusion of blood and Martyrdom.

The second day they were to be clothed in black, representing mourning for
the defunct, which have dyed in the wars.

The third day they were to be clad with White Vestures, in honor of the
purity of the Virgin Mary.

These Knights (to show that they are distinguished from other orders of
Knighthood) do wear a Chain of Gold made after the fashion of Fuzells, with
a Fleece Ram, hanging at it.

The King of Spain, is chief of this Order, as he is head of the house of
Burgundy.

There are four and twenty Knights in number of the said order, which are
Princes of the most Noble families, in Burgundy, Spain, Flaunders and
Netherlands.

In Spain, Charles the Kings Brother and the Duke of Alba, The Duke of Osuna,
the Duke of Arcos, The Duke of Escalona, The Duke of Medina, Sidonia, The Duke
of B^jar, the Duke of Cardona, and the Marquis of Pescara and Bastos.

In Italy, Marquis Spinola, and other noble Princes.

In Germany, Diverse of the house of Austria, and other Princes, as the Duke
of Bauaria, and the Duke of Nubourke.

In Flaunders, the Duke of Ascott, and some others.

Knights of the Order of Saine James.
THe Master and chief of this Order, is the King of Spain, as annexed to his
Crown, and he is the only perpetual Governor and administrator of the same
order.

The original cause of the institution of this Order, was, to secure those
which went in Pilgrimage to Santiago in Galicia, who in former times had been
much oppressed and molested by the Moors. Also the Nobility of Spain, did
join with the Monks of Saint Augustine, for the establishing of that Order:
and they did get it Confirmed by Pope Alexander, Anno. 1175. The principal
agent for the obteining of this Confirmation was Pedro Fernandes de Puente O
Fuente Calada, who afterward was Master of the said Order.

This order has ninety four Lord-ships, or Dignities belonging to it of
different reueneues, but in all they are worth three hundred thousand Ducats a
year.

These Dignities are bestowed (upon certain Knights of the said Order) (by the
King) according to his favor, and their deserts.

The Patron of this Order is Santiago, and they are governed by the rule of
Saint Augustine.

The badge by which the Knights of this Order are known, is a Cross made of
red Velvet in the fashion of a sword.

When any Knight of this Order, is Enstalled, it is performed with great
solemnity; the Master of the Order, inuesting him with a white Robe (or his
deputy in his absence) and giving unto him a Sword, the rest of the Knights
always giving their attendance at the performance of such acts.

This is done at some Church or religious House, belonging to the Patron of the
same Order.

These Knights (in case of necessity) are bound to serve their King in the
Wars seven years, upon his Majesty's command, and so are the Knights of all
other Orders.

Knights of the Order of Calatraua.
OF this Order his Majesty of Spain is head, as he is of the Order aforesaid.

To this Order, do belong fifty Lordships or dignities: but in regard some of
them are but of small alowance, two of them are joined together, so that now
they are bestowed but upon five and thirty persons: the yearly revenues of
all do amount unto a hundred and twenty thousand Ducats a year; and they
observe the rule of Saint Benedict as their Patron. This order had its
beginning, Anno, 1158 in the time of the King Don Sancho the desired.

The badge whereby these Knights are known, is a red Cross with a wauing or
cheuerne circle about it.

Knights of the Order of Alcantara.
THE King is likewise Master of this Order and unto it are belonging eight and
fifty Lordshippes and Dignities: but because some of them are united two in
one, there are but one and forty of them: they are worth a hundred thousand
Ducats a year: and they do also observe the Order of Saint Benedict as their
Patron.

This Order had its beginning in the year, 1212. When the King of Leon, did
win the City of Alcantara, from the Moors, he gave it to the Knights of this
Order to defend the same.

This Order had its adoption or filiation from that of Calatraua, but since
they were exempt from it by a Bull, from Po^e Iulio the second.

The badge whereby these Knights are distinguished from them of Calatraua, is,
in that these wear a green Cross in fashion, but not in color like to that
of Calatraua, because that is red.

His Majesty of Spain, is perpetual administratour of these three aforesaid
Orders. Now the benefit of these three Mastershipps of the aforesaid Orders,
the King often lets them to the Fucares, (the great Merchants of Spain,) for
three hundred thousand Ducats a year, which goes into his own purse.
Moreover, these said Fucares, are to pay unto those which are professed Knights
of these Orders and have no dignity, to each of them twelve thousand Marauedis
yearly, to buy them bread and water. This authority is confirmed to the King
by the Popes Apostolical Bull.

Knights of the Order of Christ
THe King himself and the Duke of Beragansa, are the Chief heads of this
Order, unto which belong fourteen Lordships or Dignities, by estimation worth
four and twenty thousand Ducats a year and more.

This order had its beginning in the year 1320. and was both approved of, and
established by the authority of Pope John's Bull, and in the year 1323. the
demeanes and revenues thereof were increased and bettered by the King Don
Manuel.

The Knights of this Order, do acknowledge only Christ, to be their supreme
Patron and Protector: but under him the Pope, and the King as his Vicegerent.

The Badge these Knights wear, is a red Cross, with a white line, drawn
through the middle of both parts of it.

Knights of the Order of Montesa in Valentia.
THE Chief of this Order, is the Marquis of Nauarres: and unto this Order
belong thirteen Lordships or Dignities, which are estimated to be worth twenty
thousand Ducats a year. This Order is much decayed in respect of what it has
been: thy follow the rule of Saint Benedict, and it was confirmed by Pope
Benedict the thirteenth.

Knights of the Order of Saint John.
THe Chief of this Order, is the great Master of the Island of Malta, and the
Knights of this Order have for their Revenues (with the Priorates) eight
hundred thousand Ducats a year, in demeanes unto them apperteining, their
Lordshipps are, 134.

A Scedule of the Offices of which the King of Spain allows his Privy
Counsel to dispose of, as in their own Donation.
THE Viceroy of Naples. The Viceroy of Sicilia. The Viceroy of Arragon. The
Viceroy of Valentia. The Viceroy of Portugal. The Viceroy of Nauarra. The
Viceroy of Sardinia. The Viceroy of Peru. The Viceroy of Mexico. The Viceroy of
the East Indies. The viceroy of Catalunia. Generalissimo of the Sea. General
of the Galleys of Naples. General of the Galleys of Genoua. General of the
Horse of Spain. General of the Artillery of Spain. General of the Horse of
Flaunders. General of the Artillery of Flaunders. General of the Horse of
Millan. General of the Hombres, or Men at Arms of Millan General of the
plate Galleones. General of the Fleetes. Admiral of the Fleets. General of
the galleys of Sicilie. General of the galleys of Portugal. General of the
galleys of Catalunia. Campmaster general of Spain. Campmaster general of
Flaunders. Campmaster general of Portugal. Governor of Millain, with the
title of Generalissimo. Governor of Galicia, with the title of General.
General of the forces of the lower Palatinate. Governor of Oran, in Afric.
Governor of Alarache. Governor of Mammora. Governor of Brasi^l.
Governors of diverse places in the East and West Indies, and Islands, in the
Ocean and Mediterranean Sea, and other Frontiers in Barbary.

Governors of the strong Castles of the Spaniards in Flaunders viz. Antwerp,
Gaunt, and Cambray, with diverse other petty governments throughout the King of
Spain his Dominions.

Ambassadors.
THe King of Spain his Ambassador at Rome.

The Ambassador in Germany. The Ambassador in England. The Ambassador in
France. The Ambassador in Flaunders. The Ambassador in Venice. The
Ambassador in Genoua. The Ambassador in Sauoy. The Ambassador in Florence.
Besides these Ambassadors he has diverse others Agents in Germany, and
elsewhere.

Also the Council have the choosing of Spia Mayor, or grand Spy, which is a
place of Dignity in Spain.

All these places and offices of worth, Dignity, and eminence, are (by the
Kings permission) in the power and donation, (upon Consultation) of the
Council of State: but the rest which do not principally concern the State,
they are referred to the Council of War, to the Council of Italy, the
Council of the Indies, the Council of Portugal, the Council of Navarre, the
Council of Arragon, the Council of Galicia, which are all depending on the
Council of State.

There are certain other Councels, which are not subordinate to the Council
of State, but are absolutely subsisting of themselves, by virtue of their own
authority, as

First, the Council of Inquisition. The President of which is called the grand
Inquisitor, and most commonly is the Kings Confessor, and by his order a
Dominican Friar.

This Council is rather superior then inferior, to the Council of State for
they determine matters of themselves (Concerning matters of Religion) without
imploring the assistance of the Kings prerogative) only acknowledging the Popes
supremacy as Christ's Vicar-generall.

Next unto this is the Council royal of Castilla, on Court Royal of Justice:
The President of which Court in many respects (as the equity of Causes
requires) is equal with the King.

He has continual insight, into the government of Spain, and has full power
and authority in himself to rectify and reform by Iustitiary correction, any
delinquent that shall transgress against the laws of the Kingdom.

Moreover if any Magistrate, or any others that bear office in the Kingdom
(upon Complaint made unto him, and sent for by virtue of his warrant) be found
faulty in the administration of Justice; it is in his power to punish the
Magistrate, or Officer according to his delict and offense in that behalf.

There are subordinate to this Counsel, the Chaunceries of Valladolid and
Granada, and the Audi^ncia, or Court of Justice in Seuill: and moreover it has
the ordination of threescore and odd Corrigidores, or governors of Provinces,
Cities, and Towns in Spain. In a word, it is a Council of the greatest
privilege and authority in Spain, and therefore the King preferres none to
be President of that Council, but such a one as he is well assured of his
Loyal allegiance to himself; and his fidelity and uprightness of Conscience
in the Administration of Justice, for the good and tranquillity of his Common
weal.

The next is the Council of Camera, or the Kings Priuie-Chamber, which
Council by the Kings special direction and license withal, have the
privilege to dispose of, and bestow all Churchliuings, which are in the Kings
gift, as Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, Denaries, Rectories, etc. The King
himself having the same authority from the Pope of Rome.

Also the Council of Orders, which do only treat of the several orders of
Knighthood, and their Privileges, and likewise have power and authority to
question and decide Controversies, if there be any such occurrences between
the said Knights of Orders.

Next is the Council of Hacienda, commonly called the Kings Exchequer.

Next the Council of accounts, which do only meddle with the Kings R^uenues,
Rents, and Subsidies.

Also the Council of Crusada, commonly called the Popes Bull, by virtue of
authority whereof, in the Popes name the King of Spain, does yearly send out
a privilege throughout his kingdom of Spain, that the inhabitants therein
from the age of seven years to threescore, shall have free leave and liberty
to eat grossura, that is gross meats, viz. livers, lights, necks, and such
like parts of any kind of flesh; on Saterdayes all the year long, and
likewise Whitemeates in Lent, as butter, Cheese, Milk, Eggs, and the like;
and upon all fasting days throughout the year: Also by virtue of the said
Bull they obtain diverse Pardons, Indulgences, and grace^ from the Pope, for
one whole year: and so from year to year: paying for the same dispensation
yearly to the King, one shilling in silver: all this the Pope gives to the
King, as an extraordinary token of his loving favor to him: the sum in all
amounting to above two Millions of Ducats a year. All this the aforesaid
Council does order; and receive the said Moneys from the Collectors thereof to
the Kings use.

Lastly, the Council of Descargos called the Council of discharge, does at
the death of any King of Spain, treat of the Kings debts (if he owes any)
and likewise, they do take care to see the last Will and Testament of the said
deceased King performed.

Privileges of some of the Nobility of Spain.
THe Duke of Igar, does every New-yeares day dine with the King, by virtue of
his privilege granted to that Posterity, by the former Kings of Castilla; as
a requital of their good service done in the Wars against the Moors: and
likewise he is to have the same suit of apparel that the King wears the
same day.

The Duke of Arcos, is to have the same suit the King wears upon our Lady day
in September, although he be not that day at the Court.

The Marquis of Villena, is to have the Cup the King drinks in every twelfe
day, if he be then at Court.

The Countess of Cabra, as customary and by right of privilege due unto her,
is to have yearly the same apparel that the Queen wears upon Easter day:
Thirty four Marauedis, makes Sixepen^^ English.
or else fifty thousand Marauedis in lue of it.

The Countess of Palma, has the same privilege upon our Lady day in
September.

The Earl of Oropesa, by his place is to bear the Kings naked sword before
him throughout all the Kingdom of Castilla, upon occasion of Parllaments,
public acts or meetings: and in the Kingdom of Arragon, the Earl of
Sastago enioyes the same privilege: but in their absence, the Master of the
Kings Horse is to perform the same office.

Amongst the Grandes of Spain, Next unto the President of Castilla, who takes
his place always next to the King.
there is no precedence of place in public acts, but only the Constable of
Spain is to have the first place, and next unto him the Admiral, and the rest
(according to our English Proverb) first come, first served.

The Admiral of Castilla, (when he has any occasion to go to the Council
Royal) has his sword by his side; which is not lawful for any of the Grandes
to do besides himself, and the President of the said Council places him on
his left hand.

The Duke of Medina-Coeli, his privilege is every year upon Twelfe day to
petition to the King by way of clayming right and title to the Kingdom of
Castilla, as heir apparent to the same, which his Majesty graciously
receives, and gives answer in these words, We hear you: and so referres it
to the Council Royal of Castilla, where it rests without any further
proceedings.

The libertyes of the Province of Biscaj, have this privilege that when the
King in progress, or upon any other occasion comes into the same, he is to
have one foot bare, and his only style of that Province is Lord of Biscaj, and
not King.

Likewise the Nobility and Gentry, of the said Province, are not to be
a^tainted nor attached upon any crime, or default, but by virtue of a warrant
under his Majesty's own hand.

The Privileges of the Constables of Spain are these.
IF in former times there happened any difference betwixt party and party,
either concerning Religion, or Public affairs, the parties at Controversy
were to try themselves in the cause by dint of Sword (the King himself being
present) and the Constable was only to be Judge in the cause, as it happened
in Seuill, in the time of the Catholic King Ferdinando and Elizabeth his
Queen, betwixt two in Combat: of which Don Ferdinandes of Vellasco was Judge.

Also when there is any open war in Spain, and that the King gives battle,
the Constable in his own person is to be in the for front of the army, and
to lead them in the field, and upon a retreat he is to bring off the rear,
although in former times the Lords of Biscaj had the same place: and after them
the Masters of Santiago, bu^ now it only and properly belongs to the Constables
of Spain.

Moreover the Constable in time of War is to quarter the army for their
lodging, and likewise to prize the victuals for the Camp; for assistance
wherein he is to appoint certain Marshalls and other officers to see the same
performed.

Also all Proclamations do issue forth in the name of the King and his
Constable, which privilege none of the Nobility have but himself.

Also the said Constable in time of War has his Kings at Arms, Heralds,
and Sargeans at Arms; and he himself may wear an Estoque or Tucke, which
none else wear but the King: and for his fee he is to have one days pay in a
Month throughout the whole Army of Soldiers: and this Money is paid by the
King out of his own purse, and not by the Soldiers.

Also* the Constable although he be neither Duke nor Earl, yet he may wear
a Coronet in his Scutcheon of arms, by virtue of the privilege of his place.

Lastly, Which none has but himself.
Oliuares the Kings Favorite has this by right of privilege from the King,
that if any of his Majesty's servants have any occasion to speak with him,
they must kneel; and most commonly they have access to him as he lies in
his bed.

The Order which the King observes in his Chapel, and the Government thereof.
NOne are to sit with their Hatts on in the Kings Chapel but Grandes,
Bishops, Ambassadors of Kings: and of Sauoy and Venice; together with the
Chaplains of Honor, and his Majesty's Preachers.

At the right hand of the High-Altar, there is a Bench covered with Carpets,
standing close to the wall, which affronts the body of the Church, upon which
form or bench the Bishops have their places when they are present at Service.

Near unto the Altar (on the same side) is placed a fair Cannopie with
Curtains, in which the Kings Chair is set, having a short form or stool
before him, with a Cusheon to lean upon, as also upon the ground to kneel
upon, but first there is a Carpet spread upon the ground, which are all suitable
to the color, of the color of the Altar, unless the King mourns.

Next to the Kings curtain is set a stool covered with Velvet, whereon the
Lord high Steward of the Kings house sits, (with his hat on) although he be no
Grande: and behind him do stand two archers of the Guard.

A little lower on the same side is a long bench covered with velvet or
tapestrie for the Grandes to sit upon.

On the left hand of the High-Altar stands a Cathedral chair for the Kings
chief Chaplayne, which chair also serves for ^he Bishopps (which celebrate
Mass) to be invested in.

Right over against the Kings feate is a rich chair of State, placed for the
Popes Nuncio if he be a Cardinal: if he be none then either Cardinal Sapata,
or Cardinal Spinola, possess that place being present.

Next unto this is a long form covered with velvet for the Popes Nu^tio, (if
he be not a Cardinal) and the Ambassadors from other Countries, and before
them is set another form covered with velvet for them to lean upon when they
kneel.

Below this are two long forms standing one before another, and reaching
almost to the end of the Chapel; and these are also covered with velvet for
the Chaplains of Honor to sit upon with their Surplesses, and the Kings
Preachers to sit upon with their heads covered.

Behind these forms next to the wall stand the Nobility (which are not
Grandes) and Gentry with their heads uncovered, amongst whom do stand the
reteiners to the Ambassadors.

Near unto the Kings Canopie, do stand two Deanes of the Chapel, and
Masters of Ceremonies; who are to give notice to the Dignity that celebrates
Mass; to carry the Gospel and Pax to the King to kiss, which when they are
brought, the curtains are drawn: and before the Dignity (which brings
these to the King) do walk four Stewards or Controulers, with their staves
in their hands, and so conducting him in the same manner to the Altar again,
return to their places behind the Ambassadors where they stand.

The King does oftentimes give way to his Brother to sit with him under the
Canopie: and also to some one of the Bloud-Royall, who is near allied unto him
to sit in a back chair behind his: who also has the honor of kissing the
Gospel and Pax, with the King and his brother.

At the lower end of the Chapel ^ight against the High-Altar are four
tribunalls or casements one above another in order.

In the lowest the Queen sits to hear Mass being accompanied with her
children, Infantes of Spain, the Ladies of Honor, and others her attendants.

This her Casement or Tribunal is made so close that she may see, and yet not
be seen as she sits in it.

In the second Tribunal next above the Queens, made in form and fashion like
to the first, there are certain forms on which the Nobility and Gentry take
their places, where they may sit covered, because it is not accounted as part
of the Chapel.

In the other two above these, do sit the Ladies and others of the Queens
servants, where also strange Ladies and Gentlewomen, which come to hear Mass
may take their places.

There is no passage to the two uppermost Tribunalls, but through the Queens
quarter.

Yearly upon Twelfe day (in Memorial of the three Kings of the East) the King
offers at the High-Altar, three silver Challices gilt with gold: of which one
is dedicated to the Escuriall, the second remains in the Chapel, and the
third is given to some poor Parish Church at his Majesty's pleasure and
direction.

Likewise it is a Custom in Spain, for the King after the first year of his
Coronation, yearly to offer at the High-Altar so many Crowns as he is years
old, which money is distributed to the poor by his Majesty's Almesmoner.

When the King goes to the Chapel, his guard of Spaniardes, and Germans*
with their Holberts in their hands do make a Guard for his person, from the
Presence to the Chapel: the Spaniards taking the right hand file as the King
goes to the Chapel, and the Germans at his return back.

Now for his order of going to the Chapel, first go the Deanes of the
Chapel, and Masters of the Ceremonies: next unto them the Gentrey of the
Court: then the titulars, and after them the stewards and Controwlers with
staves in their hands, next again unto them go the Grandes two and two
together, then next (if there be any) some of the blood Royal, then the King
and his Brother, or if his brother be absent, and a Cardinal present, he goes
on his left hand. Now in order follow the Popes Nuntio, and the Ambassadors:
and after them the Master of the Horse, the Lord high Steward, and Captain of
the Guard: and last of all the Guard of Archers, or pentioners, follow without
observing any order.

In the same manner likewise the King comes from the Chapel, only the King
(as he comes out) has his hat in his hand, till he comes to the midst of
the Chapel, and then puts it on: which done stepping two paces forward,
speaks to those of the blood Royal (immediately going before him) to be
covered, and going forward two paces more, turns about and bids the
Ambassadors be covered, so going to the Chapel door beckens to the next
Grande unto him, to be covered; which Grande being obseruant with low
obeisance puts on his hatt, and after him all the rest of the Grandees. And so
the King goes to Dinner.

The State of the King, and Queen, at Meals.
Always at Festival times they use to Dine in public.

First, for the Queens Service, her Table is placed at the upper end of the
presence, the place being a Boarded ascent a foot higher, then the other part
of the floor; and over the Table hangs a rich Cannopie of State.

This Table is covered with a Carpet, upon which a Cloth is laid, and upon
this a Leather Carpet, and also a Cloth upon that: at the upper end of the
Table a service is laid for her Majesty, upon the first napkin are two loaves
set, one white, and another somewhat courser, which most Commonly she eats of.

These two loaves are covered with a napkin, and a Plate dish upon that, and
then all is again covered with a wrought Tablecloath of needleworke, her Meat
is brought up in this manner;

First, go before three Corporalls of the three Guards of the Spaniards,
Germans and Burgundians: after them two Seargeants at Arms, with their Mases
of silver, and gilt, in which are ingraued the Arms of Castilla and Leon: next
unto them go four Stewards or Controulers with staves in their hands, and
then the Lord High-Steward with his hatt on; now the first course is brought up
by the Guard, and being brought to the Queens Table the Lord High-Steward
places it thereon: which done the Queen comes out herself, and sitting
down one of the Chaplains says grace, and hereupon there is access
granted to all strangers into the presence, to see her dine, whilst she is
at dinner there are three Ladies of Honor attending upon her person, as they
all do in their daily courses.

One of these Ladies uncovering of the meat dishes, delivers them to a second,
who presents them to the Queen, and if the Queen be silent thereat, the
second Laid delivers the dish of Meat (and so one after another in due order)
unto the third who carues thereof to the Queen, and so gives it to a Minino a
Noblemans son, though somewhat less in person, yet in degree above the
Pages, who carries away the same out of the Presence, which first and second
dishes are most commonly for the Chaplain of Honor, who does weekly wait
in his turn.

These Ladies are richly attired, with towells upon their shoulders. Now if the
Lady aforesaid presents a dish of meat to her Majesty, which she does not
desire to eat of, she lifts up her head, in token she likes it not, and
thereupon it is taken away.

For every dish of meat that the Queen does taste of, she has a clean
trencher and napkin delivered unto her: and the number of dishes does not
exceed above twenty upon a feastiuall day.

When her Majesty has any desire to drink, she beckeneth with her head to
one of the three Ladies then attending, who (understanding her meaning by the
sign) beckens to one of the Mininos to go for it: who presently goes, being
conducted by one of the Controulers, or Stewards, to the presence door, where
he departs from him; and then a Yeoman-vsher attends him to the
Plate-cubboard, where he takes a Glass or Cup of Water, (with a bearing plate
whereon it stands) and returns back to the aforesaid Lady in the same manner
that he went from her; and then the Lady and he do both kneel down to the
Queen; and the Lady taking the bearing plate and Cup in her right hand, and
uncovering the Cup with her two middle fingers of her left hand: and the
bearing plate with her forefinger and thumb of the same hand, holds the Cup or
Glass still in her right hand, pouring forth a little water out of the Cup
into the bearing plate; which she does taste of, and then presents it to the
Que^ne, who drinks thereof which done the Lady with due obey san^^ rising,
takes the Cup from the Queen, covering it in the same manner as before she did
uncover it, and she so d^liuereth it to the Minino, who carries it back in
the same manner he brought it.

The second Course is brought in as the first; with which when the Queen has
ended, her fruit and banquet is in like manner served in by the Mininos, who
deliver it into the Ladies hands to place upon the Table, of which when the
Queen has with content tasted, the Mininos take it away.

Then the Ladies and Mininos take away all but the first cloth that was laid,
and then a Basin and Ewre is brought by one of the Ladies, who powers out the
water while the Queen washes, and one of the Grandes attending with a Towell,
does cast one end of it to the Queen, and so departes, and thus Dinner being
ended, all depart to their own repasts, or Dinners.

But we must note that all the while the Queen is at Dinner all the Grandes
(then present) do stand covered with their backs against the wall, and so do
the Ladies on the other side, which do not for the present attend the Queens
person, each Lord in the mean time courting and conferring with his beloved
Ladies: and likewise the Ladies with their affected Lords; and so the Ladies
that wait, do sometimes take occasion to greet and salute their lovers, whom
they intend to make their Lords and Husbands.

Now all this while Drums are beating, Trumpets Sounding, and loud Music
playing below in the great Court.

The King is served in the same manner of State, Ladies attendants only
excepted, in whose place the Gentiles hombres de La Boca, or Gentlemen-tasters,
do perform their offices: but if the King and Queen dine together then the
attendants wait on both sides.

The order and manner of the Kings and Queens, going abroad in their Coach.
FIrst a little before they go to their Coach, the Drums beat and Trumpets
sound to give notice to the Nobility, and Gentrey at Court, to be ready with
their attendance, then not long after the King and Queen go to their Coach in
this manner.

The Queen goes on the Kings right hand, and before them go the Grooms of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, and the Gentiles hombres de la Boca, or tasters to the
King, with the Stewards, Controulers, and the rest of the officers of his
Majesty's Household with the Mininoes and Pages.

After them, next follow the Lord and Lady hie Chamberlaines, and the Ladies
and Maids of Honor, and at their going into the Coach, one of the Quirries
puts down the Boot, and then going to the Coach side, the King himself arms
the Queen into the Coach, and places her on his right hand; and after going
in himself, is helped in by the Chief Sumillier du Corpse, Gentleman, or
Squire of his body. Sometimes the Kings Brothers and Sisters (being present)
and the Kings chief Favorite do ride in the Coach with them: and the boot
of the Kings Coach being put up again by one of the Quirries: They which
before did attend the King and Queen (going into their Coach) take another
Coach by themselves and ride next before the King; and after the Kings Coach,
does ride the Lady High-Chamberlaine, and other Ladies, and Maids of Honor
in other Coaches, those Noblemen which are the best beloved friends affording
them their willing and ready assi^^ance upon such occasions, which at other
times is not usual with them, neither permitted: After they are all settled in
their Coaches, this order is observed.

First, rides the Captain of the Guard, with a truncheon in his hand and often
without his cloak.

Then follow the two Guardes of Spaniards and Germans, after them the
Stewards, and Masters of the Horse in their Coaches: and next to them the Kings
Coach with six Horses, and his footmen on both sides; and his Pages with
their hats in their hands, en querpo or without cloakes next to the Boot of
the Coach of each side: and oftentimes with their hands upon the same.

After the Kings Coach ride some of the Mininoes on Horseback without Cloakes
also, some two of them each carrying a piece of Taffata for the Kings hat, and
some things of the Queens.

After these follow the Lady Chamberlaines and other Coaches of Ladies, with
their Guardians or Keepers (which are old men on horseback by them) and so the
rest of the attendants as they follow.

The Manner of the Kings Riding forth on Horseback, to any Public Acts,
Meetings and Assemblies.
FIrst, warning given of his going abroad as before, his horse is brought from
his stable to the Court gate in this manner.

First of all before the Horse, go all the Masters, Grooms, Lackies and other
officers of the Stable on foot, and uncovered, in number about a hundred
persons.

Next is the Kings horse led by a lackie, and on each side two Quirries bare
headed.

After the horse next follows the Master of the Kings horse, well mounted, and
having his head covered: and after him follows his Lieutenant with his hatt
off, and then the three Guardes, of Spaniards, Germans, and Burgundians.

When his Majesty is on horseback he goes out of the Court in this manner.

Foremost of the company go all the subordinate or inferior officers on foot,
and uncovered; and if it be to any Feasts (as Iuego de Zor^s and Iuego de
Cauias, Viz: Wild Bulls.
as the baiting of Bulls, and dar^ing of reeds (on horseback) there ride before
him Trumpeters and Drummers, with kettle drums upon Mules.

At such times and upon such occasions the Queen rides abroad with him: both
of them being royally a^tended with the P^^^es and Gentrey belonging to the
Court.

But if he goes to any other Public meetings, then attend upon him all the
Gentlemen of his House and Court.

There are other houses of Pa^^^ament viz, Arragon, Portugal, Valentia and
Catalunia, etc.
The Magist^^^e of the Town^ ^^th^ll the Titulars, Burgesses of Parliament*
(w^i^^ in Castilla, are but six and thirty) Kings at Arms, Mace-bearers, with
the Arms of Castilla and Leon: the Lords Stewards or Controulers, next after
all these the Lord-high-steward with his Ensigns: next to him the Earl of
Aropesa* (who still bears the naked sword before the King) last of all follow
the Grandes accompanying his Majesty, his Querries going along by his stirrope
uncovered.

After the King, rides the Master of the Horse, then next the Council royal
of Castilla, and if there are any more Counsels (then present) they ride
before amongst them of the Nobility, according to their places.

Also at this time two of the Guards, viz. the Spanish and Germans, do walk
with their ^alberts on both sides of the Kings Coach, and the Guard of
Burgundians on Horseback with ^hei^ Petternels.

When the King goes not to any of these P^blicke acts or meetings, he rides
more privately and less attended.

A SCEDVLE OF THE Parish-Churches, and Monasteries of Friars, in MADRID.
SAint Mary's the prime Church. Saint Saluador. Saint John's. Saint Nicholas.
Saint Michell. Saint Just. Saint Fines. Saint Lewis Chapel of ease to Saint
Fines. Saint Martins a Parish and Conuenticle of Benedictine Friars. Saint
Placedo a Chapel of ease to it. Santa Cruza. Saint Seb^stians Saint Andrews.
The Parish of the Passion, Chapel of ease to the same. Saint Peter.
The Conuenticles of Friars, or Monasteries.
SAint Ierems. Saint Bernards. Saint Martines. Saint Nonuerto. Our Ladies of
Atochia. Saint Thomas his College. The College of Donia Maria of Arragon. The
College of the Jesuits, Casa Professa of the Jesuits. The Nouiciade of the
Jesuits. The Monastery of Saint Philip. The Monastery of Saint Frauncis. The
Caputchins. Sandiego. De Mercede. Santa Barbara. The Recolets.
The Carmen which go not barefooted. The Carmen which go barefooted. Saint
Basil. The Holy-Trinity. The Recolett Trinitarians. The Victoria.
Besides diverse Chapels or Cells, and almost as many Monasteries of Nuns.

Certain other special brief Observations concerning the King and state of
Spain.
FIrst the King of Spain, (for his Priuacie and secret ouerseeing the
Council, and hearing of their particular Allegations, Determinations, and
Censures, concerning matters in causes brought and discussed before them) has
his private Window where he may see and hear, yet neither be seen nor heard,
the cause of which first invention was imagined, and likely to be in the King
for the upright administration of Justice.

Also his Majesty reserueth two days in the week, to receive petitions with
his own hands, from the petitioners in his chamber of presence: and on those
days any one may more freely have access to his royal person then to his
favorite.

Also there are petitions to be delivered to the Council of state, which are
not first delivered to the King: but received by the Secretary of State, and so
read to the Council to consider of: but if any petitions concern a weighty
cause, appealing to the Kings examination and censure, then the Council make
referment thereof to his Majesty, who calls unto himself four more (with his
favorite) and so give satisfaction to the petitioners as the equity of their
causes requires. Now the Council themselves seldom give an absolute denial
to any petitioners but hold them in suspense with demurres and procrastinations.

The Kings audience to Ambassadors.
When any Ambassador comes with an Embassage to the King of Spain, he is
brought to the Court by some Noblemen, (as it shall please the King to give
direction) and so to have access to his presence where he sits in his Chair
of State, and his Grandes only standing on both sides of him: now upon the
delivery of the Embassage and the Kings approbation thereof, his Majesty
graceth the Ambassador with a seat near himself, or some such like not
ordinary favor. Now the consideration of the Embassage is referred to the
Council of State, or to such amongst them as his Majesty shall be pleased to
nominate and appoint, and upon his dispatch, the king gratifies him either with
a Chain of Gold, or some such like free gift.

The demeanor of the Spaniards in these Times.
THese generally are of an apt and quick apprehension, soon coming to
maturity of policy: their allegiance to their King is faithful; are sober
and vigilant, but miserable and couerous: yet both temperate and hardy in
time of war.

They desire much to be curiously apparelled in black, and their chiefest
delights for recreation and pleasure are feats of Arms and Horses for service.

They use often to stand much upon and boast more of their Gentilitie, and
Pedigree, otherwise very civil in their Conversation.

They in no wise affect a Country life, but are much addicted to Courtlike
re^idency and habitation.

Also they are full fraught with Complementall Verbositie:

They hate Duells, but often use private quarrelling in the st^eets, and are
much given to sudden desperate stabbing: as also to Venery and Women.

Nothing is more fearful to them then the terror of the Inquisition, and
nothing almost more desired by them then a King of a black complexion.

Their Women are sober, and of a decent proportion, but of a swarthie
complexion: amiable, and loving to their husbands, and kind to their friends,
in doing good unto them, according to their ability.

They are stately in carriage, and much addicted to painting and perfuming of
themselves.

Neither they, nor their children, drink any wine, but water.

The purest and best language is in Castilla, which comes very near to the
Latin.

They of the Province of Biscaj, do still retain their old accustomed
language or speech: so does Portugal, Galisia and Catalunia.

The Language of the Kingdom of Seuill, Murcia, Valentia, and Granada are much
corrupted with the Atabian, and Moriscos speech, but chiefly, by the common
sort

The King of Spaynes revenues, and his Forces at Sea, and on Land.
THe King of Spain, his revenues (within his Dominions) are esteemed to be no
less worth then twenty Millions of Ducats a year: but in regard of the long
continuance of War in Flaunders, (which since the beginning thereof has cost
the King more then threescore Millions) and the continual charge he is at of
Garrisons in Africa, besides his Sea forces and sundry great enterprises, he
is much impouerished and indebted: for he owes above twenty Millions of
Ducats to the Genouesses, besides diverse other several engagements, for which
he pays yearly interest: so that most commonly he is so much behind hand as
the full value of his Plate-fleete comes to, if it return safe home to him,
now the Kings part of that fleet comes not to above seven Millions, or
thereabouts, the rest being the Merchants, amounting to so much as the Kings
Share or rather more.

The Kings part is most commonly transported for payment of his debts to
Genoua, so soon as it is brought home.

His revenues of estate does more consist of Customs and taxes, then Crown
land or proper means of his own.

The taxes and impos^s, are more heavy levied upon Castilla, then any other
part of his Dominions, and some Provinces are free by right of privilege, as
Biscay, Valentia, Arragon and Catalunia.

In Portugal the King has given (for term of some lives) most part of his
revenues to retain their fidelity to his Crown.

For the Kingdom of Naples, the King does yearly give unto the Pope on good
Friday (for his absolution from excommunication (on the same day) which is
Customarie) a Iennet (most commonly of Color white) which is taught to kneel
down, and the same Ienner in the same manner upon the said day is presented to
the Pope with a purse of gold about his neck: which the Pope accepts as a
token of his Majesty's. Fealty to his holiness: but the King of France does
not acknowledge any such matter, but does lay claim to the Kingdom of Naples,
as heredi^ary to his Crown.

This Kingdom of Naples for wealth (in respect of the continent does exceed
most Kingdoms of Christendom. For this Kingdom with Sicilie, Millane,
Sardinia, Majorca, Minorca, ^launders and Burgundy do yield the King above
eight Millions a year, none of which is put into the Kings Cofers except a
little from Naples and Sicilie^ the rest and more is disbursed for the
maintenance of his Viceroys, Governors, Captaine^, Garrisons, Officers, and
other charges in that behalf.

The Kingdom of Spain in imposts, Bulls of Crusada, and Ecclesiastical first
fruits, does yield unto the King at the least six Millions of Ducats a year:
which are disbursed for the maintenance of his Court, payment of Pentions, and
defraying of Charges in Martial affairs.

For men at Arms the King is able to furnish, and has ready upon very short
warning (if there should happen any sudden invasion) fifty thousand foot,
and twenty thousand Horse or rather more, all which have continually complete
Arms in a readiness as they themselves are, to serve the King in land service.

For Sea forces besides the Plate fleet (which most commonly with Merchants
Ships are threescore sail) he has at Cales and Gibraltar, sixeteene stout
men of War to maintain the Streights and clear the Coasts.

Also at Lisborne, for the maintenance of the Coast of Portugal, he has
twelve men of War, the Admiral of which is of a thousand Tun burden.

Likewise in Biscaj, he maintains ten men of War more, for the safeguard of
those parts and Galicia.

Now besides all these he has some four and thirty Gallyes for clearing of
his Coasts, in the summer time especially.

In the Kingdom of Naples, his Majesty has nine or ten great Ships for
Sea service, besides four and twenty Galleys, and fifteen more in the
Kingdom of Sicilie, besides those of Genoua.

Now as the Mariners are not very skillful so they most commonly take with
them no more provision for Anchors, Cables, and Tacklings, then need requires
for the present, and few good Gunners they have of their own Nation, but are
beholding to English, and other strangers.

Indeed few do desire to be Sailors or Mariners, in regard the land Soldiers,
have always the pre-eminence over them, and their Ships are full furnished
wi^h them.

Now when there is any doubt of the safety of the Plate fleet, most of the
above said Kings Ships go to meet them for their safe Conduct, and Conuoy
home.

The several Kingdoms or Provinces in Spain, are these, Toledo, Seuill,
Cordoua, Iaen, Leon, Navarre, Valentia, Gibraltar, Granada, Murcia, Castilla,
Galicia, Arragon, Catalunia, Portugal the Segniory of Biscaj, the Algarues of
Algezira.

When any Proclamation issues from his Majesty upon any public occasion,
his titles prefixed are these. Philip by the grace of God, King of Castilla,
Leon, Arragon, the two Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarre, Granada,
Toledo, Valentia, Galisia, Majorca, Seuill, Sardinia, Cordoua, Corcica, Murcia,
Iaen, the Alga ues of Algezira, Gibraltar the Canarie-Ilands, the East and West
Indies, and all the islands, and firm Land of the Ocean Sea; Archduke of
Austria, Duke of Burgandie, Brabant, and Millane, Earl of Asbourg, Flaunders,
Tiroll and Barcelona, Lord of Biscaj, Molina, else now after these Titles, and
Proclamation expressed, he in Spain, only uses, I the King. But when upon any
occasion he writes to the States of Flaunders, he writes, I Philip Earl of
Flaunders.

The Cities in Spain are these, There are only two Parliment men chosen in
every City which stand for the whole Pr^uences.
Seuill, Granada, Guenca, Soria, Auila, Cordoua, Iaen, Toledo, Guadalajara,
Segouia, Salamanca, Camora, Vallodolid, Burgos, Toro, Leon, Murcia, all these
are to tender their service to his Majesty upon any occasion of Parliament,
being thereunto called, and also Madrid, although it be no City, but the only
place of the Kings residence in Court.

Cities in Galisia.
Compostella. Tuie.
In Austria of Ouiedo.
Mondenedo. Leon. Pomperado.
In Austria S. Ellene.
S. Ellene.
In Biscaj.
Victoria.
In Navarre.
Pampelone.
In Catalunia.
Barcelona. Tarragone. Mouson. Seguenca.
In Andalusia.
Seuill. Cadiz. Medina Sidonia. Esica. Iaen. Mallega. Zxeres. Cordoua. Vbeda.
Bacca. Adujar.
In the County.
Aymonte.
In Castilla.
Burgos. Taragone. Guadalajara. Segouia. Calohorra. Zamora. Toro. Medina del
Campo. Salamanca.
In Arragon.
Saragosa. Tarrell. Durago. Valentia.
In Valentia.
Cuenca. Segoruia. Oraguella.
In Mancha.
Alacantie. Segure.
In Granado.
Granado. Almerie. Carthagena. Murcia. Gudix.
In Toledo.
Cuidad Royal. Alcala de He^ares. Toledo.
In Estremadura.
Placenta. Auyla. Badajos. Merida.
In Portugal.
Lisbone. Euora. Coimbra. Porto. Braga. Bragance. Cuidad Roderigo. Beiria.
Cono. Oliuensa. Eluas. Guarda. Settuuall. Lelues. Leria.
A note of all the Havens, Ports and Fishing Towns, upon the Coast of Spain,
from Fontarabie in Biscaj, to Barcelona in the Mediterranian Sea.
In Biscai.
Fontarabie, a bard Haven. Passage and Rend^rie, an open Haven. S. Sebastians,
a bay Haven. Suinaj and Guittari^, bard. Montrica and Deua, Fishing towns.
Mondac and Alequito, Fishers. Vermeo and Placentia, Fishers. Bilbao and
Portugalete, bard.
In Asturies.
Aluredo a Key Haven. S. Ander an open Haven. S. Vincent de la Barkera Fishers.
Ariba de Sella Fishers. Villa vitiosa Fishers. Chinchon a Key. Torre Fishers.
Peua Fishers. Loarca bard. Auiles bard.
In Galicia.
Riba deo bard. Vuiero and Sidera Fishers. Farroll open. The Gr^yne open.
M^ngea bard. Corcauiaua bard. Muros bard. Porta Vietra bard. Vigo and Bajone
open.
In the County.
Aymonte a bard haven. Selua and Palos Fishers
In Andaluzia.
S. Lucar de Barameda, stands in the entrance of the river Guadalquiuir, which
goes up to Seuill, and does consist most of Fishers. Seuill a bard haven. Rota
a key. Cadiz open. S. Marie port bard.
Streits toward Barcelona.
Gibraltar an open Rode and Key. Grand Malega a Key Rode. Maruela an open Rode.
Velez Malega a key Rode. Almerie Fishers. Carthagena a Haven.
In Valentia.
Alicante the port of Valentia a Haven. Velentia a Creek. Empullas. Taragona.
all Fishers. Palamos. all Fishers. Empurias. all Fishers. Rosas. Barcelona an
open Haven.
In Portugal.
Camina bard. Viana bard. Villa de Gonde bard. Auero bard. Porto de Portugal
bard. Caso^is Fishers. Lisbone open. Sensembrie ^ard. Setun open. Lagos a Key.
Villa-nouas bard. Farouillas bard. Figera. Fishers. Tauilla. Fishers.
Castromariti. Fishers.
I only touch the great inconvenience that Bra^^e Coins, The Brass Coins of
Spain.
has and does daily produce in Spain. Philip the second being straightened in
Moneys, to supply his present necessities in War, gave birth to this Monster,
in Coining five Millions of Brass in several pieces, the greatest pieces are
called Quartillos, of the which eight and a half make two Royalls, which is
tweluepence English, one pound of Brass makes threescore and odd of them.
Since which time they have been Coined by Philip the third, and Philip the
fourth now reigning, above eight M^llians more. The Easterlings discovering the
benefit and profit thereof, have at several times fraughted the king of
Spaynes Dominions with thirty Millions more being brought in under hand. At the
first it past as current as their silver, only one Royal in a hundred Royalls
abared: but since (to the great detriment of the Subjects) it has raised to
two, and so to sixty in the hundred exchange, which occasioned the State of
Spain, to search into the secret, and to redress the error, the care as
dangerous as the sore. For the better sort of people having go^ten (through the
scarcity of Silver which has been in Spain this seven years) the most part
of this Brass coin into their hands, which caused his Majesty's Treasury to
receive their rents in Brass in stead of Silver. Now for the prevention of
future inconveniences, and to frustrate the Easterlings, the State of Spain
have decreed that this Coin shall pass current but for half the value, which
loss falling upon the better sort of people, they to save themselves have
inhaunsed their Commodities to the double value thereof, so that the poorer
sort of people are not only deprived of all commerce, but straytned in their
provision of daily sustenance, to the hazard of their lives, the Exchange
holding still to twenty in the hundred.

The circuit of Spain, is five hundred and forty Leagues by Sea, and
fourscore by land, in all above eighteen hundred English Miles, many more
particulars I could here recite, as of their Customs, and transportable
commodities which the Kingdom affords, but I presume they are already
divulged, and therefore I will not trouble the Readers patience with any more
at this time.

FINIS.

