THE ENGLISH SPANISH PILGRIM.

OR, A NEW DISCOVERY OF SPANISH POPERY, AND IESVITICALL STRATAGEMS.

With the estate of the English Pentioners and Fugitives under the King of
Spaines Dominions, and else where at this present.

Also laying open the new Order of the Iesuitrices and preaching Nuns.

Composed by James Wadsworth Gentleman, newly converted into his true mothers
bosom, the Church of England, with the motives why he left the Sea of Rome; a
late Pentioner to his Majesty of Spain, and nominated his Captain in
Flanders: Son to Mr. James Wadsworth, Bachelor of Divinity, sometime of
Emanuell College in the University of Cambridge, who was perverted in the
year 1604. and late Tutor to Donia Maria Infanta of Spain.

Published by special License.

Printed at London by T. C. for Michael Spark, dwelling at the blue Bible in
Greene-Arbor, 1629.

To his friend Mr. James Wadsworth and his Book.
Go happy ofspringe of a pregnant brain,
Sins Commentary, a perspectiue for Spain,
Through which her maskt delusions appear
Naked, as if they had bin practiced here.
If any Jesuit damn the Authors quill,
That writes against her from whom he learnt his skill,
Or wonder how that City odious proves,
Which bred him, and his Fathers memory loves:
Know this, that Asa was not plagued, 'cause he
Deprived his mother for idolatry.
Good Parents patterns are, if bad, forbear
To imitate, and make their faults thy fear.
Should I relate the dangers he endured
After his soul a liberty procured;
I should but wrong his Book, by making those
Which read such horrid lines afraid of 's prose.
When the I Will of Ree, and Martins lucklesse Fort
Our trouble and their triumphs did report:
Him Callis dungeon kept, as if his fate
Should pay the rash invasion of a State.
Yet not their catchpole Popery, nor all
Their Macheuils could work his funeral:
That hand which first converted him has brought,
Him safe, and their discouerd at heisme wrought.
Thomas Mottershed. of C. C.

To the most Noble and thrice Honorable William Earl of Pembroke, Lord Steward
of his Majesty's household, and Chancellor of the University of OXFORD.
MY Lord, though unknown unto your Lordshippe, but by a relation made unto
your Honor of my travels and observations beyond the seas, your Lordshippe
vouchsafed to grant me your Letters of favor to the University of Oxford for
the furthering of me in the printing a book entitled, The English Spanish
Pilgrim: and now having accomplished the same, I should think my self most
happy, if it would please your Lordship to protect and favor these rude lines,
not looking upon the mean understanding of the Author, but the good will and
affection wherewith I have written them; to wit, for the honor of God, and
good of my Country: wherein I do especially discover diverse subtilties and
policies, of the English Jesuits, Friars, Monks and other Seminary Priests
beyond the seas, as likewise our English fugitives under the King of Spaines
Dominions, and the wrong I received in turning to mine own true Religion. I
do therefore most humbly beseech your Honor that you would be pleased to take
this book under your protection for the furthering of my 'cause, and
repressing of my adversaries, and I shall ever pray for the much increase of
your Lordships health and Honor. The book I dare not say deserves your
favor, it being a greater token of Nobility in you to Patronize with your
greatness that which is mean in it self, then only to be favorable, where
merit may challenge liberality; yet in it self the work is religiously
disposed to the discovering of truth, and that all which are any whit inclined
to the Sea of Rome, may see the veil unmasked wherewith they were hoodwinkt. I
detain your Honor no longer, but with a little digression from you to that
God, whom I humbly implore to preserve your Lordship the years of my desire,
which is as unlimited as your Nobility.

Your Honors most humble and devoted servant, James Wadsworth.

THE ENGLISH SPANISH PILGRIM.
CHAP. I.
The life of the English Espanoliz'd trauailer, persecuted by disastrous time
and fortune; his voyares, passages, and encounters with that most Antichristian
f^y the Jesuits, by whom his Father was seduced, the year 1604. and
afterward in 1609. his Mother was entrapped by no other snares, and was
transported into Flanders, with her Son the Pilgrim, who scarcely had seen
five years to an end, from thence into Spain 1610. where he passed eight
years in the Royal Town Madrid and in Civil.

IN the year 1604. in the County of Suffolk I was borne, in the Reign of our
late Royal Sovereign, whose eminency of virtues procured the wonder of all
other Nations, and the glory of ours. My Father was a Student in Emanuell
College in Cambridge, where the University, and his own merits invested him
with a degree of Bachelor of Divinity; and his Majesty preferred him to be a
double benefic't man in Cotton, and great Thorn, in the County aforesaid, and
Chaplain and Ordinary to the Bishop of Norwich; and after that, his Majesty
sent him with his first Ambassador Legier Sr. Charles Cornewallis into Spain
as his Chaplain, and joint Commissioner, where at his first arrival, the
Jesuits held with him a subtle dispute about the Antiquity and the
Universality of the Church of Rome, which they make their preface to all
seducements, his grand opposers being Joseph Creswell, and H. Walpole, two the
most expert politicians of our Nation, that then maintained the state of the
triple crown; whose understanding nevertheless would not prove captive,
either to their subtilest Arguments, or most alluring promises. The Ambassador
seeing how wisely he quitted himself, sent Letters to his Majesty, informing
him how learnedly he was accompanied. The King as he was a liberal Mecanas to
the learned, especially to those that were of the Clergy, sent him his Royal
grant of the next falling place of Eminency in his Kingdoms, as an
encouragement to his further services. Mean while the Jesuits perceiving how
little they prevailed, used other illusions stronger then their Arguments, even
strange apparitions of miracles; amongst others, the miracle which they pretend
to be true to have happened Vide Lewis Owen in the publque Library of Oxon. p.
59.
to the eldest son of the Lord Wotton at his death, in the City Vallodalid
where a Crucifix framed him this articulate sound: Now forsake Item vide
Bedell. cap. 5. p. 83.
your heresy, or else you are damned, whereupon the young Lord and my Father
became Proselites to their iugling Religion, the report whereof not long after
became a loadstone also to the old Lord Wotton his Father, with many others to
draw them to popish Idolatry. And so my Father leaving the Ambassadors house
privately; and discarding wife and children and fortunes in England, was
conducted forthwith by the means of Father Creswell to the university of
Salamanca, whereat the next day after his arrival, he was carried to the
Bishops then inquisitors house, where he was admitted with no little joy to
their Church, where he prostrating himself on the ground, and the inquisitor
putting (as their custom is) his right foot on his head, said with a loud
voice, here I crush the head of heresy: the which ceremony and others ended,
after a months abode in the said University, he passed with Creswell to the
Court of Madrid, where the King informed by Creswell what had happened, was
exceeding joyful, and gave charge to his chief Secretary of State Don Iuan
Idiaques, that he should give him whilst he lived a fair annual pension out
of his own private purse; but here Creswels policy is seen, which was to
counsel him not to take above fifty Ducats monthly, for fear if he should
take more, the Heretics of England (for so his tongue styled them) should
happily say, he changed his air for profit, not conscience: and that having left
greater means in England, 'twould prove a singular example to draw many souls
after him, since 'twas clear it was not gain was his mark. Gentle Reader,
take notice here of Jesuitical stratagems; recount a while the grief and
sorrow of my Mother his wife, my Brethren and Kindred; when as they hoped daily
he would prove the honor of their lineage, their expectation on a sudden was
terminated in sighs and lamentings. But it is necessary I declare how my
mother likewise not long after was allured by my Father thus revolted: and
having withstood for five years space all his letters and inticements, with
those also of the Jesuits and Priests (But where the husband goes first, the
wife commonly follows after, it being the weakness of that sex) was at
length seduced by one Kelly a Jesuit, who coming for that end with letters
from her husband, mislead her away, having brought her to sell all she had,
carried her forthwith into Flanders with her four children, Hugh the eldest,
since dead in Madrid, Katharine who died a Nun in Lisbone, Mary who now
lives a Nun in a Monastery called Camber by Bruxels, and James this Author,
your English Spanish Pilgrim. These with their mother lived and expected their
Fathers pleasure, and there having been ordered to take shipping for Spain,
embarked her self at Dunkerke for St. Lucas in Spain, in a ship called the
Hound of Dunkerke, a ship very famous for it is feats in war; there were
also twelve other ships in their company, whereof ten suffered wrack in a
tempestuous storm; this Hound with two others escaping, whose Masts were cut
down, and had not the tempest surceast on a sudden, they might have fared as
the rest. Thus through a Million of dangers we arrived the Spanish coasts,
where her husband with joyful imbracements most lovingly welcomed her and her
children. I now forthwith was brought to a school in Civil to learn to
write, and read the Spanish tongue, and having attained here to my prefixed
end, was presently after catechized in the Roman faith at Madrid, where, and
at Civil I continued about eight years, from whence through the counsel of
the Jesuits, my Father sent me to St. Omers, where I was ensnared to the
discipline of the place after their accustomed manner.

CHAP. II.
This second Chapter contains his voyage from Madrid to St. Omers, and how the
ship which wasted him thither, was by the way surprised, and pillaged by the
Rochellers, who took away their Sails, and all other tacklings necessary, as
for the ship, so likewise for their further sustenance, committing them to
the merciless mercy of the waves: But the providence of God conducted them to
a safe haven.

IN the year 1618. I took farewell of the royal Town Madrid, my Father and
Mother and other friends, and after their benediction, I was for St.
Sebasteans, accompanied with one Mr. Pickford, his Majesty's of Spaines
pensioner in the Castle at Antwerpe, who was to be my conductor to the foresaid
St. Omers in the Province of Artois, seven leagues from Callis. At St.
Sebastians which is 100. leagues from Madrid, we chanced on a French ship of
an 100. Tun, bound for Callis, wherein being embarked with the first
favorable wind, we hoysed up sails and lanching into the maine, we steerd our
course toward the English Channel, whether we hardly arrived being pursued
with an exceeding fierce storm, even to the hazard of our lives, our ship
leaking much, and beating it self against the winds and billows of the
turbulent Sea. This past, the ship redrest as well as time and place could
afford, we still made forward; and in our passage one of our Mariners deseryed
a far off a great vessel making after us, and chasing us narrowly, which
struck the Master and passengers with no little affrightments, and not without
cause; for presently we perceived him to be a man of war of Rochell, and
made all haste possible to gain the wind of him, and so avoyde him: but all
was in vain, the man of war being lighter and less burdened, our ship
being old and deeply laden with the commodities of iron and wool; all which
being thought on, we fell into diverse opinions, as whether it were the best
to prepare to fight it out, or strike Sails and submit. Don Gondamours Nephew
who was with us in our ship, and was then bound for Flanders, appointed there
by his Catholic Majesty Captain of a troop of horse, advertised us to
yield, supposing thereby we might save our lives. But of all Mr. Pickford as
an old beaten soldier, challenged to himself the privilege of the monitour,
to whom all assented jointly, that they were ready to submit themselves to his
counsel: He then being Captain and Master of the ship, commanded to be
brought before him all the provision and best victuals of the ship, and
cheered up the company therewith, telling them thus; that they ought to make
merry with that that God had sent them, since doubtful it was whether ever they
should meet together any more. Thus having made a good refection, he commanded
them to betake themselves heartily to their devotions, and put themselves in
defense, saying better it was to dye a thousand deaths, then to fall into the
Rochellers hands; they (the passengers) being most of them retainers to his
Catholic Majesty, and having thus encouraged us, immediately the man of war
came upon us, and fetching us up, gave us a broad side with his Ordnance;
where upon the Mariners (contrary to their promise) stroke Sail and
submitted. They presently aboarding us, took each of us apart to make us
confess what monyes we had, and what other commodities, threatening withal
that if we concealed ought from them, they would forthwith pistol us; such
was their rapine and avarice, that no haste and expedition to surrender all
could content, but some were bastinado'd, others buffetted, and kicked, without
respect of person or age; amongst the rest I bare my part, for being taken
aside by a Scullion boy of the ship, was stripped stark naked, and having
made a purse of my boots, he pulling off one, heard a merry jengling for
himself, whereupon forced me to silence with the danger of my life for fear
he should loose the pillaging of the other; for it was catch as catch may, and
therefore disrobed me of the other boot, hoping no less booty, with the
greatest dexterity that ever shoemaker used. This being done, our Sails were
plucked down, and we committed to the mercy of the waves, where we suffered
three days famine and cold, and longer we might, had not those senseless
creatures, the wind and the waves been so kind as to show us the way to
Galisia, where we met with a Bark which was then for St. Sebastians, where
being arrived, every one of us began to shift for himself. I adventured on the
courtesy of Mr. Peter Wiche, Merchant, and now Ambassador for his Majesty of
England, at the famous City of Constantinople. who clad both my back and my
purse after a competent manner. This past, my foresaid Guardian Mr. Pickford
delivered me up unto two Franciscan Flemmish Friars, which were then bound for
their covent at St. Omers, their general chapter being then ended at
Salamanca, with whom I was embarked for Amsterdam in Holland, but by the
violence of the Seas, we were forced into St. Georges channel betwixt Ireland
and Wales, where the tempest being so great, and our provision so small, we
were constrained to enter into Mylford haven, where the foresaid Friars being
wearied with the tossing of the sea, resolved to make the shortest cut they
could to St. Omers: Landing therefore at Pembroke Town, and having been
enquired of by Sir Thomas Button Vice Admiral of those Seas, and the Mayor of
the said Town, and an oath being administered unto them whether they were
Jesuits, Priests, Monks, or Friars or of any such order and Roman function,
swore flatly the contrary, and so got a Pasport of the said Mayor, and so they
parted for Bristole: and I pardi demanding of them on the way how they could
take such an oath with a safe conscience, they answered, they did it with a
mental reservation, that is, they were not English Priests of an Heretical
function, and so we passed from Bristole, from thence to London, where I was
not permitted to speak with my friends because forsooth Heretics upon pain
of damnation; because I was young and not sufficiently founded in the Roman
Catholic faith, and able to defend the points of my Religion, So thence
without stay we hasted to Zeland, and from thence to St. Omers, where they
delivered me up to the College of the English Jesuits.

CHAP. III.
This third Chapter contains his education at St. Omers for four years, with
the description of the College and Government there, besides diverse
subtilties and tricks of the English Jesuits in their discipline, which is
rather barbarous then civil.

THis College was founded about some 40 years since, by the order and
furtherance of Father Parsons that famous Jesuit, who sent Father Placke to S.
Omers with sufficient monyes for the Thi^ Father Placke is yet living, and
con^emned by the rest in his old age, not able for further service.
foundation, having before obtained of his Catholic Majesty a pension of 2000.
Duccats per annum, for the maintenance of the Students there.

At which College (as I above said) accompanied with two other Friars, I
arrived, who after they had been well refectioned by the Rector, they took
their leave of them and the rest of the paternities, and returned into their
own Couents: I remained behind, and for the first night was by the Rector and
the other Fathers well entertained at supper, making up the time our stomachs
would spare us, with the discourse of my present journey from Spain, which yet
that they might more at large be informed of, they lengthned the meal to my
narration, until bed time broke up both. No sooner had the morning, and my
self opened our eyes but the Rector and Father Creswell sent for me, where
they begun a remonstration of their rules, and orders and observations,
somewhat shorter then their entertainment. First that they might take none
blindfold, they opened me with a general confession of all my sins; then
closed up all again by the Sacrament, and after this least there might be any
relic of the world left upon me, they made me disinvest my self of such
profane garments I had, and the superfluities of hair, but one they kept, the
other they threw away; then was I reinuested with a Doublet of white Canuas,
Breeches and stockings that had not troubled the Weauer with over much pains,
Cassocke and stockings of the same black and grave, the band precise and
short, with a hat that might almost shadow all, and shoes correspondent. Thus
accoutred, the Rector delivered me to another Student, to whom he gave the
charge of showing me the College, and committing me to Father Thunder to
appoint me a Study and a Chamber in the Dormitory, which was speedily done, and
the next morning I was promoted to the first form called the Figures, there
had I given me a schedule which contained the duties and obseruances of the
house, which are as follows.

First and above all, entire observance and duty to be performed to the Rector
as our Vice-God, next to the Vice-Rector as his minister, next to the Praefects
which are ouer-seers of the Schools. The first of these was Father Robert
Drury, who had his Sermon knocked out of his head with his brains at Black
Friars; The other, Father Thunder, who appoints Chambers and Studies, makes
them render account of their studies, keeps hours of study and recreation,
and exercises many of his claps upon their breeches. The third is Father Darcy
Prefect of the Sodalitium Beatae Mariae, and the refectory. Then to all the
rest of the Fathers in the house, as Father John Flood, * he who is their
Champion to And likewise ghostly Father to the Students.
answer and write against the Protestants in England. And Father Baker, bursar
of the College, who keeps the bag and prouides necessaries. Besides,
especial respect is due to the five Masters of the Schools, to Father Adrian
or Tush, which the Students call him from his own mouth, to Father Lacy, the
Reader of Poetry, and Master of the Syntax. Father Henry Bentley, and Father
John Compton of Grammar, and Father John Crater of the Figures, and Father
Wilson ouerseer of the Print-house; and besides, duty is to be given to the
Porter, who is the Lord Mountagues brother, who has not as yet been higher
promoted; to the Bursar, Brewer, Tailor, Butler, Baker, Apothecary,
Shoemaker, Master of the Infirmary, who over looks the sick, the Clearke
and Cook which are all Lay brothers; which why they should be thus honored
with Cap in hand I know no reason, unless they mean to pay them with respect
of boys for the disrespect they give them themselves; yet this may seem
sufficient for those, all which except Father G. Kempe, and Brother Brown were
neither borne nor bred to deserve higher, being such as either misfortunes,
debts or misdeeds had in ship-wracke cast upon coast, where only perpetual
servitude was their liberty, and misfortune their only fortune. Thus much for
the obedience the Students are bound to bestow upon Father Jesuits, and Lay
Brothers. Let us now descend to the Students: their chiefest quality is noble
blood for the most part, to make such a Proselite the Fathers compass sea and
land, persuading them that Nobilis non mascitur sed fit.
such a calling adds to their Nobility. Of others less eminent by birth, it
is required they should at least equal, if not transcend in eminency of parts
and wits, which in time would purchase better portions then men more nobly
descended would have affoorded from inheritance. The number of the first
ordinarily neither amounts above or under an 100. of the other 20. The
obs^ruation of the distribution of the day is thus: Eu^ry morning the fist
hour summons them up, the first half is bestowed in making up themselves and
their beds, the place where they sl^pt is called a Dormitory, which contains
three long Galleries topping the house: each of these is furnished with some
50. beds, distanced only by a partition of boards; the next half hour the
Chapel does challenge their attendance, the Mass their devotion, whosoever
is absent shall be sure to have the unwelcome presence of Father Thunder. At six
they go all to study in a large Hall under the first Gallery, where according
to order each takes his seat, where they study one hour, and in the midst
walks Father Thunder, and see^ they all keep silence and be diligent at
their books; all are bound to be there without budging at seven, which is
their hour of breakefast, they go down two by two with their books under
their arms, and first those in Rhetoric unto the refectory, where every one
has for his part a piece of bread and butter, and beer as pleases him. The
loss of this breakefast is their punishment whose names had been given up to
the Prefect for having spoke English the day before, but within a quarter of an
hour, each boy quits the Refectory, and repaires to the schools; from seven
and half, until nine and better they are exercised in repeating and showing
what composures they had made, after which time the Prefects and Masters leave
the schools, and the Students of the three under schools, go up to those of
the upper, which read to them Greek till ten, at which hour every one
betakes him to his study until eleven, as in the morning before, then to
dinner. After they have raunged themselves a while, the Rector and Fathers
enter, the elder says Grace himself, or ordaines another, which being done,
he places himself at the upper end of the Table, the others in their order.
All this while the Students mouths are shut, not from eating, but speaking,
bestowing their ears upon six other of their companions disputing three
against three in two pewes one overthwart the other, of such things which may
rather help digestion to the Fathers, then benefit their own understandings,
as whether their paternities had better eat flesh or fish, drink wine or
beer; and this dispute begins and ends with their dinner: At the Fathers meal
both Ceres and Bacchus vouchsafe their company to sit, and that liberally too;
their meat is what their delicacies can desire, that their Procurator caters
for: the Abbey of Watton two leagues distant, furnishing them with that
fatness it was wont to afford the Monks as you may read in Owen. See Lewi^
Owen.


Now let us come to the Collegiates or Students, and their diet: First they are
served in by seven of their own rank weekly and in course, and according to
seniority each man has first brought him a mess of broth which is the
antipast: afterward half a pound of beef which they call their portion,
after an apple, or piece of cheese for their post past, bread and beer as they
call for it. When they have ended the meal, the Rector enioynes silence to the
disputants, and then rising from the table himself, stands and says Grace,
which said the Seudents first go out one by one, each making his reuerance hat
in hand to the Rector; next after, himself goes forth to hear them play their
music, which is in a great Hall over the Refectory, thence until one of the
clock they recreate themselves in the Garden, thence each man to his study
which is until two, then again to the schools, so until four and a half
(as in the morning) at their Greek and Latin exercises* then again to their
studies until six which is supper time, and in the same manner spent as
dinner, saving that six others go into the pewes, and after some short
disputations, one of one side reads the Latin Martyrologe, and another after
him the English, which contains the Legend of our English Martyrs, and
Traitors together, sometimes two in one day.

The Students hear out the relation with admiring and Cap in hand to the
memory of Champion, Garnet, Thomas Becket, and Moore. After this until seven
and a half, music until eight, they recreate themselves together, thence to
their studies again until half an hour be past, so to their Letanies, and
to provide themselves to bed, but before they do it for the most part they
demand on their knees all the Prefects benedictions, otherwise they take not
themselves blessed; then while they are disrobing themselves, one amongst them
reads some miracle or new book until sleep close up all, and Father
Thunders noise awake them in the morning. Discipline is here enough were it
well bestowed; thus pass they their days and years, save Tuesdayes and
Thursdayes when on the after noones they are licenced to the recreation of the
open fields; On this wise; dinner ended we march forth of the College by two
and two, Father Thunder himself carrying up the rear until we are distant
about a mile from the Town, where we walk, or play at ball or bowls or
other such games, till the clock and our stomachs strike supper time, whence
repairing to the College, roast mutton is our provision being not ordinary. Now
let us touch Sabbath affairs unto which on Saturday on the after noone from
four till six, and after supper till eight all the Students confess
themselves to their ghostly Fathers above named: on Sunday morning at six of
the clock they hye to their studies, where they read sacred letters until
seven, from thence to the Chapel, and Congregation of our Lady, which is kept
in one of the schools, Father Darcy aforesaid being Prefect of that place,
where sitting in a chair, he exhorts all to the honor of the Virgin Mary,
declaring to them her great power and miracles; all the schools are not
admitted here unto, but those only whom the Prefect and his 12. Consultors
approve of, which 12. Consultors are ordinarily termed his white boys. The
privilege of this sodality is that they have graces, rosaries, and beads,
Indulgences, Meddals and hallowed grains from his holiness. In virtue whereof
as the Prefect tells them being once admitted into the same society, they may
obtain pardon of all their sins past, and at the hour of their death,
saying or but thinking on the name of Jesus, Mary, Joseph, they are actually
pardoned and freed from the pains of Purgatory, which otherwise had they not
been of this society they should have endured.

With one of the aforesaid grains saying one Aue Marie they may by the virtue
of each deliver a soul from Purgatory. Besides on the day any that are in this
sodality established, their sins are remitted, swearing sidelity, and stiling
themselves the Virgins slaves: On this manner each Sunday betwixt seven and
eight they spend their time and they all go to Mass, and receive the
Communion, thence to breakefast, after to the Study, whereas before they busy
themselves in reading divine stories till dinner; anon after dinner to their
Church where they sing Vespers and Letanies to our Lady for Englands
conversion, having written on their Church and College doors in great golden
letters, Jesus, Jesus, converte Angliam, fiat fiat. These are only the outsides
of their profession: But now will I rippe up the very bowels of these
treacherous glosing Fathers: First those scholars who are Nobly descended and
of rich parentage, they strive to allure by their honied words, and flattering
imbracings, indowing them with pictures, beads, meddals, Agnus dei, which they
have from Rome: Also that their baits may take effect, they license them to
participate of all those wines and juncates provided for their own pallates,
and if white boys of a comely feature they bestow on them (though ill
deserving) the pre-eminence of the schools. And with these is the Prefect of
music most recreated, reading to them Ovid, Hor. Catull. and Propertius. As
for the Interrogatory and confession of their ghostly Fathers, I refer you to
Peter de molin, which is entitled Novaute du papisme, where you may at large
read those abominable abuses committed in their Interrogatories. Again, a
second bait is laid for those more grave then the former; for instance, a
Gentleman of Yorkshire by name Mr Henry Fairefax, son to Sr. Thomas
Fairefax, who not yielding to their enchanting allurements, one night being a
sleep in his bed, two Jesuits clad in gorgeous white as they had been
Angels, approaching his This they did in imitation of the two Angels that whipped
S.Jerome.
bed side with two good disciplines in their hands, the ends of some stuck
with wyery pricks, having uncovered him, they did after so savage a manner
raze his skin, that he became for a while senseless, speaking unto him in
Latin that they were Angels sent from the Virgin to chastise him for some
offenses by him committed, viz. for resisting the power, and reuiling the
proceedings of his superiors, exhorting him to that Order by virtue of the
testimony given by the Virgin of the holy Order of the Jesuits, which said,
they departed, and left the rest so far astonished that they knew not whether
they had been Angels or devils: the day dawning, he found his lineaments of
such a purple die, that they kept their hue a month after: But somewhat to
allay the fury of his torment, Father Thunder, and Father Gibbins persuaded him
it was some divine correction to the intent he should take on him their habit;
whereupon giving credit to them, at 17 years of age he was admitted into
their society, about four years after Father Thunder blushed not to acquaint
this Gentleman with the truth of it, and that it was only done for his good,
tract of time having now sufficiently digested his misery, and being by this
time inured in their Orders, that howsoever (he so well approved of their
demeanours) be resolved to continue his abode with them.

The second example is that Father Francis Wallis alias Clearke, now Minister
of the College desired to allure to their Order, one Mr. William Abinton a
Student in their house, only son to Mr. John Abinton, in whose house the
Traitor Garnet was apprehended for two reasons: First because he was ingenious
and well learned: secondly, because his Father had lost the greatest part of
his means in behalf of the aforesaid apprehension, the Jesuits also having
made largesses of promises to requite the said loss in ample manner, could no
otherwise do for him but so. The course Wallis took was this, one morning
seeing him pass by his window went after him, calling him by his name, and
saying unto him that a little before he had This Gentleman lives now in
England at hi^ Fathers house in Holborne, and has affirmed to me d^ue^setimes
the same: Besides I was in his company when it happened.
heard a divine revelation from St. Ignatius Loiola, that the first Student he
saw going by his door, he should declare unto him he had chosen him to be one
of his Apostles, and that without delay he must be for his orders; All which
the young Gentleman having attentively heard, he doubted not of the truth of
the vision, but before he would be entered a Jesuit, he craved the space of
a month to take farewell of his friends in England, which conditionally was
granted, with a promise of a speedy return: but he no sooner had arrived his
own Country shores, but he utterly disclaimed their superstitious reueales.

The third example is Mr. Herbert Crafts, sometimes of the University of
Oxford, son to Sir Herbert Crafts, who travailing to St. Omers to visit his
Father who lived in the Town, was by him and Father John Flood, brought to the
Roman obedience, and though his Father was a good Catholic, yet he counseled
him never to turn Jesuit. Yet for all that, they found out a way to draw him
unto them, which was a subtle and a crafty one indeed, viz. to entice him to
See the Sparing discovery. page 12.
take the spiritual exercise which he refused not being a matter of honor
amongst the Catholics to enter into; the order they observe in taking of it is
this: in 15 days space he is appointed a chamber solitary, and sequestered
from the rest, for this said space he is to speak with none save his ghostly
Father, who directs him in the distribution of each day, one hour is to
examine his conscience of what sins he has committed in times past, another
time to say his prayers, and office of the Virgin Mary; another for the hearing
of Mass, and saying of his Rosarie, but the principal to which the ghostly
Father does apply himself, is to give that person certain meditations made by
Ignatius Loyola which are as follow. First, that meditation of the creation of
the world: secondly, 1
the creation of mankind, and how much 2
man is obliged and bound unto God for his creation: 2
thirdly, what a man ought to do for those apparent benefits which we receive
from his liberal hands: fourthly, that there is no way more 4
certain unto salvation, then that of a Monastical and solitary life: fifthly,
the explanation of 5
this question, what this solitary or Monastical life is, which they answer,
that it is to live in a Monastery or Desert: sixthly, that all religious 6
Orders at their first course and original were holy, and sacred institutions,
but by the corruption of time they have lost their ancient purity: seventhly,
what a man is to do for the surety of 7
his salvation, seeing that (as it is their abominable maxim, with a kind of
a negative limitation) that any wandering from their Collegiate society, (which
they term their Paradise) into the world, can hardly attain to the hope of
salvation: 8
eighthly, that that man which desires the salvation of his own soul, must
renounce all the doctrine of the reformed Churches, and cleave only to their
holy society; and that for two reasons: the first, that as all Orders at their 1
first beginnings did observe their injunctions punctually, but through their
corruption and dissension for priority lost that efficacy which they had at
their Foundation; so they suppose their Jesuitical society being newly
instituted, has not had the time to be corrupted (their other societies of the
Dominicans and Franciscans being by their private dissensions much tainted. ^.
ibid. p. 25.
Secondly, that considering that their Grand Ignatian Saint being highly
preferred to the Almighties favor by the holy Ghost, and even paralelling him
with our Savior in that power of casting out Devils, (if not rather procuring
offertories by this fained power) thought that if other Idem docuit Franciscus
vid. testimonium Gregorij 9. in fine testamenti Francisci.
Orders had been more strict then theirs, he had never founded his or this
society.

And furthermore, they pretend that St. Ignatius received by divine revelation,
that none of his Order should ever be damned for 200 years term, and this
they believe as an Article of their Creed. In conclusion of all, they exhibit
unto him the meditation of death, and contemplation of the pains of hell, so
by these means they won the Gentleman to their Order against the will of his
Father. In this very exercise I my self was initiated for some 15 days space,
but it was Gods pleasure to give me more understanding then to be led away
with the rest. Besides these they have yet farther plots to bring their young
Students in belief that they are well seen in Chyromancy, and can tell them
their fortunes, and what are these think you? either they must be Jesuits, or
look for a disastrous end. Of these falsifying tricks I my self was an eye
witness. Now let me descend to their most barbarous proceedings, which are
indeed numberless, but for avoiding prolixity, I will recount here a few: Some
few years since, there was one Mr. Edward Hastings at Hurlston, an ingenious
young Gentleman, whom when they could not draw unto them by the means
aforesaid, they exercised on him such Tyrannical discipline, that the least
fault he did they Stoically interpreted to be equal to the greatest, and
punished him accordingly; this most cruel handling of him being intolerable, he
writ to his friends and informed them thereof, most earnestly entreating them
to send for him. *But their letters were intercepted There is no way to go out
of this College, or to write or receive any letter, save with consent of the
Rector, for they are kept as in prison under lock and key.
by the Rectors hands, and answered by him a gain, that he was wild and head
strong, and that it would prove his utter ruin if ever he came into England,
which he perceiving, he resolved with himself to leap over the College wall,
but being taken in the instant, Father Thunder clapped his buttocks till he left
him half dead, to make him an example, then sent him away with four shillings
in his purse to conduct him for England: so likewise they used * Sir This Sir
William Brown died at S. Omers.
William Brownes son, and thus also they dealt with one Mr. Henry Tailor,
sithence Secretary to Count Gondamor, who having well felt the foresaid Fathers
claps, was thence sent to Rome with a mission, and then also quickly weary of
the same kind of discipline, wrought means to depart from thence too, but
they gave him but forty shillings to convey him to England, who took St. Omers
in his way to visit his mother there living, where then Father Blunt being
resident, the Provincial of the English Jesuits, and and she remembering him
of the services that her late husband Dr. Tailor Dr. of the Law had done for
their Society, in protecting in his Chamber that Jesuit Father Gerat, a
complotter of the Gunpowder Treason, and then interpreter to the Spanish
Ambassador in England, in consideration whereof, the Provincial Blunt gave him
a letter of favor to Gondamor the then Ambassador in England, where the letter
was writ in this tenure, I entreat your Excellency to do for this straggling
sheep who has been bred with us, but refusing to take any more religious
functions has forsaken our College; which Count Gondamor having read, made
little account of the Gentleman, but notwithstanding reflecting upon his
fathers deserts, gave him house room and diet, and afterward perceiving his
dexterity of wit, made choice of him for his Secretaty, and now since the death
of his Master, he is retainer to his Catholic Majesty. These past, in the
year 1622. Father Baldwin was elected Rector of the College of St. Omers, who
had lately suffered imprisonment in the Tower of London for seven years space,
for suspicion of high Treason, was in the year 1619. by Gondamors intercession
set free: this man insisting on the same steps with his predecessors, became
the first English Rector of that College, and the second year after, there
was sent to this College, a young Gentleman Estenelaus Brown by name, son
and heir to Mr. Anthony Brown, brother to the Vicount Mountague: this
Gentleman after two years abode there, wearied by their tyrannycall
discipline, and desirous to get his neck from their yoke, counterfeited a
letter from his Father to the Rector of the said College, and delivered it to
one Higham a book seller, who Sometimes the boy of W W. book binder in London.
lived in the Town, and used often to the College, who delivered it to the
Post which comes weekly from London to S. Omers, to that end he should give
it to the Rector, which done, and the Rector vnclosing the letter, taking it to
be his fathers own writing, wherein he entreated to send his son over into
England, and furnish him with all necessaries besides, which the Rector failed
not to do upon hope of his speedy return; but he having privately disclosed
unto one of his fellows what his purpose and intentions were, was betrayed by
his babbling, and well punished for a liar; whereupon the Rector informed his
Father what prancks he had played, and that if ever he should be in England
he much doubted he would turn Protestant; hereupon his Father sent word
back, that he should detain him there, protesting that he was sorry to be
father to so untoward a son; and thus perforce they detain this young
Gentleman to this hour; and such like courses they take with all that would
leave them; and if any escape them, and be after promoted to any place of
honor, they traduce him and brand him with all titles of ignominy, and to this
end they have their Agents in all places of consequence to put in against them
as witness these that follow. Sir Edward Bainham, Sir Griffin Markham, the
Archbishop of Rhemes, and Father Barnes a Benedictine, and others whom in my
seventh Chapter I shall speak of at large.

Now let us come to the Jesuits themselves what love and unity they mutually
entertain amongst them, and to their three several professions: the first and
chief of them are mere Machiauillians, who do nothing but employ themselves
in matters of State, and insinuate themselves into the secrets of great ones,
and giving true intelligence to none, save to the Pope and his Catholic
Majesty, whose sworn vassals they are; these observing no Collegiate
discipline are dispensed withal by his Holiness, as if they did God greater
service in thus employing themselves, then following Collegiate courses. As for
their religion, they make it a cloak for their wickedness, being most of them
Athiests or very bad Christians; these are they that observe these ten
Commandments which follow.

1 To seek riches and wealth: 2 To govern the world. 3 To reform the Clergy.
4 To be still jocund and merry. 5 To drink white and red wine. 6 To correct
Texts of Scripture. 7 To receive all Tithes. 8 To make a slave of their ghostly
child. 9 To keep their own and live on another man's purse. 10 To govern
their neighbors wife.
These ten Commandments they divide into two parts, all for me, and nothing
for thee: the charity they mainetaine each among other is none at all, for they
labor with envy; as for example, Father Parsons died at Rome, through grief
for not being made Cardinal, Creswels faction prevailing against him, and
Creswell himself notwithstanding his services done to the Sea of Rome and
State of Spain, was by new vpstart Jesuits, exauthorized and ejected from his
place, which was Prefect of the English Mission As you may read in Speed his
Chronicle.
which is now by dispensation from the Pope converted into a Prouinciall-ship,
which was given to Father Blunt, who was lately in England, and wretched
Creswell dyed about a year after at Gaunt in Flanders, well stricken with
years, but far more with discontent, on the 20 of March 1622. And their
malicious projects have cast out Father Fosser from being their Agent in the
Spanish Court 1627. who for a Jesuit, which is rare, was an honest meaning
man, and a very good fellow, and have subborned in his place Father North a
grand Matchiuillian, and thus they have used diverse others, as old Father
Flacke, Father Strange, Father Gibbins. The second sort of Jesuits are those
who preach, confess, and teach youth, and envy each other for the number of
their scholars and ghostly children; they are besides in no small emulation
about their own worth and learning, reading for the most part to their white
boys loose and lascivious Poems. A third sort of Jesuits there are, not
unfitly termed simple ones; these are wonderful austere in their life, of a
scrupulous conscience, and brought up to color the courses and the Actions of
the more cunning and politic ones: of this rank some four years since was
one Master S. of whom the Jesuits got some 12000. pound sterling, but since he
has seen their juggling and cheating, has left them, and returned to his true
religion and Country; of this rank also there yet lives Vicount Mountagues
brother, now Porter of the College at St. Omers, of whom they have got no
less then 10000. pound sterling, of whom they report, that after his death his
body shall work miracles for the austerenesse of his life; of the same
condition is Sr. Gerard Kemps brother, who is a Caterer to the College, out of
whose purse they have picked 2 or 3 thousands. These three several ranckes and
Orders aforesaid are grown to a faction, about the Iesuitrices or wandering
Nuns, some allowing, some disliking them utterly. This Order of Nuns began some
12 years since, by the means of Mistress Mary Ward, and Mistress Twitty,
two English Gentlewomen, who observe the Ignatian habit, and go clad very like
to the Jesuits, in this only differing from other Nuns: They walk abroad
in the world, and preach the Gospel to their sex in England and elsewhere: The
first that induced this Order of Nuns, was Father Gerard, then Rector of the
English College at Liege, Father Flacke and Father Moore assisting him
therein, but others oppugned them, as Father Singleton, Benefield, and Flood,
refusing to give them their Ite praedicate, but rather adjudging them to a
retired and monastical life, whereupon there has risen no small variance
amongst them; but in the mean space this foresaid Mistress Ward is become
mother General of no less then 200 English damsels, being most of them Ladies
and Knights daughters, who live in their Colleges at St. Omers, Liege, and
Colen, and from thence are for England to convert their Country: it fell out
that not long after their Who were the fairest of all the rest, as Mistrisse
Vaus, Stanly, Portescue.
mother General went to Rome, with seven or eight others to establish their
Order with his Holiness, which though he confirmed not so fully; yet he gave
her a toleration, which being obtained, she procured another College also to
be erected in Rome, where she has under her government about 100. Italian
Maids; But from Rome the last year she went to Vienna, where she has
likewise procured to be erected another Monastery, the Emperesse her self
protecting her; but now she is daily expected in England, to take account of
her she-Apostles labors; in a word to conclude, these Jesuits endeavor to
demollish all Orders and places of eminency above them; all which I observing,
labored with all possible means to get out of their clutches, and though I
had promised them to turn Jesuit, yet had I leave to go to Civil with their
Mission and from thence to Madrid to take leave of my Parents, and so to
return again to them, and thus in 1622. I departed St. Omers for Spain, with
the Mission consisting of 12. of us, whose true names were, Clifford, Gerard,
Appleby, Conniers, Hausby, Robinson, Euely, Nail, Atkins, Midleton, Farmer,
and my self.

CHAP. IIII.
This fourth Chapter contains his departure from St. Omers, and voyage into
Spain, where on the Seas he with those eleven in his company were taken by a
Statesman of war, having been in fight with them from seven in the morning,
till three in the afternoon, after by the Captain of the said man of war,
whose name was Jacob. May, were boarded upon a ship of Hamburge, which they
met with on the Seas bound for Spain, in the which ship after ten days
sail, they were taken again by a little Gally belonging to the Port of Sally
in Barbay.

IN the year 1622. August the first, we departed from St. Omers for Callis in
France, where we were embarked in a ship belonging to Dunkerke, which was
then newly loaded for St. Lucas in Spain, having taken a false certification
from the governor of Callis, that the ship and goods belonged thereunto.

This ship was of an 100. Tun burden, carrying 12 piece of Ordnance, 40. men
besides passengers, one Surgeon, and two Trumpeters. And we departed with
seven other ships in the company, and having sailed to the Promontory called
Fines Terrae, upon the coast of Galisia we descryed a ship coming from the
coast of Portugal, which took his course aside of us, at last we perceiving
he discerned our French colors, we forthwith made toward him, who put out
the States colors, but we supposing him to be a Pyrate of Argier, Sally, or
Rochell, it would not be amiss to aboard him being so near the coast of
Spain, not doubting within a few hours to take him, to the which end the
Admiral with the other fine being all French, joined himself to the Vice
Admiral being the strongest of the company, they were conceited, it were best
to let him go; but the Vice Admiral desirous to contest with them prepared
himself for to fight, launching forth his boat, charging his Artillery,
Muskets, and Murdering pieces, laying his trains of powder, nailing up his
decks, crossing the hatches with Cables, and hanging his gripling chain on the
maine Mast; which done, the Captain of the Vice Admiral Jacques Banburge by
name, began to encourage his Mariners, telling how easy it was for seven to
take one, not thinking the supposed Pyrate to have had above 30 men, and 10
piece of Ordinance, whereupon the rest gathering together, resolved that the
Admiral should make the first onset, and the Vice Admiral the second, and the
rest in their order; but the Hollander discerning us to be French made no haste
to escape us, and having gotten the wind made toward us with a desire to get
some provision of us for his money and we toward him, which seeing, he hung
out a flagge of truce, but our Admiral saluted him with two pieces of
Ordinance, our Vice Admiral with four, and the rest in their order came on,
which he valiantly withstood, putting forth on each side some 14. brass^
^^^ces of ordnance, not having before out above 4 or 5, his burden being some
200. Tun, with an hundred and fifty men, and five Trumpeters, who turning
about gave us two broad sides with his Ordnance, shooting three or four of
our ships through, and through out. Our Admiral and the other French ships
seeing themselves deceived, and that he was no Pyrate but a States man of
war, fled, leaving our Vice Admiral engaged in the sight. The Vice Admiral
seeing how the case stood, said unto us 12. that we were now to dye with
honor, or survive with infamy, and because we were young and inexpert in sea
fight, to encourage the better made us to drink each one of us a good draught
of Aqua vitae with Gunpowder; This done, he enjoined his Mariners to play on
them with small shot, but they replying so stoutly, made our Mariners quickly
quit the hatches and fly to their Ordnances underneath as their best defense,
whereupon we killed the Master of their ship, which their Captain perceiving
discharged more eagerly, and with the shot took off the stern of our ship,
which our Captain perceiving grew desperate, even sometimes minded to blow up
the ship, in 12 shootes more they struck down our maine Mast, and killed our
Surgeon who newly was come up from under the lowermost deckes, and saying
these words si deus nobiscum quis contra nos, was slain on a sudden with a
common bullet, and having one hand on my shoulder, pulled me down along with
him, his blood stre(...)ng out upon me.

And thus after seven hours fight they aboarded us, with fire and sword
massacring all those that came first to their hands, and after they had cleared
the decks they desisted.

Then examining all that suruiued, amongst the rest they found us 12 to be
English youths and passengers, and kindly entertained us. Next day they meeting
with a ship of Hamburge bound for Spain, loaded with boards and beer,
commended us to him to convey us to the foresaid St. Lucas in Spain,
surrendering up all our furniture which we brought in the Dunkerks ship,
which ship they carried with them to Holland, being laden with very rich
commodities to the value of 7000. pounds, and so thanking them for their
affection to the English Nation we left them, and continued our course for
Spain, and coming to the Cape of S. Vincent, we deseryed coming toward us a
little Gally, which we took to be a Fisherman, and being destitute of
victuals and provision, we got up the maine Mast and made signs unto them for
succor, hoping in an hour to have gone with them on shore at the Fort of S.
Vincent.

But our supposed Fishermen came sooner then welcome, for having first coasted
us round about, and perceiving our vessel though great, yet of little defense
(as in truth it was, all the Mariners being mere Anabaptists) came directly
upon us, and we getting on the hatches ready to leap into them; perceived our
Fishermen turned to a Gally of 18 oars on each side, having in him besides
about 100. Moors, Moriscoes, and other runnagates, who coming within shot let
fly at us two pieces of Ordnances, and making a great shout altogether in sign
of joy they had gotten a prize.

And we seeing ourseues quite lost, struck sail and submitted, they entering
our ship, took us out into them, and sent our ship with our Pilot and
twelve Moors into Sally.

CHAP. V.
The fifth Chapter declares how he was sold with the rest in Sally, and the
great misery they endured until they were ransomed, and how the Merchant was
poisoned by the Moors for redeeming them, and after his death how the Jesuits
cheated his sole daughter and heir of the monyes which from us was due unto
her, for those her Father disbursed in our ransom.

AFter we were taken by the the Moors (as aforesaid) we were bound hand and
foot, and cast into the Prow or forecastle of their Gally, where we lay four
days space, not permitted so much as to stir from the place.

After these four days past, and the seas grown calm, they untied our hands
and feet, brought us from the Prow to the board of the Gally to help them in
rowing, putting four and four to an oar, but I being unable to keep stroke
with the rest, was well beaten, and bound again, and cast back to the Prow,
the rest doing their deuoire, where kept close till night, then I enjoyed their
company.

At midnight, two Moors come down unto us, and secretly selecting two of the
youngest and fairest amongst us, abused their bodies with insatiable lust, and
on the next morning they stripping themselue stark naked, and pouring out
water one upon the others head, supposed by this washing they were cleansed
from their new acted sin.

Another night the Moors making merry upon the decks, and half drunk with
their drink which they call Opium, our Mariners of Hamburge, and some
Portugal Captives which were with us perceiving such opportunity, we encouraged
each other to rise up against them, their weapons being below with us, and one
of the Portugals hands untied; whereupon we agreed, and this Portugal
beginning to untie the rest, was apprehended in the Act by the Captain of the
Gally, who coming down in a fury, said that he knew what we intended, and
that he could discover in his sleep, more treachery then we could invent
being awake* And well might he do so having the help of their Priest with him
who was a witch (as most of them are) and then putting the plotters to death,
he fettered us more strongly with irons.

And so coasting the coasts of Spain, still expecting some other booties, but
finding none, entered the straites of Gibralter toward Argier, but the wind
turning contrary, we were constrained to repair unto Sally. And the day
before our arrival there, being destitute of victuals, the Priest called their
Alfaqui, conjured the fish of the sea to draw near to the Gally, so that they
took them up with their hands, as many as sustained us till we arrived at
Sally, where we were carried to the Castle, and there crammed like Capons, that
we might grow fatter and better for sale, and being brought to the market, were
shared amongst them and sold.

And thus we were divided to several masters, taking farewell one of another
with tears in our eyes, never thinking to meet any more: the price which was
given for each of us was 25. pound more or less, our masters being Moriscoes,
which dwelt at the Castle.

The Hamburges likewise were sold in like manner, but in this respect were in
far worse estate, because they were sold to Moors in that Country, and
therefore had less hopes of future redemption: But amongst the rest of our
company I deemed my self the happiest, because I fell to the Captain of the
ship, whose name was Alligallan a Morisco, who had been banished with a
100000. more from Spain, by Philip the third, upon suspicion of treason. These
Moriscoes came into Spain with Jacob Almansor, otherwise called Vliaor Caliph,
who conquered Spain and brought them in with him, where they resided 500.
years, until the last extirpation as now said.

This Morisco carried me to his house, where fettering one of my legs with an
iron chain, and clothing me with a canuas suite, laid these injunctions upon
me: first he gave me charge of his stable, and then to grind at his hand mill,
and to draw water at the Fountain, with many others of the like nature.

The victuals he gave me were Bereugenaes, Cabbage, and Goats flesh; As for my
lodging it This Bereugenaes is like our Turnips.
was in a dungeon in the market place, where they use commonly to lodge their
slaves, who repair there every night about eight of the clock, their masters
manicling their hands before for fear they should make an insurrection, the
number of them being about 800. being Spaniards, Frenchmen, English, Italians,
Portugals, and Flemmish, our beds were nothing but rotten straw laid on the
ground, and our couerlets pieces of old sails full of millions of lice and
fleas, so that we could take no rest, being constrained to put back to back
and rub out the pain; about five of the clock in the morning the door being
opened we repaired to our masters houses, and so to our wonted work.

And it chanced on a time that I having not performed my ordinary task, was
beaten by my master so cruelly, that for a long time after I lost the use of my
left arm, which he perceiving said, at most it was but the loss of a
Christian dog. Another time going to fetch water from the Fountain, I
chanced to make water against the Church wall, which a Moore seeing, presently
made toward me, and asked whether it was the custom of my Country to do so
or no, if it was, it was not the custom of theirs, and thereupon beat me till
he left me half dead. A while after this, my Master perceiving me to be
sick and feeble, and not able to perform any service, gave me leave to see a
French Merchant, by name Iehan de la Goretta, to see if I could persuade him to
redeem me; this Merchant traded from thence to Civil, and Cales, and used to
traffic for slaves and other commodities, to whom when I had opened my case,
he promised to do for me what possibly he could, and having taken my name in
writing, he presently told me he knew one of my name, whom (as it fell out) was
my Uncle, who was then the English Consul for the Merchants at S. Lucas, and
thereupon having examined me, and finding me to tell the truth, offered to my
master 50. crowns for my ransom, but my master utterly refused it, then the
Merchant rose higher, and gave him the sum of sixscore crowns and upwards,
and so I was ransomed and set at liberty.

Now I began (having a Moore in my company for my conductor) to enquire after
my companions, whom I found in the Castle, and in several private houses, whom
they scarce ever suffered to come abroad, especially the fairest and youngest,
whose bodies they abused with their Sodomy. I having with much difficulty
obtained to see them, took my leave of them and went to the Merchant,
acquainting him how I had been with my companions, and entreating if he could
possibly he would ransom them, who made great demurre for the present, not
knowing them, and besides they being so many in number, that their ransom
would amount to a far greater sum of money then he could well disburse,
whereupon I persuaded him that it would be an exceeding charitable deed, and
no less auailable unto him, their Fathers and friends being men of great
fashion in England.

So then at last the Merchant partly resolved to redeem them, went to visit
them, but most of their masters would not part with them upon any terms, which
the Merchant perceiving, betook himself to the Governor of the Castle who was
his very great friend, and presenting him with a diamond ring of 600. crowns
price, procuring the Governor to buy them for himself, who did it, and gave
for them, some 30. pound, some 40. pound a piece.

Which done, he delivered them up to the Merchant, which the Moors their said
masters understanding, came in great rage and took them out of the Merchants
house where we were altogether expecting to be embarked the next wind for
Spain, but one of their masters saying I was the occasion they were like to
loose their slaves, drew his Cemiter upon me to kill me, but I betook my self
to my heels, and took sanctuary in the Governors house, whom when I had
informed how the case stood, came out with his guard and protected me, and
took my companions from their masters again, and put us all in a house near
his own, with a guard of 12 musketeers to defend us till such time as the
Merchants ship was ready for Spain.

Hereupon the Moors their masters were further enraged, and having complotted
together, said they would have them to be gelded, and to be sent for Eunuchs
as a present to the King of Marruecos to attend upon his 300. wives, so they
went to the Governor and declared this their mind unto him, the Governor was
much perplexed, not daring to deny any thing which was for his King.

Whereupon the Governor not knowing any other way to prevail, entreated them
that they would not do so, and that upon a greater occasion they should command
him greater matters, and so with persuasions and good words he obtained his
will, and we being freed from all danger, and the Merchant ready to depart for
Spain, one of the aforesaid Moors presented him with a poisoned tart, to the
end he dying therewith, they might recover all their slaves. But as it pleased
God this poison wrought not with him for a day and a half, for after dinner
he took his leave of the Governor being as yet found, and the Governor
brought him on shipboard, taking us 12. along with him, where departing, we all
gave him most humble and hearty thanks, as the sole instrument of our most
happy delivery. And thence having hoysed up sails we went on our voyage, and
scarcely having sailed the space of half an hour, the Merchant began to wax
wonderful sick, and to rave, and withal to complain of the dart, which the
master of the ship seeing, turned his course to Mammora, a town now
belonging to Spain, eight leagues from Salley, where anchoring that night, we
expected the morning tide to enter the Port, the morning tide being come we
carried our Merchant on shore, and I being about to lay him on a bed, he
presently expired in mine arms, not making any will or disposing of his goods:
Next day he was buried with all honor the Governor of the Town and Soldiers
could exhibit, we 12. carrying torches before his corpse to the Church, sang the
requiem and dirges of the dead, and the Priest celebrated mass for his soul.

Which Ceremonies ended we returned to our ships, and being ready to depart
with the next morning tide, there drew toward Mammora, the Moore whom they
call the Saint of Salley, with 30000. other Alarabes, and assaulted it with
such fury and shouting, as if heaven and earth were come together, then making
their onset were valiantly repulsed, the town being assisted with 150
Mariners, and Passengers out of our ship and pinnaces, but especially by two
French Gunners who never let fly in vain, the Spanish Gunners missing for the
most part.

Thus a great part of the Moors being slain, the rest fled with their St.
back again to Salley.

And we two days after departing the town, continued our course for Cales,
but drawing near the City of Alarache, we were chased by three men of war of
Argier, so that we were forced to take shelter under the Castle of Alarache,
where I and another of my companions got on shore, unwilling to venture any
further in the ship, but finding there a lighter boat of the Governors ready
for Cales, we embarkt our selves therein, being accompanied with one Captain
and a Dominican Friar, and when we were near Cales the Friar began to tell the
Captain of the best Curtesans in the town, but in the midst of his story he
perceived a Turkish Bark making toward us, which broke off his discourse, and
drove him to mumble over his moldy beads, and say his Breuiary, and office to
the Virgin Mary. But having gotten on the Spanish shore, told what was behind
of his former discourse.

Here I departing with my other companion, went to St. Lucas which was three
leagues off to my Uncles house, where I was received and entertained with no
little joy; where also ten days after, the rest of our company arrived, with
whom being furnished for my journey accompanied them to their College in
Civil, whence taking my leave I left them, being not willing to taste any more
of their discipline, and wishing them withal to take order to satisfy the
Merchants daughter, having already done it for me.

The Rector made answer for them to me, that he would take that to his charge.

And so I went to the Court of Madrid to visit my Parents and friends who knew
not what was become of me, where being entertained with no small joy, I opened
to my Father the misery I had suffered and acquainted him with the Jesuits
practices at S. Omers, and the reasons wherefore I left them; this my Father
hearing, grew into dislike with the Jesuits, but especially when he understood
that the Rector of the College at Civil had cheated the Merchants daughter
whose father lost his life in ransoming their scholars, which cheat was
contrived on this manner. The Jesuits of Civil having been informed that the
Merchant disbursed not ready money for their ransom, but was to pay it at his
return, now (he not returning) they affirmed that they thought in conscience
they were out of debt for the matter, never considering that the Merchant had
left his warehouse fraught with the value of 10000. crowns behind, which their
deceit his daughter now seeing sued them in the law, but the Jesuits so
possessed the Judges that they overthrew her in the cause, so that now she was
left destitute of Father and goods, the foresaid Moors and Jesuits being
trebly paid.

Now the Jesuits wrote to England to their friends for their ransomes, which
being speedily sent, they enjoyed themselves.

Moreover they made a Tragicall-Comedy of our voyage, whereby they got much
money and honor, whereupon all people admired Gods providence, and our
delivery out of such manifest dangers, which the Jesuits ascribed only to
their protector S. Ignatius we being their scholars, and thereupon they
collected no small sums of money, which they pretended was to pay for our
ransoming. All are there living, s^ing only Conniers who dyed upon his
arrival at Civil through the misery he endured.


And now they keep these scholars in the College studying until such time
which is about 2 years hence, when they shall be ordained Priests and Jesuits
to be sent to convert their Country.

CHAP. VI.
This sixth Chapter contains diverse* remarkable things touching the Jesuits
and Monks, and also the death of his Father in Madrid, where after his voyage
he lived two years, until his Catholic Majesty nominated him his Captain
for Flanders.

IN the year 1623. I arrived at Madrid as aforesaid, where I resided with my
Parents living in peace and tranquillity, until such times as there came to
Madrid, that magnanimious and virtuous Prince Charles Prince of Wales, now King
of great Britain, whose voyage procured the wonder of the world, the like
being never heard or read of; but leaving the description thereof to more
skillful pens then mine own, I return to my intended subject. First then
the Jesuits perceiving what final accounts I made of returning unto them,
gave me over for a castaway, and sought by all means they could to disgrace me
to my parents and friends, but I being before acquainted with their dealings,
kept me out of their clutches. Now the Earl of Carlisle the Lord Hayes by name,
arrived at Madrid, took me from my Father and made me his interpreter for the
time of his abode in Spain, and after his departure I past my time to and fro
in diverse English Gentlemen's company, still expecting the conclusion of the
match between England and Spain, and hoping thereby to be admitted into the
service of Donna Maria the Infanta whom my Father had tutoured in the English
tongue, and had also the promise of all courtesies she could possibly do him,
and thus passing my time, I fell into acquaintance with Mr. Francis Brown
son and heir to the Vicount Mountague, and Mr. Henry Barty, the now Lord of
Lindseys brother, one Mr. Anthony Inglefield the foresaid Mr. Brownes cosen
germane and Earl of Bristols Page. This Mr. Brown had a Benedictine Monk to
his Tutor whose name was Friar Bennet, alias Smith, who through the advice of
another Benedictine Monk one Father Boniface, took him out of the Earl of
Bristols house, and put him to a Priests house in Madrid to be tutour'd and
brought up in learning, telling him that it was very absurd that such a
Gentleman's son as he was should be Page, and that especially in Spain.

But their intent was to make him one of their own order, and so get his
means away from him, for they enjoined the Priest to look to him very
narrowly, and not suffer him to go abroad, without either going himself, or
else sending a faithful companion along with him, and that upon Sundays and
Holidayes he should bring him along with him to his cosens house to dinner,
where I meeting afterward with him, and growing intimate with him and his
cosen, they complained to me what severity the Monks exercised upon them, but
especially upon Mr. Inglefield, enticing him daily to take their habit upon
him, saying, that there was not such an order to be found in the whole world
besides, and that he should be admitted into the company of any Duke or
Prince, and moreover reckoning up how many Popes had been of their Order and
the like. As for Mr, Brown they kept him in so close, that he rather lived the
life of a Monk then a Courtier, for they made him every day to meditate upon
death, and the danger of living in the world, thinking thereby to draw him to
their Order, at least to be well affected thereunto. Likewise they made him say
the office of our Lady, and their grand Priests breuiary, and so at length they
got such a hand over him, that they made him often times go on foot whilst they
rode about juncketting in his coach; but now leaving the Monks awhile, let us
come to the Jesuits and Austen Friars.

First how the Jesuits went about to seduce to them one Mr. Henry Challoner,
son to Sir Thomas Challoner, late Tutor to Prince Henry: this young Gentleman
not contenting himself with the bare knowledge of Arts, and liberal sciences
at home, but desiring likewise to be more really and experimentally informed
by visiting foreign parts, imbarkt himself at Dover for S. Lucas in Spain*
where being arrived took his way by Civil to Madrid, and at Civil he went to
the College of English Jesuits to see the discipline and government thereof,
and the Jesuits seeing him to be but tender of years, made full account to
draw him to their Orders by their flattering words and inticements, telling him
as yet he was in a great error, that it were his best course to admit of the
Roman Catholic faith without which there is no salvation; but he demeaned
himself so discreetly that they could not possible work him over with all
their enticements. Hereupon seeing they could not prevail by their arguments
and inticements the kept him in their College perforce, where considering in
what strait he now was, contrived the means of his liberty after this manner:
he told them that he had a brother a near retainer to his Highness of Wales,
who had sent for him to prefer him to his service, which the Jesuits hearing
dismised him speedily, for fear they should incur some great displeasure.
And so taking his leave he took his journey for Madrid, where by the way he
met with a certain Austin Friar, which was then travailing for Madrid, whose
company he enjoyed to the foresaid Madrid, but on the way the Friar well
observing the comeliness and ingenious looks grew forthwith inamoured with
him, insomuch that he desired to be his bed fellow, and in condition thereof he
promised him a nights lodging with his sister, who for her beauty was then
paralel'd but by very few in all Spain, but this young Genrleman not giving
way to his requests, as exceeding the bounds of reason and modesty, left the
Friar much perplexed in his unnatural desires; when they came to Madrid, the
Friar went to his Covent, and this young Gentleman to the Court, where he was
entertained by his Highness, who gave charge to his Secretary that he should
want for nothing, telling him that his Father had been a second Father to his
brother whose god-sonne he was; thus passing his time at the Court under the
Princes protection and care, was here also as before at the Civil College
assaulted by one Father Foster, but he put him off as the rest. A little after
he returning into England with his Highness, now my Father continued in his
tutorship of the Infant until he fell sick and dyed, November the last, 1623.
the chief occasion of his death being this: the Jesuits and their dependants
seeing that he consulted not with them as in times past, for finding himself
wonderfully mistaken in them and their religion, said it was high time for him
to look to his own soul, and yet he doubted not if it pleased God but he
would save one. Whereupon the Jesuits endeavoring by all possible means to
exauthorize him under hand, informing the Infanta that his disease the cough of
the lungs might prove infectious to her person; upon this she sent her
Physicians to visit him, and they finding it otherwise, she continued him in
her service.

But a little after he being advertised by his friends of the Jesuits plots
and information against him, and seeing also the same himself, went home, and
after the eight days space with sickness and discontent he dyed, leaving
his place to one Father Boniface, in whose Church he was buried, his body being
accompanied by the Earl Gondamor and other Nobles of the Court, and all the
servants of the Infanta, with many other English Gentlemen, as Mr. Barty, Mr.
Brown, Sr. Edward Bainham, Mr. Inglefield and others; the dirges and requiems
and other ceremonies ended, my brother and I went to kiss the Infantas and Don
Oliuares his hands, who most graciously received us, and procured us our
Fathers pension.

This past, I lived at Madrid at my mothers house 7 or 8 months, in which I
continued my former friendship with M Brown, and M. Inglefield, but especially
with M. Inglefield, who told me again how vehemently he was urged and
importuned to turn Monk, whereupon I diswaded him from it, which Father
Boniface smelling out, gave order to his tutor to refrain my company, which M.
Inglefield took so grievously, that on the sunday following when his tutor was
saying Mass at the high altar, got from him, and came to me where I
entertained him with all respect and courtesy. But Father Boniface
understanding where he was, came to him, and persuaded him to return to his
tutor, but seeing he could not prevail by persuasions, thought to do it by
threats; but all in vain, for the young Gentleman was resolved rather to dye
then to turn Monk, which Father Boniface seeing returned to his Covent as
wise as he came.

A little while after, he counseled Mr. Bennet the aforesaid Mr. Brownes
tutor, to convey him to Rome, which he did, and entreated Sr. Griffin Markam,
and Sr. William Stanley who then lived at the Court, and with whom I daily kept
company, to persuade me to follow the wars, supposing thereby in my absence
to regaine Master Inglefield with their persuasions: I presently gave ear, and
having got audience of his Majesty, I entreated him for a commission and patent
for a land company in Flanders, which his Majesty forthwith granted me, and
withal gave me 200 crowns for my viaticum: so taking leave of my mother and
friends, I took my journey for Flanders, but in the mean space, M. Inglefield
received a letter from his Father, in which he enjoined him to return to the
University of Doway in the Province of Artoais, where his younger brother was a
Student, which foresaid University was but four leagues out of my way, and so
we resolved to travail together, and a day before we departed, Father Francis
Fosser came to visit us, and invited us to accompany him the next day to
Vallidolid, it being but two leagues out of the way to Flanders, at whose
request M. Inglefield and my self resolved to go with him, but especially for
the great desire, we had to see the English College there; whereupon the next
day we departed to Vallidolid, where after three days journey we arrived, and
were invited forthwith after our arriuals by the Rector and other Fathers of
the College to lodge with them, whose request we accepted of, staying with
them that night at supper, and bedtime being come, they lodged M. Inglefield at
one end of the College and my self at the other, telling us it was not a
custom among them for two to lie together, whereupon I betook my self to my
rest, and he to his: And I being in bed, the Sub-Rector and two of his
scholars went to his Chamber, and after some conference had with him, they
brought him certain junckets and sweet meats with the best wine in the
town, telling him that if he would be pleased to stay with them in their
College, he should have all the respect and honor which a Gentleman of his
quality may challenge. Furthermore they showed him the sepulcher and monument
of his great Uncle S. Francis Inglefield, sometimes privy Counselor, and
Master of the Wards to Queen Mary, and King Philip, who had also been buried
in their College, and had been as they say one of their chief Benefactors,
and for his sake they were bound to give him respect, and the best counsel
they could: but he replied that he must with all have make for Doway, since his
father had sent for him to come thither: on the next morning as soon as I rose
I went to his Chamber, where he told me of all occurences and passages with the
Jesuits the night past, which having done we resolved to depart after dinner,
but the Rector, and Father Fosser, and Father ward the Sup-Rector, very
earnestly besought us to stay with them two days longer, because they had a
Lay brother John Hill alias Wood by name, who was there for Flanders, and would
be for our company if we would stay so long for him, which we did. This Hill
had been sometimes a Pyrate, and Captain of a ship belonging to Sir Francis
Mannering, who coming for England, Hill with drew himself, and fled to
Ligorne in Italy, where giving all that he had got by Pyracy to the Pope, and
the general of the Jesuits for the remission of his sins, at last turned
Jesuit himself* whilst we expected the company of the said Hill, the Jesuits
continued their banqueting and collations in M. Inglefields Chamber, but
seeing at last how little they prevailed in their purposes dimist us, Hill
going along with us, whom we found to be a crafty companion, and one who with
his subtle artifice and skill labored to entice Mr. Inglefield to St. Omers,
which the better to effect, he sowed dissension betwixt us as we travailed to
St. Sebastians, where he went to the Jesuits * Residency* and we to an Inn
in the town, but This residency the Jesuits got by cheating the Priest of the
town about 6. years since.
the day following this brother Hill came to our lodging, and in my absence
invited him to dine with him at the Residency, with whom he went, and after
dinner the Jesuits persuaded him to leave my company, Hill having informed
them how I had affronted him in the way, and besides that the way I resolved to
take was very dangerous and chargeable, since I was to go by land, and through
many deserts in France, and the lands of Bordeaux; which arguments had so far
forth prevailed with him, that had I not by a desperate search and enquiry by
chance found him out, he had been gone by sea to St. Omers, with Hill, but
when I met with him and asked him his resolution, he told me he would go by
sea, urging me with the aforesaid reasons of the Jesuits, which I having
forthwith confuted and cleared my self, we instantly resolved to take post*
horses, and continue in our journey by land, and on the very same day we rode
to S. John Lucy in France, and Hill followed us, choosing rather to loose all
the provision he had provided for sea, then to leave M. Inglefields company:
so posting on through the desert of Bordeaux, finding my self clear from the
danger of the inquisition, and falling into words with Brother Hill, they gave
occasion of blows, at last after half an hours fighting, being by M.
Inglefield parted, who inclined to my side, the which brother Hill perceiving
lost his labor in that he intended, reconciled him unto me, and that night in
token of an humble reconciliation, supplied the place of an Oastler in pulling
of my boots, so arriving at Bordeaux, being weary with riding Post, we agreed
with the messenger to travel with him to Paris, giving him every man five
pound apeece (the journey being 300. miles) to defray our charges, whence
coming within four leagues of Orleance, some jests passing between M.
Inglefield and a Frenchman, Hill persuaded M. Inglefield who did not understand
the French tongue, that he was abused by the Frenchman, which gave him
occasion to strike him over the face, whereupon the Frenchmen which were in
company assaulted us, and had it not been for a Rocheleer we had been slain,
who related unto him that he was misinformed by Brother Hill, which they
considering, dry*basted brother Hill and left us. Afterward coming to
Orleance, Hill complained to the Jesuits in the French College of the seeming
abuse offered unto him, upon which they pretending to be Christ's followers,
persuaded him that if he took a blow on the right ear, he should turn the
left also, where seeing himself so slighted in his complaint, railed
extremely against them, not deeming them worthy to be covered with the robs of
their disorderly Orders, and thinking them to be a disgrace to all others of
that society. From thence continuing our journey till we came to Paris,
calling him there to an account of the money which we delivered unto him being
our purse-bearer, found his reckoning short by 7. pound, which he pretending to
have lost, gave us reason to discard him; we travailing by our selves from
Paris to Doway, at which place leaving Mr. Inglefield with his brother, and
Doctor Which discourse began by reason of their intemperate drinking of
Muscadine, which was the incendiary of some quarrels the day before.
Kellison President of the English College, I resolved from thence to
Brussels, and so to Bredah, but being invited by M. Francis Fowler the night
before I departed to the Caterers house, I found at supper, the L. S. son, M.
P. S. and M. T. A. and M. W P. where supper ended, M. P. floting in his cups,
began a* discourse concerning the casualties we are subject unto in this world,
preferring the Order of a Franciscan before others. To who^ I answered that on
condition he would turn Friar, I would turn Monk, I being seconded by M. S.
and M. Fowler, which their jest at last turned to earnest, whereupon M. P.
disrobing himself of all his rich apparel, gave them to his Host Edmunds,
who being potshotten and perceiving the Moon to shine bright through the
windows, said with a loud voice, that the holy Ghost was descended, and
opening his arms to receive it fell down backward and broke his pate, from
thence being carried to his bed, we continued drinking to our new vocations
till the day peept out, at which time reeling to the Franciscan Monastery
entered himself into their Order, they never examining the cause of this
sudden vocation, being glad of such a prize, shaued his crown and invested
him in their ornaments, M. S. and M. Fowler going to the Monks were admitted
with the like joy at the same instant. But I taking my leave of them at the
monastery door, said that I for my part was only in jest with them. But this
being noysed about the University, it came to Doctor Kellisons ear, under
whose charge these new Friars were, who sent for me, and said he much admired
that such a thing should happen in my company, and if that they had intended
religion they might have been secular Priests in his College, it being for
them more profitable and honorable: I answered that I thought it impossible to
govern the wills of other men, and supposed my self happy in keeping my self
from the like shauing. Upon this answer the Doctor demanded of me in what case
they were when they entered themselves, to whom I said they might thank their
god Bacchus more then any thing else for their new orders, which he hearing
took his leave of me and went to the Franciscans, accompanied with M. Bredley
a Priest M. Parkers cozen. So I leaving the University went to Bruxels, and
from thence to Bradah: but Bradley being denied entrance by the Friar, who
said it was against their Orders for any one to speak with any of their
Nouices, * leapt over the Garden For so they term all the first year.
wall, and got under his Cozens window, calling and saying unto him, Cozen,
Cozen, consider I pray that you have taken a religious Order without knowledge
of mother, brother, or kindred, and that your vocation is not good, being
undertaken in a hot brain His Cozen hearing this and being counseled by the
Friars, he opened his window and said, discedito a me Satan. Six days after
being in a better temper, perceiving his own folly, desired to depart from
thence, which he did with great difficulty, for he was persuaded by the
Friar, that if ever he departed from them, being entered, he lost the
salvation of his soul. To whom he answered that he intended this journey for
England to receive his portion; and taking leave of his friends to return
again. Upon which promise they suffered him to depart. Thence coming into
England, was received of his friends, and not suffered to return, only sent a
sum of money to maintain their Covent. The Friars perceiving that he should
never return, preached against his Cozen B. and other Priests for diswading
him from his return. But concerning M. S. and M. Fowler, who were entered into
the Benedictine monastery, whose example encouraged M. Alex. Wy, and M. Edward
More to follow them. But the Monks being more subtle then the Friars, used
these men with all the courtesy they could, that they might induce their Order.
After these kindnesses they bare a more rough hand over them, and amongst the
rest Doctor Radisend their President, upon slight occasion enjoined these
Gentlemen to penance, which was, that they should prostrate themselves at the
inward Chapel door whilst the rest of the Monks came in and sang Vespers.
Whereupon some of the brauer sort to show their authority, would tread somewhat
hard upon them, and their long lying on the ground, with their hard pressing,
caused them to let fly backward, insomuch that the sent compelled the Friars
to depart the Chapel. A while after these Gentlemen perceiving their hard
usage, departed their monastery, resolving for England, although they had
promised (desiring to be freed from their bondage) to make aspeedy return,
which they never performed to this hour.

CHAP. VII.
This Chapter contains the state and demeanor of the English Fugitives under
the King of Spain his Dominions and else where, with a Catalogue of the
Colleges and Monasteries belonging to our English Jesuits, Monks, and
Seminary Priests beyond the Seas.

But gentle Reader, give me leave a little to digress, and reckon up unto you
the state of our English Fugitives in the Court of Spain, and first and
foremost S. Anthony Shurley, who styles himself Earl of the sacred Roman
Empire, and has from his Catholic Majesty a pension of 2000. ducats per
annum, all which in respect of his prodigality is as much as nothing. This S.
Anthony Shurley is a great plotter and proiector in matters of State, and
undertakes by sea-stratagems to invade and ruinate his native Country, a just
treatise of whose passages would take up a whole volume.

Next unto him there is one Sir Edward Bainham, who was a grand complotter of
the Gunpowder treason, and an agent for all the rest to Flanders, Rome, and
Spain, at which place he lived for four or five years in great reputation
and esteem. In Spain he grew familiar with Creswell, but the Gunpowder
treason taking no effect, they forthwith fell to difference, and having spent
12000 pounds sterling which he carried out of England with him, he fell into
great misery wherein he lives to this day, and (because his plot failed) he is
neither countenanced by his Catholic Majesty, nor by the Jesuits who seduced
him. I being in his company at Madrid, and telling him of Creswels death, he
made answer that he hoped he was in the deepest pit of hell, having been the
occasion of his ruin, with many others.

Likewise there is one M. John Persall, who is a mere formalist, and has for
his pension of his Catholic Majesty 20 crowns a month; but were it not for
Don Duarte brother to the Duke of Braganza, who relieues him now and then, he
might starve with hunger notwithstanding his pension.

There is also one M. William Sadler, who has These pensions are but only as
a bait to allure others: for they are seldom or never paid.
40 crowns monthly pension from his Catholic Majesty, who nevertheless were
it not for his wives sake he might keep lent all the year long, for she with
her daughter brings him gold and silver without going to the Indies. Moreover
there is one M. Henry Butler, which teaches his Catholic Majesty to play on
the Violl, a man very fantastical, but one who has his pension truly paid
him for his fingers sake. Also there is one M. Burton who lives by his wits.
Also there is one mistress Mary Monpersons who lives by trading.

Again, there is one M. Anthony Pinto, sometimes a servant to Creswell, who
seeing how ill the English Fugitives were treated, discarded the name of an
English man, and now passes for a Spaniard, and thereby lives far better
then the rest, being one no less subtle then his master: thus much for the
English secular Fugitives of note at Madrid.

But now let us come to the Clearkes and religious men. First, to the English
Jesuits whose Agent and Procurator general is Father North, one for policy,
very subtle and dangerous. This North was created D. D. in Paris, and was
sometimes Vice President of the College of Doway, and afterward turned
Jesuit. Agent and Procurator general for the English Monks, is one Father
Boniface, a very crafty fox, and a Smiths son in Redding, he is so ambitious
and haughty, that he will not acknowledge his parentage, but gives out he is
some great Gentleman's Son. As for the secular Priests they have one Missenden
for their Procurator general, a simple fellow, but wonderfully malicious. Now
touching those of the Scottish Nation which reside in the Court of Spain,
there is none of account but Colonel Simple, who betrayed a town in Holland
to the Spaniards some 30 years since, and received 25000 crowns for requital
of his treachery, and now living in Spain, has lately begun a foundation of a
Scottish Seminary, the Prefect or Rector whereof, he intends to make his base
son Hugh Simple, whom he has trained up in the Spanish Jesuits Seminaries,
one who may prove as treacherous a companion as ever was his father. For his
Majesty now of England, being in the Court of Spain, he gave up diverse
petitions and aduertisements to the King and Counsel of Spain that they
should not conclude any match with England, unless there should be erected in
each University under our King his Dominions a College of Jesuits for the
trayning up of youth in the Roman faith and doctrine, and to show himself the
more zealous, printed these said aduertisements with his name subscribed, and
delivered them to his friends of the Court. As for the Irish Fugitives, there
are more of them then of any other, the street wherein they lodge is by the
Spaniards termed the lousy street, and as for their quality, save these that
follow: First, he that pretends to be Bishop of Aramath, and Dublin, then the
Earl of Beere-hauen, with two or three more of the King his Pages, all the
rest are mere cheaters and vagabonds. The said Bishop and Earl are Agents for
Tyron and Terconwell, who live in Flanders in the Archdutchesses Court, and
from them to other Papists in Ireland, they daily importune his Catholic
Majesty and his Counsel to invade the said Kingdom with an army, not doubting
but it shall be delivered up into his hands, from which their solicitation
they could not forbear even when our King was in Spain. And thus much for the
English, Scottish, and Irish Fugitives which are at this present resident in
the Court of Spain. Now for the Colleges and Seminaries of the Jesuits,
Monks, and Friars, and other Seminary Priests, I remit the Reader to Lewis Owen
his running Register in the public Library at Oxford, of which he may at large
see which I will here but name; as the College at Vallidolid, and that at
Civil, and the Residence at Madrid, and another at St. Lucas, another at
Lisbon, of which a secular Priest, one Numan by name is the head, who is now in
suite with the Jesuits about the propriety thereof, but especially because
there is one Don Pedro Cotinio a Portugal Gentleman, who was once governor of
Baia in Brasill, who by reason of his great corruption and unlawful gifts he
received there at his return from Spain, fearing least he should be examined
by his Majesty how he came by these great riches, he had to bring the world
into a good conceit of him professed that he would build a College for the
education of 100 English youths, which after they had been trained up there,
might return to their Country and convert many to the Roman obedience, of
which College he promised the said Numan to be head, and likewise he made
the same promise to the English Jesuits, that one of them should be head, if
his Holiness would approve thereof, and hereupon engaged them so deep in the
Law, that 20 years trial will scarce end their controversy, he in the mean
time derideth both parties, having no intention at all to perform what he
has promised.

But nevertheless one Haruy a secular Priest, Numans Agent here in England for
the getting over of youth, persuades the Catholics and their Bishop of
Chalcedon, that without doubt Father Numan will overthrow the Jesuits. As for
any Scottish College or Seminary there is none, saving that which Colonel
Simple is beginning in Madrid. As for the Irish they have three, one in
Salamanca, another in Civil, and a third in Lisbon. As for English Nunneries,
there is only one which is at Lisbone, whereof you may read more at large in
Robinson, and thus much for Spain.

As for English Fugitives in Italy, there are very few. At Millaine there
resideth Sir Thomas Stukeley, who has 100 crowns a month pension from the
King of Spain. This Stukeley is a grand traitor, and enemy to his Country,
and were it not for the Duke of Feria, who entertaineth him at his own table,
he might long since have rode back to Madrid on an Ass as he came.

Likewise there is one Webb, a retainer to the King of Spain, who lives
wonderful poorly. As for the City of Florence, there lives Sir Robert
Dudley, who styleth himself Duke of Northumberland, who left England because
he could not be suffered to enjoy a second wife, his first wife then
suruiuing. This Dudley now enjoys his second wife by a dispensation from his
Holiness, and is in great esteem with the Duke of Florence, in regard of his
Art in contriuing and fabricating of ships, and Gallyes; and has obtained of
the Emperor to be declared Duke of Northumberland, who has given him the
title already, and the land when he can catch it.

Now let us come to Rome, where of all places of Italy we have but one English
College, (besides the residence of the English Iesuitrices, who spoke Latin
to his Holiness, to the end that he should confirm their Order, and their
sufficiency (though women) for preaching the Gospel to all Nations, even to
Turks and Infidels, mentioned in my third Chapter,) whereof Father Fitz
Herbert is the Rector, who had been before a pensiuner, and spy to the King
of Spain in France, and his service being past, and his pension failing him,
out of pure necessity he and his man were constrained to turn Jesuits, or
else starve. And he being a worthy scholar and a great politician, was very
welcome to that Order. But to come from Italy to Flanders, our English
Fugitives living there, are as follow: Sir William Stanley, who betrayed
Deuentre a town in Holland to the Spaniards, this Knight laments now his
misfortunes, and says he has out-liued his friends, and in the year 1624.
he was constrained to go to Spain in his old age, having now seen 95
years, and there to go Cap in hand to all the privy Counselors, to crave his
pension which had not been paid him in six years before. And after he had
spent 3 months in petitioning them, they granted him 10000. crowns, and the
title of an Earl to sell, or bestow on whom he pleased; and thus he returned
to Flanders leaving his money in the hands of a Spanish Jesuit Father Antonio
Vasques by name, who promised to return it for him by a bill of Exchange, but
never did it to this day. Whereupon seeing himself thus cozened in his old
age, turned Carthusian at Austend, and gave the Carthusians there his Plate,
and that little money which he had, where I have heard him often complain of
the Jesuits, and say he was heartily sorry to find them such knaves, and that
if his Majesty of great Britain would grant him pardon, and leave to live the
rest of his days in Eancashire with beef and bagge-pudding, he should deem
himself one of the happiest in the world; but this could never be obtained of
his aforesaid Majesty he having been so great and notorious a traitor.

Likewise there is one Neuill, who styles himself Earl of Westmerland, but
his Earldom many times will scarce furnish him with a dinner, This Neuils
first wife is yet living in London.
and were it not for his * second wife who plays the she Physician in the
Archdutches Court, he might be put often times to narrower shifts,
notwithstanding his 100 crowns pension a month.

There is also one Sir Thomas Liege, who notwithstanding his 40 crowns pension
a month in the Castle of Antwerpe, for a man of his fashion his wife and
children live in a very mean estate.

Amongst all these Sir Griffin Markham has gone the best way to raise his
fortunes; having got into favor with the Duke of Nuburge who gives him the
surest pension of all. This Sir Griffin Markham at his first arrival at
Bruxels being kept under by the Jesuits, was driven to such an exigency that
he was constrained to pluck out the inlaid silver of the hilts of his sword,
to buy flower to make an hasty pudding for his dinner. There also is one M.
Ward, who notwithstanding the pension of 40 crowns monthly, lives in great
want. Mr. Young likewise having like allowance, and sharing in the same misery.
Besides Mr. Parsons, brother to the grand Jesuit of that name now dead, is in
no better condition.

There is also one Gabriel Coltford, a notable spy and traitor, both to his
King and Country, who with his companion Clifford, is more noxious to our
Kingdom then 100 others, who is of indifferent estate, but of a mind far
above.

There is also one M* Versteagan, who did not his wife keep up his credit
might be yokt with the rest.

And now we are come to the regiment which the L. V. and S. E. P. conveyed for
the Archduchesse service. This L. V. after his arrival, sent a cozen of his,
one Captain B. into Spain, hoping of some great reward answerable to his
expectation, which was a chain of gold from his Catholic Majesty, valued at
400 crowns, which my L. refused having been at 5000. pound charge in that
service. Three of his Captains which were Sir R. H. Sir E. E. and C. T. andC.
S. a little before had a like recompense, they being cassierd, and the
soldiers mixed with other companies, who having disburst in the conduct of the
Soldiers 3000 crowns, not 1000 returned to them again. Whereupon my L. V.
upon distaste herein left the service being minded for England, leaving Sir E.
P. Colonel in his room, who after the siege of Bredah being ended, was alike
rejected, and his regiment being reformed into one company, was given to
Captain Rhisby, once Sergeiant Mayor to the same regiment. And a while after,
Sir E. P. and most of the Captains were purposed for England; as Sir W. T.
Captain B. Captain B. Captain L. Captain V. Captain L. Captain M. and
Captain W. with their Auditor C. all these are returned to England with the
ruin of their states and fortunes; and those that continued took their pay of
reformed Captains, which were Bennington, Gage, Shawe, and Sir E. E. the
Scottish regiment which was under the conduct of the E. of A. was likewise
reformed, whereupon Sir * W. E. Sergeiant Mayor to the said regiment, A great
person, who if he had been employed at his return would have p^ooued the
glory of this Nation.
upon discontent thereof, departed and came for England. Sir I. H. Captain B.
and Captain H. following him, the remainder of the regiment reformed into one
company, and given to Sir James Creeton, there being behind Captain Lucy, and
Captain Mannington, with diverse other Scottish Captains. And the said E. of
A. having had a promise of his Catholic Majesty to be one of the most Noble
Order of the Golden fleece, in expectation thereof, and other honors, continued
there until the year 1628. but seeing how his pension and hopes failed him,
he returned for England.

There remain also at Bruxels one Lerde Littleton, who notwithstanding his
fathers services to the Pope, and his 40. crowns a month pension, is in the
same predicament with the rest.

Now for the Irish, as Tyron and Terconnell, they have some pittance allowed
them, and especially Tyron; who has a regiment of three thousand Irish under
him; wherewith he projecteth with supply from Spain, to invade and surprise
Ireland. And thus far of our secular Fugitives.

Now take a Catalogue of the Monasteries, Seminaries, and Nunneries in
Flanders: First, at Bruxels, there is a Nunnery of English Nuns, of the Order
of S. Benedict, the Abbatisse whereof is the now Lord Northumberland his
sister, and has under her tuition some 60 English Damsels. The ghostly Fathers
that are overseers of this monastery, are two English Jesuits, Father
Gardener, and Father Walgraue alias Flower, who are likewise Agents for the
Jesuits in England, and intelligencers for the Archduchesse.

There is besides another Nunnery of the third Order of St. Francis, which is
governed by one Father Bell a Friar of the same Order: and another at Cambray
of the Order of St. Benedict, which is governed by two Monks of the same Order,
as Father Leander, Father Rudessend. Another at Louaine and Gaunt, which are
likewise governed by the Jesuits, another at Graueling of poor Clares,
governed by the Jesuits, as also are the Residencies of the Jesuits, that are
at St. Omers, Liege, and Colen.

There is also a monastery of the English poor Terresians at Antwerpe,
governed by one Doctor Wright a secular Priest, all which foresaid Nunneries of
them contain at least 40. or 50. Damsels which are most of them Gentlemen's
daughters of very great fashion in England, and the rest some Chambermaids
which having been by the Jesuits well rigd of their maidenhead, and something
old, are sent over to these or such like places to do penance for their sins in
a Nunnery, where it is much doubted that they continue nevertheless in their
old courses, and entice likewise the young Dames to the same.

For not many years since, one Ward a secular Priest, and Chaplain to the
English Nunnery at Bruxels, falling in League with some of them, got from them
about three or four hundred pounds worth of jewels and diamonds, which the
Jesuits smelling out, turned him out of his place; telling him that he had
used juggling and dishonest means to come by that which he had gotten from the
Monastery: And in the year 1625. there arose the like difference between Dr.
Clement, Deane of S. Trigoules at Bruxels, and Vicar general of the armies of
his Catholic Majesty, and Father James Harford Chaplain to a Company. Doctor
Clement accused Father Harford of dishonesty with another man's wife, and
Harford accused him for being dishonest with his own Niece, and for a glutton
and uncharitable man, saying he had seen him disgorge his stomach of whole
Capons legs at once; whereupon Father Ramyres Canon of St. Trigonles, one
guilty in the same kind, reconciled them for fear of further scandal.

But to come from their Nunneries to their Colleges, as first to S. Omers,
which I have fully decyphered in my third Chapter: next that at Doway, whereof
Dr. Kellison is President: next that Monastery of Benedictine Monks, of which
Father Rudessend is the President, with whom Sir Herbert Crafts leads a
Monastical life. There is also a Monastery of English Franciscan Friars,
besides two more Colleges, the one consisting of Irish, the other of Scottish
men. To these the Jesuits have a College at Watton, not far distant from S.
Omers, which they call their Nouiship for the nurturing of their young
Jesuits, Father Benefield being Rector thereof. Another they have seated in
Gaunt, which is entitled Casa professa. Another under the Prince of Liege,
that was founded with those monyes which were got from Mr. S. whereof in the
second Chapter. The discipline they use in this College to their Nouices, is
in teaching. Philosophy and Divinity, Father Sherley being their Rector. As for
your Monks, they have besides these, three monasteries; one in Paris in the
Suburbs of S. Germane, whereof Father Bernard alias Berington is Prior; this
was he that imprisoned Barnes that famous Monk, who was coming for England,
who is likewise the greatest intelligencer to the Spanish Ambassador against
our State. The other two Monasteries are situated one at S. Mallows in
Brittany, and the other at Nausey in Lorane. Concerning your secular Priests,
they have one College in Paris, by the name of Arras College.

As for your English Fugitives, it is with them as follows. First, at Rhemes
lives Dr. Gifford Primate of France, and Archbishop of Rhemes, the Duke of
Gwies reserving all the revenues thereof for his own Kitchen, deducting only
to the Archbishop 2000 pound annually. At Paris lives Dr. Bradshaw, Dr. Mailer,
and M. Fosser, a secular Gentleman; who at the Queens coming to England was
advocate to her Majesty in the behalf of the Catholics in this Land; but he
having understood, that intelligence was given to the Archbishops Grace of
Canterbury concerning his carriage, he retired to France with all expedition,
where failing of these large promises formerly made to him, lives in misery and
extreme poverty.

By this may be discerned the number of our English Fugitives, with their
Colleges, Nunneries, and Monasteries beyond the seas, which yearly draw out
of our Land 100. at least of young Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, who although
they pretend conscience, and want of charity here, the occasion of their
departure, yet none (I dare say) in the world, they being gone over, more
envious and hard hearted then they themselves each to other. As your private
Gentlemen Fugitives hunt after advancement by disparaging others of their own
rank; your Priests disparage the Jesuits; the Jesuits the Priests; the
Priests again the Monks; the Monks the Friars, and the Jesuits all. Insomuch
that if you visit any of them, your entertainment shall be scarce any thing,
save their vpbraidings, and exclamations against one another monasteries and
private persons: so that it would be no small pains for a man, so long to
travail amongst them, until he might find three persons to speak well each
of other: this being a fault so common amongst them, that they are noted among
all Nations whatsoever with whom they converse. Others there are whose most
earnest expectation and heartiest desire is, the ruin and utter destruction of
their own native Country, which is the issue of their departure, and
accordingly God does prosper them, laying on them the like punishment he
inflicted on the Jews, by dispersing of them through many Nations, and giving
them up to dissension among themselves, and living in great want and misery.

CHAP. VIII.
This eight Chapter contains the cause why he left the service of his
Catholic Majesty and came for England, and returned to the bosom of his true
mother the Church of England, and the injuries and adventures he suffered in
France, till he arrived the English shoares.

FIrst, though a child and having not as yet attained the years of discretion,
I was still (as all men are by a natural inclination) well affected toward my
native soil; which the Jesuits collecting from me, pressed me, and declared
daily to me how much I was obliged unto God for delivering me out of the
bondage of error and heresy in my very infancy, and diswaded me withal from
conuersing with any of my native Country which were not of the Church of Rome,
upon pain of being anathematized, and rejected out of the same holy Catholic
Church. And when they heard of the decease of my grandfather and other
kindred, they charged me not to wish a requiem to their souls because they
were heretics, and so consequently are damned in hell, and commanded me to
pray to the Virgin Mary, and all the Saints in heaven for the rest of my
suruiuing friends, that they might at length become Proselites to the Roman
faith and obedience.

When I came to be 18 years of age or there aboutes, I undertook in secret to
read and peruse the sacred scriptures, and being curious to know the grounds of
the differences between the Protestants and our selves, as of those: of the
Popes supremacy, the real presence of Christ in the holy Eucharist, the
Indulgences, pardons, and profits of Purgatory, with the Popes authority to
depose and set up Kings, I began likewise to enquire into, and examine the
lives and courses of our Jesuits and Priests, and moreover I superuised the
letter of Dr. Hall and Mr. Bedell, which I found in my Fathers study, and after
I had conserred one thing with another, I found more resemblance and
probability of the truth in the Protestants religion then in our own. Besides
this, I never found any pregnant proof they had out of the Scriptures, that
the Pope was the only head of the Church militant, or any good authentic
argument for Purgatory, Indulgences, holy grains, Meddals, and the like; as
for the real presence, I could never obtain fully of my self to believe it.
And as for the Popes Bull, for which each person from seven years of age and
upwards gives 12 pence to his Catholic Majesty, by virtue whereof he may eat
* grossura, with eggs, milk, butter, cheese, This grossura, is the same with
that we call gross meat.
and the like, on Saturdayes and such like days; I perceived it to be a mere
policy and trick of the King to fill his coffers, the Pope giving him way, and
partly sharing with him. Now touching their miracles they pretend to be daily
done in Spain, Flanders, Italy, and other parts, (though inquisitiue there
abouts) yet I never could see any. And as for the holy Crucifix which is in the
Suburbs of the City Burgus, which they show to great personages, as if it were
Christ himself, telling them that his hair and nails do grow miraculously,
which they cut and pair monthly, and give to Noblemen as holy relics, I
judge it a thing incredible, and thereby all their pretended miracles to be but
mere Impostures. King Charles by the Infantas entreaty visited this Nun when
he was in Spain.
As likewise the grand miracle of * Hermana Luisa the Nun of Carrion, who for
twenty years space has lived by the bare receipt of the host, which to
believe I think argues a very sottish credulity, and infinite other miracles
and relics which they have, I have found to be mere cheats and cosenages. As
also their Masses for the dead, and delivering of souls out of Purgatory, by
saying Masses for them on a privileged altar. Nay some of them make spells of
their relics, as Peter Godsrey, that famous Priest Read at large hereof in
the French ^^agreall history.
of Marsels in France did, who was burnt not many years since for bewitching
the principal Ladies of that Province; for instead of an Agnus dei, and other
relics, he gave them enchantments, whereby they might fall in great love
with him. Moreover I examined the cause why the Pope should beatisie Garnet,
and Campian, Father Bently and Father Fre(...)n the one minister of the
College, and the other one of the masters of the school.
with others, under the pretext of religion, and could find no reason but for
the contrary, seeing the Jesuits confessed to my self, that the Legend of
miracles of their Saints is for the most part false, but it was made for a good
intention, and herein that it is lawful and meritorious to lie and write such
things to that end the common people might with greater zeal serve God and his
Saints, and that otherwise there would be no means to govern them, and
especially to draw the women to good order, being by nature more facile and
credulous, and for the most part addicted to novelties and miraculous events.

Likewise it is their Doctrine, that it is a meritorious deed to kill or depo e
any King or prince excommunicated by the Sea of Rome.

Likewise, the discontent of my Father after his death, and his Letters to his
Brother in England gave me to understand, that the Roman Faith was not the
surest way to Salvation.

Likewise, these most abominable dealings that are used at the Election of
their Popes, being chosen for the most part by favor and moneys, their
Predecessors being extinguished by Poison and villainous means, and for which
effect the King of Spain has Ambassadors continually employed at Rome, which
Ambassadors do confer great largesses of annual pensions to inflame them to
nominate him Pope whom Omnia voenalia Romae.
he pleases. The like does the King of France by his Ambassadors, but the
Spanish Indian Oil for the most part greaseth home to the purpose. For when
the Spaniards saw the King of France to enuade the Valtoline, the year 1624,
that the Pope took his part as one of his creation, they began to cast out
Libels, and set them upon the Pasquill of Rome, threatening the Pope with a
sudden end if he did not recant, which he did, for fear that the Spanish
Venom might not operate in his Stomach.

Likewise, the detention of the Kingdom of Naples from the Pope confirmed me
that the Spaniards were, and are little better then Atheists, only making use
of the Pope for their own particular ambition and ends, as to confirm and
establish him in unlawful Monarchies, and under color of Religion to make
Subjects become Slaves.

Moreover, Charles the Fifth sacking Rome, and with his Army besieging the Pope
in his Castle of S. Angelo, was to this particular end, to confirm him
Emperor, and to color and maintain all his unlawful usurpations.

Likewise, it confirmed me in the Protestants Religion, to see how in Flanders
and other parts, the Jesuits, Friars, and others, before they enter their
Colleges, Monasteries, and other Religious Houses, to be Probationers only for
a week or a month, their Friends, Parents, or others give them a good sum
of money to spend in Alehouses, Tauernes, and other profane Houses, for to
take their farewell of the world. Of this I was an eye witness both at
Antwerpe and Doway.

Likewise it confirmed me in the said Religion to see Protestants with whom I
conuersed to be so modest, religious, and honest, quite contrary to the report
of the Jesuits which make them worse then Devils. All which I having well
considered with my self, and also observing the cozenages and impostures of
the Jesuits, Priests and Monks in S. Omers, Doway, Flanders, Spain, France,
and elsewhere, my Father being dead, and I at my own disposal, I came for
England, where intending to declare my self a Protestant, was advertised by
some great Personages of authority in this Kingdom, to keep my resolution to
my self for a while, whereby I might discover the plots and stratagems of our
adversaries, and so do my Country far greater service. Whereupon I straight
made my repair to the Court of the Archduchesse, where being suspected as a
Spy, and in great hazard of my life by the negligence of some who had employed
me, I had forthwith been imprisoned had not Earl Gondamor interceded for me,
who never could be persuaded that ever I would turn Protestant, being so long
confirmed in the Romish Religion. But I would not let any occasion ouerslip me,
but taking the best opportunity the time would then alot me, I directed my
course for England, where after a quarter of a years abode, I was sent over to
France, having there my residencie at Paris, where I gave intelligence to some
great Parsonages of this Kingdom, and At this very time one Smith nephew to
the B B. of Calcedon staid two months in Paris to kill me.
sending Letters by my Man for England, he being bribed by some of our Land
(whose names I will here spare) they were intercepted and delivered to a Sorbon
Doctor, Doctor Matler by name, whom the Letters partly concerned. * This became
an occasion of great afflictions unto me, for being by him discovered, my
Pension from Spain was debarred me, and forthwith the Jesuits and Priests
banded themselves against me, and caused my Oast to deliver me up to Prison for
some moneys I owed him, where I suffered for six months space, and perceiving
no order taken for my deliverance thence from England, and being also
solicited and importuned by Letters from my Mother and other Friends out of
Spain, and visited daily by one Fr Latham, Of this their visitation M.
Gorstellow my fellow-prisoner was an eyewitness.
Dr Mailer, and at length by Francis Fosser who came from my Mother in Spain,
who persuaded me to return unto Spain, and recant, and if I would not be for
Spain, he would have me for Naples, Millaine, or Scicily, where my former
Pension should be continued unto me, and his Catholic Majesty would grant me
a Company as before he did in Flanders, and would confirm unto me my Patent of
Infranchisement, so that I should enjoy all privilege that any Gentleman did
there borne, which Letters and visitations I entertained until my Mother had
paid my debts with my own Pension, and being freed out of Prison, I showed
them a fair pair of heels, and instead of going toward Spain or Italy, I
bended my course toward England, taking my journey toward Roan and Deep in
Normandy, being accompanied with Mr Thomas Gorstelow, Fellow of Corpus Christi
in Oxford, and finding no Shipping either at Roan or Deep, we bent our course
for Callis, taking our journey by a Town called Arks or Arka, two Leagues
distant from Deep, where lodging at an Inn in the furthermost part in the
Town, at midnight the Oasts Nephew and other Soldiers whom we had courteously
entertained at supper, being Billited in the same lodging with us, and then
bound for At this very time news came that the Duke had inuad^d the I Will of
Ree.
Denmark, who smelling us out to be English, made us rise out of our beds,
telling us, that their Captain sent them to take us as Spies sent to betray
the Kingdom, and under this pretense about ten or twelve of them apprehended
us with Staves or Pistols, carrying us to a desolate Bridge betwixt our lodging
and the Castle, and robbed us of our money, as for me they threw me over a
Bridge into the water, where I hardly escaped drowning; for after I having once
sunk under the water, I got up, and caught hold of a Willow twig, by which I
saved my self and got on shore as wet as a drowned Rat, and sorely bruised
with their knockes, I went early in the morning into Arks, complaining how
hardly I had been used, but to no purpose, for I found none to pity me, and
laying my self down under and Tailors stall in the Marketplace, I began to
lament my misfortune, where having scarcely layne for the space of two hours,
I descryed Mr Thomas Gorstellow set out in a fair white canuas suit, adorned
with no less then a thousand patches, when he had espied me, he drew toward
me, and asked me how he looked in his new habit, without shirt or cloak, in an
old greasy hat, with stockings correspondent, to whom I answered, that he
looked like a Picheron, and withal I told him how I saved my self from
drowning by laying hold on a willow twig, who made answer unto me, that he
thought I had either undergone the mercy of the Sword or the water, and I
thought the like misfortune had befell him, and questioning him about his
escape, he declared unto me, how he had exhorted the Soldiers, and the
aforesaid Oast his Nephew, from murdering of him, showing them how grand an
offense it was to spill Christian blood, and that they should take all his
clothes if they mistrusted he had hid any money in them, in the end he
prevailed so far forth with them, as to save his life, but they stripped him
stark naked, and carried him into a Wood, leaving him only an old hat, and
withal pricking him forward with their Swords into the said Wood, where they
left him all night wandering, in the morning not far from the Wood he lighted
upon a Farmers House, and having declared his case there, the Farmers Daughter
especially took great compassion on him, saying without doubt he was a
Gentleman of a good House, which appeared by the cleanness of his skin and
comely feature, and good carryage, and entreated her Father to bestow on him
his old canuas suit, which he did, and afterward he went with him to the Town
called Arka, to complain to the Governor, where we met as is abouesaid, and we
two going together to the Governor accompanied with our old Farmer, were
answered by him, that he wished to God we were the last English men living, and
that if we were worthy to be laid by the heels, he would do it, which when we
heard, we departed very mute, not knowing whether to betake our selus, yet
this good old Farmer vouchsafed to bring us out of the Town, telling us, he
was ignorant of the wars betwixt England and France, and in the Streets told
every one he met, if it had not been for him (pointing to my companion) he
had been as naked as when he came out of his mothers womb. And amongst
others, we met with a Sergeant of a Company, who hearing how we had been
robbed by his Soldiers, discovered them by a hat they gave my companion, and
commanded us to follow him to his Captains lodging, which we did wondrous
unwillingly, fearing least we should have been laid by the heels. But when we
came before him, having heard us, he sent for his Soldiers, and finding the
truth, caused them to restore to my companion and me our clothes, but our
money and papers there was no hope to recover, which much troubled my
companion, who had lost a Note-booke of great importance. The Captain then
told us, that the English Nation was very unwelcome to the French, and yet we
were in great hazard of our lives, but he having been a Trauailor, was not
unacquainted with the extreamities of a Stranger, and so told us if we pleased
to go along with him, he would convey us over to Denmark, from whence we
might easily retire to our own Country. For which we gave him thanks, and
resolved to go with him: but before we took our journey, he invited us to
dinner at his own Table, and dinner ended we departed with him toward St
Valery, but being on foot my self, soon tired, my Feet and Legs being sore
bruised at my fall from the Bridge into the water, and being not able to
continue, I was forced to leave my companion, and so giving unto him my Sword
at our parting, I took my rest under a Hedge, but he kept on his Journey to
St Valery, and so to Denmark, where he served as a common Soldier for the
space of four months, suffering great misery and want till he returned to
England. And I returned after I had recovered my self to Deep, where I met
with a Shallop bound for Callis, where after much entreaty, they took me in
for Gods sake, the next night we arrived at Callis about midnight, there we
lodged in the Suburbs which they call the Corgene, at one Roberts his House, at
the Sign of the Boot, where having scarcely rested half an hours space, I
fell in with a Master of an English Bark newly come from Dover, who had wharft
over a hundred French which had been taken upon the Sea by the English, of
whom I desired passage for Dover, which he offered most willingly, and money if
I needed; whereupon having so good an opportunity offered, I began to be merry,
drinking and discoursing with the said Master of the present news and
occurrences, but such was my fate, that it pleased God to lay upon me great
afflictions and miseries, which are as follows. There were in the house 5 or
6 Papists, who were likewise the same time bound for England, which knew me,
but being disguised, some in the habit of Merchants, others of swaggering
trauailers, I could hardly discry them, but they after they had well viewed
me, began to consult among themselves what they had best do, for said they,
if I went for England in the same ship, without doubt I should descry them, and
besides that I intended no good for the Catholics in England, having forgone
my pension and service to the King of Spain, and above all forsaken my Mother,
Uncle, Brothers, and Sisters, and so resolved to accuse me upon pretense of
being a Spy to the Duke of Buckingham, and that I was by him sent to betray
the Kingdom, which resolved, they begun to doubt whether it were I or no,
and therefore the tide serving, began to embarke themselves, and I with them,
where being together, I called two of them to mind, the one was named George
Gage, who had half his nose eaten away with a C^nker, and sometimes had been
my school fellow at Saint Omers College, whom I had likewise known in the
English College at Doway, from whence he then came, and brought with him a
This book was written in Latin by Hermannus Hugo.
book entitled the siege of Bredah, translated out of Latin into English by
his brother Captain Gage and himself, which was dedicated to the Duke of
Buckingham. Another of them whom I knew, was one Edward Brown, who came from
Amiens, and was Steward to master Shelton that lives there; of the other four
as I was afterward informed, three were Jesuits, and the other a Monk, whom
when I knew I began to be perplexed, but too late, for Gage having heard my
voice, said to the rest, certainly it is Wadsworth: then they staid the Bark,
and took their Host Robert with them, and went to the Captain of the Ports,
informing him that I was an Arch-spye against their State and the like;
whereupon he came presently unto me, and committed me to the custody of four
soldiers armed with Houldbeards to be kept until the morning without
alleging any other cause, but that I was an English man and had not the
Gouerners pasport to show. In the morning at the opening of the gates, they
carried me to the Sergeant Mayor of the town, by name Buchero, who examining
me what I was, had answer I was an English man, and that I went to see some
friends I had in England; then he carried me to his house* where leaving me
locked up in a Chamber for the space of an hour, came to me again, and brought
me to the Governors house, who refused to examine me, but commanded the
Sergeant Mayor to carry me to the town prison: At entrance into the prison he
told me that I should do well to confess the truth unto them* and reveal my
employments, and that he well knew I was Buckinghams Spy for England, for
which end I had received great sums of money to give intelligence and betray
their kingdom, to which I answered, I never had any thing to do with the said
Duke, but he told me I lied, and that I was accused by Angels, (meaning the
Jesuits) and commanded me to be put in a cage, which was a kind of dungeon
on the top of the prison, near the which stood the rack, and threatened me
therewith if I confessed not the truth, but I always answered him that I was
ignorant of what he questioned me, so he left me alone for the present, locked
under seven doors, where I remained for the space of three days without meat
or drink; at the end whereof they brought me a dish of tripes with a piece of
bread and water, and afterward I was freed from the Cage in the day time and
had the liberty of the dungeon, they gave me a purse besides with a long cord
to be put out at a hole to beg alms of passengers, not having any victuals
given me, but what I bought with the money I got for Gods sake, which God
knows was very little: And likewise I had not liberty to go out of the room
to do what nature requires. My bed was straw, which in ten months had been
changed but thrice, without any covert at all. As for my shirt I never had any
variety; as for my hair it grew wild and sauage-like; and for my companions
they were millions of lice and fleas, and in this woeful* plight I continued
well nigh ten months, the aforesaid Gage with his companions being the cause
thereof. And to augment my misery, Father Baldwin, with the rest of the English
Jesuits in S. Omers, not only sent but came themselves to Callis to persuade
the Governor for my continual restraint from liberty while my vital spirits
should continue within me. Not much unlike did Dr. Kellison from Doway, and the
Jesuits of England, who wrote letters to Callis, entreating the Governor to
keep me fast. And that they might rest the more assured of my detention, they
made one Hudson an English man who there lives their chief Agent against me,
whom only for his wives sake the Sergieant Mayor of Callis, by name Buchero
entertained.

At length I perceiving that my life was the mark that they shot at, they
having not long before through a mistake determined to have hanged me as one
who had stole horses, had not the truth been discovered by one Carpenter the
King of France his Advocate general, and one of the politest wits in the
Kingdom for the Law, whose hap it was at that time to have been in prison
with me, whereupon duly weighing with my self the events of my trauails, I
seriously resolved (the Lord assisting me) patiently to undergo what ever
should by those blood-suckers be inflicted upon me, raking it as a punishment
justly due unto me for my sins, and it pleased God to second my resolutions,
for presently after there came my Lord Mountioy, who had b^ene taken prisoner
at the Isle of Ree, and after his release, coming for Callis and bound for
England, I having formerly been acquainted with him in Spain, and espying him
going by the prison gate, I called unto him and acquainted him with my misery;
he having heard it, and aforetime known me, he presently solicited the
Governor for my liberty, which he obtained: It was no sooner granted, but by
the Sergeant Mayor, at Hudsons wife her entreaty, it was again hindered, who
at every word she spoke, charged me with high treason against their State.
Colonel Gray a little after came likewise that way, and interceeded in like
manner for me but could not prevail. Mr. Walter Mountague did the same; the
Governor of Pontsell, who was my Lord Mountioy his Conductor for England, did
also at his return make strong intercession for me, but all in vain. The King
of Denmark his youngest son came by Callis at that time, and travailing for
Holland, did supplicate earnestly for me, the Governor excusing himself to
him, made answer, that it was not he, but the King that detained me. There was
also Sr. Edmund Vernam, and Mr. Haukins the Kings chief Agent did their best,
but none could prevail to set me at liberty, only they relieved me with some
good pieces of money, which the jailour for the most part got from me,
threatening to keep me more private if he had not the better half of that I
had, and finding the sweetness thereof, there passed not one but he privately
for his own lucre acquainted them with my misery. At length there came a
Gentleman of Freezland, by name Scipio Intima, who had been my fellow prisoner
in Paris, this young Gentleman was of a proper and comely feature, and of such
carriage and nimble wit as a man might possibly meet withal; I seeing him
pass by my grate and knowing him, called to him out of the grate, and
acquainted him with my unjust detention, who presently wrought so effectually
with the Governors wife and daughters, whom he certified of my innocence and
misery, insomuch that they took great pity upon me, and acquainted the Warden
of the Capuchins, who then was with them therewith; and he upon their relation
came forthwith to visit me, and commiserated my estate likewise, and going to
the Governor told him thereof, who urged great matters against me, and said
that I was reus laesae Maiestatis; but his wife and daughters seconding this
his earnest soliciting, and this young Gentleman swearing and protesting my
great innocence, did so far prevail with the Governor, that he gave way that
I might have an equal trial by Law, which before I could not obtain, and gave
leave that the Kings Advocate who was in prison with me, might be my
Councellor. All which being granted, my Advocate begun to write the occasion
of my unlawful detention, with a petition which he sent to the High Court of
Parliament at Paris, where the Court of Parliament commanded all my adversaries
and accusers to be personally cited before them, and to bring in their
allegations and accusations against me. My Advocate did likewise challenge the
Law of the Kingdom, which is, that no malefactor can be kept in prison above
three months, but he must have either the sentence of life or death to pass
on him, unless it be for treason against the Kings proper person; I having
continued eight months in prison contrary to the foresaid Law, urged likewise
that saying, quis enim innocens esse poterit si accusari solummodo sufficiat,
All this was so well set sorth by my said Advocate, that there was none to
prove any thing against me, so that the High Court of Parliament pronounced me
innocent, and condemned the Sergieant Mayor of Callis, and the rest of my
adversaries, to the reparation of honor, damage, and interest, and forthwith I
was restored to my former liberty. Thus giving hearty thanks to Almighty God
for this his gracious deliverance, and freeing me at such time as I least
imagined, out of the hands of these infernal monsters, and blood-suckers, the
Jesuits and their faction.

And presently coming for Dover I embraced my native soil with full
resolution never to depart out of it, beseeching God to bless me, and to make
me (though unworthy) a member of this his holy Church, whereunto through so
many persecuting afflictions and miseries I have at length arrived.

Gentle Reader, here thou have had a view of the travails, miseries, and
observations of the English Spanish Pilgrim, wherein I vow to God I have not
written any thing but what for the most part I have been an eye witness of:
if the times had been more favorable unto me, I would have much enlarged
this my discourse, the which I purpose by Gods assistance to dispatch so soon
as I can find a convenient time and opportunity. So beseeching the Almighty to
keep in true faith, concord and unity, this our Kingdom of great Britain,
France and Ireland, I rest.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3. line 9. read his, for my. p 7. l. 16, r. Wayche, for Wiche. p. 17, l.
11, r. Campion p. 24 l. 32, r. alias, for at. p. 25, l. 20. r. George, for
William p. 29. l. ^9. r Foster, for Fosser. and l. 23. r. Northon, for North p
31, in the margent, r. also the Lady Willoby. p. 40, l. 32. r. Verengenas. p.
42. l. 2. r Cadix. p. 45, l. 14, r. Alarbos. p. 53. l. 10, r. Duke. for Don. p
54, l 18, r. Flanders, of Artois. and l. 24. r. Valodolid. p 55, l. 30, r.
Foster. p. 56, l. 6, r. Henry, for Francis. p. 57, l. 10, r. Luz, for Lucy. p
60, l. 9, r. Bradley. p. 61, l. 14, r Rudisend. p. 64, l. 7, r. Northon. p. 64,
l. 25, r. Lier in Planders, for Holland p. 65, l. 16, r.* Armath and l. 20, r.
Therconill. p. 73, l. 30, r. with Harford, guilty in the same kind was Sir T.
M. who was bastonado'd in the Strand. p. 83, l 28, r. Gostellow p. 84, l. 12,
r. and, for or.


