A true and just Record, of the Information, Examination and Confession of all
the Witches, taken at S. Oses in the county of Essex: whereof some were
executed, and other some entreated according to the determination of law.
Wherein all men may see what a pestilent people Witches are, and how unworthy
to live in a Christian Commonwealth.

Written orderly, as the cases were tried by evidence, By W. W.

Imprinted in London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree by Thomas Dawson 1582.

To the right honorable and his singular good Lord, ^he Lord Darcey, W. W.
wishes a prosperous continuance in this life to the glory of God, and a daily
preservation in Gods fear to his endless joy.
IF THERE HAS BIN at any time (Right Honorable) any means used, to appea^e
the wrath of God, to ob^aine his blessing, to ^errif^e secreete offenders by
open transgressors punishments, to withdraw honest natures from the corruption
of evil company, to diminish the great multitude of wicked people, to increase
the small number of virtuous persons, and to reform all the detestable abuses,
which the perverse wit and will of man does daily devise, this doubtless is
no less necessary then the best, that Sorcerers, Wizzardes, or rather
Dizzardes, Witches, Wisewomen (for so they will be named) are rygorously
punished. Rygorously said I? Why it is too mild and gentle a term for such a
merciless generation: I should rather have said most cruelly executed: for
that no punishment can be thought upon, be it in never so high a degree of
torment, which may be deemed sufficient for such a devilish and damnable
practice. And why? Because all the imaginatio^s, all the co^sultatio^s, all the
conferences, all the experimentes, finally all the attemptes, proceedinges and
conclusions of Sorcerers, Witches, and the rest of that hellishe liuerie, are
mere blasphemers against the person of the most high God; and draw so near to
the nature of idolatry (for they worship Satan, unto whom they have sworn
allegiaunce) that they are by no means to be exempted from the suspicion of
that most accursed defection, nay rather they are guilty of apparaunte
apostasy, which is more heinous (considering the circumstances of their
ordinary actions, then any trespass against the second table, which ouglye
sins of blasphemy, and gross, or rather devilish idolatry co^curring in no
malefactor so rou^dly, as in sorcerers, witches, Inchau^ters and. in who^ the
meet with a millian of enormities more, as it were in a center; the
magistrates of foreign lands, noted so precisely, that weighing the quality of
the crime, they kept a due analogy and proportion of punishment, burning them
with fire, whom the common law of England (with more measure of mercy then
is to be wished) strangleth with a rope. An ordinary fellon, and a murderer
offending against the morrall law of justice, Bodinus in confutatione futilis
opinionis Wier^; Lamias, lamiarumque Veneficia astruentis.
is throtled: a Sorcerer, a Witch, (whom a learned Physician is not ashamed to
auoche innocent, and the Judges that denounce sentence of death against them no
better than hangmen) defying the Lord God to his face, and trampling the
precious blood of that immaculate lamb Jesus Christ most despitfully under
feet, is stiffled: the one dies on the gallows, and so does the other:
wherein doubtless there is a great inequality of justice, considering the
inequality of the trespass, which deserves a death so much the more
horrible, by how much the honor of God is eclipsed, and the glory due to his
inviolable name most abhominably defaced, even to the uttermost villainy that
they can put in practice.

This I speak (Right Honorable) upon a late view of trial, taken against
certain Witches in the county of Essex; the orderly process in whos^
examinations, together with other accidents, I dilygently observing and
considering their trecheries to be notable: undertook briefly to kni^ up in a
few leaves of paper, their manifold abuses: and obtaining the means to have
them published in print, for that a number of memorable matters are here
touched, to present the same unto your Lordship, of whose gentle acceptance
though I do not doubt, yet will I not be over bold thereupon to presume: but
rather refer the same to your honors judgment and patronage, by way of
humilyation, that going abroad under couerte of your honorable name, the
discourse may seem the more credible, your lordship knowing the grounds of
this whole book to be true and justifiable, and therefore the further off from
fear of impugning. But supposing I have been too tedious, and sparing to
trouble your Lordship with multitude of words, I buyld upon hope, and so put
forth my book, praying the Lord here to bless your Honor, and all about you
with the increase of his grace in this life, and with the presence of his
divinity in the life to come. Amen.

Your Honors to command W. W.

The xix. day of February the xxiiii. year of the reign of our Sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth.
The information of Grace Thurlowe, the wife of John Thurlowe, taken before me
Brian Darcey^ the day and year above said, against Vrsley Kempe alias Gray,
as follows.
THE said grace says, that about xii. months past, or near there abouts,
her son Dauye Thurlowe, being strangely taken and greatly tormented, Ursley
Kempe alias Gery came unto the sai^ Grace to see how the child did: At which
time the child lying upon a bed in the chimney c^^ner, she the said Ursley
took it by the hand, saying, A good child how art thou laden* and so went
thrice out of the doors, and every time when she came in she took the
child by the hands, and said* A good child how art thou laden: And so at
her departure, the said Grace prayed the said Ursley to come again unto her
at night to help her. And thereupon she the said Ursley replied, and said, I
warrant thee* I, thy Child shall do well enough: and y^ night it fell to
rest, the which it did not of a long time before. And the next day the said
Grace going to mill ward meeting the said Ursley, she asked her how her
child did, and she said it took good rest this night God be thanked, I I
said the said Ursley, I warrant thee it shall do well. Note, that the palme^
of the childs hands were turned where the backs should be, and the back
in the place of the palms.

The said Grace says also, that about three quarters of a year ago she was
delivered of a woman child, and ^aith, that shortly after the birth thereof*
the said Ursley fell out with her, for that she would not suffer her to have
the nu^sing of that child, at such times as she the said Grace continued in
work at the Lord D^^c^es place: And says, that she the said Grace nurs^ng
the said child, within some short time after that falling out, the child lying
in the Cradle, and not above a quarter old, fell out of the said Cradle, and
brake her neck, and dyed. The which the said Ursley hearing to have happened*
made answer it makes no matter. For she might have suffered me to have the
keeping and nursing of it.

And the said Grace says, that when she lay in, the said Ursley came unto
her, and seemed to be very angry for that she had not the keeping in of the
said Grace, and for that she answered unto her that she was provided: And
thereupon they entered further into talk, the said Grace ^aying, that if she
should continue lame as she had done before, she would find the means to
know how it came, and yt she would creep upon her knees to complain of
them to have justice done upon them. And to that she the said Ursley said,
it were a good turn. Take heed (said Grace) Ursley, thou have a naughty name.
And to that Ursley made answer, though she could vnwitche she could not
witch, and so promised the said Grace, that if she did send for her
privily, and send her keeper away, that then she would show the said Grace,
how she should vnwitch herself or any other at any time.

And the said Grace further says, that about half a year past she began to
have a lamenesse in her bones, and specially in her legs, at which time ye
said Ursley came unto her v^sent for and without request: And said, she would
help her of her lamenes, if she the said Grace would give her xii. pence, y^
which the said Grace speaking her fair, promised her so to do, and thereupon
for the space of v. weeks after, she was well and in good case as she was
before. And then the said Ursley came unto the said Grace, and asked her ye
money she promised to her. Whereupon the said Grace made answer, that she was
a poor and a needy woman, and had no money: and then the said Ursley
requested of her cheese for it: but she said she had none. And she the said
Ursley, seeing nothing to be had of the said Grace, fell out with her, and
said, that she would be even with her: and thereupon she was taken lame,
and from that day to this day has so continued.

And she says, that when she is any thing well or begins to amend, then her
child is tormented, and so continues for a time in a very strange case, and
when he begins to amend: Then she the said Grace becomes so lame, as
without help she is not able to arise, or to turn her in her bed.

The information of Annis Letherdall, wife of Richard Letherdall, taken by me
Brian Darcey Esquire, against Vrsley Kempe, alias Gray the xix. day of February.
THe said Annis says, that before Michaelmas last, she the said Ursley sent
her son to the said Letherdals house, to have scouring sand, and sent word by
the said boy, yt his mother would give her the dying of a pair of women's hose
for the sand: But the said Annis knowing her to be a naughty beast sent her
none. And after she the said Ursley, seeing her gyrle to carry some to one of
her neighbors houses, murmured as the said child said, and presently after
her child was taken as it lay very big, with a great swelling in the bottom
of the belly, and other privy parts. And the said Annis says, yt about the
tenth day of February last she went unto the said Ursley, and told her that
she had been forth with a cunning body, which said, yt she the said Ursley
had bewitched her child: To yt the said Ursley answered, that she knew she
had not so been, and so talking further she said, that she would lay her life
that she the said Annis had not been with any: whereupon she requested a woman
being in the house a spinning with the said Ursley, to bear witness what she
had said. And the next day the child was in most piteous case to behold,
whereby she thought it good to Carry the same unto mother Ratcliffe, for that
she had some experience of her skill, The which when the said mother Ratcliffe
did see, she said to the said Annis that she doubted she should do it
any good, yet she ministered unto it, etc.

The enformation of Thomas Rabbet, of the age of viii. years or there abouts,
base son to the said Vrsley Kempe alias Gray, taken before me Brian Darcey
esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices, the xxv. day of February, against his
said mother.
THe said Thomas Rabbbet says, that his said mother Ursley kempe alias Gray
has four several spirits, the one called Tyffin, the other T^ttey, the
third Pigine, and the fourth Jack* and being asked of what colors they were,
says, that Tyttey is like a little gray Cat, Tyffin is like a white lamb,
Pygine is blacklike a Toad, and Jack is black like a Cat. And he says, he
has seen his mother at times to give the^ beer to drink, and of a white Lofe
or Cake to eat, and says that in the night time the said spiri^es will come
to his mother, and suck blood of her upon her arms and other places of her
body.

This Examinat being asked, whether he had seen Newmans wife to come unto his
mother, says, that one morning he being in ye chamber with his mother, his
Godmother Newman came unto her, and says, that then he heard her and his
mother to chide, and to fall out: But says before they parted they were
friends: and that then his mother delivered an earthen pot unto her, in the
which he thinks her spirits were, the which she carried away with her under
her aperne.

And this examinat says, that within a few days after the said Newmans wife
came unto his mother, and yt he heard her to tell his mother that she had sent a
spirit to plague Johnson to ye death, and an other to plague his wife.

The enformation of Ales Hunt, taken before me Brian Darcey Esquire, the
xxiiii. day of February, against Joan Pechey widow.
THis examinat Ales Hunt says, that she dwells in ye next house unto ye
said Joan Pechey, and yt she the said Joan two or three days before Christmas
last, went to ye house of Johnson ye Collector appointed for ye poor, whereas
she ye said Joan received beef and bread, the which this Examinat says, she
heard to be of the gift of ye said Bria^ Darcey). And this examinat says
that ye said Joan going homewardes, murmured and found great fault at Johnson,
saying, he might have given that to a gyrle or another, and not to her, saying,
the bread was to hard baked for her, and that she then seemed to be in a
great anger therewithal. This examinat says, she was at that present in the
house of the wydow Hunt, and that there was but a wall between them, The said
Joan coming to her house did unlock her door, the which this examinat did see
her do: And after she was entered into her house, this examinat says, she
hard the said Joan to say, yea are you so sawsie? are ye so bold? you were
not best to be so bold with me: For if you will not be ruled, you shall
have Symonds sause, yea said the said Joan, I perceive if I do give you an
inch, you you will take an ell: and says she is assured that there was no
christian creature with her at that time, but that she used those speeches unto
her Imps.

And this examinat says, that she has heard her mother say, that she the said
Joan was skillful and cunning in witcherie, and could do as much as the said
mother Barnes, this examinats mother, or any other in this town of S. Osees.
And further says, she has hard her mother to say, yt the said Joan did know
what was said or done in any man's house in this town.

The information of Margerie Sammon, sister to the said Ales Hunt, taken
before me Brian Darcey Esquire, the xxv. day of February against the said
Joan Pechey as follows.
THe said Margerie says, that she has hard the widow Hunt to say, that the
said Joan Pechey should say that she could tell what any man said or did
at any time in their houses, when and as often as she listed: and says, that
the said widow Hunt did tell her that she has hard the said Joan Pechey,
being in her house, very often to chide and vehemently speaking as though
there had been some body present with her: And says, that she went in to see
to whom the said Joan should speak, but she found no body but her self
all alone: And says, that she the said Joan Pechey was with this examinates
mother, mother Barnes, the day before she departed, where this examinate left
them together while she went home to her mistress house to do her business
and work.

The enformation of John Tendering of Saint Osees, taken before me Brian Darcey
esquire, the xxvi. of February 1^82.
THe said John says, that William Byette having occasion to come to this
examinate, says, that after they had conferred and talked, he the said
William Byet did declare to this examinate, That, that morning he did tell him
that he had a Cow with had lien two days or longer in a strange case, and had
eaten nothing, and was not likly to live, and that he and his servants several
times had lifted at the said ^owe to raise her upon her feet, but they could
not make her to arise or stand: whereupon he told this examinat, that he had
caused his said servants to fetch straw, and to lay the same round about her:
And that he himself took an Axe, minding to knock her upon the head, and so
to burn her: And said that the fire being kindled, the said Cow of her self
start up, and ra^ her way until it came to a wood stack* and there stood still,
and fell a biting of sticks, bigger then any man's finger, and after li^ed and
did well.

The enformation of Febey Hunt, daughter in law to Ales Hunt, of the age viii.
years or there abouts, taken before me Brian Darcey esquire, the xxv. day of
Frbuarie against Ales Hunt her mother.
THe said Febey hunt says, yt she has seen her mother to have two little
things like horses, the one white, the other black, the which she kept in a
little low earthen pot with woll, color white and black: and that they stood
in her chamber by her bed side, and says, that she has seen her mother to
feed them with milk out of a black trening dishe, and this examinat being
carried after this confession by the Counstables to her fathers house, she
showed them the place were they stood and the board that covered them: And this
examinate chose out the dishe, out of which they were fed, from amongst many
other dishes. She this examinat did also confess that her mother had charged
her not to tell any thing, what she had seen: And if she did those things
would take her, and this examinate says, that her mother did send them to
Hayward of Frowicke, but to what end she can not tell, and she being asked
how she knew the same, says, that she hard her mother bid them to go.

The enformation of William Hook Painter, taken before me Brian Darcey
esquire, the xxiii of February, against Ales Newman.
THis examinate William Hook says, yt he dwells in the next house unto Ales
Newma^, and says, that he has hard William Newema^ her husband to say unto ye
said Ales his wife, yt she was the cause of her husbands great misery and
wretcher state, and says, that when the said Ales does give her husband
any meat to eat, then presently he the said William says to his wife, do
thou not see? do thou see? whereunto this examinate says, that he has
heard the said Ales to say, if thou see any thing, give it some of thy
meat. And says further, that he has heard the said William Newman bid the
said Ales his wife to beat it away.

The enformation of Elizabeth Bennet, taken by me Brian Darsey esquire, the
xxiiii. day of February 1582* against Ales Newman.
THe said Elizabeth says, that she never sent any spirit to plague Johnson
or his wife, neither knew sheemother Newma^ to have sent any of her spirits to
plague him or his wife, she this examinate for her part says, she was
greatly beholding to the said Johnson and his wife. But denies that ever she
sent any spirit to hurt him and his wife: or that she knew mother Newman to
have hurt them. But this examinat says, that she being at Iohnsons to have
wool to spinne, he being a clothmaker, of whom she had many times work, At
that present mother Newman being come thither, she this examinate faith she
hard the said mother Newman to desire Johnson to give her xii.d. saying: her
husband lay sick, whereunto she heard him answer that he would gladly
help her husband: but that he had laid out a great deal more then he had
received, saying, he was a poor man, and he, his wife and family, might not
want for the helping of her husband, saying that he could not help her with
any, until he had collected more money, whereupon she departed, and used some
hard speeches unto him, and seemed to be much angry.

The examination and confession of Vrsley Kemp alias Gray, taken at S. Osees,
and brought before me Brian Darsey esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices of
the peace, the xx. day of February 1582.
Condemned.

THe said Ursley Kempe says, that about ten or eleven years pas^e, she
this examinate was troubled with a lamenes in her bones, and for ease thereof,
went to one Cocks wife of Weley, now deceased, who telled this examinate that
she was bewitched, and at her entretie ^aught her to vnwitche her self* And
^ad her take hogs dunge and charuell, and put them together and hold them in
her left hand, and to take in the other hand a knife, and to prick the
medicine three times, and then to cast the same into the fire, and to take the
said knife and to make three pricks under a table, and to let the knife stick
there: and after that to take three leaves of sage, and as much of herb John (
alias herb grace) and put them into ale, and drink itlast at night and first
in the morning, and that she taking the same, had ease of her lamnesse.

The said examinate says, that one Pages wife, and one Grayes wife, being
either of them ^ame and bewitched: she being requested and sent for to come
unto them, went unto them: And says, that she knew them to be bewitched,
and at their desires did minister unto them the foresaid medicine, whereupon
they had speedy amendment.

The said Brian Darcey then promising to the said Vrsley, that if she would
deal plainly and confess the truth, that she should have favor: and so by
giving her fair speeches she confessed as follloweth.
THe said Ursley bursting out with weeping, fell upon her knees, and confessed
that she had four spirits, whereof two of them were he is, and the other two
were she is: the two he spirits were to punish and kill unto death, and the
other two she is were to punish with lamenes, and other diseases of bodyly
harm, and also to destroy cattle.

And she this examinate, being asked by what name or names she called the
said spirits, and what manner of things, or color they were of: confesses
and says, that the one is called Ti^^ey, being a he, and is like a gray Cat,
the second called Jack, also a he, and is like a black Cat, the third is
called Pigin, being a she, and is like a black Toad, the fourth is called
Tyffin, being a she, and is like a white lamb.

This examinate being further asked, wh^che of the said spirits she sent to
punish Thorlowes wife* and Letherdalls child, confessed and said, that she
sent Tyttey to punish Thorlows wife, and Pigen Letherdalls Child.

And this examinate, without any asking of her own free will at that present,
confessed and said, yt she was the death of her brother Kemps wife, and that
she sent the spirit Jack to plague her, for that her sister had called her
whore and witch.

And this examinate further confessed, that upon the falling out between
Thorlowes wife and her, she sent Tyffin, the spirit unto her child, which
lay in the Cradle, and willed the same to^^^ ^e the Cradle over, so as the
child might fall out thereof, and break the neck of it.

These foresaid 5. last recited matters, being confessed by the said Ursley
privately to me the said Brian Darcey, were afterward (supper being ended,
and she called again before me, the said Brian) recited and particularly
named unto her all which she confessed, as before in the presence of us, whose
names be herevnder subscribed.

Also after this examinates aforesaid confession, the said Thorlows wife, and
Letherdalles wife being then in my house, and she the said Letherdalls wife
having her child there also, were brought in my presence before this
examinate: who, immediately after some speeches had past between them, she
this examinate burst out in tears and fell upon her knees, and asked
forgiveness of the said Letherdalls wife, and l^^ewise of Thorlows wife, and
confessed that she caused Newmans wife to send a spirit to plague the
child, asking the said Letherdalls wife, if she were not afraid that night
that the spirit came unto the child, and telled her about the same hour, and
said that she her self by reason thereof was in a great swett. And this
examinate confesses, that she caused the said Newmans wife, to send a
spirit to Thorlowes wife, to plague her where that thought good, etc.

The said Letherdals child (being a woman child)) at the time of this
examination, appeared to be in most pitious sort consumed, and the privy and
hinder parts thereof, to be in a most strange and wonderful case, as it
seemed to very honest women of good judgment, and not likely to live and
continue any long time.

Note also that it is specially to be considered, that the said child being
an infant and not a year old, the mother thereof carrying it in her arms,
to one mother Ratcliffes a neighbor of hers, to have her to minister unto it,
was to pass by Ursley this examinates house, and passing bye the wyndowe, the
Infant cried to the mother, woe, woe, and poynted with the finger to the wyndowe
wards: And likewise the child used the like as she passed homewards by the
said window, at which she confessed her conscience moved her, so as she went
shortly after and talked with the said Ursley, whereupon ^hee used such
speeches as moved her to complain.

The second confession and examination of Vrsley Kemp, taken the xxi. day of
February.
The said Vrsley, being committed to the ward and keeping of the Constable that
night, upon some speeches that she had passed, said, that she had forgotten
to tell M. Darcey one thing, whereupon the next day she was brought before
Brian Darcey, and the second time examined, who confessed and said.

THat about a quarter of a year last past, one Ales Neweman, her nere
neighbor came unto this examinates house and fell out with her, and said she
was a witch, and that she would take away her witcherie, and carry the same
unto M. Darcey: But this examinate says, she thought she did not mean it,
but after they had chidden they became friends, and so she departed carrying
away with her, her spirits in a pot, as this examinate says.

And she further says, that about Christmas last, she went to the said Ales
Newman, and declared to her that Thorlows wife and she were fallen out, and
prayed the said Newmans wife, to send the spirit called Tittey, unto her to
plague the said Thorlowes wife, where that thought good: The which this
examinate says, she did, and at the return of the said spirit it ^olde
this examinate, that it had punished Throlowes wife upon her knee, And then it
had a reward by sucking blood of this examinate, and so returned as she says
to the said Ales Neweman.

This examinate says, that about three months past, she and one John
Stratton fell out, and the said John called her whore and gave her other evil
speeches, whereupon this examinate says, that shortly after she sent her Boy
for spices unto the wife of the said John: But she says, she sent her none,
whereupon this examinate says, she went unto the said Newmans wife, and told
her of the falling out between Stratton and her, and requested the said
Newmans wife, to send Jack the spirit unto Strattons wife to plague her, y^
which the said Ales Newman promised this examinate to do the next night, as
this examinate says she did: And the spirit told this examinate when it
returned, that it had plagued her in the back even unto death: and the spirit
did suck of this examinate upon the left thigh, the which when she rubbeth
(she says) it will at all times bleed.

And she says that then the spirit did return to the said Newemans wife
again, and had the like reward of her as she thinks.

This examinate says, that about Friday was seuennight being about the
nienth of February, she went unto the said Ales Newman, and did show her
that one Letherdalls wife and she were fallen out, and says, that she prayed
her to send one of the spirits unto her young child: whereunto she the
said Ales answered well, she would: and this examinate says, that at that time
she could have no longer talk with her, for that her husband was then
present in the house: and this examinat says, that the said Ales sent the
spirit Pigin, to plague ye said child where that thought good, and after that
it had sucked of this examinate, she says it returned to the said Newmans
wife, and more at that time the said examinate confessed not.

The third examination and con^ession of Vrsley Kempe alias Gray, taken before
me Brian Darsey esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices of the peace, the
xxiiii. day of February.
THis examinate, being asked how she knew the said Elizabeth Bennet to have two
spirits, says, that about a quarter of a year past, she went unto mother
Bennets house for a mess of milk, the which she had promised her: But at her
coming this examinate says she knocked at her door, and no body made her
any answer, whereupon she went to her chamber window and looked in thereat,
saying, ho, ho, mother Bennet are you at home? And casting her eyes aside, she
saw a spirit lift up a clothe lying over a pot, looking much lik a Ferret. And
it being asked of this examinate why the spirit did look upon her, she said
it was hungry.

This examinate, being asked how she knew the names of mother Bennets
spirits, says, that Tyffin her spirit did tell this examinate that she had
two spirits, the one of them like a black Dog, and the other red like a
Lion, and that their names were Suckin and Lyerd, and says that Suckin did
plague Byettes wife unto death, and the other plagued three of his Beasts
whereof two of them dyed, and the third leyer fire or drooping, and not likly
to live: Byette caused his folks to make a fire about her: The Cow feeling
the heat of the fire, starte up and ran her way, and by that occasion was
saved.

This examinate says, that about the fourteen or fifteen day of January
last, she went to the house of William Hunt to see how his wife did, and she
being from home, she called at her chamber window and looked in, and then
espied a spirit to look out of a potcharde from under a clothe, the nose
thereof being brown like unto a Ferret. And says, that the same night she
asked Tyffin her white spirit, what Hunts wives spririte had done: And then it
told this examinate, that it had killed Heywarde of Frowicke six beasts which
were lately dressed of the gargette. And says, that her said spirit told
her, that Huntes wives spirit had a drop of her blood for a reward: but
she says, that she asked not her spirit upon what place of her body it was.

This examinate says, that one Michell a shoemaker of Saint Osees did tell
her, that he thought that Glascockes wife had bewitched his Child, whereof it
dyed: Whereupon she this examinate says, that she went home, and asked
Tyffin her white spirit, whether the ^a^e were so: which told this
examinate, ^^^t she had bewitched the said child, and sent one of her
spirits to plague it to the death.

And says also, that the said Glascockes wife did bewitche the Base child
that Page and his wife have in keeping, and that her said spirit telled her
so. And being demanded, how many spirits Glascockes wife had, and by what
names she called them, this examinate says, that she asked not her spirit
Tyffin any such questions.

This examinat says, that the said Elizabeth Bennette did send her spirit
Suckin to plague one Willingall, whereof he languished and died: being sick
of an impostume.

This examinate says also, that the said Elizabeth sent the said spirit
to William Wills his wife to plague her, whereof she languished many years
and dyed.

This examinate says, that the said Elizabeth (not above three weeks
sithence) sent her spirit Lyerd to plague Fortunes wife and his child.

This examinate says, that the said Elizabeth did send her spirit Lyerd to
Bonners wife to plague her, the which her said spirit, told this examinate
to be done upon the knee.

This examinate says further, that Ales Newman went unto Johnson being
Collectour ^or the poor, and did require him to give her xi^. d. for her
husband which was sick. But he aunswering her that he had disbursed more
money then he had collected, saying, therefore he could not then help her
with any: The said Newemans wife fell out with him very angerly, and the next
day after sent one of the spirits that she had from this examinate to plague
the said Johnson and his wife unto the death: And that her spirit called
Tyffin did tell the same unto her, and she being asked what words the said
Newemans wife used to Johnson upon the falling out, says, that she asked not
her said spirit.

This examinate says, that Newmans wife being at Butlers, and asking a piece
of meat, was denied thereof: whereat she went a way mourmuring, And then
shortly after sent one of her spirits to punish him upon the back: The
which Tyffin her said spirit tells this examinate was done, whereof he
languisheth and is greatly payned.

This examinate being asked, whether her white spirit called Tyffin did ever at
any time ^el her any untruths, or whether she had found it at any time to tell
any thing contrary to truth, says, that the said spirit did ever tell her
true in any matter she required of it, and says, that she never knew it to
tell her otherwise then truth.

This Exam. being asked, whether she sent any of her spirits to plague or
punish John Strattons child, confesses and says, that the spirit which
plagued Strattons wife to the death, did also punish the said Strattons
child, saying, that the said child should not complain thereof until the
mother were departed.

Note, it is to be considered, that the said Ursley Kempe in this her
confession has uttered many things well approved and confessed to be most
true: And that she was brought thereunto by hope of favor.

The Examination and confession of Ales Newman, taken before me Brian Darcie
Esquire, the xxi. of February.
Condemned.

THis examinat says, that she went unto the house where the said Ursley
Kempe alias Gray dwelt, and entered into communication with her, and that they
fell out greatly: and confesses that she said unto the said Ursley that she
knew her to be a witch, but denies the residue of ye speeches alleged by
the said Urley against this Examinat.

The said Brian Darcey finding this examinat to be obstinate, and that she
could be brought to confess nothing, said to this Examinat, that he would
sever and part her and her spirits a sunder, nay says she this examinat,
that shall ye not, for I will carry the^ with me, and hold being taken of her
words, after some distance she added (if she have any.)

The enformation of William Bonner, taken before me Brian Darcey Esquire, the
xxiiii. day of February.
THe said William Bonner says, that ye said Elizabeth Bennet and his wife were
lovers and familiar friends, and did accompany much together: and says that
since Candlemas last his wife has complained of a lamenesse in her knee, and
that sithence also she has been much troubled. And says also that not ten
days past the said Elizabeth Bennet being with his wife, she being sickely
and sore troubled, the said Elizabeth used speeches unto her, saying, a good
woman how thou art laden, and then clasped her in her arms, and kissed her:
Whereupon presently after her upper Lip swelled and was very big, and her
eyes much sunked into her head, and she has lien sithence in a very strange
case.

Upon the said enformation made by Vrsley Kempe alias Gray, against Elizabeth
Bennet, I Brian Dercey directed my warrant for her apprehe^sio^, whereupon she
was brought before me the said Brian, whose confession being taken the 22. day
of February.
Condemned.

THe said Elizabeth Bennet being charged with the foresaid information, denies
the same in general, and after many and sundry dema^ds being asked, whether
she had not a pot or pitcher of earth standing under a pair of stairs in her
house and wool in the same, in the which usually the said two spirits did lie,
denied ye same with many oaths, saying, yt she was well assured yt she had none
such, whereupon it was said to her, if it be proved to your face, what will you
say to all the other matters you have bin charged with, are they true? To that
she made answer and said yea: Then was the pot brought before her, the which
she then confessed to be her pot, but denied yt the wool therein was any of
hers, the^ I calling her unto me, said, Elizabeth as thou will have favor
confess the truth. For so it is, there is a man of great cunning and
knoweledge come over lately unto our Queens Majesty, which has advertised
her what a company and number of Witches be within England: whereupon I and
other of her Justices have received Commission for the apprehe^ding of as many
as are within these limits, and they which do confess the truth of their
doeings, they shall have much favor: but the other they shall be burnt and
hanged. At which speeches she the said Elizabeth falling upon her knees
distilling tears confessed as hereafter follows.

Saying, that one William Byet dwelt in the next house unto her three years,
saying, yt the first year they did agree reasonably well, but ere the second
year passed they fell out sundry and oftentimes, both with this examinat and
her husband* Byet calling her oftentimes old trot and old witch, and did
banne and curse this examinat and her Cattle, to the which this examinat
says, that she called him knave saying, wind it up Byet, for it will light
upon your self: and after this falling out this examinat says, that Byet had
three beasts dyed, whereof he seeing one of them somewhat to droupe, he did
beat the said Cow in such sort, (as this Examinat says, that she thought
the said Cow did die thereof.

This examinat says further, that Byets wife did beat her swine several
times with great Gybets, and did at an other time thrust a pitchforke through
the side of one of this examinats swine, the which Durrant a Butcher did buie,
and for that when he had dressed it, it proved A messell, this Examinat
says, she had nothing for it but received it again, etc.

This examinat says also, that above two years past there came unto her two
spirits, one called Suckin, being black like a Dog, the other called Lierd,
being red like a Lion, Suckin this examinat says is a he, and the other a
she. And says, on a time as this examinat was coming from mill, the spirit
called Suckin came unto her and did take her by the coat, and held her that
she could not go forward nor remove by the space of two hours, at the
which (this examinat says) she was much amassed, and she says, that the
spirit did ask her if she this examinat would go with it: Whereat she this
examinat said, In the name of God, what art thou? Thou will not hurt me, at
the which speech it said no, and this Examinat says, that she then prayed
devoutly to Almighty God to deliver her from it: at which time the spirit did
depart from her until she had gone a good way, and being come within xxx. or
xl. rodes of her house, this examinat says, that the said spirit came again
unto her and took her by the coats behind, and held her fast, whereat this
examinat says, that she desired God to deliver her from that evil spirit,
and then that did depart to the Well. And this examinat says, yt within one
hour after, the same same spirit came again unto her she being a sifting of
her meal, and says, the same remained with her until she had laid her
leaven, and then departed.

The said examinat says, that the next day she being a kneading of her
bread, the said spirit came again unto her, and brought the other spirit
with it called Lierd, and that one of them did ask her why she was so snappish
yesterday, to that this examinat says, that she made answer, I trust I am in
the faith of God, and you shall have no power over me, at which words this
Examinat says, the said spirits departed.

Then she this examinat says, that she being a making of a fire in her
Quen, the said spirits came again unto her, and took her by the leg, this
examinat feeling it to take her by the leg says she said, God and the holy
Ghost deliver me from the evil spirits, at which words this examinat says,
that the said spirits did depart to her thinking.

But this examinat says, that within half an hour after she having a fire
fork in her hand, and being a stirring of the fire in the Quen, the spirit
(called Suckin) came unto her and took this examinat by the hippes, and said,
seeing thou will not be ruled, thou shall have a cause, and would have thrust
this examinat into ye burning Oven, and so had (as this examinat says) but for
the foresaid forke, but this examinat striving and doing what she could to
her uttermost, the said spirit burnt her arm, the which burning is apparaunt
and evidently too be seen, and when it had thus done it did depart.

And this Examinat says, that about a month after or more, she being a
walking in a croft near unto a Barn called Heywoods Barn, the spirit called
Suckin came and followed this examinat, she spying the same as she looked
back, at the sight thereof this examinat says, yt her eyes were like to start
out of her head: then she says yt she did beseech God to govern and guide her
from the evil spirits, whereupon she says they did depart,

But the same evening she this examinat being set a milking of a red Cow with
a white face, says that Suckin and Lired came again unto her, and says that
Suckin appeared at that time in the likeness of a black dog, and Lired in
the likeness of a Hare, the one sitting on the one side of her, the other on
the other side of her within less then two yardes: And says, that the Cow
she was then a milking of, snorted and ran away, and brake her paile and
spilt al her milk, neither could she get the said Cow any more that night to
stand still, and says, that for the loss thereof her husband did much chide
her, but she would not tell him what was the cause: and she praying to the
father, the son, and the holy ghost, says that they did depart, and that
she saw them not a quarter of a year after, nor above three times since
Midsommer last.

The said exam. says, that about that time they appeared again unto her, and
says that a little before there was a falling out between her and the said
Byet, whereupon and for that Bye^ had oftentimes misused her this examinat and
her Cattle, she says, that she caused Lyard in ye likeness of a Lion to go
and to plague the said Byets beasts unto death, and the spirit returning
told this examinat that it had plagued two of his beasts, the one a red Cow,
the other a black. And says that the spirit told her, that he plagued the
black Cow in the back, and the read Cow in the head.

This Examinate says further, that about Whitsontyde last past, the spirit
called, Suckin, did come again at that time unto her, sayeing to this
Examinate, that he had met Byettes wife two several times, tellyng this
Examynate, that it met her once in this Examinates yard, and the next day
after it said, that it met her at the style, going into her ground: And
says it told this Examinate, it had plagued y^ said Byets wife to the death.
She this Examinate saying it was done by the spirit, but not by the sending of
this Examinate. The said spirit sayeing* I know that Byet and his wife have
wronged thee greatly, and done thee several hurtes, and beaten thy swyne, and
thrust a pytchforke in one of them, the which the spirit said to have done,
to win credit with this Examinate.

And this Examinate says further, that about Lammas last past: For that the
said William Byet had abused her, in calling her old trot, old whore, and
other lewd speeches, she this Examinate, caused the spirit, called Suckin,
to go and plague the said Willyam Byette where that would: The which the
said spyrite did, and at the return of it, it told this Examinate, that it
met Byet in the barn yard, and that it had plagued him in the hippes, even
unto death: And says she gave it a reward of milk: and says, that many
times they drink of her milk bowl. And being asked how she came by the
said spirits, she confessed and said, that one Mother Turner did send them
unto her to her house (as she thinks) for that she had denied the said
Mother Turner of milk: And when, and as often as they did drink of the milk:
This Examynate says they went into the said earthen pot, and lay in the wool.

The Examynation and Confession of Annis Glascocke, wife of John Glascocke,
sawyer, taken before me Bryan Darcey Esquyre, the xxiiii. of February.
TThis Examinate being charged by Mychel the shoemaker, that a woman, so^times
fellow with her in the house, should report her to be a naughty woman, and
a dealer in witchcrafte, denies that she knew any such woman, or that any
such speeches were used unto her.

This Examinat being charged that one sparrowe being lodged in her house,
should hear a strange noise or rumbling since Christmas last, says, that
she made a noise by removing of boards one night for that she would have him
to lie in an other chamber.

This Examinate says also, that long sithence she dwelt by the space of one
quarter or more with her brother Edward Wood, and that at several times in that
time certain ledde^ weights and great stones were cast into the house, and
diverse strange noyses of rumblinges heard: the which weights and stones came
always nearest one Arnoldes head, being then a boorder in that house, and
says that Arnoldes wife was accounted a witch: And was suspected to cause the
same stones to be cast, to the intent to drive her husband from boording there
being in Ielosie of this Examinate: She being at that time not above the age of
xx. years.

This Examinate says, that by many years past she was much troubled with
straung aches in her bones, and otherwise: whereof she consumed by the space of
two or three years: And says, yt she was told, that about Sudbery there dwelt
one Herring (named to be a Cawker) to whom she went, who declared to this
Examinate, yt she was hau^ted with a witch (naming Arnolds wife) And that she
should not escape death without she had some remedy, whereupon this examinat
says, yt she prayed ye said Herring to help her. And that he then delivered
unto her a little lynnen bag of the breadth of a groate, full of small
things like seeds, and willed her to put the same where her pain was most,
the which she proved by sewing it upon her garmente, near the place where
her grief was: And after a while this Examinate says, she recovered, and was
well.

This Examinate denies that ever she hurt the base Child, which Pages his
wife kept, or that there was any falling out between this Examinate and her:
And says, that she knows not, whether the said Child be a base Child
or not.

This Examinate being charged, that she sent a spirit to plague Michell, the
shoomakers Child, or that she had bewitched the said Child, denied that she
had done either of both. And she being asked, whether she ever fell out with
one Fortune or his wife, or whether she hurt any of their children, says,
that there was no falling out between them, or that she hurt any of his
Children.

Annys Letherdall and Margaret Sympson women appointed, to see and view the
body of this Examinate: said, and affirm upon their credites, that upon the
left side of the thighe of this Examinate, there be some spots, and upon the
left shoulder likewise one or two* Which spots be like the sucked spots,
that Ursley Kempe has upon her body.

This Examinate and the said Ursley Kempe alias Greye, being brought before
me face to face, the said Ursley then charged this Examinate to have plagued
and punyshed Mychelles Child, whereof it dyed: And also Fortunes wives Child,
whereof it languyshed. At which speeches this Examinate used outrageous words,
calling the said Ursley whore, saying, she would scratch her: for she was a
Witch, and that she was sure she had bewitched her: For that she could not
now weep.

The Confession and Examynation of Ales Hunt, the Wife of Willyam Hunt, taken
before me Bryan Darcey Esquyre, the xxiiii. of February.
THe said Ales Hunt being asked, whether there was any falling out beetwene
this Examinate, and Haywarde of Frowycke, or his Wife: says, there was none:
But rather she had cause to be beeholding unto them: saying, that Haywardes
wife did christen her a Child. And she being charged to have a spirit in a
potsharde, which Ursleye Kempe had seen, denied that she had any such, or
that she had plagued Haywardes Cattle with that or with any other spirit.

This Examinate being asked, if she never did feed her spirits with milk out
of a little trenyng dishe, said no: the which dyshe was brought by the
Constable from her house, and then showed to this Examynate, the which she
denied to be her dyshe, or that she had any such in her house.

This Examinates warrant being made, and to her read, and she committed to
the Counstable to be carried to the Gaile, desired to speak alone with me the
said Bryan Dar^^^: whereupon I went into my Garden, and this Examinate
followed me, she then falling upon her knees with weeping tears, confessed
and said, that she had within vi. days before this examination, two spirits,
like unto little Coltes, the one black, and the other white: And says she
called them by the names of Jack and Robbin: And that they told her, that the
said Ursleye Kempe would bewray her this Examinate, and willed her therefore
to shift for her self. And so they went from her, and sithence this Examinate
says she saw them not.

This Examinate says, that her sister (named Margerie Sammon) has also two
spirits like Toades, the one called Tom, and the other Robbyn: And says
further, her said Sister and she had the said spyrites of their Mother,
Mother Barnes: who departed out of this world within xii. days before the
taking of this examination.

The Examination and confession of Margery Sammon, taken before me Brian
Darcie Esquire, the xxv. of February.
THe said Margerie Sammon, sister to the said Ales Hunt, daughter to one
mother Barnes lately deceased, (which mother Barns was accounted to be a
notorious Witch) says, that she remained at home with her mother by the
space of half a year, and says she was with her mother several times, when
she lay sick, and also at the hour of her death: But denies the having of
any spirits of her said Mother, or that her mother had any to her knowledge.

The said Margery yt night being committed to ye ward and keeping of ye
counstable, and the next day brought before me the said Bryan in the
presence of her sister Ales Hunte, And being charged by her said Sister to
have two spirits like toades, given her by her mother at her death, utterly
denied the same saying, I defy thee, though thou art my sister, saying she
never saw any such: At which speeches her sister taking her aside by the
arm, whyspred her in the ear: And then presentlye after this Examinate with
great submission and many tears, confessed that she had two spirits delivered
her by her mother, the same day she departed. And that she this Examinate
carried them away with her in the evening, they being in a wicker basket, more
then half full of white and black wool: And that she asking her mother what
she should do with them, she bad her keep them and feed them: This
Examinate asking wherewithal: her mother answered, if thou do not give them
milk, they will suck of thy blood: And says, she called them by the names
of Tom and Robbin. And this Examinate being asked how often she had given them
meat sithence she had them, says and confesses, that she fed them twice
out of a dyshe with milk: And being asked when she fed them last, this
Examinate said, upon Twesday last past before this examination, and that with
milk.

This Examinate says also, that when she took them of her mother, she
said unto her, if thou wil^e not keep the said spirits, then send them to
mother Pechey, for I know she is a Witch, and will be glad of them. And says
further, that she hearing, that Ursleye Kempe was apprehended, and fearing
that she should be called in question, says thereupon she took the said
spirits being in a basket, and in the evening went into the ground of her
Master, and so into Reads ground, and bad them go to the said mother Pechey:
At which words they skypped out of the said basket, and went before this
Examinate, she this Examinate sayeing, all evil go with you, and the Lord
in heaven bless me from ye: And says, she might see the said spyrites
goeing toward a barred style, goeing over into How lane: And when they came
at the style, she says, they skypped over the same style and went the
ready way to mother Pecheyes house: And says she verilye thinks the
said mother Pechey has them.

The Examination and confession of Ioane Pechey widdowe, taken before me Brian
Darcie Esquire, the xxv. of February.
This Examinate Joan Pechey being asked how old she was, says, she is
threescore years and vpwardes: And says that she has dwelt in the Town of
S. Oseys above xl. years: And says she knew Mother Barnes, and she knew her
to be no witch, or that she ever heard her to be accounted, or to have skill
in any witchery. And she being asked whether she was with her when she lay
upon her death bed, says that she was not.

This Examinate also denies, that she has or ever had any Puppettes, Spyrites
or Maumettes: Or that she had any Spirits, which she bought, or were conveyed
unto her by Margerie Barnes, or sent by any other sithence the death of Mother
Barnes.

This Examinate also denies, that ever she said to any of her neighbors, or
to any other person in secret sort or merely, that she knew or could tell
what any man in the Town at aany time did or said, when she her self listed,
or would know.

This Examinate says, that she never used any of those speeches, which Ales
Hunte has informed against her, As yea art thou so sawsie? art thou so boulde?
thou were not best to be so bold, for if thou beist, thou shall have Simonds
sauce.

This examinate being asked, what she thought of the sudden death of Johnson
the Collector, says, he was a very honest man, and dyed very suddenly: And
says she heard, that one Lurkin should say, that he heard Johnson to say,
that Mother Newman had beewitched him. And being asked of whom she heard it,
she answered she could not tell: And says that she her self never used
any hard speeches against the said Johnson.

This Examinate being charged to have willed her Son Phillip Barrenger,
being of the age of xxiii. years to lie in hedde with her, denies that she
had so done, other then she had willed him at some times to lie upon the
bed at her back.

But the said Phyllyppe being examined, confesses and says, that many
times and of late he has layne in naked bed with his own mother, being
willed and commanded so to do of her.

This Examinate being asked, whether she had any Cat in her house, says that
she has a Kyttyn, and a little Dog. And being asked, what color the
Kyttyn was of, she this Examinate said she could not tell, saying ye may
go and see.

The Information of John Sayer one of the Constables of Thorpe, taken before
me Bryan Darcey Esquyre, one of her majesty's Justices against Als Manfielde,
the xiii. day of March.
THe said John says, that above one year sithence he had a Thetcher, which
was a thetching of a barn of his, near Mother Manfieldes house, and that then
she the said Ales came unto the Thetcher, and would have had him to^hetche
over an oven of hers, whereunto this Thetcher made answer and said, he would
do it, if his master would let him, but else he would not do it, whereunto
she said, he had been as good as to have willed you to do it. For I will
be even with him. And he says, that within a while after, he had occasion
to come by the house of the said Ales Manfielde with his carte, well near
three quarters laden, and being before her door upon the hard ground:
says, his carte stood, that he could not make it go forward nor
backwarde, by the space of one hour and more: The which he says, he thought
to be done by some wit^herie, which the said Ales Manfielde then (...).

The Information of Robert Sanneuet, taken before me Brian Darcey Esquire, one
of her M. Justices the xiiii. of March.
THe said Robert says, that about xv. years past, there dwelt with him the
daughter of Elizabeth Ewstace, and that for some lewd dealings, and behavior
by her done, he says, he used some threatening speeches unto her, being
his servant: And that shortly after she went home to her said mother, and
telled her of her masters using of her: And the next day he says, as he
was a sitting by his fire side, his mouth was drawn awrye, well near up to
the upper part of his cheek: whereupon he says, he sent presentlye to
one of skill to come unto him, who came unto him, And that he seeing him in
that case, took a lynnen cloth, and covered his eyes, and stroke him on the
same side with a strong blow, and then his mouth came into the right course:
and he says that he willed this Examinate to put away his servant, and
that out of hand: the which he says he did.

This Examinat says, that iii. years sithence his brother Cross was taken
very sickly, and at times was without any remembrance, and that he sent for
this Examinat, and when he came unto him, he told him that Margaret Ewstace
had bewitched him, and brought him into that weak state he then was at: Whereto
this Examinate says, that if that be so, he then wished a spyt red hot and
in her buttocks, which speeches of his, he says was carried by one then in
the house unto the said Mother Ewstace, and this Examinate says, that she
seeing a neighbor of his going toward this Examinates house, asked her
whether she was going, and she answered unto this Examinates house: Whereunto
she the said Mother Ewstace should say, nay go not thither, for he says I am
a witch: And said, his wife is with Child and lusty, but it will be
otherwise with her then he looks for: Whereupon this Examinate says, that
his wife had a most strange sickness, and was delivered of child, which within
short time after dyed.

This Examinate says, that the Summer after he milked vii. mi^che beasts, and
that all that summer many and very often times, his said beasts did give down
blood in steed of milk and that he had little, or no profit by them: And he
says that about iiii. months after many of his hogs did skippe and leap
about the parde in a strange sort: And some of them dyed.

The Information of Vrsley Kemp Alias Gray, taken at Colchester by Thomas Tey
and Brian Darcey Esquires, two of her M. Justices the ix. of March.
THis Examinate being charged that she should report to several persons
that have comen unto her, sithence her imprysonment, that Ales Newman should
send a spirit to plague the late Lord Darcey, whereof he dyed: And she being
asked, whether she said so, says she said, that Tyffyn her white spirit
told her that Ales Newman had sent a spyrite to plague a noble man, of whom
we (meaning the poor) had all Relief: The which she Says she took to be the
said Lord Darcey, And other wise she said not.

The Information of Rychard Rosse of little Clapton, taken before me Bryan
Darcey Esquyre, against Henry Cilles and Cysley his wife, the i. day of March.
THe said Richard says, that about vi. years past, the said Henry Cilles
wrought with this Examinate in husbandry many and several times, and says yt
at one time he the said Henry being at plough in ye said Richardes ground with
his plowgh of horses, they being as well and as likely to any man's judgment,
as any men's horse might be when they began to work: yet before they had gone
twice or thrice about the land, two of his lykest horses fell down in most
strange wise, and dyed.

This Examinate says, that a little before he had denied the said Cillys of
two bushels of maulte, which she would have had for three shillings, but he
held it at ten groates. And says further, that within a while after the
said Cysleye Cyllis did come unto this examinates wife, brynging with her a
poke, and desired to buy a bushel, or a bushel and a half of maulte of her,
or as much as her bag would hold: But for that she the said Cysley would not
give her her price, she departed without having any, using many hard
speeches at that time: whereupon they fell out.

This Examinate says also, that his wife finding Cylles his cattle in his
ground, did hunt the^ out thereof, which Cylles his wife seeing, was thereat in
a great anger, and gave her lewd speeches, and says that presently after, many
of his beast were in a most straung taking: the which he does say, to be
wrought by some witchcraft, or sorcery by ye said Henry or Cisly his wife.

This Examinate says, that about xii. months and more past, a barn of his
standing in his ground, a good way of from his dwelling house with much corn
therein, was in a most sodeine sort fired and burnt: But (he says) he
cannot charge the said Henry or Cysley his wife, to be the doers thereof,
other then the youngest son of the said Henry and Cisley, should say here
is a goodly deal of corn, and a man unknown should answer there was the
diuel^ store.

The enformation of Henry Sellys, son of the said Henry, taken before me
Brian Darcey Esquire, the said day and year.
THe said Henry says, that he is of the age of ix. years, and that
sithence Candlemas last, one night about midnight, there came to his brother
John a spirit, and took him by the left leg, and also by the little Toe,
which was like his sister, but that it was al black: at which time his brother
cried out and said, Father, Father, come help me, there is a black thing yt
has me by ye leg, as big as my sister: whereat his father said to his
mother, why thou whore cannot you keep your impes from my childre^^ whereat
she presently called it away from her son, saying, come away, come away, At
which speech it did depart.

This examinat says, that the next day he told his mother he was so afraid
of the thing that had his brother by the leg that he swett for fear, and
that he could scarce get his shirt from his back: his mother answering thou
lie, thou lie whoresonne. This Examinat being asked, wherewith he had
seen his mother to feed her Imps and wherein, he says, yt she fed them out
of a black dish, each other day with milk: and says, that he has seen her
to carry it unto a heap of wood and brom standing under a crab tree by the
house, and being asked what their names were, he says, that one of them is
called by two names which is Herculus, sothe hons, or Jack, and that is a
black one, and is a he, and the other is called Mercury, and is white, and
is a she: and that their eyes be like unto goose eyes, and says, that he
has seen his mother to remove four Brom fagots, and so to creep into the
crabtree root, whereas they stand and lie upon a sleese of wool. And this
Examinat says further, yt the same night Rosse his maid was taken: when his
father came home, his mother told him her husband, that she had sent Herculus
to Rosse his maid: and he answered, ye are a trim fool. This examinat says,
that as he and his mother were coming (they being in Rosse his Bromefield)
she said unto him, take heed ye say nothing.

The information of John Selles the youngest son of Henry and Cysley, taken
before me Brian Darcey Esquire, the third day of March.
THe said John Selles says, that he is about the age of vi. years iii.
quarters, and says* ye one night there was a black thing like his sister,
that took him by the leg and that he cried out, saying, father, father,
come help me and defend me, for there is a black thing that has me by the
leg: at which he says, his father said to his mother, ye stinking whore what
mean ye? can ye not keep your imps from my children? and being asked what
color they were of, and what they were called, he says, that one is black,
and another is white, and yt he has hard his mother to call them Imps, and
that they have eyes as big as himself: and he says, yt his father bad his
mother put them away or else kill them. And says, yt a while sithence his
mother delivered the^ to one of Colchester (he thinks his name is Wedon or
Glascocke) and says yt Wedo^s wife had a cap to dress of his mothers, and
says, that they were carried away in a basket at that time. And being asked,
whether his father or mother bade him that he should say nothing, he
says, that h^s mother said unto him that he should go before: a gentleman,
and willed him to take heed he telled no tales nor lies.

He says, that his father called one of them, which is the black one, John,
which he said his father mocked him because his name was so: And his mother
called ye white one an Impe. He says he has seen his father to feed them
out of a black dish with a wooden spone, and yt he knows the same dishe,
and the last time he fed them it was behind the Bromestacke at ye crabtree.
And he says, that the man which carried them away gave his mother a penny,
and that when she should go to him she should have another penny, he says
at that time his brother was from home at one Gardeners house.

And being asked, whether ever he saw his mother to feed them, he says,
that he has seen his mother to feed them twice, and that out of a dish with a
spone with thin milk.

Note also, it is to be considered, that there is a scarre to be seen of this
examinats leg where it was taken, and also the nail of his little Toe is yet
imperfect.

The information of Joan Smith wife of Robert Smith, taken before me Brian
Darcey Esquire, the said day and year.
THe said Joan says, that one holy day in the after noone sithence Michaelmas
last, she had made her self ready to go to Church, and took in her arms
her young child and opening her door, her mother (grandmother to the child)
one redworths wife, and Selles his wife were at the said door ready to draw
the latch, she this examinat telling her mother she was coming out of doors
to Churchward: whereat the grand mother to the child, took it by the hand and
shoke it, saying, a mother pugs art thou coming to Church? And Redworthes wife
loking on it, said, here is a iolie and likely child God bless it? after
which speeches, Selles his wife said, she has never the more children for
that, but a little babe to play wtall for a time. And she says within short
time after her said child sickned and died: But she says yt her conscience
will not serve her, to charge the said Cysley or her husband to be the causers
of any such matter, but prays God to forgive them if they have dealt in any
such sort. etc.

The examination and confession of Henry Selles and Cysley his wife, taken
before me Brian Darcey Esquire, the first day of March.
THe said Henry says, that he has wrought in husbandry by some long time past
with Richard Rosse of little Clapton, and yt one time he being at plough, two of
his horses upon a sudden fell down and were in most strange taking, but what
the occasion should be thereof (he says) he knew not. And says, yt he does
not remember yt he would have had any malt of the said Rosse at his price, or
yt there was any falling out between the^: and denies yt his child cried out
unto him, saying, father come help me, or that he called his wife stinking
whore: and denies all the residue of the matters in general informed against
him, etc.

Condemned.

The said Cysley his wife says, that she does not remember yt Rosse his wife
did at any time hunt her catell being in her ground, or yt she used any hard
speeches to his wife thereupon, or yt she fell out for yt she could not have
any malt at her price: but she says at one time she met Rosse his wife, and
that there was some talk between them, the which she does not remember more
then that the said Rosses wife said, I shall see at your end what you are.
And being asked if she knew not mother Tredsall, she says she knew her,
but she denies, yt she said if she were a witch, she learned the same of the
said mother Tredsall: and denies that her child cried out in the night to
his father, and all the residue of ye matters ingeneral informed against her.

Ales Gilney, Joan Smith, and Margaret Simson women of credit, appointed by
me Brian Darcey, to view and see the body of the said Cysley, say, that she
has upon her body many spots very suspicious, and the said Margaret says,
that they be much like the sucked spots, that she has seen upon the body of
Ursley Kempe and several other.

The enformation of Ales Baxster servant with Richard Rosse, taken by me
Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices of the peace, the xix. day
of March.
THE said Ales says, that about Hallamas last past about four of the clock
in the after noone, she went a milking into her masters ground two closes of
from the house, and that she had eight or niene beasts to milk, and says yt
after she had milked all but one, and as she was a milking of that one, before
she had half done, the Cow start and stroke down her paile, and that she
saw all the rest to make a staring and a looking about: And she says as she
was a making an end of milking of that Cow, she felt a thing to prick her
under the right side, as if she had been stricken with ones hand, and she says
that after, as she was going homewardes with her milk near the style in the
same closse, there came a thing all white like a Cat, and stroke her at the
heart, in such sort as she could not stand, go, nor speak, and so she
remained until her said master and two of his workmen did carry her home in a
chair: she says, she saw the said thing to go into a bush by the style, and
that she knew not her master when he came unto her.

Robert Smith says, that about Hallamas last past he wrought with Richard Rosse,
and that about v. a clock was called by the said Rosse to help him to fetch
home his maid, and going then with him they found the said Ales his maid
sitting leaning against the style, and in yt case as she could not stand, go,
nor speak, and yt he and one other with their masters help took her up and
brought her home in a chair.

The information of Henry Durrant, taken by me^ Brian Darcey Esquire, one of
her Majesty's Justices of peace, the 26. day of March, against Ales Hunt.
THe said Henry Durra^t says, yt about the second day of this present month,
he went to Colchester to appear before the Justices there to be bound from
killing of flesh, and after that he had so done he says, that he went with
several of his neighbors unto the Castle, to see the witches that were
committed thither, at which time he says, he talked with Ursley Kemp alias
Gray, who then told him after some demands which he used unto her, that Ales
Hunt and her mother (the widow Barnes) had bewitched his daughter, whereof she
dyed, saying, that because they were denied of a piece of Porke at such time
as they came for it, therefore they were offended with you: and says further,
that he does remember that they came unto him and would have had a piece of
Porke, the which for that it was newly dressed, and somewhat whot, he made them
answer that he would not cut it out.

The enformatio^ of Richard Rosse and others together, with the confession of
Henry Selles and Cisley his wife.
The examination and confession of Ales Manfield, taken at Thorpe, and brought
before me Brian Darcey esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices, the xiii. day of
March.

Condemned.

THe said Ales Manfielde says, that she is of the age of three score and
three years or there aboutes, and that about xii. years sithence one margaret
Greuell came unto this examinat and said, that she should go out of her
house yt she dwelt in unto another house in the town: And then telled her
that she had four Impes or spirits the which she would not carry with her
to that house, for fear they should be espied or seen, and prayed her this
examinate that she would keep them, and also telled her what they would do
for her (saying she should have them upon condition that she the said
Margaret might have them at her pleasure, otherwise she should not have them)
and with what, and how she should feed them, and at her desire and request
she says that she was contented to keep them: And thereupon she says it
was concluded and agreed between her and this examinate, that she the said
Margaret should have them as often and as many times as she would at her
pleasure, and that then she received them.

This examinate being asked, what names they were called by, and of what
likeness, says that one of the^ was called Robin, an other Jack, the third
William, the fourth Puppet alias Mamet, and that two of them were he is and the
other two were she is, and were like unto black Cats, and says that she kept
them in a box with woll therein: And yt they did stand upon a shelfe by her
bed where she lay. This examinate says also, yt ye said Margaret Grauel has
commen unto her many and often times sithence ye said agreement between the^
made, and according to ye said condition has received of this examinat ye said
imps or spirits: she this examinat being telled of her some times wherefore she
would have the^, and that some times she knew by asking ye said imps or spirits
where they had bin, and what they had done when they returned again unto her.
And being asked how often and when to her remembrance, she this examinat says,
about 7. years since ye said mother Grauel came unto this examinate and told
her y^ Chestons wife and she were fallen out, and had chidde^ very much: and
that she gave her evil speeches, whereupon she requested to have ye spirit
Robin to go to plague his beasts: and the^ sent it, which said when it
returned, yt Cheston being at plow and leaving work, yt it had plagued a
bullock of his yt was well liking and lusty, whereof it should pine and die.

This examinate says, that the said Margaret Greuell, well near two years
after, sent her spirit Jack to go to plague Cheston, upon the great Toe unto
the death.

This Examinate says, that when it returned it told her that it had plagued
the said Cheston upon the Toe even unto death, and that it had sucked blood of
the said Margrettes body, and that besides it had of her Beer and Bread for
the labor: and says, that she this examinate gave it Bear and Breed then
also for telling of her.

This examinate says also, that five years past or there aboutes, her spirit
Robin told her that Margarette Greuell had sent the said spirit unto her
husband to plague him, where of he pined above half a year and more, having
by that means many and several strange sores, and thereof died. And this
Examinate says that, that he would eat as much or more then two men would
do, and that it sucked blood upon the body of the said Margaret for the
labor: she this examinate being asked upon what place, says the said spirit
did not tell her.

This examinat says, that on a time she went unto the house of Joan Cheston
widow, and desired of her to give her some Curdes: but she says she gave
her none, whereupon she says, that she sent her Impe Puppet alias Mamet to
plague her Beasts, where that would, and so it did: And that when the said
Impe returned, it told this examinate that it had plagued four of her Beasts
with lamenesse, and that it did suck blood upon this Examinates body for a
reward.

This examinate says, that about two years past, one John Sayer did fetch
doung out of an Orchard, from a pittes bank, near this examinates house, and
did by reason thereof, gulle a green place before her door, whereupon she
says, she sent her Impe called Puppet alias Mamet to stay the Carte being
before the door, the which it did, and she says that she saw him and
others to lift at the wheels, and to set his hauser rope, the which did little
good, and that the same hauser rope and other of his horse harness burst a
sunder, and she says, she gave her said Impe Beer for the labor.

This examinate says, that little before Michaelmas last, her said four
Impes said unto her, saying, I pray you Dame give us leave to go unto little
Clapton to Celles, saying, they would burn Barnes, and also kill Cattle, and
she says, that after their return they told her that they had burnt a barn
of Rosses with corn, and also told her that Celles his wife knew of it, and
that all they four were fed at Cells house by her al ye time they were away
from this examinate, wc she says was about a seuennight: An^ that Puppet
sucked upon this examiaminates left shoulder at their return unto her: And the
rest had beer.

This examinate says, that William, one of her Impes not above a seue^night
before her apprehension, told her that she should be called in question, and
bad her shift for her self: saying, they would now depart from her and go
unto saint Osees unto mother Gray, mother Torner, or mother Barnes two
daughters, but to which of them it was that they would go she does not now
remember: but they told her yt they to who^ they went had hurt me^ and women to
death, and several men's cattle and other things.

This examinat says, yt about a quarter of a year since, she went unto ye
house of mother Ewstace to speak with her, at wc time she says, she saw three
imps wc she had standing in a yearthe^ pot in ye one side of her house next ye
heath, and says that one of the^ was white, ye other gray, and the third
black, and says they were like cats. This examinat says also, that her white
spirit told her, yt mother Ewstace their dame, sent her impes to hurt a child,
whereof it should pine and become lame, but whose child she remembers not.

Also this examinate says, yt upon some conference between mother Ewstace and
her, she this examinate told mother Ewstace, yt mother Greuel did plague her
husband, whereof he died, which was done by her spirit Robin: and she says that
she also told mother Ewstace, yt mother Greuel sent her spirit Jack to plague
Chesto^ to the death: but what answer she the said mother Ewstace then made,
she now remembers not.

This examinate says, that about a year since the said mother Grauel told her,
that she had caused her impes to destroy several brewinges of beer, and
batches of bread, being asked where, she says a brewe^ at Reads, a brewe^ at
Carters, and a brewe^ of three or four bushelles of malte at Brewses.

The said confession being made by the said Ales in manner and form aforesaid,
I the said Brian in the presence of they cunstables and other the Townsmen of
Thorpe, said as I had several times before unto the said Ales, what a danger
it was, and how highly she should offend God if she should charge any
person with any thing untrue, and also telled her that her said confession
should be read again unto her, willing her that if she heard any thing
read that she knew was not true, that she should speak, and it should be
amended, the which being done, she said her confession was true, and the
said Margaret and Elizabeth being then also called before me, she affirmed
her confession to their fa^es.

The enformation of Thomas Death and Marie his daughter, taken by me Brian
Darcey esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices, the xv. day of March.
THe said Thomas Death says, that about two years sithence, there was a
great falling out between this examinates wife and the said Cisly Celles, for
that one George Battle having put a child of his to the nursing and keeping of
the said Cisley, and after he taking the said child away from her, and put
the same to this examinates wife to be nursed and kept, whereupon at the next
meeting of the said wives, the said Celles his wife chid and rayled at her,
and said, thou shall loose more by the having of it, then thou shall have for
the keeping of it, and within one month after (as he now remembers) he says
that a child of his, of the age of four years, being in good liking and well,
went but out of the doors into the yard, who presently fell down dead, and
after by help being brought to life, the said child was in a pitious case,
and so died presently.

This examinate says, that he had presently after several Swine the which
did skippe and leap about the yard, in a most strange sort, and then died.
And he says that over night he had a Calfe which was very fatt, and the next
morning he found the same dead.

This examinate says, that he having bin at sea and newely arrived at
Ipeswitch, a messenger which was newely come from his wife, by chance met
him, who told this examinate that his daughter Marie was taken very strangly,
and lay in a most pitious case, saying he had brough^ her water to carry unto a
Physician to have his opinion thereof: Whereupon this examinate says, that
he and the messenger went therewith unto one Berte dwelling in that Town, and
showed him the same, he says, he asked him if that his daughter were not
bewitched: But he said that he would not deal so far to tell him,
whereupon he not satisfied to his mind, met after with an acquaintance of
his, and asked him where he might go to a cunning man, telling him in what
case his daughter lay in: who then sent him to a man whom he knew not, nor
his name he now remembers not, with whom after he had conferred and showed
his daughters said water: This examinate says, he told him if he had not
commen with some great haste to seek help* he had come too late: And this
examinate says, that he toulde him that within two nyghtes after the parties
that had hurt his daughter should appear unto her, and remedy her: And he
says, that he him self did not then come home, but went to sea: But he
says he sent his messenger home with things that were to be ministered unto
his said daughter.

This examinate says, that when he came home, his wife told him that the
next night after his daughter had received the things ministered unto her, that
she heard a noise like a groaning, and that she did arise and went unto her
daughter, and asked her how she did: whereunto her daughter made answer and
said, ah mother that you had commen a little sooner, you should have seen
Celles wife and Barkers wife here standing before me.

Marie Death, daughter of the said Thomas Death, says, that about two years
sithence upon a Sunday, she was taken with an ache or numnes from her neck
down her back all over: And she says, that after her mother had ministered
things unto her sent from a Physician: The next night after she says she
heard a voice, saying unto her, look up, at which she says she lifted up
her eyes, and then did see Celles wife and Barkers wife standing before her in
the same apparel that they did usually wear. And she this examinat says,
she thought they said unto her be not afraid, and that they vanished away,
as she thinks it was about midnight, And the next day after, this examinate
says, she amended, and was in case to arise without help, where before two or
three could scarce turn her in her bed as she lay.

The enformation of Joan Cheston widow, John Carter and other the inhabitants
of the Town of Thorpe, taken before me Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her
Majesty's Justices of the peace, the xiii. day of March* against Ales Manfielde.
THe said Joan says, that in summer last* mother Manfielde came unto her
house and requested her to give her Curdes, she says that answer was made
that there was none, and so she departed. And within a while after some of her
cattle were taken lame and could not travel to gather their meat, so that her
servants were constrained to mow down grass for the^ by the space of eight
days, she says, that afterward the said mother Manfielde came again
unto her, and demanded Curdes, and she says, that she then ^elled the
^aide mother Man^^^lde, that she had bewitched her Cattle, and that she then
said unto her, that if her cattle did no^ amend and become well, she would
burn her: whereupon she says, that her cattle did amend, and within a
very short while after were as well as before.

Lyndes wife says, that the said Mother Manfielde came unto her, and asked
her a mease of Milk, who answered that she had but a little, not so much as
would suckle her calfe, whereat she departed: and she says, that that
night her Calfe dyed, being very lusty, and xx. days old.

The enformation of John Carter and others of Thorpe, taken by me Brian Darcey
esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices, the xx. day of March, against
Margarette Greuell.
Continued in prison.

THe said John says, that on a time Margaret Greuell came unto this
examinates house, desiring her to have Godesgood, which was denied her, and
says that within a few days after his folks went in hand with brewing:
But of two brewinges after they could make no beer, but was feign to put the
same to the swill Tobbe, which was half a Seame at a brewing, and says, yt
the third time they went to Brewing with the like quantity, and that his son
being a tall and lusty man, of the age of xxxvi. years, was wished to take
his Bow and an arrowe, and to shoot to make his shaft or arrowe to stick in
the Brewing Fat, and that he shot twice and could not make the same to
stick, but at the third time that he shot, he made the same to stick in
the brewinge Fat, and after he says they could brewe as well as before.

Nicholas Stricklande Butcher, says, that Margaret Greuell sent her son
unto him for a Rack of Mutton, he having newely killed a Mutton, saying, the
same was whot and that he could not cut it out, and says, that he ^a^ him
come again in the after noone, and the Monday after his wife seething Milk
for the breakefaste of his woorkfolkes, the same stancke and was bitter: And
says within few days after his wife went to chearne her Cream that she
had gathered, and that she was from the morning until ten of the clock in
the night ^ Chearning, and could have no butter: the which this examinate
seeing, he says he caused his wife to power the said Cream into a Kettle,
and to set it upon the fire, the which was done: And making a great fire under
it, this examinate says, they could not make it to sees over: Then this
Examinate says, that he seeeing it would not do, he says he took the
kettell off the fire, and powered the one half thereof into the fire, and the
other half he let stand in the Kettle, the which he says stancke in
such exceeding sort, as they could not abide in the house. And this
examinate says, that the second time that his wife went to to chearne her
Cream, she continued a chearning and could have no butter, but that it was
as the other, the which he says, his wife was constrained to put it into ye
^wil Tub. And after yt this Examinate says, that the head and master Cow of
five beasts did also cast her Calfe, and presentlye after fell a hauleynge,
the which he fearyng that it would have dyed, saying, that he fed it and
killed it.

The enformation of Felice Okey widow, taken by me Brian Darcey esquire, one
of her Majesty's Justices of the peace, the xx. day of March* against Elizabeth
Ewstace.
THe said Felice says, that she was the late wife of Thomas Cross, and
that she on a time finding the geese of Elizabeth Ewstace in her ground, did
drive them out, and that by mischaunce one of her geese was hurt: whereat the
said Elizabeth ^ell out exceeding lie with this Examinate, and gave her hard
speeches, saying, that thy husband shall not have his health, nor that which
he has shall not prosper so well as it has done, and that she also said,
thou haste not had so good luck with thy gooslings, but thou shall have as
badde: And she says, that never after that she could have any of them
geese which she her self kept: and also the same night she says, that one
of her Kine gave down blood in steed of milk, and after for the space of
viii. days.

THis examinate says, that her late husband T. Cross, was taken in a strange
sort, and thereof pyned, and says, that on a time as her said husband was a
walking in his ground, he was ca^^ amongst B^^hes, and was in that case that
he could neither see, hear, nor speak, and his face all to be scratched:
and she says, that he being in that strange case, when he came to his
memory, he would always cry out upon the said Elizabeth even unto his
dying day, and would say that sithence she the said Elizabeth had threatened
him he was consumed, and that she had bewitched him.

The examination of Lawrance kempe taken before me Brian Darcey esquire, one of
her Majesty's Justices, the xx. day of March, against Vrsley kempe.
THe said Lawrence says, that his late wife was taken in her back, and in
the privy parts of her body, in a very extreme and most strange sort, and
so continued about three quarters of a year, and then died* and he says,
that his said wife did tell him several times that Ursley kempe his sister,
had forspoke her, and that she was the only cause of that her sickness.

This examinat says, that his said wife did tell him that two years before
she met the said Ursley his sister upon Eliots heath, and that she fell
upon her, and then took up her clothes and did heat her upon the hippes, and
otherwise in words did misuse her greatly.

This examinat says, that when his wife lay a drawing home, and continued so a
day and a night, all the parts of her body were cold like a dead creatures,
and yet at her mouth did appear her breath to go and come: and that she so
continued in that case, until the said Ursley came unto her without sending
for, and then lifted up the clothes and took her by the arm, the which she
had not so soon done, but presently after she gasped, and never after drew
her breath and so dyed.

The examination and confession of Margaret Greuell, taken before me Brian
Darcey Esquire, one of her Majesty's justices of the peace, the 24, day of
March.
Continued in prison.

THis examinat says, that she is of the age of lv. years or there abouts, and
being charged with the foresaid enformation and confession made by the said
Ales Manfield against her, ^e^teth the same in general, and says, that she
her self has lost several bruings, and bakings of bread, and also swine, but
she never did complame thereof: saying, that she wished her gere were at a
stay, and then she cared not whether she were hanged or burnt, or what did
become of her.

This examinat being asked, what falling out was or has been between Cheston
and her, says, on a time she went to the said Joan Ceston to bu^e a
penniworth of Rye meal, but she would let her have none, and faith, she said
that it was pity to do her any good, saying, that she this examinat had told
master Barnish yt shrifes dog did kill a Do of his by the park pale, and
says, that there was none other falling out as she remembers.

This examinat being viewed and seen by women, say, that they cannot judge
her to have any sucked spots upon her body.

This examinat and the said Ales Manfield being brought before Brian Darcey,
the said Ales did affirm her confession made by her to her face to be true.

The Examination and confession of Elizabeth Eustace, taken before me Brian
Darcey Esquire, the xiiii. day of march.
Continued in prison.

THe said Elizabeth Eu^tace says, she is of the age of liii. years or
thereabouts, and denies the enformation and confession made by the said Ales
Manfield ingenerall: Or that ever she had any Impes or Mamettes saying, out
upon her has she told any thing of me? and she being asked, what
conference had been between her the and said Ales Manfielde says, that there
was none to her remembrance, other then once she went unto her, and carried her
ointment to annoint her lamenesse that she was troubled with, and that then
there was no conference which she reme^breth.

The said Ales Manfielde in my presence did affirm her confession made
against the said Elizabeth to and before her face to face.

The enformation of John Wadde, Thomas Cartwrite, Richard Harrison with several
others the parishioners of little Okeley, taken by me Brian Darcey Esquire one
of her Majesty's Justices the 16. day of march.
John Wade says, that about two month s^thence Annis Heard said unto him,
that she was presented into the spiritual Court for a witch, and prayed him
to be a means to help her, that she might answer the same when the days
were longer: whereunto he said, that he told her that the Regester dwelt at
Colchester, saying, it must be he that therein may pleasure thee: whereto she
said, that she would go to John Aldust of Ramsey to speak unto him, for
that he goes to Colchester that he might speak to the officers for her, and so
she departed: this examinat says, that since that time he drove forty sheep
and thirty lambs to a pasture yt he had at Tendering, being thereof well
near fourscore Acres, the which he had spared by some long time, and knew
the same to be a good sheep pasture, and says, that after they had bin there
viii. or ix. days, he went to see them (having nevertheless appointed one to
look to them): And at his coming, he found one to be dead, another to be
^ame, another to sit drowping, and a lamb in the same case by it, which all
died, and he found one other with the neck awry, which is in that case to
this day, and one other which was so weak that it could not arise, and this
examinat says, that sithence he with others that presented her, and sithence
she the said Annis talked with him, he has had not so few as twenty sheep
and lambs that have died, and ^e lame and like to die: and he says, that he
has lost of his beasts and other cattle, which have dyed in a strange sort.

Thomas Cartwrite says, that after a great wind and snow well near three
years sithence, there was an arm or houghe of a tree of his that was blown
down, whereof Annis Herd had removed a piece and laid the same over a wet or
durtie place to go over, which being to this examinat unknown, he took the
same and the rest and carried it home: the which the said Annis knowing, that
he had carried the same away, she said, that the churl (meaning this
examinat) to a neighbor of hers had carried away the piece of the bough that
she had laid to go over, saying, that she would be even with him for it.
After which this Examinat says, within three nights after, there then being a
snow two of his beasts went from all the rest, where as they lay as he might
well perceive by the snow, and the head Cow fell over a great bancke into a
ditch on the other side, and there lay with the neck double under her, and the
head under the shoulder, but a live, and he says, he gate it home by good
help and laid it in his harne, and faith, that it lay fourteen days in a
growing and piteous sort, but of all that time would eat nothing: whereupon
he says he took an are and knocked it on the head. And also the other Cow
that was with the said Cow being a caluing in a most strange sort died, the
which this examinat faith, yt he verily thinks to be done by some witchery
by the said Annis Herd.

Bennet Lane wife of William Lane, says, yt when she was a widow, Annis Herd
being at her house she gave her a pint of milk and also lent her a pish to
bear it home, the which dishe she ^ep^ a fortnight or 3. weeks, and then y^
girl of the said Annis Herds came to her house on a message^ and she asked the
girl for the dish, and said though I gave thy mother milk to make her a posse^
I gave her not my dish, she this examinat being then a spinning: and so yt
girl went home, and as it seemed told her mother, who by her sent her dish
home to her yt which girl having done her arrand, and being but a while gone:
she this examinat says, she could no longer spin nor make a thread to hold,
whereat she was so grieved yt she could not spin, she says, she took her
spindle and went to the grindstone therewith once or twice, and grownd it as
smoth as she could, thinking it might be by some ruggedness of ye spindle
that did cause her thread to break, and so when she had grownd it as well as
she could, she went again to work therewith, thinking that then it would have
done, but it would not do no better then it did before: then she says, yt she
remembered her ^elf and took her spindle and put it into ye fire, and made it
red hot, and then cooled it gain and went to work, and then it wrought as
well as ever it did at any time before.

This examinat says, that ^n other time the said Annis Herd owed her two
pence, and the time came that she should pay the Lords rent, and she being
a poor wom^n was constrained to ask her the two pence, and to borow besides
(as she said): whereto she the said Annis answered, that she had paid eight
or nine shillings that we^ke, and she had it not now: saying she should have
it the next week, whereto she this Examinat said, you must needs help me
with it now, for this day I must pay the Lords rent, then she said she
must go borrowe it, and so went and fetched it, saying, there is your money,
whereunto she this examinat answered, and said, now I owe you a pint of milk,
come for it when you will and you shall have it: the which she came for ye next
day, and had it with ye better, this examinat says, yt ye next day she would
have fleet her milk bowl, but it would not abide ye fleeting* but would rop and
role as it were the white of an egg, also the milk being on the her it did not
so soon seath but it would quail, burn by and stincke, the which she said
she thought might be long of y^ feeding of her beasts, or else that her vessels
were not sweet, whereupon she says, she s^alded her vessels, and scoured them
with salt, thinking that might help, but it was never the better but as
before: then she says, she was full of care, that she should loose both
milk and cream, then she says it came into her mind to approve another
way, which was, she took a horse shue and made it read hot, and put it into
the milk in the vessals, and so into her cream: and then she says, she
could seath her milk, fleet her cream, and make her bu^ter in good sort as
she had before.

Andrewe West and Anne says, that on a time the said Annis Herd came unto his
house, saying, she had been at mill, and that she could get neither meal nor
bread, at which her speeches he knowing her need, says, he caused his wife
to give her a piece of a lofe: and that the^ he said unto her* Annis, thou art
ill thought of for witchcraft, the which she then utterly denied yt she could
or did any such thing: whereunto he says, his wife said we have a sort of
pigges I wo^e not what we shall do with the, saying, I would some body had
one or two of them, to that the said Annis said, that if a poor body should
have of them and bestow cost, and that then if they should die it would half
undo the^, and said if her Landlord would give her leave to keep one, she
the^ wished that she would give her one of them, whereunto this examinat said,
she should have one: But for that she came not for it, this examinat says,
that he did think that she cared not for it, and after a while one of her
neighbors bought two of them, and within ii. or iii. days after the said
Annis came for one: to whom this examint said, for yt they had not hard no more
of her, that he thought she would have none, and told her that he had sold two
of them, and so the said Annis departed and went home.

This examinat says, yt his wife the next day sent unto the said Annis a pound
of wool to be spun: and that she said to the boy that brought it, saying, can
she not have her weeders to spin the same? and that she then said to ye boy,
your Aunt might as well give me one of he^ pigges, as to Penly. and this
examinat says, that within two hours after, one of the best pigs that he had
fell upon a crying as they stood all together before the door in the yard, and
the rest of the pigs went away from yt: at the length the pig that cried
followed stackering as though it were lame in the hinder parts, and yt then he
called his weeders to see in what strange case the pig was in, and asked them
what was best to do therewith, to which some of them said, burn it, other
said, cut of the ears and burn them, and so they did, and then the pig amended
by and by. and within two days after this examinats wife met with the said
Annis Herd, and she then burdened her with that she had said to her boy: To
the which y^ said Annis made answer, yt she did say so: and then this
examinats wife told the said Annis in what case her pig was, saying, thou
saidest the other day thou had no skill in witcherie, his said wife then
said, I will say thou have an unhappy tongue. After which, this examinats wife
could not brewe to have any drink yt was good, so as she was full of care,
saying, yt sometimes she put one thing into her brewing fat, sometimes an other
thing to see if it could do it any good, but she says, it did none: then she
says one gave her counsel to put a hot iron into her mesh fat, the which she
did, and then she could brewe as well as she did before.

Edmond Osborne and Godlife his wife, said that a little before Christmas last
past, he bought at Manitree malt, and brought it home, and said to his wife,
good wife, let us have good drink made of it. And the next day she went in
hand to brew the same, and when she had meshed her first worte and did let it
go, that did very well: Then his said wife having occasion to send her lad to
their ground, she bade the lad call at Annis Herds for iii. d. the which she
owed her for a pecke of Aples, and that the lad so did: And she answered him
very short, and said, she had it not now, saying, she should have it as soon
as y^ Wool man came: and the lad came home, and told his dame what she had
said. And at yt time, she this examinat was ready to meshe ye second time,
and when she had done, her mesh ^at wrought up as the fat does when it was set
a work with good beer, and bare up a hand breadth above y^ fat, and as they
thrust in a stick or any other thing, it would blow up and then sinked again,
then she says, yt she did heat an iron read hot, and put ye same into it, and
it rose up no more. And then she let go, and then she did seath the wort, and
when it was sodden it stancke in such sort, as that they were compelled to
put ye same in the swill tubbe.

Richard Harrison Clerk, person of Beamo^d says, that he and his late wife did
dwell at little Okely, in a house of his said wife, and that he the said
Richard Harrison had also the personage of Okeley in farm, and about Summer
was tweluemonth, he being at London his wife had a Ducke sitting on certain
eggs under a Cherrie tree in a hedge, and when the said Duck had hatched, his
said wife did suspect one Annis Herd a light woman, and a common harlot to have
stolen her duckelins, and that his said wife went unto the said Annis Herd and
rated her and all too chid her, but she could get no knowledge of her ducklins,
and so came home and was very angry against the said Annis. and within a short
time after, the said Richard Harrison went into a chamber, and there did read
on his books for the space of 2. or 3. hours bidding his said wife to go to
bed with the children, and yt he would come to her, and she so did: and being
awhile laid down in her bed, his wife did cry out: Oh Lord Lord, help me
and keep me, and he running to her, asked her what she ailed? and she said, Oh
Lord I am sore afraid, and have bin diverse times, but that I would not tell
you, and said, I am in doubt husband, that yonder wicked harlot Annis Herd does
bewitch me, and ye said Richard, said to his wife, I pray you be content and
think not so, but trust in God and put your trust in him only, and he will
defend you from her, and from the Devil himself also: and said moreover, what
will the people say, that I being a Preacher should have my wife so weak in
faith.

This examinat says, yt within two months after his said wife said unto him,
I pray you as ever there was love between us, (as I hope there has been for I
have v. pretty children by you I thank God) seek some remedy for me against
yonder wicked beast (meaning the said Annis Herd). And if you will not I will
complain to my father, and I think he will see some remedy for me, for (said
she) if I have no remedy, she will utterly consume me, whereupon this examinat
did exhort his said wife as he had before, and desired her to pray to God, and
y^ he would hang her the said Annis Herd if he could prove any such matter. and
after he went to the personage, and there he says he gathered plummes: and the
said Annis Herd then came to the hedge side and Anwicks wife with her, and said
unto him, I pray you give me some plummes sir: and this examinat said unto her,
I am glad you are here you vield strumpet, saying, I do think you have
bewitched my wife, and as truly as God does live, if I can perceive y^ she be
troubled any more as she has been, I will not leave a whole bone about thee,
and besides I will seek to have thee hanged: and says, he said unto her that
his wife would make her father privy unto it, and that then I warrant thee he
will have you hanged, for he will make good friends, and is a stout man of
himself. and says, yt then he did rehearse diverse things to her yt were
thought she had bewitched, as Geese and Hogs, and as he was coming down out
of the tree, she the said Annis drink, she says, sometimes water and
sometimes beer, such drink as they drunk.

She this examinat says, yt her brother sometimes seeing them the Auices and
black birds, to come about him, says, that he says they keep a tuitling and
tetling, and that then he takes them and put them into the boxes.

She being asked if she saw them suck upon her mother, says, that the Auices
and blackbirdes have sucked upon her hands, and upon her brothers legs: being
willed to show the place, she said, here sucked Aues, and here sucked Aues, and
here sucked Blackbird. And being asked how one spot upon the back of her
hand came so somewhat like the other, she says the same was burnt.

The examination and confession of Annis Herd of little Okeley, taken by me
Brian Darcey Esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices of the peace, the xvii. day
of March.
Continued in prison.

THe said Annis Herd says, that she told one of her neighbors that the churl
(meaning Cartwrite) had carried away a bough which she had laid over a slow in
the high way, and said that she was feign to go up to the anckle every
step, and that she said he had been as good he had not carried it away,
for she would fetch as much wood out of his fields as that does come unto.
And she says also that she reme^breth she came unto goodman Wad, and telled
him that she was presented into the spiritual court for a witch, and that the^
she desired yt she might answer the same when the days were longer.

Also she confesses yt Lannes wife gave her a pint of milk and le^t her a
dish to carry it home in, and that she kept the dishe a fortnight or longer,
and the^ sent it home by her girl, and also that Lannes wife came to her for
ii. d. which she ought her.

Also she confesses that she came to the house of her neighbor West, and
telled him that she had bin at mill, but she could get no meal, nor yet no
bread, and that he gave her a piece of a loaf: and she confesses the speeches
that then were of the pigs: And that she said to ye b^y that brought woll, yt
his Aunt might as well have let her have one as Penley. She says also, yt she
reme^breth yt she came to goodwife Osborne, and bought of her 3. peckes of
aples, and confesses yt she ought unto her iii.d. but denies that the boy
or ladde came to her for any money.

Also she reme^breth that mistres Hariso^ charged her to have stolen her
ducklings, and that she called her harlot and witch, and confesses yt she came
unto M. Harison, he being at ye parsonage a gathering of plu^ms, and that she
prayed him to give her some plu^ms: But denies that she has any imps Aueses
or black birds, or any kine called Crow or Done: And all and every other
thing in general, or that she is a witch or have any skill therein.

The enformation of Edward Vpcher, Thomas Rice, and several others of the
inhabitants of Walton, taken by me Brian Darcey esquire, the xxv. day of March.
THe said Edward says, yt he and wife being at Colchester, this last week,
they went together unto the Gaile, to speak with Ursley Kemp, and then entering
into talk with her, says, he asked her if she could tell what sickness or
diseases his wife had, whereunto ye said Ursley the^ told him, yt his wife was
forspoke^ or bewitched, he the^ asked her by whom, she told him it was by a
woman yt dwelt in their town, saying, that ye party has one of her ears less
the^ ye other, and has also a moole under one of her arms, and has also in
her yard a great woodstacke.

Ales Miles says, that she went to the house of Joan Robinson for a pound of
^ope, at which time she the said Joan was gone from home, And says that her
maid Joan Hewet told her, that her Dame made her nose bleed, and the^ called
her Catte to eat ye same, saying she did marvel why her dame should call the
Catte to eat her blood.

Thomas Rice says, that about xiiii. days past, Joan Robinson came unto the
house of this examinate, and desired to borrowe a Hayer, the which his wife
denied her, saying, that she was to use it her self, whereat she departed,
and presently after there arose a great wind, which was like to have blown
down their house. And the next day after one of his Kine could not calue
without help, it being drawn from her, died, and the Cow was in danger and
did hardly escape.

And says also, that his wife has a brood Goose a sitting, that has been
as good for the bringing forth of her brood as any goose in Walton, and
says, that sithence the said Joan was denied of the hayer, the goose in the
night will goefrom her neste, and will not suffer his wife nor none of his
folk^ ^o come near her, but she will fly away, so as she has lost two of
her eggs.

And says also, that he thinks the same to be done by the said Joan by some
witchcraft.

Margery Carter says that about ten years past, the husband of the said
Joan came unto this Examinates house, and requested this Examinates husband to
hyre a pasture for a Cow, the which she says was denied him, with answer
that he could not forbear it for fear he might want for his own beasts.
and that presently after two of his best and likliest beasts in a strange sort
brake their necks. and says also yt prese^ntly after this mischance Ioans
husband came unto this examinats husband W. Carter, and said, God restore you
your loss, now you may pastor me a cow, the which then he did, and then his
beasts left breaking of their necks. And says also, yt about 2. years since,
the said Ioans husband would have bought a house and an acre of ground of W.
Carter her husband, the with he would not sell unto him, for yt he would not
have him his neighbor. And ye next day he had a fair ambling mare, for ye
which he might have had 5. li. often times: The with mare of her self came in to
ye stable, and presently was in a great sweat, and did hold her tongue out of
her head, and shook and quaked in a strange sort, and presently died, the with
when it was fleed, a neighbors dog came and fed of it, and thereof presently
died.

Also she says, not above 14. days past, the said Joan Robinson came unto
this examinate, and requested to borrow a Heyer, to who^ she made answer yt
she had vowed not to lend the same: And says, that wtin 3. days after, she
had one of her best beasts drowned in a ditche where there was but a little
water.

Ales Walter says, yt well nere 4 years past, the said Joan came unto her,
and requested to bie a pig of her: whereto she says she would lend her one,
but sell her any she would not: whereto the said Joan said yt she would have
none except she did bye it, and so they parted. And presently after ye sow
would not let her pigs suck, but did bite and fly at them, as though she had
bin mad, when they had sucked above 7. days very well: and she says yt she
sold of the pigs, the which Joan Robinson hearing, came unto her, and requested
to bie one of them, which she had for 3. d. and telled her that her sow did
the like, and bad her give the^ milk as it came from the Cow and they would
drink, which she approved, and they drank.

This examinate says, that two years since, she going to the house of Joan
Robinson, found her and her husband sitting by the fire, with who^ after she
had talked, Joan Robinson required to bye two pigs of her sow that then was to
pige: whereto she said she would see first what she should have her self,
and would not then promise her any. And the same night her Some piged two piges
in the cote where she lay, and for the more safety of them, she took a
broom faggot and laid it close ouerwharte the door, because the pigs should
not come out, and says the same night all the farey of pigs being ten, came
out over the broom sheafe, and stood one before an other in a tract place
lieke horses in a teem, being al dead to the number of nine, and the tenth was
drowned by the pond side being about a rod from ye cote.

Allen Ducke says, that about five or six years past the said Joan came
unto this examinate, and requested to bye a Cheese of his wife, but she made
her answer, that she could sell none, yet nevertheless she was very
desirous to have one, the which she says, she denied her, and that she
went away in a great anger. And this examinate says, that the next day he
went with his Cart and four horses therein to fetch a lode of corn, and that
his wife and two of her children rid in the Cart. And says, that as he went
toward the field he watered his horses at a ware called the Uicarage ware,
which horses when they had drunk, he could not get them out of the water,
but was feign to wade to the forhorse head, it being about a yard deep, and
to take him by the head and to lead him out. This examinate says, that the
said Joan came unto this examinates wife at two several times to bie two
pigges, whereof he says she was denied, and presently after he had two pigs
that died. And says, that he assuredly thinks yt the said pigs died of some
witchcraft which she the said Joan used, and the like for the staying of his
horses being in the water.

John Brasyer says, yt about two years since the said Joan Robinson came unto
this examinates house, and requested to bie a sowpigge to weane, the which was
a month old, whereunto he told her he meant to weane it him self, and that he
would not let her have it, the which being a fat and a well liking pigge above
all the rest, the next day died.

Also this examinate says, yt sithence Christmas last past, this examinates
wife went unto the said Joan Robinson, to pay her money she ought unto her
for wares which she had being due upon scores: And for that she his wife
would not pay her her own reckoning, she fell out with his wife: And
presenely after he had a cow that was drowned in a ditche not a foot deep
with water: Al which he supposes was done by some witchcraft by the said Joan.

The enformation and confession of Joan Robinson, taken by me Brian Darcey
esquire, one of her Majesty's Justices of peace, the xxv. day of March.
THe said Joan says, she went to the house of T. Rice to borrowe a Heyer two
days before a flawe of wind which was denied her: but denies that she has
any impes or caused his calfe to die, or that she hurt her brood goose. Also
she ree^mbreth that her husband went to W. carter to bie a house and an acre
of ground, and to hire a cow pastor, and to borrow a Hayer of goodwife Carter.
But denies yt she sent any impes to hurt any of his beasts, or his ambling
mare, or caused any cow of his to be drowned.

Also this examinate says, that she went to bye a pigge of Ales Walter, but
denies that she required to bye any that was not pigged of her or of any other
at any time, and denies that she sent any Impes or spirits to kill any of
her pigges, and all the other matters against her informed she denies in
general.

Imprinted in London at the tree Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson. 1582.

The names of xiii. Witches, and those that have been bewitched by them.
The Names of those persons that have been bewitched and thereof have dyed,
and by whom, and of them that have received bodyly harm etc. As appears
upon sundry Enformations, Examinacions and Confessions, taken by the
worshipful Bryan Darcey Esquire: And by him certified at large unto the
Queens Majesty's Justices, of Assise of the County of Essex, the xxix. of
March. 1582.
S. Osythes. 1 The Witches. Ursley Kempe alias Gray bewitched to death Kempes
Wife. Thorlowes Child. Strattons wife. 2 Ales Newman and Ursley Kempe
bewitched to death Leth^^dalles Child and Strattons wife. Confessed by Ursley
and Elizabeth. The said Ales and Ursley Kempe bewitched Strattons Child,
Grace Thorlowe, whereof they did languish 3 Elizabeth Bennet bewitched to death
William Byet and Joan his wife, and iii. of his beasts. The Wife of William
Wills and William Willinga^^e. Elizabeth Bennet bewitched William Bo^ners
Wife, John Butler, Fortunes Child, whereof they did lang^^^^. Ales Newman
bewitched to death John Iohnso^ and his Wife, and he^ own husband, as it is
thought. Confessed the Cattle. 4 Ales Hunt bewitched to death Rebecca Dur^ant,
and vi be^sts of one Haywa^des. 5 Cyssey Celles bewitched to death Thomas
Deaths Child. Little Clapton. Cyssey Celles bewitched Rosses maid, Mary
Death Whereof they did languish Thorpe. 6 Cysley C^lles and Ales Manfielde
bewitched Richard Rosses horse and beasts, and caused their Impes to burn a
barn with much corn. Confessed by Ales Manfield 7 Ales Manfielde and Margaret
Greuell. bewitched to death Robert Cheston and Greuell husband to Margaret.
Ales Manfield and Margaret Greuell bewitched the widow Cheston and her husband
v. beasts, and one bullock, and several brewinges of beer, and batches of
bread. Thorpe. 8 Elizabeth ^^^sta^e bewitched to death Robert Stann^uettes
Child and Thomas Gross. Elizabeth Ewstace bewitched Robert Sanneuet vii.
milth bea^^s, which gave blood in steed of milk, and several of his Swin^
dies. Little Okley. 9 Annys Herd bewitched to death Richard Harrisons wife, and
two wives of William D^wsinge, as it is supposed. Annys Herd bewitched
Cartwright two beasts, w^de, she^pe and lambs x^. West, swine and pig^, Othorne
a brewing of beer, and several other losses of milk and cr^^me. Walton. 10
Joan Robynson bewitched beasts, horses, swi^e and pigs of several men's.

The said Ursley Kemp had four s^yrites viz. their names Tettey a he like a
gray Cat, Jack a he like a black Cat: Py^^ a ^he, li^e a ^ack ^oad, and Tyffyn
a she, like a white Lamb. The he is were to plague to death, and the she is to
punish with bodily harm, and to destroy (...)

Tyffyn U^sleys white spirit did tell her always (when she asked) what the
other witches had done: And by her the most part were appelled, which spirit
telled her always true. As is well approved by the other Witches confession.

The said Ales Newman had to said Ursley Ke^p^ spiri^s to use at her pleasure.

Elyzabeth Bennet had two spirits, viz. their names Suckyn, a he like a black
Dog^ And Lya^^ (...).

Ales Hunt had two spirits like Coltes, the one black, the other white.

11* Margery Sammo^ had two spirits like Toads, their names Tom and Robyn.

Cy^^y Celles had two spirits by several names viz. Sothea^s Herculus, Jack of
Mercury.

Ales Manfield and Margaret Greuell had in common by agreement iiii spirits,
viz. their names (...), whereof two were he is, and two she is, like unto black
Cats.

Elizabeth Ewstace had iii. Impes or spirits, of color white, gray and black.

Annis Herd had vi. Impes or spirits like a^ises and black birds, And vi.
other^ike ^ine, (...) ^nises she fed with wheat, barley, Otes and bread, the
^i^e with strew and hey.

Amys Glascocke 12 Joan Pechey 13 Joan Robinson
These have not confessed any thing touch^^^ (...).

Ana^s Glascoke bewitched to death Mychell S^e^ens Child. The (...) Child at
Pages. William Pa^es Child.



