SALOMONS SWEET HARP: Consisting of five words, like so many golden strings,
touched with the cunning hand of his true skill, commanding all other Humane
speech: wherein both Clergy and Laity may learn how to speak.

PREACHED OF LATE AT Thetford before his Majesty, by THOMAS WALKINGTON
Batchelour in Divinity, and fellow of S. John's College in Cambridge.

Dat rosa mel apibus, qua sugit aranea virus. Printed by CANTRELL LEG,
Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, LORD THOMAS HOWARD, Earl of Suffolk, Lord
Chamberlain, one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy counsel, and his
very singular good Lord, T. W. wishes all felicity external, internal,
eternal.
RIght Honorable:
All actions of poize better accomplish their wished end, either by
remuneration, or a dutiful affection (I silence both solid direction and
adiument, which only prevent error, and supply defic^encie) due reward the
former, multiplies and cheares up endeavor, yet so being the base-borne birth
of every servile nature, only the last is the true loadstone of labor, this
being the generous offspring of untainted liberal thoughts: Howeuer, we
though saplesse branches of the happy olive tree (our own actions unsuitable to
demerit) may worthily declaime against the pioners of due desert (give me leave
to use that word) who bury it in base oblivion. Yet we all, I can truly avouch
(as that Honorable oracle of wisdom Northampt.
could say) do happily live under Libra, under the golden line of Justice,
moderation, and grace, so that we cannot tell whether nights or days be more
happily passed over our heads. Yet this surely is (nether does error
transport me) in regard Julian in his Casar.
of our happy Marcus Philosophus, (whom Silenus in his pasquil could not
carpe at, so worthy was his deportment) I say in respect of the Princely Head
it self chiefly, to many the fountain head of honor; and as we may rightly
say in general (if considering Justice) deriuing honorable equity to all.
Nor can I impeach some of the noblest senses attendants on this head; who in a
Justice Geometrical are ever wont to parallel reward with merit, and not like
Salomons sleeper to fold up the chill hands of their favor in their own warm
bosoms: yet the Muses may complain the number of such are too few.

The ancient honors, fraunchises, and immunities of the Muses, the adoring of
learning which was of old, causes those tears that then brast out of their
fair cesternes for exultation, now in modern time, to have recourse back like
Jordan to drown the swollen heart in discontent: only now our pens do shed
forth a many tears of ink, abundance of these drops, the lively
resemblances of our sorow-duld, nay dead eyes: and this is the reason why all
our pens (I think) are more employed now then wont, like silly Israelites
ener making up the tale of brick: to let the ungrateful world see, that as
gifts are more inhaunced, so the remunerating hand is much shortened.

Before the temple of Romulus there Patricia. Plebeia. Plin. 15. 29.
were two myrtles grew, the one Senatoriall, the other vulgar, for so they
termed them: whiles the one was ever green the other withered: there was an
intercourse in their flourish and decay, two intimates of Senate and the
Commonaltie, either of their languid authority, or of their flourishing
dignity: for when the Senate was in glory, the other was in subjection, and so
the contrary. Favor and dislike, reward, and neglect to learning and
ignorance, wisdom and folly, be as them two myrtles to them two states:
learning must needs flourish and dispread her golden bows whiles the blessed
beams of respect and favor do happily reflect upon her:

-- Immensum gloria calcar habet: as the Poet says fame, so favor is a
spur: by this, learning (prizelesse in it self) gets it esteem: whereas
neglect of merit it dulls and rebates the quicker edge of all proceedings, and
then folly (contemptible in it self) gets the vpperhand. Speak I all this,
not as though your Honorable self (a known Patron unto learning) were in
ecclips for deficiency that way, nor speak I this as if mine own worthless
action were worthy of the poize, or did basely expect reward, due to desert
and not to me: but only in their persons whose merit has been very much, and
against them who have very little esteemed it: for virtues and better parts
most usually like lively sparks of Vestall fire, are raked up in embers of
obscurity: my speech does aim at some, who may, no doubt, peruse these lines
with a blushing eye. What I harbor in my breast, I do reserve to my own
vnsyllabled cogitations: and so much for the respectlesse world.

Now for your worthy Honor which I ever will esteem, the dutiful affection I
bear and ever will to it, has been a spur to prick me on (though free and
ready of my self) amongst the troop of Secretaries, to presume to offer up
this poor paper sacrifice as incense on Minerva's shrine. My ruder hand
wherein learning is not palmestred, has only pende what it could copy out of
my cogitations, though surely first they leuild at a fairer mark, not soaring
for a vulgar stoop. If I have er'd, it is in love and in constraint: as with a
disease so with actions past: a disease at first is easily cured, but hardly
seen: but in process of time, it is easily seen, but hardly cured: so that
now a fault can not be salued, except by the precious balm of a more gracious
acceptance.

Let this I pray your Honor, be attorney to plead for my defect, in that I,
like the Sirens, who are wont in procella cantare, in malacia lugere, to sing
in a storm, and mourn in a calm, do likewise, being incu^bred with other
necessary occurences for my degree, tune these my unpleasant notes, too rude a
touch and harsh a melody for a nimble apprehensiue court-like ear, which
feeds daily on diuiner food, on the Pythagorean harmony that rauishes the
inward sense.

Concerning my subject, it is nothing rare: for there is no soil in the whole
Elysian field of divine writ that lies fallow, vacant, and unsown, so
toylesome ever has been the cunning hand of industry in this fruitful plot,
both for Paul's planting and Apollos watering, so that I might worthily have put
my stammering pen to silence: only it pleasing his excellent Majesty to
daigne to grace with unexpected favor these lines in words delivered to his
understanding ear, I so being called to their divulgation, did deem it not
unmeet among the rest happily to hold the plowe, not looking back so much as
to mine own wants: and therefore have I chosen to shroud this abortiue issue of
my brain, under your Honors gracious wings, my self being happily couched
under them already, having sweet repose under the shade of that vine I most
did affect, and whose clustred branches I will ever honor both with my heart,
my tongue, my pen and all. Humbly suiting your Honor for this, to entertain
these fewer drops of dutifullnes distilled from the limbecke of an humble true
heart and hand (unanswerable either in their portion or proportion to your
worth) which I wholly dedicate as a free will offering to your Honors sacred
altar, as great an offerer (in a respectfull balance) for this my silly Lamb,
as they that sacrifice their Hecatombs. Daigne at your Honors vacancie to
look on it: the glorious sun it self may without impeachment to his worth,
cast his pleasing rays upon the barrennest ground, as well as on the most
fertile soil: so may the leaden mine partake as well the blessed hidden
influence of heavenly stars, as the golden mineral without disgrace to
constellation: and it may so come to pass, your Honor may gather hunnie from
this homely weed. Thus in all humility requesting earnestly your Honors
future grace and favor, by whose gracious means my happier studies may be
encouraged to worthyer tasks, as also my fortunes bettered: howeuer, being
contented with the lowest ebb, as it shall please the hand of providence to
dispose of me: whose favor never was as yet to any like the Poets Tenedos,

statio malefida carinis: Virg.
a trustlesse anchor-hold to the sea-beaten barks: I humbly take my lowliest
leave, beseeching the Almighty that as both your Honorable self, your right
Noble Lady, and all your Olive branches, that plant your table round about,
have had the mercies of God hitherto, not in any little epitome, but as we may
so rightly say, in the largest volume of his unspeakable bounty: so still and
still to all posterity, (even from a single well wishing heart unto you all)
you yet may taste the oreflowing cup of Gods endless favors, both here in the
wilderness of this world, and there in the true land of promise, the kingdom
of bliss, whether we all if rightly bred, if true trauailers, must happily
direct our iourneyes.

And thus again I humbly take my leave. From my chamber in S. John's College
once graced with your Honors residence. Iun. 28. 1608.

Your Honors most devoted and dutiful Chaplain, T. Walkington.

Ecclesiastes 12. 10. Bickesh coheleth limtso diure kephets.

The Preacher sought to find out pleasant words.


Beloved in our Savior Christ Jesus: There is a bleareeyd Leah as Genesis 2^. 17.
well as a fair faced Rachel: foolish Rehoboams shecles of brass 1. King. 14.
as well as the golden shecles of wise Solomon: the distasteful and bitter
waters Exodus 15. 23.
of Marah as well as the well-relishing and wholesome waters of Bethesda: the
Ioh. 5. Mar. 11. Ier. 11. 16. Iud. 12. Reu. 22. 2.
cursed figtree as the fruitful olive tree: Iothams bramble as well as the
chearing vine, or the tree of life which bare xij. manner of fruits, and gave
fruit every month, whose very leaves served to heal the nations withal. Such
difference is there in words: there are the words of Salomons fool, of the
Atheist, of cursing Shimei, profane Julian, worldly Denas, proud Ahsaloni,
covetous Gehezi, flattering Judas, hypocritical Pilate, simoniacall Simon
Magus, drunken Nabal, incestuous Ammon, scoffing Cham, as well as the words of
the wise, which are as goads to prick and stir up this sinful sluggard
that rocks and lulls himself asleep in the cradle of carnal sensuality: who
cries still, Yet a little, and yet a little more, snorting as fast as Plinies
bears, which as he says, vix possunt Plin. l. 8. 36. not. hist.
vulneribus excitari, can hardly be awooke with wounding strokes; no not with
the remembrance of the wounds and doleful pangs that our blessed Savior
suffered on the cross for his sake. These words are the words of spiritual
wisdom, like that wine which was kept the last at the marriage in Canaah of
Galile: Ioh. 2. 10.
these do edify and feed and fat the soul: for the lips of the righteous
Prove 10. 24. so Ier. 3. 15.
(that preserve knowledge) do feed many: they are like the well of Jacob that
Genesis 29. 2. Heb. 5. 12.
watered three flocks, I mean the court, the country, and Bethel. They have
Nazian in orat. de Pent. or (...) A. Gell. 7. 16.
both (...), and that I may use Nazianzens word, (...); that is, both strong
meat, and milk, and delices: I call them delices which are fit to to be
known and pleasant, yet not so necessary, as that seventh number whereof he
makes a large discourse, and such like. The former they do feed no more then
the golden fish the fishers dreamed Theocrit. eidyll. 22.
they had taken with their hook: -- (...), Vbivis auro contectum.
they rather bring in a famine, even that lamentable famine in the Prophet, not
a famine of bread and water, but a famine of the word of God; even that famine
Amos 8. 11.
which sends a leanness to the soul, that Psalm. 106. 15.
I may speak with the phrase of the blessed spirit.

The latter betters the speech: as the blind man did cry first in the flesh
but Marcus Heremita in l. de lege spirituali. i (...), then (...). answ.
jehovah.
not in the spirit, but after he began to see and was touched with the finger of
faith, then he bettered his style. First, he cried, O thou son of David, but
after, (...), O Lord, or son of God. But the former waxes worse and worse:
like unto their speech, that when Christ rid in pomp to Jerusalem, cried,
Hosanna, but Matthew. 21. 9.
when he was on the cross, Hosineca: hosanna, Matthew. 27. 22.
that is, save us now: hosineca, that is, save thy self now. The former, the
speech of folly, brings in schisms, errors, and heresies into Christ's Church;
the latter, unity and uniformity: the which two in the Church are likened by
S. Cyprian Cypr. lib. de v^it. Eccl.
the one unto Christ's coat without seame, the other to Ieroboams coat cut
into twelve pieces.

Now as Abigal said of Nabal, as his 1. Sam. 25. 25.
name is, so is he; so we may say as a man's speech is, so is himself; if
spiritual, heavenly; if carnal, fleshly. For wisdom and folly are two trees
planted in the heart, which bear their diverse fruit in the Plato.
tongue: the heart it is natures cesterne of speech, and the tongue is the
channel or conduit pipe to derive it thence: as the one the source and
welspring bubleth, so the other as the cock it flows either the sweet gush
of the spiriruall rock, I mean Jesus Christ, of whom Ioh. 7. never Ioh. 7. 46.
man spoke as this man does; or else the unpleasant waters of Jericho that
Elisha 2. King. 2.
was feign to season and cure with a cruse of salt: for out of the abundance of
the heart, the mouth it speaks: although oftentimes in sophistry, as
Porphyrius the Thaodoret. Sermon. 3.
Atheist, whom Theodoret calls, (...) (...), and (...), the ringleader and
standerd of impiety, the open chalenger and oppugner of verity: he spoke one
thing, says he, with his mouth, and had taught his heart another thing. So
Arrius that denied the coessentialitie Naz. in orat. de laudibus Athan.
of Jesus Christ, who as Nazianzen speaks, (...), paid dearly for his
intemperate tongue: for as the histories record he voided out his bowels upon
a stool: he swore in the Nicem Council that he believed as he had writ,
(having two papers) to wit, according to that he had in his bosom secret, not
that which he had in his hand open. So Herodian says also of Severus, Herod.
l. 2.
(...): he harbored one thing in his breast, and hatched another thing in his
tongue. Thus Ananias and Saphira played Act. 5.
the sophisters and hypocrites, lying to the holy Ghost. But we speak of
canonical and regular speech, as the school terms it, when speech is a true
gloss to express the hidden text of the heart.

Oh then what a full cesterne of sweet water shall we think that
sweete-sounding cymball of Gods glory Solomon had, that blessed preacher, that
sanctified Prophet, who spoke from his heart and as the Spirit gave him
utterance. Whose Lingua her ba nascitur iuxta fontes. Plin. 24. 19.
tongue like the herb Lingua that grows by the fountains, did daily converse
and take advise of his heart, like David and his familiar friend. And sure
Psalm. 55. 14.
therein lay his greater wisdom: for better is it by far for the tongue to
be deeply seated in the heart, then for the heart to be shallowly seated in
the tongue; according to Salomons own saying, The heart of a fool is in his
Ecclesiastic. 21. 26.
tongue, but the tongue of the wise is in his heart. And by the way, it is not
an iniudicious note: the Hebrewe word for the heart is lev, (whereupon no doubt
our live comes) which consists of two letters, lamed and Beth, L, and B: L, is
for lashon the tongue, the other B, for Beth, a house, to intimate thus much,
that the heart ought to be Beth lashon, the house of the tongue, wherein the
tongue ought to dwell, and have her continual residence. What a singular
portion of wisdom shall we think this Solomon was enriched withal, both for
his heart and his tongue? he had as much and more wisdom in his heart, then
words in his mouth, (...), a drop of words, but a sea of matter and wisdom:
and them words being riuered from this sea, most pleasant, comfortable, and
delightsome words to a disconsolate and languishing soul: even like the
twelve fountains of Elim to refresh Exodus 15. 27.
the thirsty Israelites withal: even like the bread and water that comforted
the soul of Eliah under the Juniper tree: ^. King. 19. 6.
even like the flagons and apples the spouse Cantic. 2. 5.
of Christ desired to be comforted withal, Stay me with flagons, and comfort
me with apples: for I am sick of love.

Such gracious and heavenly words the Manna and food of the soul did
Aristae. in suo ^b de Sept. (...) Joseph. 12 2.
Solomon set on his table, richer then that King Ptolomie sent to Eleazer: such
golden jewels he hung in the ears of his auditors, more prizelesse then the
Exodus 32. 2.
golden earings of the Israelits: such pure myth did drop from the learned lips
of Solomon, more fragrant then that precious ointment in the Alabaster box:
like Esa 50.
them words of the Prophet Esaias, The Lord has given to me the tongue of the
learned, to know how to minister a word of comfort in due season to the wearied
soul. Thus spoke he in his three-folde Origin. in his prelude before the
Canticles.
Philosophy, as Origin terms it; Moral, Natural, Theoreticall: moral, in
the Proverbs: natural, here in Ecclesiastes: and contemplative in that
heavenly song of songs. Thus was he like Cleopatra, whose tongue was termed,
(...), Plutarch.
a sweet instrument with many harmonicall strings: thus was he like
Athanasius, who was, (...), of a Nazian epitaph. Basil.
gracious and sweet utterance: thus like Plato, the bees as it were did hiue
and Gyraldus.
make the hunni-comb in his mouth: thus was he like an Apollos, cloquent and
Act. 18.
mighty in the Scriptures. He whose wisdom the Queen of Sheba came afar to
1. King. 10.
hear, he here goes afar himself to find out words of wisdom: for it is
said here, The Preacher sought to find out pleasant words.

May it please you to term this text, The Princes pattern, The preachers
platform, or, The Laymans lesson: for it is a schoolmasters to teach us all
how to speak, even from the tall Cedar of Lebanon unto the hysope that
springs on the wall. Or, in a word, I pray call it, The Art of speaking. Oh
that I, silly I, were blessed both with the theorie and practice of that heavenly
art; then might I by right as a right Physician of the soul, challenge a grace
ad practicandum in this poor hospital of Christ, where there is many a
spiritual blind Bartimeus, many a lame Mephibosheth, many a leprous Naama^,
many a bedred Aeneas, many a soule-sick Ezechias, nay many a soule-dead
Lazarus, rotting and putrefying in the grave of sin, wrapped in that winding
sheet of woe, muffled in ignorance, key cold in charity; having the heavy
tombe-stone of desperation pressing down their souls almost to the nethermost
hell. Oh that I had the tongue of men and Angels, that I might feed the flock
of Christ with manna the food of angels! oh that I could like an Apollos both
eloquent and mighty in the Scripture, deliver this embassy from my King, my
God, as behooves the minister of God, that so I might minister grace unto the
hearer.

But I may rightly say with the Prophet Jeremy, O Lord God, I cannot Ierem. 1.
6.
speak: for I am a child. Or with Moses the man of God: O my Lord, I am not
Exodus 4. 10.
eloquent, neither ever have been, but I am a man flow of speech, and flow of
tongue. Or with the prophet Esaias, Woe Esa. 6. 5.
is me: for I am a man of polluted lips. Therefore for the breaking of this
little piece of bread, I will use Bernards invocation Bernard. in Cant.
to God: O piissime, frange esurientibus hunc panem tuum, meis quidem si ita
dignaris manibus, sed tuis viribus: O sanctified Lord God, break this thy bread
unto these hungry souls, (if thou will please to daigne me that grace) with
my unhallowed hands, but with thy ayding power of grace. O let me tune the
strings of my tongue in consort with Salomons sweet harp, oh let my heart
indite a good matter, oh let my tongue be the pen of a ready writer: as David
cried for the water 2. Sam. 23. 15.
of the well of Bethlehem in a prophetical thrist for the well of everliving
waters, even the blessed babe that was borne at Bethlehem: so let me cry for
these s^ heavenly words, give me O Lord to find out these pleasant words of
Solomon, whereof here we read, The Preacher sought to find out pleasant words.

In the unfolding of which, we will only trust on thy merciful aid, O Lord:
Xenoph. 7. institut. Cyr.
and as Cyrus in Zenophon being mounted on his horse, and making toward his
enemy, (it thundering on his right hand) cried thus, (...), we will march
under thy conduct, O mighty Jupiter: so will we by thy sacred help and
assisting grace (O Lord) proceed in this our text.

The words we will branch into three heads, the

Subject. Project. Object.
1 The subject: that is King Solomon. set out by a spiritual title, the
Preacher.

2 His action or project: he daily busied his brain how to speak: he spoke
not extempore; he had it not, as we say, on the tip of his tongue; but he
sought earnestly, and carefully endeavored not to be silent, but to speak.

3 The object, that he aimed at in his speech, even words of spiritual delight
and pleasancie.

The Preacher sought, etc. 1 The subject. Solomon, or Ecclesiastes, or the
Preacher: he was the blessed penman of this book, the heavenly musician, who
was equaliz'd unto the sweet 1. King. 4. 32.
singer of Israel, whose songs were a thousand and five: whose sweeter strain
went beyond the apprehension of a vulgar ear: out-stripped the Poets Daphnis,
of whom thus the Caprarius speaks, O how pleasant and amiable is thy voice, O
Daphnis!

(...): Evdill. 8. (...).
I had rather listen to thy chaunting and inchaunting voice, then to taste of
the most delicious Hyblean hunnicombe. This Solomon whose admirable wisdom the
Queen of Sheba came afar to hear, presenting unto him, sixescore talents of
gold, pearelesse precious stones, and abundance 1. King. 10. 10
of sweet odours. He who excelled 1. King. 10. 23
all the Kings of the earth in riches: for he offered in one sacrifice unto the
Lord 22. thousand beeues, an hundred 1. King. 8. 63.
and twenty thousand sheep. Who made himself palaces of the trees of
Lebanon, whose pillars were silver, the pauements gold, the hangings purple,
whose midst was paued with the love of the daughters of Jerusalem. Who had
Eccles. 3, 9, 10
in his building seventy thousand that bare burdens, and 80. thousand masons
1. King. 5. 15.
in the mountain. He who planted himself vineyards, made him orchards of all
manner of fruit, who had the gold of Kings and provinces, who had men singers
and women singers the delights of the sons of men, who had nothing withheld
from him of all his heart desired: Ecclesiast. 2.
who was seated in the blissful Eden and Paradise of all content, glutted
with all delicious viandes; crammed as it were with the pleasures of the world,
wanting no delicie to relish his taste, no elegancie to delight his eye, no
symphony to ravish and surfeit his ear: when he had had his full repast in
sin, when he had run through myriades of delights, glutting all his five
senses, which we may term the Cinqueports, or rather the sinports of his
soul: having thus run his wild-goose chase, waging war against God
almighty, tandem receptui canit, he sounds at length a woeful retreit, he comes
home by weeping cross: he sees, the windows of his spiritual eyes being open
with Daniels unto Jerusalem, that he was Dan. 6. 10.
in the very suburbs of death, rowing along by the banks of hell: he sees that
vanity was the Golden calfe he daily sacrificed unto upon the altar of his
sinful heart, with the fire of too carnal devotion. This mighty Monarch
therefore vnmasks and pulls off the vizard of all vanity, and pens this
book, this heavenly book of Retractations, which the ancient Rabbis
entitled, Teshuuah leshelomoh, the repentance of Solomon: it is he that
conuerts himself by the help of 1. Pet. 2. 11.
God, and being converted seeks to convert others to God: it is he that here
is the Preacher. We must not think with David Kimchi, that Esaias wrote both his
own prophecy, and the Canticles, and Mercerus ex Baua bathra.
this book also, that he was the preacher; nor with the Talmudists, that
Ezechiah and his adherents writ the book which they call Iimshoch, that is,
Esaias, the Proverbs, the Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes: but as Boaz said to
Ruth, gleane in no Ruth. 2. 8.
other field but this: so let us embrace no other sinister opinion but this,
that Solomon was the penman of this book, that here he was this Preacher, who
sought to find out pleasant words.

They that auerre Solomon not be this preacher, the penman of this book, do
prove it hence; because the book is penitenciarie, and they constantly avouch
that he never repented, but that he was damned to the gulf of hell: of which
thing, because comprised by method within the lists of our Text, we will by
Gods assistance treat a little.

Their chief Authorities to patronize their opinions are culled out of
Augustine, Aug. de civ. dei. 17. c. 20.
one place in his book of the city of God, where he says, that Solomon had
good beginnings, but evil endings: secondly, ad Faust* Manich. l. 22. c. 88.
per tot. c.
in his book Ad Faust. Manich. The holy Scripture, says he, reprooues and
condemns Solomon, because no where we read of his repentance, and Gods
indulgence. But the most strict place of all is in his commentary upon the
Psalms: where he says in plain terms; In Psalm. 126. in the midst of the
enarration.
Solomon reprobatus est a Deo, Solomon was reprobate of God, a castaway as
they interpret it. I know that some of the Fathers are diffident concerning the
salvation of Solomon, and amongst them this Augustine as it seems at a blush:
yet notwithstanding they may be answered.

1 First for the first: be it that he began in the spirit and ended in the
flesh, yet this is not to be meant of his final ending, he died not in his
sins: we know the iustest man he falls 7. times a day, that is often, yet he
rises again, and after his rising he still falls, when the finger of the holy
Spirit holds him not up: and every fall (though not final) may be called malus
exitus; an evil ending, in regard of the holy rise which is a good beginning.

Or else thus he began to sway the scepter of his kingdom very wisely and
religiously, yet after he revolted from God, especially in his old age, which
may be called his exitus, yet so that ere he did depart this world, ere he were
gathered to his fathers, he did cleanse his ways, he did repent.

2 For the second, we will answer with Bacchiarius (a Britain, in Augustines
Bacchiar. ad Ianuar. de l^psis recip. med. cap.
time) in a book which he writ concerning a Monk that had committed
adultery; says he, let us grant that in no place we read that Solomon
repented: be it so: at acceptabilior erat poenitentia, priuata eius conscientia
quam publica notitia ecclesiae: more grateful to God was his penitencie in the
closet of his own heart, then by giving public notice to the Church.

3 For the last. The word reprobatus Tertull. ad Iudaeos, a little from the end.
does not always signify, (...), as we take it for one in the state of the
damned, for a castaway, but for one reproved of God. So Tertullian speaking
of the second coming of Christ, says, that Christ post reprobationem fuit
assumptus, after his reprobation was taken up: now what blasphemous tongue
would ever say that Christ was a reprobate? So Salomo^ was reproved of God,
Iren. 4. haeres. 45.
as he was of the Scripture. Ireneus after he had recited the good gifts that
God had enriched Solomon withal out of the rich exchequer of his unspeakable
bounty and mercy, about the midst of the chapter he says, that he fell
grievously, and was tainted with the pollution of outlandish women, yet says
he, sufficienter eum increpavit scriptura, vti dixit mihi presbyter, vt ne
gloriaretur vniuersa caro in conspectu Domini. Whence we may gather these two
things: 1. that he was reproved of the Scripture, as we spoke before: 2. that
the word of God so sufficiently wrought upon his heart, that it caused him to
repent, yet Ireneus speaks it from the relation of a Priest. I confess Austen
in the last place quoted out of his comment. upon the Psalm. speaks very
preiudiciously of Solomon, as may be gathered out of his succeeding words,
where he takes away the argument derived from his penmanship. But if he
uncharitably and sinisterly censured this holy man, it was no doubt a blemish
in him: and perchance rather to deter and affright every soul from falling
so low, then peremptorily and preiudiciously to determine of his damnation: we
may say as Augustine himself says in another case of Saint Cyprian, who held
the Anabaptization of heretics, so of Augustine, this was peradventure, magis
discendi modestia, August. cont. Donatist.
quam docendi diligentia.

For their reason it is this. Because his soul was so deeply tainted with
Idolatry, and love of his concubines: and if he had repented, say they, we
should have read of his taking away the high altars before his death. But to
answer. Although his soul was, dibapho peccati tincta, dyed in a crimsen dye
of sin, yet he that came with read garments from Bozrah, who trod the
wine press Esa. 63. 1, 2, 3
of Gods wrath alone, he that sat upon the white horse, whose eyes were like a
Revel. 19. 11, 12, 13.
flame of fire, and on his head a many crowns, who had a name writ that no man
knew but himself, whose garment was dipped in blood, he, he could purge him
with hysope, he no doubt could make the scarlet soul of Solomon. as white as
the snow in Salmon.

Again, what if he were for a time fascinated and bewitched so with the love
of his concubines, that for their sakes he followed Ashtaroth the god of the
Sidonians, 1. King. 11.
Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and Milchom the god of the Ammonites, yet no
doubt he might before his death command these abominations to be ruinated and
defaced, which were not peradventure, and which he being bedred it may be
could not in his own person by reason of his too long delay, see thrown down.

And by the way, nor is it a (...), Ambrose upon S. Luke.
S. Ambrose says, God permitted Solomon thus grievously to fall, least the
Jews might be deceived and think, -- promissum diuinum ad illum manasse* and
so consequently that he was the Messiah.

But with authority and reason counterpoised against their ungrounded censure
for any thing I see, we will prove directly that he repented, and so was
saved. I will only mention that place in Ecclesiasticus, in which chapter is
set Ecclesiast. 47.
out the praise of Nathan, David, and Solomon: it is there said Solomon felt
sorrow for his folly, but God left not off his mercy to him, nor did he
destroy him for his works, (...), which I think may be interpreted well; he
wiped him not out of the book of life, being the posterity of David whom he
loved.

Hierome upon Ezekiel cites a place Hierom. in 43. Ezech. Prove. 24. 32. Septuag.
out of the Proverbs in the Septuagints translation, where Solomon thus speaks
of himself, (...), etc. that is, at the length I repented, and beheld, etc. I
know the Hebrew runs not so, for thus, vaechezeh anochi ashith libbi, etc.
then I beheld and laid it to my heart, and looked upon it, and received
instruction. Where the fault is, it is not at this time to be discussed, since
it requires an ample discourse, and I would not become tediously irksome: for,
as Nazianzen says, (...): Nazian. orat. de Sanc* bap.
that is, satietie in speech is as great on enemy to the ear, as surfeit to
the body. But this is not only Hieromes but also Cyril the Cyrill.
Archbishop of Alexandria his allegation, who cites also this very place out of
the Septuagints in his book de Baptismo. But Bacchiarius in his forementioned
Baechiar. ad Ianuar.
book, he brings in this reason that he was repentant, and so saved. All the
godly kings, says he, are reported in the Scripture to have been buried among
the kings of Israel their fathers in the city of David, amongst which Solomon
as a godly king is said to be thus buried: but it is not read of the wicked
kings, as Jeroboam, Ahab, and the rest, that they were thus buried: therefore
it is likely that Solomon was saved, that he did repent in the judgment of the
church: but let them that can discern see into this reason.

In brief our plain arguments to prove his salvation, are these.

1 First, In the 2. of Samuel, Solomon 2. Sam. 12. 25.
is caled Iedidah by Nathan the Prophet, at the command of the Lord: the word
signifies, beloved of the Lord: and so says the text, because the Lord loved
him: now whom the Lord loves, he loves to the end: and therefore he was saved.

2 Secondly, He was a sacred Scribe and penman of the Canonical Scripture,
inspired by the holy Ghost, as all other Prophets were; which thing besuits not
any reprobate: now it is said in S. Luke, Luke 13. 28.
that all the Prophets of God are, (...), in the kingdom of God: therefore to
seclude Solomon one of the Prophets from the kingdom of heaven, were to deny
the Scriptures.

3 Thirdly, He calls his former ways madness and folly, therefore it is
probable, Eccl. 2. 12.
that he seeing in the Scriptures mirror and looking glass, his own
blemishes and foul deformites, that he washed away the spots of his soul by
the troubled waters of Bethesda, the tears of true repentance.

4 Fourthly, He was the liueliest type of Jesus Christ the true pacificus the
true Solomon, that ever was, save Melchisedeth.

To say then that he who was thus buried among the faithful for a faithful
man in the city of David with the kings of Israel his fathers, who was
sufficiently reproved, and so consequently amended by the holy Scripture, who
was the lovely darling of God, the penman of heavenly writ, one of the
sanctified Prophets, who was so lively a resemblance of our Savior Christ, who
saw into his own madness and folly, that he, he I say was damned, withstands
reason, denies Scripture, and injuries the dead in the Lord: and I verily am
persuaded in my soul and conscience, that his portion is fallen in a fair
ground, that his inheritance is in the land of the living. And thou O my soul
enjoy for ever that blessed paradise he now happily does bathe himself in: and
give me leave to end this point with the Poet, Happy and thrice happy are
them souls,

Queis datur Elysium sic habit are nemus, Sannazarius.
who thus are made free denizens in that heavenly Jerusalem the city of the
Saints. And thus I conclude, that Solomon he was this Preacher, and penman of
this penitential book, with making this short double use unto our selves: 1.
let him that stands, take heed least he fall: 2. let every one upon the bended
knee of his heart humbly desire the Lord to convert him; then being converted,
with Solomon let him convert his brethren. Now will I come nearer unto this
first word, Coheleth, or Preacher.

As the Prophet says of Jerusalem the earthly Eden of pleasure, the navil of
the world, the cathedral sea of God, Many excellent things are spoken of thee,
O thou city of God: so we may say of Solomon, many glorious titles are given
to thee, O thou man of God. Diverse singular men have had other names for their
excellency, as Origin was called Adamantius: Erasm in vit. Origin.
Johannes Constantinopol. for his mellifluous eloquence was called Chrysostom:
Basil was called Magnus: Gregory Nazianz. for his worthy disputations in
divinity was called Theologus. Thus he that was Saul before his conversion as
Sheol or hell, was after called Hierom.
Paul, that is, mirabilis, wonderful, or os tubae, the mouth of the trumpet of
the Lord, though there be no great substance in that. But King Solomon as a man
specially graced with rarest parts, has sundry excellent and worthy names: as
first Solomon, that is, a peacemaker; then Iedidah, that is, beloved of the
Lord; then Ithiel, that is, God with me; then Agur, that is, gathering
together, and so in the same sense here in cahal congregavit.
this book, and in this place is he termed Coheleth, or Ecclesinstes, or the
preacher, because like the sound of Aarons golden bells, he calls the flock of
Jesus Christ together by his heavenly and pleasant words.

The Hebrew word Coheleth is here of the feminine gender, as the learned know,
as if he called himself the she preacher, or the woman preacher. Because as
some say, he writ it when he was satur annis, Ecclesiast. 12
very aged, when they began to wax dark that look out by the windows, when all
the daughters of singing were abased, when his Almond tree began to flourish,
and the grasshopper was a burden to him, when his silver cord was lengthened,
and the golden ewre broken: when he was as Nazianz. speaks of Eleazar, (...),
grayheaded, Nazian. orat. ^^^ (...). Ier. 6. 4.
and graue-witted: when his day declined, and the shadows of his evening began
to be stretched out, when his manlike strength once failed him, when he was by
age as weak as woman the weaker sex, at the very brink of death, then he writ
this book, and calls himself the woman preacher; which confirms the former
assertion of the Hebrews, that this was his last book, his palinodia, his
sweet recantation, like the swanne on the banks of Maeander. Cantator cygnus
funer is ipse sui, Martial. distich.
who sings the sweetest, when her death is nearest; that this was his
penitenciarie more then auricular confession: therefore seems he in this
Autumn of old age to scoff at his young April years, nay almost all his former
days; which were much like this backward spring without buds and blossoms of
heavenly virtues: and therefore cries out in this book, Rejoice Eccl. 11.
O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and follow the lust of thy heart (as I my self have done) but presently
least he might peradventure, being in a loss, run himself breathles in a
false sent, over the craggie and steepie ways of sin, he winds his
dreadful horn to check him back again: he lets him see, after this his
comicall plaudite, a tragical and lamentable plangite, after mirth a doolefull
end, he comes in with a terrible But; which serves as a peale of ordinance, or
a thunderclap to rouse him out of his dead slumber of iniquity: he brings in a
But, to curb and stint him, like huge banks to limit his boundless Ocean:
But know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment, which I my
self seeing, and having tasted the pleasure of sin for a season, especially
with these my alluring concubines, that have woefully drawn me from Almighty
God, have thought it very requisite to set an everlasting memento mori before
thy face, to put thee in mind of the second death, the endless death of the
soul in hell fire, which by a divine accident those outlandish women (making
almost my pore self as outlandish, even an aliant from the commonwealth of
Israel) have caused me happily to do: and therefore am I Coheleth, as a woman
preacher.

Others say, he calls himself the sheepreacher, as having respect to his
chief and heavenly part, his soul, or having a reference to wisdom comprised
in his soul (the cynosura or polestar to direct al his speech and action:) as
if thus he had said: Mark now what Solomon the preacher says, yet not what
Solomon, but what his very soul and wisdom, harboring in his aged breast by
long experience, what it can say to the throwing down of Dagon this gilden
idol Vanity, which all the world adores; list with an attentine ear what sage
advise delivers, what a learned lecture of mutabilitie, curiosity, mortality
it reads: and therefore is he Coheleth, or the sheepreacher.

Oh you, you that are in eminent place, that daily converse with Salomons
golden throne, ye pines of Ida, ye cedars of Lebanon, ye oaks of Basan, ye that
lie on downy pallets, on beds of Iuory with Amos 6.
the princes of Israel, ye that feed on the dew of Hermon, on mannah Angels
food; here take your sweet repose, sit you down hear with me, feed a while
in a spiritual contemplation, consider what I say, and the Lord Jesus give you
understanding: see how this mighty Monarch casts away his Princely ornaments,
deuests himself of his royal robes, his stately Parliament weeds (indeed but
as weeds in regard of spiritual flowers of heavenly habiliments) see how he
leaves his ^haire of state, and as it were rapt up into the third heavens of
all spiritual thoughts, he humbly turns Clergyman, betaking himself unto
the pulpit to preach; and all to teach thee a spiritual meditation,
humiliation, conversion, and that thou being converted to God, should
convert others unto God. O how beautiful upon the mountains are such lovely
feet that come with the glad tidings of salvation from the Lord. He that is an
earthly King acts the King of Heavens ambassador: thus he humbles and yet
honors himself. We read of a worthy history in Pol. Virgil. Pol. Virg. Angl.
hist. l. 7. ad finem.
Canutus sometimes happy king of this our happy Isle, being flattringly called
of some of them that were nie him, King of kings; to disprooue this their too
hie a title, he sat him down upon the shore of Thames hard by the flowing
water upon a garment wrapped on a heap, and after a little pause (many wondering
what he intended) he thus spoke unto the billows, Proud waves, I command you
to cease your flowing; who no sooner having vttred the speech, but the
rebellious waves set him wetshod: see, says he, ye call me King of kings, and
alas, I have no power to forbid this silly wave: after he going to Winchester
raught of his golden diadem, and with his own hands impald the head of
Christ's statue with his Crown, and never would wear his crown after: howeuer
this were in too superstitious a zeal, yet he showed his great humility. Our
blessed Solomon here was like unto this Canutus for humble demeanor; he lays
aside his regal scepter, his golden diadem, and wholly betakes himself to be
a preacher: which he seems even to prefer before his royal dignity: for thus
he speaks in this his book at the beginning; The words of Eccles. 1. 1.
the preacher son of David King in Jerusalem, naming the preacher in the
first place. Theodoret says, (...): Theodor.
precious pearels they shine in basest places, the heavenly stars yield
their influences through darkest clouds, the richest diamond loses none of his
luster though set in lead: here Solomon that union, that bright star, that rich
diamond of glory, thinks it no disparagement or disgrace unto his honor, to
betake himself to the foolishness of preaching, as Paul terms it. 1. Cor.
1. 21.


O let me ever drink of such a cesterne of heavenly sweet water, dropping from
the limbeck of a heavenly mouth: let me hear Salomo^ preach, wiser then his
teachers, wiser then us hearers.

Gratior est pulchro veniens ex ore loquela. Give me leave to parodize: far
sweeter is the water that issues from a purer fountain: as they say, Evermore
Lord give us of this bread, so let me say evermore Lord let me hear so sweet,
so wise a charmer as King Solomon the preacher was. Here is an honor unto the
royal preisthood, O ye sons of Leui: here is a rare example, a King a
preacher, a Monarch a teacher. Many Priests would feign become Princes, but few
Princes would become Priests. Howbeit the tribe of Leui was in times of yore in
far more esteem then now it is: the ministers were received as Angels from
heaven, yea, they would have been ready to have plucked out their own eyes
(then the which nothing was more dear) for their fakes: now they are almost
contemned and laid aside, even as their sweet sounding harps were hung upon the
willowes by the waters of Babylon.

Nor shall my unpleasant words or cogitations be any whit derogatorie unto the
most royal and noble tribe of Joseph: Evil be to him that thinks evil: which
tribe is as a fruitful bow, and ever be it as a fruitful bow by the well
side, and let the small boughs run upon the walls; the tribe of Leui is, and
has, and will be graced by them: nor tends my speech to impeach their
eminency. Yet for the tribe of Issacar, like an ass couching down between
two burdens, for want of wit, laying all on the shoulders of Court and
Nobility, as also on Bethel the schools of the Prophets, it like the twining
iuie climbs up too hie, I will not say with Ecclesiastical, but with temporal
promotion, naught recking either for King or Kesar, Nobility or Spirituality,
especially debasing the royal Priesthood; I mean without all sinister and
captious acception, the unlearned iniudicious Gentry, being like Rehoboam the
Eccles. 47. (...).
foolishness of the people, and the common Laity it self: O into their
secrets let not my soul come, my glory be thou not joined with their
assembly: for in their wrath they slew a man, yea even a man of God, whom
they ought not to touch: (for touch not mine anointed) such a fearful and
heauen-crying murder (like the blood of Abel, a resounding orator in the
ears of the Almighty) as the like almost has never been heard of, and my
flesh it trembles to speak of it, save only that of Zacharias the son Basil
in his oration of Christ's nativity, (...). Chrysostom. l. 2. contra
vituperatores vitae Monast.
of Barachias, who was killed between the temple and the altar, for auerring, as
Basil says, the virginity of the virgin Marie: or that of Paul's, whom Nero
slew for converting his beloved concubine unto the Christian faith: howsoever
by the sequel it appears, the fact was too much lessened and mitigated by
some partial information to the Supreme impartial ear.

But in that Solomon is here a Preacher, which he esteems as a title of
honor: for, (...), etc. who is fit for these things? we may infer that the
greatest and most royal honor to dignifie a Monarch or Potentate of the world
is this, not so much to bind by servile subjection, as to draw by the golden
chain of sacred religion: for which Ambrose so highly extolls that gracious
Emperor Theodosius. A king should be a preacher as well as a Prince, to feed
the flock of Jesus Christ as well by spiritual example and instruction, as by
a corporal Majesty to manage and rule them: for even the savage lions
ouerrule the beasts by subjection: but I do not, nor need I to speak this
for a -- quid faciendum, but to grace our happy Isle with a -- quid factum, not
teaching what is to be done, but showing what is done: for here, (evermore
thanks be unto our good God) for these many Alcyonian days and years dominion
has not ouerpoizd religion.

But can a King be a Priest? As the kings of Egypt were called Pharaohs, the
Kings of the Jews Herod's, so the kings of Palestina were usually called
Abimelechs, which word signifies both King and Father, the one for dominion,
the other for instruction: for even as Aaron and Hur held up Moses his heavy
Exodus 17.
hands being weary, so does temporal dominion conjoined with spiritual
instruction (the one commanuding fear, the other procuring a religious love)
lift up the hands of inferioritie, that are dull and heavy for necessary
performance, but even the hearts of all to a celestial obedience.

The word Cohen in the Scriptures signifies Genesis 41.
both Prince and Priest. So Potiferah was Prince of On, according to the
Chaldie, but priest of On vulgarly read. Mercerus says, the Priests were
highly placed and privileged with authority in Egypt: for as from their wise
Philosophers they choosed Priests, so out of their Priests they selected Kings;
so was it with them a royal priesthood, as S. Peter calls it.

Cohen, a priest, is used often for a chief ruler. Hira the Ia^it, haiah cohen
ladauid, was chief ruler to David: so David's 2. Sam. 8. last.
sons, cohanim haiu, were chief rulers. Homer calls king Agamemnon, (...),
the shepherd to feed the people. David says, he was chosen king to feed the
people, as he was following the ewes great with young, he choose him Psalm. 78.
so 2. Sam. 5. 2. Isa. 49. 23.
to feed Jacob his chosen, and Israel his inheritance. The Prophet Isai says,
Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queelies thy nursing mothers. When
Pharaoh had graced Joseph with a golden ring, with fine linen garments, and a
golden chain, and had set him on the best chariot save one; they all shouted
before him, and cried, Abrech, that is, as some Genesis 41. 43.
interpret it, they used genuflection and humble adoration: others say, in that
word they called him, tenellus pater, or young father; because though he were
but tender of years and green headed; yet was he a Consul, a father for his
wisdom: or as others which best accords with our purpose; in this they called
him King father, of the Hebrew word ab, a Abrech.
father, and rech, the Egyptian word, which signifies a king; because he was
Viceroy or King over all in Pharaohs room, and father to all for his
instruction and heavenly advise.

Again, we know the Hebrews have Ragnah, (whereupon regnum comes) signifies
pascere and regere.
one word both for ruling and feeding. Wise was that speech of an honorable
counsailour, that the greatest part of a king was the sacerdotiall function.
And surely the mightiest Monarch of the world, yea every inferior, none
exempted, every true Christian, even from the Cedar to the shrub, is or ought
to be, a priest and a preacher as Solomon was, to teach and instruct others:
their words of edification to the inward care, ought to be like the precious
stones set in the Exodus 39.
brestplate of the ephod: like the pillar of fire in the darkesome night of
ignorance, to direct the wandering pilgrims of this wretched world out of the
wilderness of Sin, unto the heavenly Canaan: then shall they be as priests with
God; and [as kings] reign with Christ a Reu. 20.
thousand years.

What if we (who are happily numbered among the Prophets,) cannot cunningly cast
our net out of the right side Ioh. 16.
of the ship, and with Peter the fisher of men, draw at one draught three
thousand souls, we must not leave fishing, we must not leave tilling the
fallow and barren soil of the unbelieving heart, with the plow of the
sanctuary, the blessed cross of Christ Jesus: we must never give over either
our public or private holy function: but we must stand still at the stern,
and hold the helm with courage and hope, guiding the ship of the Church,
tossed with never so many Euroclydons: assailed by never so great temptations
of Satan, (...), Act. 27. 8.
to the beautiful haven the kingdom of bliss. If but one soul be won to God
by thy blessed means, it will imparadize and greatly comfort thine own soul
with that spiritual peace that passes all carnal understanding, when she is
a flitting from this earthly tabernacle this house of clay: wherein she, for a
short time, being Gods tenant at will, does take up her inn and mansion: and
thus much of Coheleth the shee-preacher.

2
The second thing I intend by Gods assistance to speak of, is the object that
Solomon aimed at, that is, pleasant words.

Whiles the minstrell played, Elisha 2. king. 3. 15.
prophesied: so whiles the Spirit of God sings sweet melodious harmony unto
the soul, each corporeal part must needs be tuneable to every heavenly action:
there will be no iarring, no discordancie at all: the soul to the limbs of
the body, is like the Centurion to his servants; if it say to one go, it
goes, to another come, it comes, if to another do this, it does it:
heavenly is that motion, that action, that coming, where the spirit having
happy residence commands. If the spirit say unto thy right hand, do good, it
will in bounty and pity cast thy bread upon the waters; that is the
teare-bedeawed cheeks, the wet faces of the poor afflicted members of Christ:
if to thy feet, walk, presently they will run the ways of Gods
commandments: if to thine eyes, weep, they will every night water thy couch
with tears, they will burst out into a fountain, they will gush out rivers of
tears, because men keep not the law of God: so if the spirit say unto the
tongue, speak, o how will it then show forth the praise of God, how will it
edify; how will it flow out these diure kephets, these pleasant words?

Thus Solomon his strings of his tongue were in tune with the strings of his
heart, and they both are melodiously struck with the learned and cunning
finger of the blessed spirit, the sweetest musician that ever struck the heart
as a harp, and the tongue as a sweet cymball: therefore Solomon having the
spirit his schoolmaster, must needs learn to speak well, which he earnestly
thirsts after.

He did not as Lucian says, (...), Lucian. in Pseudolog.
cast out a mierie vomit of words, like the wicked in the prophet, The ungodly
are like the raging sea, Esa. 57. 20.
whose waters cast up mire and dirt: he spoke not with a heart and a heart like
Pilate, who in that was but a bad unskillful pilate in running the ship of his
soul to pieces against the rock Christ Jesus the spiritual rock: he spoke
not like your hypocrites, (who are the devils retainers in Gods liueries)
rather from his heart, then (as they) far from his heart: for sure as his
tongue was, so was his heart, and as his heart was, so was his tongue, like the
wheels of Ezechiel, (...), Ezech. 10. 10
one wheel in another: and fitly to wheels: for in that text Proverbs Prove.
25. 11.
25. in the Hebrew thus it runs, A word spoken [not in his due place] but
gnal aphnau, upon his wheels, is like apples of gold with pictures of silver.

As Athanasius in his questions to Athan. p. 288
Antiochus says, The males of the palmetrees by the pleasant euaporations of
air that breaths from them, do make the femall palms fruitful: and the
sweet influentiall breath that blows from Paradise, causes (...), that is, the
trees nie adjoining and bordering to that place to flow and cluster with
spices: so fares it with the pleasant influence of the inward heart breathed
upon by the blessed spirit, they both cause Salomons tongue to utter forth
these diure kephets, most pleasant words, even like the dulcid humor that
flowed from that lovely hand when Diomedes had wounded it: Homer.
like the sweet dropping deaw of Hermon, the shower upon the herb, and the
rain upon the grass.

[Pleasant words.]

At the skirts of the Ephod there hung Exodus 39.
xij. golden bells, and so many pomegranates: the pomegranates insinuated
integrity of life, and the xij. bells, as Justin Martyr says, intimated the
sound of Lust. Mart. in dialog cum Tryph. Iud. p. 202.
the twelve Apostles, and so consequently of all ministers depending on the
everlasting priest our blessed Melchisedech Jesus Christ. As then there is a
sound, and words to be required in Aaron and his sons, and all his
successors; so a pleasant delightsome sound is very expedient and requisite,
therefore were the tinkling bells of purest gold: the preachers words should not
prove harsh and distasteful to the hearer, but as Christ's coat was without
seame, so his word ought to be without reprehension: thus while he plants with
Paul, and waters with Apollos, God will give a wonderful increase, to the
multiplying of that blessed seed which as pure wheat shall be laid up in the
Lords garner the kingdom of heaven: thus shall he speak with Solomon these
diure kephets, pleasant words.

Wise words must have three circumstances, they must be

(...). (...). (...).
They must have maturitie, paucitie, and pleasancie. 1. For the first, to
avoid rashness in speech, that holy father Hierome.
gives a good advise, Verba prius ad lima^ quam ad linguam, words ought first
to be filed in the heart, least they prove defiled in the tongue, and the
Grecians verba coctissima comptissima.
say, (...), wise deliberation in speech is the midwife of all singularity;
therefore David desires God to set a watch before his lips: and S. James
wishes each one to (...). Iam. 1.
be swift to hear, but slow to speak: for as Zenoph. says, (...), etc. that
venison is the most sweet which the huntsman takes with greatest sweat: so are
them words most delightsome, that are most waighed in the balance, not as
verba -- quae scita erunt si quaesita, satis ditata si meditata.
abortiue borne before their due time, if we labor and study and seek to
speak as Solomon did.

2 Secondly for paucitie. Our words ought to be few, for in much speaking,
there is much iniquity: and Solomon says in his moral divine philosophy,
Prove. 17. 27.
He that has knoweledge, spares his words. We know nature has set a double
portcullis before our tongue, (our lips, our teeth) that it may learn not to
presume to wander with Cain from the presence of the Lord, to dwell in the land
Clemen. Al. 2. stromat. Nod. instab.
of Naid, as Clemens has it, which word signifies a flood, it must not be
exorbitant like a flood of waters, that outstrips and oreflowes his banks: this
Naid is opposite Eden deli^iae, whereon (...) comes.
to Eden, as Clemens says, so is multiplicitie of words to Salomons pleasant
words. Thus also is the tongue as a guilty poor prisoner, tied as it were in
chains, in fetters, and strings in the mouth, that it should not break out in
blasphemy against God, against man, against it own soul.

The Hieroglyphics, to vncloud wisdom, Orus Apollo
did paint forth (...), heaven dropping deaw: like this drisling deaw is even
wisdoms speech, therefore the Prophet Ezekiel says, Son of man, turn thy
face toward Teman, -- fac vt Ezech. 20. 46
stillet verbum, let thy words drop toward the South, to wit, not in a shower
but in a pearling deaw: for as Nazianzen says well, (...), Naz. in orat. cont.
Eunom.
the sacietie of hunnie it self, though never so sweet, procures a vomit: so
is it with all boundless unlimited speech.

3 Thirdly, words ought to be delightsome, and they be twofold, either pleasing
the outward ear, or touching the inward heart: of both which a wise man (who
both is wont to do things worthy to be spoken, and to speak things worthy
to be done) must have a Heb. 4. 12. excellent in the greek.
special care, but he must chiefly aim at the heart with the word of God,
which is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then a two edged sword,
and enters through, even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the
spirit, and of the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and the intents of the heart: his words must not be, sonantia, but sanantia,
not manantia, but manentia, not having a mere sound but sound comfort, healing
the ulcer, and taking out the core of concupiscence that lies hid in the heart:
he must rather secare quam palpare, pungere quam vngere, magis planctum quam
plausum quaerere, speak words rather of sustentation, then of ostentation, not
for the feeding of the fancy, but for the bleeding of the heart, to move
thrilling drops of remorse, rather then tears of temporary joy. Words are
most pleasant, when in speaking, every circumstance is duly observed: otherwise
it is rather unseasonable then in due time and place, like the (...).
foolish lover coming unto his mistress (as Theophrastus says) to banquet and
Theophrast. in characte re. de intempestinitate.
make merry with her when she was deadly sick of an ague, (...). We see
before what the Prophet Esai says for this, Esa. 50. 4.
The Lord has given to me the tongue of the learned, to minister a word of
comfort in due season, to the wearied soul.

A wise speaker that means to speak pleasant words, will regard time, place,
subject, object, and end, and every circumstance.

For place. Christ preached and taught in the Temple in the day time, and at
night he betook him to a retiring place for fitter praying, to the mount
Oliuet: so Elias he prayed under the Juniper tree, Jonas in the belly of the
whale, Ezekias upon his couch, Daniel in the den, Manasses in prison, the
three children in the fiery furnace.

For time and subject also. Thus Abigail the prudent wife of the fool Nabal
the Carmelite, would not reprove her husband (for reuiling David, and dealing
churlishly with him) whiles he was drunk and too much merry with wine, but
in the morning most wisely, when he had slept out some of his folly and surfeit,
then she told him of his fault and hunckish demeanor.

For object. We must in speaking utter the truth without all sophistry and
equivocation: for this proceeds from the devil the father of lies: we must
not be (...). Herod. lib. 1. 1. Tim. 3. 8. Psalm. 12. bele^ valeb.
like them historiographers in Herodians time who affected too much elegancy,
and neglected verity: like those (...), as Paul calls them, these
doubletongued deacons, like the^ in the Psalm, who do speak with a heart and
a heart: but we must deliver the message of the Lord as becomes the wise
Ambassadors of so heavenly a King, even these pleasant words of Solomon the
preacher, to wit, the words of truth, information, reformation, consolation,
salvation, such as do inchaunt, and captiuate the spiritual ear.

Again for the end: we are not to seek our selves but the glory of God, for
the golden streams of invention if they return not their tribute unto the
maine Oceane of wisdom from whence they first issued, aiming at his glory, and
magnification of his name, they are like the golden earings of the Israelits of
which Exodus 32. 3.
was framed the molten calfe they worshipped: and so we may say of every
circumstance.

These pleasant words that Solomon sought to speak, and which he, inspired by
the spirit, did speak, are the words of God uttered by an Apollos both eloquent
and mighty in the Scripture, such as will even ravish and enthrall the
understanding, Clemens compares these Clemens in Protrep.
words to Amphion and Arions sweet singing, whose dulcid and rauishing
strains of music inchaunted the wild beasts, the stones, the trees, the
birds: by the birds, says he, are meant (...), light behauoured men, (...),
etc. the serpents are men deceitful, lions stomackfull, wolves rapacious,
stones are men senseless: for, as he says, they are more stupid then stones
who are baptized or dyed in (...)
the grain of ignorance: so the Gentiles are these stones, that worship stocks
and stones, this word, this heavenly song of our celestial Arion, is able of
these stones to raise up children not only to Abraham the father of many, but
to God the father of all. Of these heavenly words eloquent Bernard. upon the
words in the x. of wisdom, Iustu^ deducit, etc.
S. Bernard the Omega of the fathers, speaks: Viae domini sunt viae rectae,
viae pulchrae, viae plenae, viae planae: rectae sine errore* quia ducunt ad
vitam, pulchrae sine sorde, quia docent mundiciem, plenae multitudine quia
totus iam mundus est intra Christi sagaenam, planae sine difficultate, quia
donant suauitatem. The ways and words of the Lord are right, are beautiful,
copious, and plain, right without error, because they direct to life
everlasting, beautiful without blemish, because they show our deformity,
copious and large for the number they comprehe^d, for the whole world is
comprised within the net of Christ: plain without difficulty, because they
sweetly relish every Christian taste: for as Bernard says in another place,
they are deliciosa ad saporem, solida ad nutrimentum, efficacia ad medicinam.
Such words as the blessed* Apostles did exhibit our Savior Christ in, (...),
Theodor. in ser. de mart.
etc. not in his scarlet robes or golden diadems, but they preached his
poverty, his thirst, his travailing, his whipping, his gall and vinegar, his
pangs of death, they preached him crucified, in the knowledge of which Paul did
so spiritually boast, that he cried out, God forbid that I should rejoice in
any thing but in Jesus Christ, and him crucified, whereby the world is
crucified to me, and I unto the world: and sure the most pleasant words that
will strike the deepest dint, and greatliest comfort the inward heart of a
spiritual man, is them of the blessed cross of Christ, though to the cursed
Jews a scandale, and to the Gentiles foolishnes. But as Plutarch says that
sweetest harmony and melody is made of Asses bones, so the greatest comfort
redounds unto the distressed soul by this (...), this foolishness of
preaching, this of the Unto the Jews a stu^bling block, unto the Gentiles
foolishnes. 1. Cor. 1. 23. Luke 19.
foolish tree of the cross of Christ, as the Gentiles term it: and assure we
our selves that as Zacheus could not see Christ before he clambred up into the
Sycomore, that foolish figtree, so without the knowing of this foolish tree,
this tree of the cross of Jesus Christ, if we do not with little Zacheus,
little in our own conceit, climb up into it, we shall never come to see
Christ, but being pestred and crowded with the throng of our infinite sins,
we shall be pressed to death, even to the second death of the soul, being
hurried headlong to Tophet, that obscure land covered with the fog of death,
even the kingdom of everlasting darkness: from which the Lord of his
infinite mercy deliver us.

Nor do I here patronize your fieriebraind Sermon-mongers, who have more
mother wit then Fathers wisdom, for they can not away with the Fathers: who
will preach whole days together, God knows how rudely and slenderly without
the majesty of the Spirit, being like unto your brazen cocks or leaden
conduit-pipes running all day, but flowing back again unto the stream, from
whence the water was derived; so still day by day flowing with the same
moisture, preaching at least the same, next year, they had this. This is not
Paul's foolishness of preaching, but a foolish preaching, when with unwashed
hands and vnlauerd hearts, they will handle the holy things of the sanctuary,
speaking without due preparation. These can never speak Salomons diure
kephets, his pleasant words.

But were Solomon the preachers words so pleasing, so delectable, so
comfortable? Then give me leave (amongst a whole rout of indecent pastors) to
single out only four principal forts, which both with my tongue and pen are
worthily to be taxed. Which I may fitly shadow out by four manner of birds.

The Lapwing. The Bitter. The Lenit. The Estridge.
1 First the Lapwing, or rather lackewing, for these will needs fly before
they be flidge, and sing before they have learnd to tune any spiritual note:
they feed the flock, before they are taught to weeld the shepherds crook:
they sit in Moses chair, not having learnd to read a lecture, before they have
sit down at the feet of Gamaliel: at least like the Mustela or weasil, which
as the Naturalist Mustela.
says, does aure concipere, ore parere, conceive in at her ear, and bring
forth at her mouth; so what only they have heard and writ from others tongues,
not digested by their own industry, nor suggested by the blessed spirit, that
are they woefully with child withal, until rash folly has played the midwife,
and delivered them of a bastard issue. Those too forward run with the shell
on their head, crying with the Poet, occupet extremum scabies, ill hap light
oth' hindmost: they are like unto Ahimaaz, who when Cushi was run before to
bring David news of Abshaloms death, said unto Ioab, Yet 2. Sam. 18. 23
what and I run too? These abortiue monsters, if I may so term them, have
like the Giant in the battle of Gath, in their 2. Sam. 21.
own conceits, six fingers on a hand, and six toes on a foot, for action
and motion they surpass all; when as, God Judge. 1. 6.
knows they are like Adonibezech, who had the thumbs of his hands and feet
cut off. Pliny writes of the Almond tree that it buds in January, and brings
forth fruit in March: to which these worthily may be likened, being so
preproperous and bold to were Aarons Ephod and his linen garment before they
be fit to put on the Christians cloak, whereof Tertullian. lib. de pallio.
Tertullian speaks; who will touch the holy things before they wash themselves
at the brazen laver of the sanctuary, wanting both the Vrim of knowledge, and
Thummim of integrity: they ran, says the Spirit, but I sent them not, and
we know none can preach but he that is sent. Those may be likened Romans 10. 15.
to nothing so well as to your quilled iacks of virginalls) so that they lift
up themselves and strike the wire or string whether in tune or out of tune,
they Ceuodi* heb. but Septuag (...). vid. Mollerum doctissim.
have done too to well. The tongue is called a man's glory, so Psalm. 16. 9.
wherefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, etc. so awake my glory,
awake my lute and my harp, etc. Psalm. 57. because there is no other visible
part whereof we may more boast and glory in, then in our tongue, being that
part by which we most glorify God: now then these penne-feathered preachers in
handling those divine mysteries so rashly without knowledge, they do make that
their ignominy which should be their glory: which Solomon well considering,
gives this advise, especially in speaking of God, Be not rash with thy mouth,
nor Eccl. 5. 1.
let thy heart be hasty to utter a thing before God: for God is in the heaven,
and thou on the earth: therefore let thy words be few. It is a great fault in
young, light prizd, and unlearned heads, to love to be in motion, as the worst
stars be usually most prodigal of their worthles influences. We may see the
difference of old wise men and young fools in the very wheels of a clock: the
great wheels they turn about the slowest, and the lesser run about the
fastest, but we see the great ones are the cause of motion in the less, and
the less be sooner worn by much. Which should make our greener heads more
highly to esteem the hoarie heirs in whose breasts time has treasured up a
greater portion of wisdom by their long experience. Let them of younger
years, especially not infranchiz'd into the happy liberty of the sons of
Leui, not presume to take the place of Bezaliel and Aholiab before they can
tell how to handle an instrument for the squaring and hewing of the stones in
the building of the Lords house; let them remember but (...), the (...).
five years silence that Pythagoras enjoined his hearers, and sure they will
not be so lavish of their tongues. By those, the Royal tribe of Leui is too
much abased and contemned, and it were very expedient that a stricter
inquisition were made for such by our reverend Fathers in God, and by other the
eminent Prelates and officiaries, who carry as well fasces as securim in their
hands. Surely, surely Ezechiel should first eat the roll and then he must
prophecy, first he must Ezec. 3. 3.
be concha to contain, and then caualis to let flow, or else he wants the
first ornament of speech which is maturitie, and so he can not utter Salomons
diure kephets, his pleasant words.

The second sort is the Bitter, too bitter indeed to plead nothing but law
and judgment to a distressed soul, plunging them deeper over head and ears
in the pit of desperation.

Marlian in his topography writes, that Marlian in his Topograph. Romans lib. 5.
25. vide etiam A. Gel. 5. 12.
at Rome they had the temple of Dea Fobris, and mala Fortuna, of Goddess
Fever, and Ill Fortune, which says he, they worshipped, non vt iuvarent, sed
ne obessent, not that they might help them any ways, but least they should
hurt them: And so I fear me may many auditories do with their indiscreet
shephards, who never whistle but openly let loose their dog, who feed with too
much tart vinegar, no pleasant food, by whom the hearers often grow more
hard-hearted and more obstinate in their sins, by aiming at them so
personally, and giving them so down strokes in that holy place of divine
exercise. We see the obdurat's marble stone is cut not with hard iron but with
softer lead, so mildnes often is the only means to win an unrelenting hard
heart to God, that is as steeled and frozen in the dregs of sin. The Lord God
almighty was not in the whirlwind that rent the rock and mountains, nor in
the earthquake, nor in the 1. King. 19.
fire, but in the still voice, to intimate that God wons in the spirit of
mildness most.

There was no noise of hammer or other instrument heard while the blessed 1.
King. 6.
temple was a building. He is the most wise who comes most near the nature of
Noah's dove, that brings the olive branch of evangelical peace in her mouth,
better far then the black raven, who brings legal death pictured upon his
dismal wings. Yet notwithstanding in wisdom there must be a medlay both of law
and gospel, to sing with the sweet singer of Israel both of mercy and
judgment. A true preacher should be like one of Ezechiels cherubins who had
two faces, Ezec. 41. 19.
one of a man, another of a lion, the one fierce the other mild, the one the
visage of the law, the other the countenance of the Gospel: he must as well
bless on mount Gerasin, as curse on mount Ebal: he must show the arc wherein
there is as well the manna of consolation, as the rod of correction. There is a
blessed tract between Borez and Senah for Jonathan and his armor bearer to
climb up unto the garrison of the Philistines, and happy is that Ecclesiastes,
that preacher; that ca^ find this golden mean, he shall speak Salomons Diure
kephets, his pleasant words.

3 The third sort is your Lenit, who makes the pulpit a cage to sing placentia
in, to sing a Lullabie to Salomons sinful sluggard, who lies snorting fast a
sleep upon the downie bed of iniquity and security. Those are they that have
a (...). (...). (...).
flexible tongue, as Nazianzen says, like them in the theaters, who wr^stling
publicly do not strictly observe the laws of valiant wrestling to win the
glory and carry away the prize from those cha^pions they contend withal, but
only do use such sleights as do (as he says there) (...), steal away the
eyes of the ignorant, and violently carry them away to admiration, to extol
their actiuitie. Those are they that sew pillowes under sinners elbowes, only
singing to the sweet dulcimer: seeking for too nice tricks of invention, even
as Saul sought for his fathers asses. They do in giving the bread of life,
that I may use Clemens Clem. paed. 2. 1.
his elegant words, (...), that is, effeminate and sift out the wholesome
strength of wheat, of (...), caupo vel propola. 2. Cor. 2. 17.
(...), as Paul speaks, that is, making merchandise, or as the word signifies,
playing the crafty vintners with Gods word.

It is said of Solomon that every three 1. King. 10. 22.
year he had the ships of Tharsish come ladened home with gold, silver,
ivorie, apes, and peacocks: I fear me the great Solomon king of heaven and
earth, has some ships that do more then once a year bring into his sacred
sanctuary little gold and silver, but a great deal of apes and peacocks,
only delighting those who are called of the Apostle, (...), 2. Tim. 4. 3.
such as have itching ears.

These bring to Iairus his revived Mark. 6. 43.
daughter music for meat, and yet not that which is the Christians best
music the Recordor, to make both her and us remember our selves, and call to
mind how grievously we have offended our most good and gracious God. The best
preacher sometimes should thunder like Bonarges James and John the sons of
thu^der, should blow the spiritual trumpet seven times against the walls of
Jericho, the partition wall of sin that makes a separation between Jesus
Christ and us, should cry alowd and spare not, should drum the march of
Christ's coming to judgment attended on with millions of Angels and archangels
into the dull and deaf ears of all impenitent libertines, with the terrible
thundercracke of the blessed and powerful word of God to rouse them up, who
are almost like the Arist. Ethic. 3. 7. (...), etc.
Celts in Aristot. who are, as he says, mad and without all passion and f^^le,
whom neither earthquakes, nor fearful noise of inundation (...) ever move.
Give me that blessed man of God, that truly anointed of the Lord, who like the
thu^der can pearce and wound the inward heart, make the hair to stand upright,
the flesh to tremble, as Felix did, the joints of the Act. 24. 26.
loins to to be loosed, the knees to knock one against the other, as
Beltashars, Dan. 5. 6.
who can leave Pelaieiah the son Ezech. 11. 13
of B^naiah for dead; he, he is the preacher, and those his words in their
suitable and right object, are Salomons diure kephets, pleasant words.

4 The 4. sort is your Estridges, who Pierius Hierogl.
have wings but fly not, so they have gifts peradventure and tongues but
speak not. Of whose learning (being like concealed land) we may say as
Ptolomaus Philodelphus in his letters to Eleazer, of the hebrew Bible
untranslated, (...); Epiph. lib. de men's. and pon.
what good can redound unto a man, either by a treasure hid, or a fountain
sealed up Worthy Ernestus Duke of Luxeburge caused a burning lamp to be
stamped on his coin with these four letters A. S. M. C. by which was meant,
Aliis seruiens me ipsum contero, by giving light to others I burn out the
lamp of my own life: If he thought this to be the duty of a secular prince;
how much more should we think it the duty of a spiritual prophet, of one
that is set apart for the holy function of the ministry, to spend his happy
days in Gods service, to preach in season and out of season, never to give
over but to run the race with cheerfulness unto the gole and end of his
life, knowing that his labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

We know the Heffers that carried the arc, they went lowing continually: but
these Estridges, these Heffers, these fat Bulls of Basan, they never low, at
least so low that none can hear them, or if they do, it is but tanquam partus
Pliny.
Elephantinus, as Elephants bring forth, that is once in ten years, and well
too, if they themselves who duly look for their tithes at men's hands, will
give the tenth year as tithe to God.

These men do not give that portion of meat in due time unto the
hungerstarued Luke 12. 42. (...).
souls: with Demosthenes they do pati argyranchen, they are molested with a
silver squinancie, mute as S. Mathews fish with twenty pence in his mouth:
they have bought a farm, purchased possessions, bought a yoke, nay a hundred
yoke of oxen, and yet all them teames of oxen can not draw them out unto the
plow of the sanctuary, unto the solemnization of the marriage of Jesus Christ
and his blessed spouse. Whom for their security and supine negligence we may
term as Athanasius calls the wicked that flourish like a green bay tree Athan.
quaest. ad Antioch. quaest. ^8.
in this world, (...), hogs that are larded for the day of destruction: And the
Lord Jesus open their eyes that they sleep not in death, nor suffer the
slumbering souls of Christ's flock committed to their charge to become as
fuel for hell fire; and that they may at the length after their long
scandalous silence speak Salomons diure Kephets, his pleasant words.

3
Lastly, In one word I will couch all: the project comes to be considered. He
sought to find out, that was his care and study, he beat his brain about
this to speak pleasant words. The hebrew word bickesh, does signify with an
earnest endeavor and care to find out a thing, even as a mettalist would
search for a golden mineral, or as a merchant for a prizelesse orient pearl:
and this Solomon he did no doubt by them four christian exercises in
Augustine; Lection, meditation, August. descala parad.
oration, contemplation: neither are (here by the way) meditation, and
contemplation, to be confounded, as some dote: for meditation is a painful
searching out of the hidden truth, and contemplation, a joyful wonderme^t at
the truth revealed. Thus Solomon he sought to find out this precious pearl of
pleasant speech with all industry. If then, in brief, Solomon who was
enriched with an extraordinary knowledge and wisdom, that he might worthily
threby be esteemed and termed the [ Non such] for wisdoms residence, the
very quintescence of science, the precious balm of the wounded soul; If he, I
say, did study to be wiser, did seek carefully to speak pleasantly; then let
us who cannot espire to his heavenly pitch, strive with might and maine to grow
in all good gifts, from grace to grace, from knowledge to knowledge, from faith
to faith, from virtue to virtue, until we become perfect men in Jesus Christ:
and let us carefully endeavor that the meditations of our hearts, and the
words of our mouths, may ever be acceptable to God our strength and our
redeemer: that we may speak these diure kephets, Salomons pleasant words.

And by your leave, here we may tax a fourth sort of teachers, insinuated in
this our text, which fitly might be called psittaci, plain parrats, but that
they ca^ not cry Aue Caesar: I mean our extemporarie start-vps, who without
preparation, premeditation, fear and trembling, are wont to speak of the
mighty name of Iehoua: they never seek with Solomon and study to speak these
pleasant words. We know Gedeons soldiers held in one hand Judge. 7.
a trumpe, in the other hand a lamp, and so should every dispenser of the
word, who are the Lords soldiers to fight his battle against the kingdom of
sin, Satan, Antichrist, and the wicked world, they should, I say, hold in
one hand the trumpe of the word, in the other the burning lamp of spiritual
understanding and meditation; they should both speak and see what they speak:
for cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. Those are they
Ier. 48. 10.
whose fiery devotion is not managed by discretion; they wholly relying on
Dabitur in illa hora, as if they had the spirit of God at command, which as
elegant Nazianzen (whom I cannot mention Nazianz. in orat. Pentec.
too often) says (...), heriliter non seruiliter, it is present to us all in
dominion, not subjection, as a Lord, not as a servant: and these are our
Donatists and Brownists, men of separation, who are wont to use such excursions
in their preaching, wandering in the wilderness of woeful digressions, when they
are the furthest from the mark showing the hottest zeal and vociferation, like
your bastard plouer that being furthest from her nest will ever cry the most.
The zeal of Gods house did even eat up David, but they with their irregular
zeal have eaten up the house of God. These are usually your hot spurs
against the state, against Caesar, against the Gordian knot of the two worthy
kingdoms, against necessary tributes, princely and noble recreations, against
our reverend prelates blessed hierarchy and all spiritual government, running
in a fiery indiscretion they know not whether like Iehu the son of Nimshi
that drove the coach as if he had been mad, crying and shouting for a
reformation (or rather a deformation,) for a new presbiterie and sage senioury,
and for our, our government down with it, down with it even unto the ground.
And it were very necessary, that in many places of this land, they being
grown unto the height of Brownisme, drawing an infinite troop (of the
brainesick commonalty especially) from their loyable allegiance, that these
ears of cockle and darnell were quickly cropped, or their heads were pruned off
in time, and that these little foxes were taken with a quick sent and a full
cry, which will in time (if not prevented with the hand of wisdom) in my
simple judgment, waighing with my self some private circumstance, by a giddie
and headie commotion, by their burning firebrands of sedition set a wild fire
on the vineyard of the Lord, which the Lord in mercy forbid: pardon me, O Lord,
if in a fervent zeal of the peace of our Sion, I may seem as a rigorous and
merciless inueigher against those schismatikes who violently would raught away
the olive branch of unity from the mouth of thy spotless dove: and, O pray
for the endless peace of Sion, they shall prosper that love thee, peace be
within thy walls, and evermore plenteousnes within thy palaces: and I charge
you, you by an oath, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, ye that are well-willers unto
Sion, even by the roes and the hindes of the field, that ye waken not and
disturb this blessed spouse of Christ, least that her comely garment, her
vestment of honor and tranquillity be cut like Ieroboams coat in twelve pieces;
which, if those smokie firebrands be not in time put out, civil dissension is
like to bring to pass.

Never was there in open speech, especially by them, (and others too) who have
not taught their tongues to speak Salomons pleasant words, so great contempt
of state, nobility, magistracy, learning, religion, and of God himself as
now, as if Lucifer had broke loose from the chains of deep darkness, and had
possessed men's hearts and tongues: Fastus festus, literae sunt liturae, curia
spuria, sacerdotium sacrum otium, Musae muscae, religio religatio, heluones
Hellenes, iusiurandum iocus, honos (...): Proud contempt is their best feeding
content: with them, learning's a blemish, the court a bastard, our ministry
unhallowed security, the Muses like flies too many in a swarm, Religion a
bannishment, gluttonisme a merry Grecisme, cannon oaths are forsooth but Lady
Lingua's recreation, and Honor is made a fool upon a stage: witness some of
our audacious theaters, now made as spanish strappados for luxations, like
Pityocamptes his bending Plutarch. in These.
pine-trees to rack the best good names, persons of state, and Universities
withal, too to intolerably permitted in that.

O blessed, and thrice, and ever blessed God, to what a dead low ebb of grace
is this world grown to now, for irregularity both of speech and action? How
are the bitter waters of Marah distilled ^o^ the sweetest flowers? Gods
abundant graces are proved the limbecks and the seminaries of all vices: the
most men are hardly yet in the Christ-crosse-row of Christianity, babes and
infants in divine knowledge, who have not yet learnd to speak; rather spellers
then gospellers.

Let us every one, even every one from the eminent Cedar unto the lowlyest
shrub, seek to imitate Christ Jesus as in all our actions, so in all our
speeches, of whom the blessed Evangelist speaks thus, from the very mouth of
his enemies; Never man spoke as this man does; the Church therefore the spouse
of Christ, being enamoured with him and with his comfortable words, she thus
begins her sacred Canticle, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: that
is, cum eius Pelican in Cant. 1. cap.
dulci alloquio, with his sweet and honie-flowing speech: as if thus she
should break out into a fervent passion of her love, saying; O sweet Jesus,
thou fountain of the gardens, thou well of living waters, thou fountain of
Bethlem, thou Ocean of bliss, thou mineral of all perfection, thou heavenly
manna the bread that came down from heaven, thou that art honey to the mouth,
and harmony to the ear, a iubile to the heart, lo I, O Lord, am sick of
love, of the love of thy laws, which are dearer to me then thousands of gold
and silver: comfort me, O comfort me with thy heavenly words the balsame of my
wounded soul: O Lord, O my dear Savior, list unto me that I may so list to
thee as the Heart brayeth and pants for the rivers of waters, so my soul
pants and thirsts for the rivers of Paradise flowing and gushing out of thy
mouth: O Lord kiss me I beseech thee with thy lips, that distill down the
pure myrrh of saving doctrine. Lord, O my Lord (for thus my lively faith
imbraceth thee) thou have kissed me by Moses, by the Prophets, these brightsome
lamps, that now are consecrated to th'euerlasting shrine, at their blessed
lips, their learned lips a long time have I bin fed: now, O Lord, I humbly
sue for the kisses of thy mouth, of thine own mouth: say thou unto my soul, I
am thy salvation: let these my poor prayers be as powerful aduocats and
suppliant orators to plead for mine unworthiness: I know the impure vessels of
mine ears, are unfit to drink in so heavenly a moisture of grace, being
neither seasoned nor sufficiently capacious to intertaine thy hallowed word the
food and manna of my soul: yet Lord thou that openest and no man shuts,
thou can open my heart as once Apoc. 3. 7. Act. 16. 14.
thou did the heart of Lydia for sacred attention, O let me claim that
interest in thine vnspeakeble mercies: let me take a fair coppie out of thy
mouth, that I may learn to speak: thy words delivered in their due place are
like apples of gold with pictures of silver, they are as flagons of
refreshment, O stay me with these flagons, and comfort me with these apples,
for I am sick of love. Thy words are the sweet savor of life unto life to
every one 2. Cor. 2.
that does believe. The precious spikenard ointment in the alabaster box, the
Mar. 14. 3.
sacrifice of Noah sweet smelling in gods Genesis 8.
nostrils, Aarons holy incense, the Queen Exodus 30 34. 1. King 10. Matthew. 2. 11.
of Sheba her sweet odours, the wisemens frankincense, the fragrant orchard of
Alcinous, they are but as the putrid smells of Golgatha, nothing in compare
with the sweet perfume of thy heauen-dropping deaw of those thy surpassing
pleasant words. Thus the spouse of Jesus Christ in a sanctified devotion,
thirsts after the words of Christ as well for her speeches imitation, as for
her sorrows limitation.

And thus let us all in the fear of God, as we tender our own dearest
souls, ransomd with the prizeles blood of Jesus Christ that immaculate lamb:
propose him unto our selves the liueliest pattern of all complete perfection,
in whom was hid all the treasures of wisdom, sanctity, and knowledge: let us
adore and kiss in all humility of soul and body his worthy footsteps, whose
happy tract will lead us unto immortality: and let us humbly crave at Gods
hands to give us hearts, and hands, and tongues malleable for good impressions,
that we may think, and do, and speak what is most pleasing in his sight. And
let us for our speech, which most concerns our text, remember that one verse
of David, which the good old Heremit Socrat scho. lib. 4. 18. Psalm. 38. 1.
Pambo could not learn in nineteen years, I said I will take heed unto my
ways, that I offend not in my tongue: calling to mind how many by their
tongues have lost their lands, their liberties, their lives and all, to the
woeful prejudice of their posterity. And if either this or any other way we do
offend, if in the day time with Penelope we weaue the spiders web of sin,
ah let us at night by tears untwist it, and by our true repentance, let us
dissolve our souls into sighs, and melt our brains into brinish tears to
lauer and rinsh away our crimsen deep-dy'd spots. And grant, good Lord, that we
who have too long served Satan by Indenture, writing it with our tongues, in
this the pen of too ready a writer, subscribed it with our hearts, dated it
even from our very infancy, sealed it with the kisses of our lips, delivered it
in the presence of many witnesses, our consciences, God, Angels, men, and every
creature, may now at last have this our grievous bond cancelled by thy mercy, O
sweet Lord, since to remit a sin is no less, nay greater glory then to
revenge it. And if we chance to lull and hush our selves a sleep or slumber
in future senfuality, O thou the keeper of Israel, who neither slumbrest nor
sleep, rouse us up with the shril sound of the trumpet of thy fearful
judgment; that wether we eat or drink, or what ear we do, we may with holy
Hierom say, Me thinks I hear the trumpet of the Lord sound these words shrilly
in my ears, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. And though the most of us
all here convented in Gods presence this day (God knows whether any one
excepted) sold our selves to sin by ignorance in the Aprile, the forenoone of
our years, grant good Lord, that in the afternoon and the cold December of
some of our days, we may dedicate and wholly deuote our souls and bodies to
thy service o sweet Savior, according to our full determination, that at what
watch soever it pleases thee to come, we may be found prepared invested with
the wedding garment, clad with the pure and snowie robes of righteousness, and
so with Joshua and Caleb, the little number of them that shall be saved, we may
happily enter into the land of promise that heavenly Canaan that flows with
milk and honey of all eternity, that heavenly Jerusalem the city of the
Saints; whose walls are built of precious stone, whose gates are pearls, whose
porters Angels, whose streets are pau'd with gold that far surpass the gold
of Ophir, through which do glide the crystal streams of life, which
whosoever tastes shall never thirst again, where God is the Angels sun and
ever shines, the Alpha of all true and everlasting joy, and the and ohgr;mega
of all sorrow and anguishment, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at his
right hand pleasures for evermore: whether he bring us that so dearly bought
us, even Jesus Christ the righteous, thy Christ O blessed Lord, but our sweet
Jesus, to whom with thee, O Father, and the holy Spirit, we in loyalty of
heart, and lowlines of affection, do ascribe all honor, glory, and dominion
this day, this hour, and evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

