THE APPOLLOGIE OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS Prince ERNESTVS, Earl of Mansfield, etc.

WHEREIN FROM HIS FIRST Entertainment, are laid open the Occasions of his
Wars in Bohemia, Austria, and the Palatinate, with his faithful Service to
the King of Bohemia.

Translated out of the Original French Coppie.

Printed at Heidelbergh. 1622.

TO THE READERS.
REaders you must give me leave to present my Book to you, without the
Epithet of Gentle, Courteous or Impartial Readers: for mine is an Apology;
which, he that is sure of such Readers, needs not make. And if the glory of
this most loyal and victorious Count, has still at home bin confronted with
envious censures: how should a story of his Actions, every where meet with such
Readers? This therefore rather hopes to make, then find you so. And readers I
call you, plurally: for it looks to fall into diverse hands, and all not alike
minded* some may light upon this Apology, who by their envious detractions
from his Acts, have bin the causers that some such as this were sit to be made
for his justification. But I hope, that they being now out of action, and so no
longer corriuals in his honor, the proof of his victorious fidelity, has by
this time either made them ashamed or silent. A second sort are those, whom
these scandalous reports have suspended in their goood opinions of his fidelity
to the King: and to them is this Apology chiefly intended: for it well hopes
that by relating the treacheries who (by his martial sentence) suffered for
it, and withal truly representing his diligence and letters to the traitors,
and the wants which disabled him from hindering their plots when his wisdom had
discovered them: will thoroughly inform such a Reader, and turn him now to an
impartial Reader. A third sort may light upon this, who have lived so far off
from news, that they never heard him so much as suspected (for thanks be to
God, his glory is further traveled then their envy, which has either bin lost
by the way, or turned back again) and I hope these men will think their
money well bestowed: in that an Apology must of necessity discover more private
and particular passages, whence this envy sprang, then any general History of
these Bohemian wars, need produce: for such a story rather relates, then
proves; and besides, here are diverse letters coppyed out, and letters be the
very linings and insides of Stories: and this way too, this Apology gives these
Readers best satisfaction Yet for one favor, I must appeal to thee Gentle and
Courteous Reader, for so I hope even (in this point) to find the first sort of
these Readers; because what I entreat, although it goes with the history yet
it is besides the scope of it, which is the thing they only malign: I mean
to crave your favorable censures, for the rudeness of the Style. For we
Bohemians (next our vulgar) more frequently use the neighbor Italian speech:
but because the camp (whither this is chiefly sent) compou^ded of diverse
Nations, best understand one another in the French, I have therefore wrote it
in that language wherein I was less perfect. But marvel not if we Swordmen
who use to hew out our way, now and then hacke at a word: a soldiers writing
style, is his stilletto, and when we parlee, we send summons, not orations,
and their own necessity persuades the vanquished to yield, and not the victors
Rhetoric: but if it be plain, plainness best sets forth truth, as this is.
And peradventure it will be the better thought to be so, for the Author
profession: for a soldier as much scorns to give the lie, as to take it.
Seeing then this brave man's Fame has bin put to his compurgators: I, who have
bin a witness of all I write, come in here as one of the Jurors, and upon mine
own knowledge deliver the truth, and (willingly) nothing but the truth: and to
this I swear, and you here see I lay my hand upon the book. Farewell, and
listen after him, his own Actions shall next make their own Apology, or need
none.

S. W.

AN APPOLLOGIE MADE IN DEFENSE OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, ERNESTVS Earl of
MANSFIELD, Marquisse of CASTLE NOVO, and BONTIGLIERE, Baron of HELDRVNGEN,
Marshall of the Army of BOHEMIA, and the Provinces Incorporated thereunto, etc.
PAssion is a most strange and wonderful thing; it is a malady and sore
disease of the soul, which hinders the functions of Judgment, and a mist
darkning the eyes of the Spirit, making things to seem otherwise, and
contrary unto that which in effect they are. Love the most violent passion of
all others, thinks that which is evil favored to be fair, and that which is
wicked to be good. Scilicet insano nemo in amore videt, hatred, Envy, and evil
will, contrary passions, produce contrary effects, and cause that which is
good, virtuous, and commendable, to appear and show to be evil, vicious and
worthy of blame. From thence, Ingratitude, bad speeches, and slander,
(accursed Daughters of such wicked Mothers) which satisfy and feed themselves
with evil, as the Spider does with the poison which she sucketh out of all
sorts of Flowers, and that from the best, like these who blame and dispraise
all sorts of actions, yea and those that are most commendable. Lycurgus, so
excellent a person, that the Oracle of Apollo was in doubt and made question,
whether it should place him among the rank of the Gods or of Men, what did
not he do for the good and benefit of his native Country? and for the
welfare of his fellow Citizens? but in the mean time, they being led and
carried away by this disease, in stead of acknowledging his benefits imparted
unto them, sought to do some mischief unto him, charged him with many
Injuries and blows, and finally banished him out of his Country. The like in
a manner happened unto Scipio, he I say, who by the ruin of the Carthagian
Empire, strengthened the foundation of the Roman Commonwealth, his bones
could find no rest in that place, whereunto he had procured the same. Charles
Duke of Burbon one of the most brave and valiant Princes that France ever
brought forth (worthy in truth to have Descended out of that most Illustrious
house, and of a better Fortune, if it had pleased God to have granted him that
favor, as well as he had endowed him with great and rare Virtues, by diverse
and good effects witnessed and set forth the greatness of his Courage, and the
affection that he bare unto the King his Master. He delivered Dision from the
siege that the Switzers laid about it: took Millaine out of their hands: And
which is more, advanced the Victory, which the King had against them in the
Battle of Marignan. For all which his Noble actions, and many other eminent
Services which he did for him, yet he could not obtain his favor. But to the
contrary, the further that he proceeded, still he found himself to be further
from it: Passion having in such manner possessed the Kings mind, that he could
not see nor behold the said Princes merits, much less acknowledge them: so
that in the end, after he had many years patiently borne and supported all
the indignities, that Envy, hatred, and evil will could or might suggest,
Falling into despite and Despair, he ran headlong into his own ruin, at
the hazard of the affairs of him that was the cause thereof. These are
examples of times past; and now behold one of the present time, an Example,
which serves for the subject of this Apology.

The most Illustrious Prince, Ernestus Earl of Manssield, Marquisse of Castle
Nouo, and Bontighere, Baron of Heldrungen, and great Marshall of the Army
Royal, of the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the Provinces incorporated thereunto,
having had that happy success, to make his Valor and Fidelity known unto the
Son of Mars, S. A. S. of Sanoy: having borne his Arms into Bohemia, for the
service of that Crown, made great offers unto the same, exposed his life and
means for the good thereof, and to conclude, having done all that, which a
great and Valiant Knight of his profession could or might do. Behold certain
evil willers, transported by the violence of her accursed passions, set upon
him, and covertly underhand seek to undermine the foundations of his
Reputation, to make his whiteness seem black, and his fidelity suspicious,
blaming him, as if he had had some intelligence with the Enemy, that he would
take his part, and afterward sell the Town of Pilsen when it was besieged,
unto him for money. And in a word, they charge him with Treason, in stead of
recompencing him for his Fidelity. The rumor whereof spread abroad throughout
all the Country of Bohemia, Germany, Italy, and France, and in all other
places, Time certainly is the mother of Truth, which at the last although it
be hidden and covered by obscurity, comes forth into the light Veritatem
tempus in Lucem eruit, says an Ancient wise man. But in the mean time, he
that is bitten and wounded by slander, cannot choose but feel the panges
thereof, yea and in a manner dye with grief (if it be great) if no remedy be
procured for the same. Now as great and valiant Courages, are hardened in
greatest dangers, and apprehend no peril, so they pass not greatly, neither
yet any whit esteem of her wounds: accounting them to be the same, which they
receive by the Arms of Mars. But seeing that experience, and the Examples of
times past make us see and find the contrary, and that it is a dangerous
thing, to seek to defend our selves against Slander, only with the buckler
of patience, it is requisite to proceed with Arms, and to fight against this
fury in the genesis thereof. All other Arms, the more they are distant from
the hand from whence they were sent, so much the more violence and force they
lose. But those of slander are clean contrary, for the further they are from
the hand, so much the more force they have, and fear nothing more then to
meet and encounter at handy blows with the party. Then in stead of flying
from them, we must approach near unto them, we must cast off our Dublets and
show them our naked breasts. That is the buckler, and the Target of steel,
which wholly and utterly repulseth them. That is it which we shoot at in this
Apology, we seek to defend the Innocence of the said Prince, against the
Impostures of this infernal fury, and to that end we will produce him in open
Field by the representation of his valorous exploits, and by his own
permission, we will open his Dublet, and let you see his naked breast, a white
breast, which never was made black with Infidelity, nor stained with the
color of the Indian Sun. As men know a Tree by the fruit, so we know a man
by his works. It is his actions that we mean, which we will make to appear
(at the least in such, wherein he has had a part during this War) and will
so lively discribe them, one after the other, to the end that they may be seen
of every one, that in time to come they may be known by every man, and in the
end be unto him a fortress, against the slanderous assaults of his evil
willers. We will begin with the treaty of Conuention with the States of Bohemia
made with him, and will set it down in English, to serve for a frontispece, and
a foundation of this work. The tenure whereof, is as follows.

We N. N. N. N. the Directors and Counselors of the Realm of Bohemia,
thereunto Deputed with full Authority and power, by all the 3. Evangelical
Estates of this Crown, make known unto all men by these presents: That
forasmuch as the state of the Affairs of this Realm requires, to provide our
selves of a Valiant General of the Artillery, and a Colonel of a certain
number of Soldiers, thereby to strengthen the Armies which we have leuyed for
the Defense of this Crown: To that end we have chosen the most Illustrious
Prince Ernestus Earl of Mansfield, Baron of Heldrungen, Colonel of the Lords,
the united Electors, Princes and States of the Roman Empire, and General of
the German Troops of S. A. S. the Duke of Sauoy, and that in regard of the
good experience that he has had in Marshall affairs, as also of other his
Noble qualities: and according to the Articles made between us, have made and
declared him to be General of the Artillery, and Colonel of a Regiment of
Dutch Soldiers, from two to 4000. men: to serve us and the said Lords of the
Three Estates, as long as this War shall continue. As by these presents we
declare and establish him so to be, to the end that he may be known and
holden for the same. In regard whereof the said Count Mansfield, has offered
to assemble his Troops with as much speed possible as he may or can, and of
himself to arm them as need requires. And with as many Horsemen as he can
get to come hither into Bohemia, to the place appointed: which when time
serves shall be set down unto him, and at the furthest within Fourteen
days, by that means to serve this Crown, and the State thereof, wheresoever
it shall be needful and requisite, and by Gods help to Defend the same,
against all their Enemies, according to the good trust and confidence that we
have reposed in him: Assuring him, that we will satisfy and content him, for
the said Offices of General of the Artilliry, and Colonel, according to the
use and custom of the War, and the agreement made with him, in such manner
that he shall think himself to be well pleased and contented. And further,
as well for our selves, as for the said Lords the Evangelical States of this
Crown, we protest, and promise to requite the good endeauours of the said
Earl in all occasions, by all kinds of good Offices. In witness whereof, we
have hereunto put our Seals.

Given in the Castle of Prague, in the Counsel Chamber of Us the said
Directors, the 20. Day of the Month of August. Anno. 1618.
THE Conditions that bound him to bring certain Troops thither, within a time
appointed, were by him happily performed, as every man knows, and the
process of the Affairs will make it more evidently appear. Now it rests to
know, whether the said Troops were employed, to the ends pretended; that is
for the Defense of the said Crown: and whether he proceeded diligently and
carefully in that charge which was imposed upon him: That is it which we do
and will Justly prove.

Among the great Sea or gulf of difficulties, whereinto the States of Bohemia
found themselves to be plunged at the beginning of their war, there was
nothing that more troubled them then the shutting up, and stopping of the great
passage into Germany: for it was from thence that they expected their aid and
relief of munition, money and men. The Town of Pilsen principal among the
rest, and the most important places of that Realm shut up that passage. It is
ten miles distant from Prague, upon the great and open way to Nuremburg, seated
in a plain Country, rising a little on the South side, between two small
Rivers, which flancke it on the East and west sides, and join together toward
the North, garnished with a deep ditch, and double walls, grounded upon a
rock, and full of a great number of Towers, with two fair Suburbs, To
conclude, a Town very strong, according to the ancient manner, and found to
be such, by two sieges made about the same, which in former time it valiantly
sustained: The first against Zischa, anno 1470. the other against the Hussites
anno 1434. which continued 10. months, in such manner, that it had the report
and commendation, that in 700. years time, no man could enter into the same
against her will. Besides this, that the Town is strong, the Citizens were
Catholics, and therefore extremely affected unto the Emperor: as in effect
they showed the same by infinite insolences by them committed against the
States, whereby they hindered them from the free use of that passage: So that in
the end, all well considered, specially the discommodities which that Town
brought unto the Commonwealth, The States resolved to reduce the same under
their obedience. And Commission was given unto the Earl of Mansfield, their
General of the Artillery, who without any delay, went and besieged the same,
but yet very weakly and ill provided of all things necessary: having in all
but nine Cornets of horse, hired, and some of the Country people, and 2000.
footmen, to whom he joined 3. Companies more of 200. in each Company, which he
raised during the siege, with some Companies of the Country people, which the
States sent unto him. With all them, and six field Pieces, (whereof the
greatest bare a bullet of five pound of Iron) he began the siege upon the 16.
of September 1618. and first assailed the Town upon the South side, (the
Suburbs being burnt up by them within the Town,) thinking to prevail by the
advantage of the height, which that side gave him without: but perceiving that
it was but in vain, he altered his purpose, and planted his Cannon against the
Cloister on the East side, where he began to play upon the same, and to set his
Soldiers on work both night and day, and at last made a breach, but so hard
to come at, and within so well rampard by those that were besieged, that he
was wholly out of hope to take it on that side, specially with those small
field Pieces, qui vuol vada qui non vuol manda, says the Italian: He had
written to Prague, to have certain pieces of greater Ordnance, but those being
not sent, and perceiving that of force he must have them, or else leave the
siege, he took horse, and rode post to Prague, and effected so much, that he
got two great Cannons, which he speedily brought thither: there stood a house
a little beyond the breach Northward, gitturing half without the walls, and
the Counterscarfe of the Town: which finding fit and convenient for his
design, he caused it to be battered and suddenly with those two Pieces, and
the rest that were there before, from thence beat so violently upon it, that
within less then an hour he had made a reasonable breach. Now in his absence,
and by commandment from himself, the Officers had so much annimated the
Soldiers, that by extraordinary travel, they turned the ordinary course of
the river, in such manner, that they might go dry-foot unto the said breach: a
thing which gave great advantage unto the said Earl; whereof he failed not to
take the benefit, and caused a furious assault to be given, a bon chat bon Rat
it is commonly said; for if they without assailed valiantly, they within as
gallantly defended themselves, they without fought for honor, and they within
for their lives. The breach was flanqued, in such manner, that they could not
get unto it; but in the face of Musket shot, which played upon them, as thick as
hayle-shot. But the courage of that Earl, and the credit that he had with his
Soldiers, made them to contemn the danger. And to conclude, after diverse
hours of resistance, and when they within had made all manner of resistance
that possibly they could, it proceeded so far, that they began to parley and
to agree within the Town to yield, with Swords in their hands, the said Earl
making them within to know, that he was as well able to deal favorably, as to
take advantage of his victory by force. This was done upon the 21. of November
the same year, being the first fruits of his labors, and news that well
pleased the States, who thereby perceived themselves to be delivered from that
troublesome Thorn in their feet. Yet there rested another, which we will
seek to pull out, the next year following, we shall see what it will be. In
the mean time the season of the year coming on, we entered into Garrison
till winter was gone.

Winter being past, the Irons began to heat, Mars with his color every day
produced some other new effects. The Enemy then held no places more of
importance in Bohemia, but Crumaw, and Budweis, places in a manner enuironned
on all sides with our Garrisons, in such manner, thus to issue out to forage
the Country, they must of force be strong, 300. Horsemen, and 200. Muskatiers
of the Enemy entered into the Field to that end. John George Earl of Solmes,
Lieutenant Colonel to the General who as then commanded those Garrisons, was
advertised thereof, and mounting on horseback with his Company, and a certain
number of Muskatiers, went to seek the Forragers, and having found them, beat
and wholly overthrew them. The state of humane affairs is subject to change
and alteration, and there is no posperity so great, but either it is mixed, or
else followed with adversity. Fortune envying at the favor which she had
showed unto that Lord, began to turn her back against him, and prepared a
cross for him. The 10. of June, anno 1619. she gave him the blow, check and
almost a mate. We will declare the circumstances thereof in some sort, for
special cause.

He had Commission to leave certain men in the Garrisons for the Defense and
keeping of them, and with the rest to go and join himself with the Army that
lay before Budweis: and in pursuit of that Commission he departed from Pilsen,
and went to Portewin, an hours going from Vodnian, where he attended for 500.
Horsemen that the Earl was to bring unto him; there he expected them from day
to day. In the mean time the Generals pressed him to go forward, without
staying any longer for them: so the Tenth of the said month, he departed from
thence with his Troops, being about 8. Companies of Foot, but not complete,
because of the Garrisons aforesaid: and about 450. Horsemen; among the said
Garrisons there was one of 30. Soldiers, in a Village called Netoliz, on the
right hand of the way, which the General held. The evening before his
departure, the Hungarians that served the Enemy set Fire thereon, and
constrained the Garrison to withdraw themselves into the Church. The General
being arrived with the Army at Zablatti (in Dutch Grossen Lasken) a Village
distant about a Germane mile and a half from the said Netoliz, was advertised
by the Earl of Solmes, (who as then was at Vodnian with charge to provide for
the said Garrisons) that the said Soldiers yet made resistance and desired him
to aid them, to go thither with the Army: my Lord found it to be a dangerous
matter, to abandon them, he feared a reproach. Therefore he resolved upon
another course, and commanded the body of his Army to stay there, while he
himself with 150. Horsemen ran thither, causing part of them to stay by the
way, to aid him in his retraict, and to the same end commanded 400. Muskatiers
to march, to lie in Ambuscado, and to stay his return. He thereupon put
forward with the rest of his Horsemen, and met with the Hungarians, whom he
valiantly charged, but the first part of them being seconded by a great number
of others, and by some Troops of Cuirasses, he was constrained to retire by
another way, without having means to prevail of the advantage which he
provided for himself by the Ambuscado, which nevertheless he caused to be
advertised, that they should slide along through the Wood and by the water
side, and so get to the Army, which they effected in such manner, that they
safely arrived there, but yet were narrowly pursued by the Enemy.

In the mean time, the Earl of Bucquoy with the maine body of his Army
consisting of 5000. Horse, and 4000. footmen, marched forward, following the
traces of the said Lord General, who being come to the Village, where the rest
of his men stayed for him, and thinking to refresh himself, suddenly all the
Earl of Bucquoyes Army showed it self. Whereupon the General mounted on
Horseback, with all his Soldiers in order of Battle, commanded them to make
a Fortification or sconse of Wagons, which was presently begun on the left
side, but by reason that the VVaggoners were put into a great fear by the
running away of certain Caroches, it was not made round about as it should
have bin. The length of the Village was behind at the back of the Generals
Army, his Horsemen being divided into 3. Battalions, in manner of a Triangle,
the better to aid one the other. The Footmen were behind, and the Carriage
in the middle, being 4. Companies on the left hand and 3. on the right, and one
before the Carriage, all in such manner disposed, that the Horsemen had means
to be defended by the Muskatiers. The Enemy being very near, and all the field
covered over with his horsemen, my Lord General set upon those that were
foremost, and scattered certain Squadrons of Hungarians, but the Cuirassiers
belonging to the Baron of Walstein coming forward, he was repulsed, and so
whotly charged on all sides, that he was put to flight. A little before the
Enemy began to give the onset, 50. Soldiers of the Colonels company that were
on the right side, were commanded to go to the Generals lodging, to defend it
and the little Street between both: but as they went, the rest of the Company
followed them by misunderstanding. And the two other Companies did the like,
and were no sooner gone, but the Enemies entered into their places: who
acknowledging and perceiving their error, turned back again, to place
themselves as they were at the first: but then it was too late, in such manner,
that they were constrained to look for their own safety: There was a Wood
beyond the Village, whether they sought to retire: but finding themselves to
be out of the Village, to cross over a plain, They were presently environed
on all sides by the Hungarians, and so hardly charged, that few of them could
save themselves, the rest were either slain or taken prisoners. In the mean
time the horsemen were broken, part of the footmen lost, and the five Companies
remaining in great hazard to be spoiled. Carpezo the Serieant Mayor, the
Rhingraue, The Captains Haid, Scheammerdorf, and N. commanding them, had the
great body of the Enemies forces before them, the fire at their backs, and all
the Ammunition (except some carkes of powder) with all the carriage burning,
whereby they were put to their shifts, and if they had any blood at their
fingers ends, it was then time for them to show it, as it became them: As Soon
as the horsemen were dispierced, the Enemy began to set upon the five
Companies, on all sides, where they could come at them, and they defended
themselves valiantly, as they were in a Garden, having the advantage of a
hedge, which was a good defense and safeguard unto them. The Earl of Bucquoy,
made certain pieces of Cannon to be shot at them on that side, thinking to
beat it down, but he could not do it that day. The Sun shone very hot, and
the heat that increased by the fire that burnt in the Village, was the cause
that the fire which the Enemy put into the hedge, easily burnt: but the
diligence of those that were assailed, surmounting all difficulties, presently
quenched it. In the mean time, the General, without any astonishment at that
disorder; had reassembled and gathered his horsemen again together, and with
them forcibly past through the Hungarians squadrons, and ran too and fro in
field, and returned again into the Village, with an intent to mount upon a
fresh horse, and to put on his Cuirasse, being then unarmed. But he found his
lodging already taken up by the Enemy, and that side of the Village that was
behind at the back of his Soldiers all set on fire: which notwithstanding, he
sought by all the means he could, to get among his footmen, but the way was
stopped on all sides. At the last, as he turned and looked about him to find
some passage out, he was desired by his Officers, to regard the evident danger,
whereinto he might fall, if he stayed there any longer, and to yield unto
necessity, to save and preserve his own person, and those few horsemen that
were left for a better occasion: who seeing that he could do no otherwise, he
resolved to retire, which he did with the point of his sword, being environed,
followed, and pursued by a great number of Hungarians. On the other side the
Enemies did all what they could, to enforce the rest of his footmen, and they
for their parts defended themselves as well as they could. In which conflict
they continued from one of the clock in the afternoon, until four of the
clock, when the Earl of Bucquoy by a Trumpet summoned them to yield. There
was no appearance, that they could long desist against so great an Army. But
for that the Lord General, as soon as the Enemy began to show themselves, had
sent two Soldiers to Budweis, (which was not above a mile and a half from
thence) to have some aid, they verily believed that it would come, and
therefore would not yield themselves: within an hour after he sent another
Trumpeter, that prevailed no more then the first. At the last, between 7. and
8. of the clock in the evening, having spent all their bullets, as also the
buttons of their dublets, and their powder, and being out of all hope of
relief, they yielded upon condition, and a solemn promise made unto them, by
the Earl of Bucquoy, in faith of an honorable Knight, holding his hat in his
hand, that he would keep good quarter with them, and release them all and
every one of them, paying a months wages for their ransomes. A fair promise
indeed, but badly holden. Words are feminine, and deeds masculine: for they
being carried to Crumaw, they were lodged, (being in all among others about
1200. hundred in Chambers, by great heaps together, so close, that they could
neither sit, nor lie down: and besides the little pittance of victuals that
was given them, they gave them no drink, which continued for certain days:
which they did, thereby to draw them to serve the Emperor, as after it
happened: for when they had endured all kinds of extremities, without having
drunk a drop of Wine or Beer for certain days together, the most part of
them yielded unto necessity. Men of good qualities, and worthy to be credited,
made this report, and withal had the testimony of the Enemy, of that great God
who knows all things, and of those poor Soldiers, that were dealt withal
in such manner. The number of the dead was easy to be known, by the number of
the prisoners, the Generals Soldiers being not above 1600. fighting men, horse
and foot: all the carriage was lost, only his own Caroch laden with certain
thousands of Florins, that was saved: which was good fortune in so great a
misfortune, and which served the said Lords General, as an instrument to
re-establish his affairs, and to set them on foot again. This is the victory
which has been reported so many times with great triumphs. The Lord General
saved himself from that discomfiture, at Thein, and from thence rode to
Piseck, and having taken order for the Garrisons, he returned to Pilsen, where
by little and little he re-assembled the Soldiers that rested of that
discomfiture: The more that Palm is pressed down, the higher it grows,
generous spirits wax bolder in adversities. The General was beaten, but not
utterly overthrown, and it was not a new matter to him, to know that war is
variable: The war is his practice, he has used it from his youth upwards,
and is accustomed to all hazards: and as he is of a prompt and active nature,
so he slept not upon that accident, he put that money which he had left to
another use, he gave out Commissions, to levy and take up more Soldiers in
Germany, in such manner, that in the space of four or five weeks, he had
gotten two Regiments of foot, and a good number of horsemen together again.
On the other side, the Emperors Army daily increased, in such manner, that in
the month of September, when it was at Miroditz, it was 30000. fighting men.
The States of Bohemia earnestly apprehending ye approaching of so puissant an
Army, wrote in have to the Lord General to come to Prague, with all his
troops, in all chances to preserve and defend it from an invasion: which was
the cause that he went to Veraun, from whence at last, by order from the said
States, he went to join himself with their great Army. The Earl of Bucquoy
was resolved to hazard a battle, and to set upon the Bohemians: but the
Generals coming to join with them, made him alter his advise, so that within
few days after he retired to Pisack, where he received news, that Bethlem
Gabor was entered into the field, with a puissant Army, to invade Austria, in
favor of the Bohemians: So to divert or impeach the inundation of that storm;
he went from Pisack and marched toward Austria. The Bohemian Army also
breaking up, and followed after him: at which time there was three great Armies
all in the field together. I leave the rehearsal of their proceedings, unto
those that were then present with them, to return to our course in Bohemia.

After the overthrow at Zablatti, and the Earl of Bucquoy being Master of the
Field, enlarged his borders, and took Prachadis, Vodnian, Winterberg, and
Pisacke. But then the States of Bohemia believing (as it was true) that when
he was gone, It was time for them to repair the ruins that he had made,
during the time of his Victory, recalled the Lord General of the Artillery,
and gave him Commission to ruin those places again, and according to that
Commission he returned into Bohemia, and with the Companies that he had left in
Garrison, and the Prince of Anholts Regiment, and some Troops of horsemen, as
he marched along he took Vodian, and set upon Prachadis, and Winterbergh, one
after the other, and with great agility wanne them again. I said before, that
Pilsen is one of the principal places in Bohemia: and Pisacke, Tabor,
Wittingaw, and Budweis, are the next. Whereof Pisacke and Budweis, were in the
Emperors power, the other two in the States hands. Pisacke being a good place,
by reason of the situation, and the walls and Ditches thereof, commanded by
a Spanish Captain, that under him had none of the Country Pesants, but good
Soldiers, and the time of the year coming on, (for it was about the middle of
November) it was more difficult to be won, and it was thought, that that
year it was impossible to be effected. And the Prince of Anholt finding that
enterprice to be very difficult, wrote a Letter to the Lord General from
Ambergh, bearing date the 15. of November, in manner as follows.

MY Lord, I am of opinion and so still continue, that your Design will take no
effect, for that the time of the year is now contrary, as also that the
proportion of the assaylers, to the assailed, and the mutenies and Discords
whereon you ground are uncertain, as likewise that the Enemies in this season,
making you believe their weakness, will have advantage against you. But be it
as it will, if you obtain the Victory, you shall deserve to be Crowned with
commendations. I pray you let me be informed of your proceedings at
Nurembergh. If there be any man in the world who with all that he has, to the
uttermost of his power, will do you good, it is he that is and will be my
Lord.

Your most affectionated Friend, to do you what service he can: CHRISTIAN,
Prince of Anholt.

A great courage accompanied with a good Judgment, effects strange things,
if there were difficulties: the Lord General of the Artillery, assured
himself to find the means to surmount and overcome them all, and upon that
assurance he went to besiege Pisacke. But because he had not sufficient Cannot
shot, he sent for some to Prague. And in the mean time while he stayed for
them, ten or twelve days past over. When they were come, the Lord General
set them so well on work, that within few days after, (that is upon the sixth
day of December) he wanne the Town. I will not take on me to set down or
declare the great importance of that enterprise. I am content to let the Reader
know it by the Copy of certain Letters, that were written to the Lord
General touching that Subject, by the Prince of Anholt, from Ambergh the 29.
of November, St. V. in manner as follows.

MY Lord, I am abundantly well satisfied with the good news, which you have
imparted unto me by my Poast, touching the taking of Pisacke, which I esteemed
to be very difficult, in so hard a time, and specially in respect of the small
provision, that might be sent unto you, wherein you have once again yielded a
proof of your valor and virtue, which I have presently made known unto his
Majesty, who therewith will be exceedingly well pleased, and have the greater
opinion of your Valor. And therefore as well in his Majesty's name, as for my
self, I give you most hearty thanks, as also unto all your Lieutenants,
Colonels, Captains, and all your Soldiers, for the pains, travails, and
other endeauours by them taken and used in the taking of the Town, desiring no
other, but condignly to requite them all and every one in particular, for the
same. And therefore I thought it good to dispatch this present Bearer, to
assure you, of the great account that I make of the taking of the said Town.
My opinion at this present is, that you must not refrain to assault the Castle
of Straconits, having the commodity of the Cannon so near, and that there is
no appearance that the Captain therein, will long withstand you, whom you
must not pardon, as you did at Winterbergh. That done, you must look to your
Cannon, and if the ways be too bad, you may leave them for a while at Pisacke.
But if it may be done, I had rather they should be left at Pilsen, and that
they should be kept there, till I give you further order concerning the same.
In the mean time, if you can affect any thing, against the Fortes of
Guldenstein as I have heretofore written to the Lieutenant Colonel Poblis, I
assure you, you shall much please his Majesty. And in effect, it will be no
small matter, if you can take order there for Victuals and Munition, and that
you can spoil the ways toward Passaw, which will put our Enemies on that side
in despair. And therewith I am of opinion, that we must content our selves
for this Winter time, unless some good supprise happen by the way, which for
my part I will not let slip, etc.

With another as follows.
MY Lord, it is his Majesty that has written this Letter hereunto annexed unto
you, upon the great contentment that he has for the taking of Pisacke. It is
said in Nurembergh that you are able to enforce Nature. I send you advise, etc.
I am, my Lord,

Your most affectioned Friend, to do you any good I can: CHRISTIAN, Prince of
Anholt.

His Majesty the King of Bohemia wrote unto him in manner as folloeth.
WE yield thanks unto God, for your happy success, and assure our selves,
that of his great benignity he will further show us much more favor, that by
your Valor, great Zeal and Wisdom, In the end we shall see all this Realm
and Country delivered out of the hands of our Enemies. And as we do in no
manner doubt, but that in all occasions in time to come, you will make known
the great care and vigilance, which you have hitherto shown for the
advancement of our Service: So we promise to acknowledge your good endeavor,
by all the Favors that we can afford.

Nuremberg the last of November, St. V. FREDIRICK.

AFter all these exploites, the Lord General retired his forces into the
Garrisons, the season of the year in all places lesning the fury of Arms, but
not the fire of jealousy, which the sound of his happy success had caused to
rise up, in certain malicious Spirits. A fire which in time to come will
consume many good Designs in the first beginning of their birth, to the great
prejudice of the Crown of Bohemia. Pliny writes of a small fish called
Remora, and says, that it is of such a quality, that cleaving fast to a Ship,
though it be exceeding great, it stays the course thereof in the maine Seas:
small matters prevent great enterprises. Our Ship will set sail, but the
stinking waters of evil will, will produce so many Remores, that on what side
so ever it sayleth, it will hardly arrive at any good Haven. The Reader shall
see how it will fall out, by the issue of this discourse, then let us proceed.

If it be grievous to a particular man, to lose that small substance that he
has: It may easily be judged, how much it displeases great personages to lose
Crowns and whole Kingdoms. It was easily to be seen and perceived, that
Crumaw and Budweis being lost, Bohemia would be clean quit out of the hands of
the house of Austria. And that how much the more those places were of great
importance for the conservation of that Kingdom, so much the more, the
Emperor, and all the Princes of that house, would enforce and strengthen
themselves for the maintenance of them.

The Lord General of the Artillery foresaw this, and that to pull those two
Towns out of their hands, they must not go empty handed thereunto. Now for
that the great Army of Bohemia was in Austria, and he in Bohemia with the rest
of the Troops, he esteemed that the conquest of those two Towns was reserved
for him, as the rest of his task. In the Winter time he began to dispose of
his affairs thereafter, framed intelligences, and lent his Spirit to look
after that which in any wise might serve for the furtherance of his Design.
But before all things, he sought in good time to provide for the assurance of
the Town of Pilsen, and that in time of need he might be furnished with money
and men. He knew the slacknesse of the land Officers, and how hardly they were
to be drawn thereunto. Therefore he wrote unto them from Pilsen, to desire
them to command the Country Pesants to travail about the fortification of
that Town: and to take order that it might be provided of Munition both for
the belly and the war, that he might have sufficient Cannon, and Horses to
draw them into the field, and that they would send him money, and men to effect
his Design, etc.

They made provision touching the first point, but so slenderly, that in steed
of a thousand Pesants, that should ordinarily have been employed, and changed
at that work, there was never above 300. together: for the rest of the points,
there was nothing but promises made in steed of effects. The Lord General
knowing their humors, and that if he pressed them not forwards, the matter would
rest there, sent them Letter after Letter, the month of March being almost
spent in following that. At last the said Lord General perceiving the season
to come on, wherein something was to be done in the field, and that they went
so slackly forward, he began again, and writing with the best Ink that he
could get, protested, that in case they took no better order for their
affairs, that if any mischief fell upon them, the fault should not be imputed
unto him: and that from that time forward he would discharge himself thereof
both before God, and all the world. These protestations were by him reiterated
diverse times one after the other, with as many passions as he could well
express. In the mean time, he could not (and that with great entreaty) get
but one part of that which he required, and none, or very little money. Their
ordinary answer being, that they would take order for the same, withal still
complaining of the insolences committed by his Soldiers. He still continued
his replies, and touching their complaints, showed them, that without money it
was impossible for him, to restrain so many malcontents: and as they required
that correction should be inflicted on them for the said insolences, he
solicited for themeanes to effect the same. And among other things he
propounded a course which is much practiced, and common in other Nations, and
easily to be put in use among them, which was a Contribution to be raised upon
the Country Pesants, offering to make an account of that which he should
gather, and to deduct it out of his, and his Soldiers pay. But they (being
altogether ignorant of matters of State,) knew not how to accept of so good a
condition, much less to effect it. They rather desired to lose all the
Country, then a little wealth, and all the body, rather then one member,
thinking to make war without money.

In the mean time the complaints increased, and from thence evil will began
to arise, which joining with envy, (whereof I have formerly spoken,) will
hereafter produce slanders and injuries, in effect prejudicial both unto the
State, and to the Authors thereof. Now as we cannot deny, much less excuse
the excess and insolences, which the Soldiers as then committed, and did
commit during that war, so it is well known, that it is impossible to
restrain and hold them under Discipline, if their wages be not paid them.
Neither they nor their horses can live by the air, all that they have, whether
it be Arms or apparel, wears, wastes, and breaks. If they must buy
more, they must have money, And if men have it not to give them, they will take
it where they find it, not as in part of that which is due unto them, but
without weighing or telling it. This gate being once opened unto them, they
enter into the large fields of liberty: There is no more staying, nor bounds
for them; in steed of contenting themselves, with that whereof they have need,
they seek to enrich themselves thereby: they take all, force, beat, and kill
those that resist them: and to conclude, there is no disorder, which they will
not commit, encouraging themselves in their wickedness, by the practice
thereof, and frequentation with diverse Nations. The German, the Flemming, the
French man, the Italian, and the Hungarian, every one contributeth somewhat of
theirs thereunto, and there is no subtilty, nor craftiness, which they know
not, and which they do not put in practice to have it. They spare no person of
what quality soever he be, respect no place how holy so ever, neither Churches,
Altars, Tombs, Sepulchers, nor the dead bodies that lie in them, can escape the
violence of their Sacriligeous hands. We know and confess all this, and to
our great grief have seen many examples thereof. These are the mischiefs of
the war, which makes it become detestable, and abominable. But what? It is
not enough to know it, and to complain thereof. We must prevent the same by
the true and right means, if we will be exempted thereof. The only means to
remedy all such disorders, and so many mischiefs, is Discipline: but how shall
it be established, where money for their pay wants? I know not who would
undertake the same, no not the Prince of Orange, (that great Master of
Discipline) himself. In the mean time the land Officers of Bohemia taking
things clean contrary, would turn the course of ordinary astaires, and to
hide and cover their ignorance, would serve their turns with the cloak of
poverty, making a great show and matter of the charges which they are forced to
disburse, and the small means that they have to defray the same: and when they
are required to pay any money, they make answer, and say, we have none, we
are not able to do it. Those that were in this Country during the time of
peace, and that knew the riches thereof, can well judge of the truth of such an
excuse.

Bohemia is one of the best countries, that is to be found within the borders
of great Germany, rich of wools, corn, pearls, precious stones, and of mines
both of gold, silver, copper, iron, lead, and all sorts of minerals, environed
with most rich neighbors, with whom they traffic in diverse manner, a country
which of long time has enjoyed peace, and for an ornament thereof, the
ordinary seat of the Emperors, a place whereinto so great riches have come and
been brought from all places in the world, for the space of these 200. years
together. Every man knows the great number, and riches of the Barons and Lords
of this country, there being some of them, that possess a million and a half
of wealth, besides the riches of the great Town of Prague, without speaking of
the rest. In such manner, that to allege poverty, for enduring of a year and
an halfes war, it is too gross an excuse, and not to be allowed. But to say
the truth, (as we ought to do) it is the covetousness of certain particular
persons, it is the great disorder that was therein, touching the receiving and
distributing of the treasures, which hindered them from paying the soldiers,
that discipline could not be established, and so many mischiefs prevented. The
good people had made the wolf a shepherd, popel de Lobkowiz, was their Lord
Tresurer, all men know his nature, and with what wood he warmes himself. The
three Estates, and the Nobility have sufficiently disliked of his dealings.
The children went to fetch mustard. And not to hold you too long with this
subject, I will only say, that men worthy of credit, and such as had that
credit, to have a sight of the books of account, affirm, That since the
beginning of the direction, until the month of November, anno 1620. which is
not above two years and a half, the States of Bohemia, without comprehending
therein the Provinces incorporated, have not disbursed three millions of
Florins. Good God, what a sum of money is that, in respect of the great
reuennes of so rich and opulent a Realm, as that is? Now let men consider of
the great sums of money, that have been levied by contribution in the plain
country, and in the villages, let them only set down the contributions of the
Town of Prague, and it shall be seen, whether it was for want of money, that
the soldiers were not paid, or for want of good will. One of them of the first
Estate, (for touching the two other, I am persuaded, they did their endeavors)
being asked, how much he would willingly contribute to the maintenance of the
war, out of 20000. dollars yearly rent that he possessed, durst offer 300.
dollars a year. And one of the principallest of them, that had a great hand in
managing the affairs of the Land, and one that could do much, being rated at
2000. dollars a year, was willing to give but 2. or 3. hundred a year. An
other of the same coat, in steed of 2000. florins, that he ought for his part,
would pay but 500, because (as he said) he had no more money. In the mean
time, running away from Prague, after the battle, he left 300000. dollars
ready money behind him, which he could not save among other things. What
profit did some of them make, of the opening of the Emperor Rodulphus chamber?
what benefit of Ecclesiastical goods? I will not speak of the rest. And yet
they are poor, they have no means to pay a little entertainment to those that
are strangers, that have no part of that abundant riches, that daily expose
their lives and bodies, for the good of the Bohemian Crown, and for the
maintenance of those, who so richly enjoy the blessings of that country. Let
the impartial Reader, that is acquainted with the affairs of the world,
judge, if it pleases him, by that which I have said, and shall say hereafter,
what is the true cause of the disorders and insolences committed by the
soldiers, and of the mischiefs and miseries happened, and fallen upon that
country. To that end, I have made this digression. Now we will leave these
great masters following their affairs in Prague, and popel de Lobkowiz telling
their money, separating the old grosches from the new, to melt and make his
particular profit of them, staying for the taking of the said Town, when
Colonel Iugge^ g^^es him a bastinado, as a beginning of a reward, for his
accursed avarice. To return unto our purpose. The General, although ill
provided of that which was necessary for him, yet weary to be enclosed within
the walls of a Town, and desirous to take the air of the fields, entered into
the field, with his troops, and some pieces of Cannon, in the month of
April, and marched to Grunberge, from whence he once again gave an other
countercharge unto the principal land officers, sharper then the former, but
to the same end, and then went forward. There is a Castle that stands ten miles
distant from Prague, in the way to Vodnian and Prachadis, near to the river of
Moldauia, in a village called Thein, which as then the enemy held, and thereby
much disturbed the Kings affairs, which he determined to take from the enemy,
and to that end wrote to Colonel Franc, (who as then was at Tabor, with six
companies of Hollanders) to come with his men, and some troops of horse and
foot men of the country people, unto the said village of Thein upon a day
appointed, and there to seize upon the bridge, that so he might join with him.
Which he did, and all the troops meeting together at the time appointed in the
said village, in the morning when the General had given two or three volleys
of Cannon shot at the enemy, he understood that some second was coming to
aid them, and that the vangard was already in sight. Whereupon he caused his
Army to enter into the field, and placing it in order of battle, resolved to
fight, if the enemy would give the onset. Now having staid in that manner
until evening, and no man seen to appear, and considering the danger that
might ensue, to lodge so many men in a village, and that the season of the
year as then was not fit to lie in the fields, as also the news that came
from the Earl de la Tour, who wrote for aid, he resolved to defer that matter
to a more convenient time, and to retire to Bekin. You must understand, that in
the mean time, the Earl of Bucquoy, that was strong in Austria, held our men
at a bay, in such manner, that the Earl de la Tour, who as then commanded the
Army in the absence of the Prince of Anholt, and the Earl of Hohenloe, was
constrained to send to the King for aid. Whereupon his Majesty gave
commission to the Lord General of the Artillery, to go thither with his
troops, as he did, but against his will, sufficiently foreseeing, by
experience of the time past, that among so many great persons and commanders,
jealousy might easily arise, to the prejudice of the common good, and of some
of them, as it happened. When he came to Niddreller, a village two miles distant
from Egenburg, in the lower Austria, where the other Army was, he stayed there
two or three weeks with his troops, attending the coming of the Prince of
Anholt, General of all the Army, who as then was at Prague, in the which time
he ceased not to write again unto the land officers, and to harp upon the
same string that he had done before, withal showing them of the poverty and
great necessity of his soldiers, growing by the dearth that was in that
country, all overrun and ruinated by the former wars, praying and hardly
pressing them to have a regard unto so many brave men, that deserved rather to
die in battle for the Kings service, then so miserably to perish for want of
food. But they were so far off from having any regard unto his propositions,
that to the contrary they sent money, to all the rest of the Army, without
sending him one penny thereof, a most great inequality, and which moved him
extremely. And to the purpose, I forgot one important thing, which is to give
light unto all this matter, but I will set it on work, and place it here. The
custom of the war is such, that when an Officer dies, he that is next in
degree after him that is dead, succeeds in his place. Now the late Monsieur
de fels, in his life time being Marshall of the Bohemian Army, having been
slain in a skirmish given by the enemy a little above Egenburg, the Lord
General of the Artillery, pretended that the same place, escheated unto him,
by order of war; and therefore wrote unto his Majesty, to the land Officers,
and to the Prince of Anholt, his General, for the same; which was granted unto
him, according to his request, and so being Marshall of the Army, he began to
execute that Office in the Kings Camp at Egenburg, where all the Army was
lodged, and continued two or three weeks without any contradiction. In the
mean time, one day the General having done him that honor to come to visit
him in his lodging, told him, that in truth he had been made Marshall of the
Bohemian Army, but that touching the office of the Marshall of the Army
Royal, that was reserved for the Earl of Hohenloe. Whereupon complaining of
that wrong, he maintained that the same Office had been absolutely conferred
unto him, without any other condition, but only that he should resign that of
the General of the Artillery: and that if he had been told so much at the
first, he would never have accepted thereof, but would rather take his Office
of General of the Artillery again. But the Prince of Anholt replying, that
then it was too late, because the same was conferred to another: he spoke no
more thereof at that time, only to conclude, he desired the Prince of Anholt,
to give him leave to depart, that he might withdraw himself elsewhere: his
coffeehouse was great, but that which grieved him most, was, that it seemed
unto him, that men made more difficulty to grant him his conge to be gone,
then to cross him, and that they sought to give him so many discontentments,
that in the end, he should go away with some disgrace, by that means to give
the greater show unto other men's actions. Certain days after the Prince of
Anholt coming again, into his lodging to visit him, he sought to persuade
him, to content himself with that Office, with the limitation aforesaid, and
to suffer the Earl of Hohenlo, to execute the office of Marshall General, of
the Army Royal; which he wholly refused, saying, that if he were but Marshall
of the Bohemian Army, he would go thither, and being there, would obey the
Earl of Hohenloe; but as Lieutenant General, and for that there were a great
number of brave Lords, in the Army to command, there was no need to take any
great care for him, once again beseeching the Prince of Anholt, to do him
that favor, to grant him leave to depart. Which he gave him. Discord and
misconstring or mistaking of matters among domestical servants in a particular
house, are to be desired for the good and profit that arises thereby, unto
those whom they serve. But dissentions between the servants of Kings and
Princes, that have the managing of affairs, cannot but be prejudicial and
hurtful unto their Masters, whatsoever Matchiauell and others like him say, or
discourse thereof. The Lord Marshall being already wearied with the cold
answers, and long delays of the land officers, and grieved at the unjust
inequality which they used in the distribution of their moneys, wrote also unto
them to have leave to depart. In the mean time there was an occasion offered,
that seemed to be favorable unto him, which was that news came that Don
Balthazar, being only Commander in Bohemiah, and having none other there to
cross him, was determined to issue out into the field, and to besiege Vodnian,
whereupon the Prince of Anholt determined to send some aid thither, and
committed the charge thereof unto the Lord Marshall, who as then took certain
troops of horsemen out of the Army to go with him. But before I leave the
affairs of Austria, I must touch one point more (which I had almost
forgotten,) among the rest of those that increased the Lord Marshals
coffeehouse: our Army was lodged (as I said before) about Egenburg, and the
enemies toward the river of Danubia, within three miles of Germany; on which
side the Prince of Anholt determined suddenly to assail it. The exploit was
well and wisely undertaken, and dexteriously persued, upon the tenth of June
about 3. or 4. of the clock in the evening, and to that end our Army
consisting of 18. or 20. thousand men, departed from the said town of
Egenburg: and the next day early in the morning, got to Heiterswrf, where the
first quarter of the enemies Army lay, without being once discovered, or
meeting with any sentinels. Nevertheless it stayed there, without going any
further (I know not the reason why) and from thence returned back again,
without performing any thing. Those that then were there may if it please them
remember, that the Lord Marshalls soldiers, thought then to have set forth, to
give the first onset upon the Hungarians, and others that lay in that quarter,
as also what was further done at that time. This being spoken to no other end,
but only to refresh the memory of those, that then were present there, and know
what I intend to speak, it being most certain, that if the onset had been
given, they had driven the enemy from thence, and gotten a great advantage
upon them. Now let us proceed.

The Lord Marshall having received that commission, (as I said before) made
preparation to leave the Army, fully assuring himself that he had already
found an occasion, by some notable action to make envy it self blush for
shame. It seemed that fortune would favor him, and that from thenceforth he
should sail in the seas of her good favor. Yet it was but a vain hope. The
Remora cleaning fast to the keele of our ship, stayed our course. The
misfortune of our Realm was such, that all was forced to go backward: and the
most clear sighted well perceived that hatred in the court, and envy in the
Army, would cause contrary winds to blow upon him. He set sail in Inn; took
his course through upper Austria, past along by Wittignaw, caused his soldiers
to show themselves before the gates of Crumaw, and Budweis: to break down the
mils about them, and to do many other exploits: after that he came to Tabor;
from thence he went to besiege the Castle of Thein, which he battered, and
after thirty Voles of Cannon shot given against it, won it by composition, and
by that means, freed the passage for the Kings Majesty from Prachadiz to
Prague. Long before he had a design to do something against Crumaw, where he
had intelligences and diverse inventions to become Master thereof: and made
account to win it within few days, if he once went to besiege it. But two
things withheld him from it, that is great want of money and men. He himself,
his Captains and soldiers being so extremely needy, that they could not be
more. He was brought to such an exigent, that to buy victuals he was forced at
times to borrow 30. or 40. Florins. To write to Prague for it, it was labor in
vain, he knew their humors too well with whom he had to deal: It was as if
he should beat the air, and lose his time, to seek to do any thing by
letters. Therefore being pressed by necessity, and the great instance that his
officers made unto him, he was constrained to interrupt the course of his
victory, and personally to go unto Prague, there to find the means, to
minister some comfort unto his Army, and to that end went thither, with an
intent to stay there but 3. or 4. days, and then to return again, to pursue
his design. But there it fell out with him, according to the manner of that
court, that is, that in stead of four, he stayed fourteen days.

In the mean time, there happened a little tragedy, which I will set down
here, because in many places it has been diversely discoursed of, and
specially concerns the honor of the said Lord Marshall. I will tell it truly
as it was. I said before, that the States of nether Austria, had entertained
one of the Lord Marshals regiments of soldiers into their pay. This regiment
had happy and unfortunate success, as the course of the war fell out. At
Langenloyd the enemy coming from Crembs, to set upon him that commanded the
same in the absence of the Lord Marshall de fels, that was not far from it
with the Bohemian Army ready to assist it. But the enemy charging them with a
great number of horsemen, enclosed them on all sides, and put them to flight,
even in the face of the said Lord Marshall de fels, not without great suspicion
of some secret conniuence. And here it is to be noted, that the said Lord
Marshall, bare a deadly hatred unto the Earl of Mansfields soldiers. After
that again it had another misfortune at Garst, whereby being some was
diminished, and the states of Austria, wanting money, they resolved to
discharge it, (as they did) but in the absence of the Lord Marshall, who took
that their proceeding in evil part, because they had promised, to send the
said regiment again to him into Bohemiah, to serve him there where he should
have occasion to employ it. The said soldiers went directly unto Prague, there
to ask for their pay; where he dealt in such manner with the first that came
thither, that they were content, giving to some three, to others four, and to
some five months pay, to stay for a month or two for the rest. After that
came others, and among them, some seditious persons, that would not content
themselves with the former order, but would be paid forthwith. The Lord
Marshall showed them what necessity and want of money he had: and that he had
not as yet received any thing of the States of Austria. But all that
notwithstanding, they would not be satisfied, and were most importunate with
him, specially after dinner, when the spirit of wine had heated their brains.
To conclude they resolved to have money, howsoever they came by it, and that
they would not leave the Lord Marshals lodging before they had it. And to that
end at the least fifty of them in number assembled there together, who
resolutely determined to stay in his drawing chamber, until such time as he
came forth to supper, and not to leave him till they were all paid. In the
mean time the Lord Marshall diverse times caused them to be spoken withal, and
made offer unto them of several conditions, as also to show them the
impossibility that he had to pay them all at one time: for that (as it is said
before) he had received no money from the states of Austria. But all reasons
and arguments notwithstanding, they would have their full and entire payment:
saying that otherwise they would not depart from thence. Supper time drawing
on, Two of the Lord Marshals Captains coming out of the chamber, thought with
good speeches to have dispatched those rascals from thence, and accommodating
themselves to necessity, make them leave the place that evening, but it would
not be: for in steed of yielding, they became more obstinate, and in stead of
good answers they used threatenings, and so from words they fell to blows. The
Lord Marshall hearing that noise, came forth with some Captains and his
household servants, that were about him, and set fiereely upon them. Wherewith
they being somewhat abashed at his presence, though they were the greater
number, began to give back and at last to run away, where many of them were
hurt, and one amongst the rest deadly wounded. This was the first act. A little
while after, again all the Captains and officers, that then were there,
thinking to go home unto their lodgings, and going along the streets, were
set upon and assailed by those seditious fellows, and driven back again to
the Lord Marshals house. This was the second act. The Captains perceiving what
danger they were in, sent for their Pistols, and making themselves stronger, by
more officers that joined with them, resolved to retire in despite of those
mutinous companions. In the mean time, it fell out that one of those which
held not with the seditious company, seeking to go forward, was by them laid
hold on, and hardly used amongst them. The Captains seeing that, stepped forward
to aid him, and charged them hotly, they for their parts likewise defending
themselves. Whereby on both sides they fell at blows. Nevertheless the
seditious soldiers retired, the better to rank and fortify themselves. The
Lord Marshall in the mean time looking out of his window, and beholding the
insolency of those mutinous fellows, went down, and mounting upon his horse,
accompanied with his household servants, joined with the Captains, with whom he
persued them, and laid some of them dead upon the ground. At last the Kings
Majesty hearing of the quarrel, sent his guard to aid the Lord Marshall, and
the Burgers made profer to assist him. But fear having already seized upon the
hearts of the seditious soldiers, there was nothing else done at that time.
This was the last act of that Tragedy, which I have particularly rehearsed,
for the reason aforesaid. The 14. days being past, about the middle of June,
he went from Prague, having first gotten some money, to comfort his soldiers,
with promise shortly after to be better supplied both with men and money. And
being at Thein wrote again unto the land Officers, and plainly made them
acquainted with the necessity that he had of more forces, to execute his
design. But never the less, to lose no time, expecting greater forces, he
went to take the fort of Walleren, after that the better to bridle other
Garrisons that were near thereunto, and so to prepare the way to besiege
Crumaw. Before his departure, the Earl de la Tour sent from the Prince of
Anholt, came into his Army, and being come to Prachadiz, the Lord Marshall
received letters out of higher Austria, whereby they were entreated to go
thither, in respect of the danger that they feared, least the Duke of Bauaria
would enter into that country. He showed the letters unto the Earl de la
Tour, and advised his Majesty thereof. To those of Austria he made answer,
that being so weak of forces as he was, he could not aid them, but that daily
he expected more forces, and that then he would most willingly come unto them;
and therewith marched forward to the fort of Walleren, to besiege it, as
aforesaid. That fort is seated upon a little hill, just upon the coming out of
the great wood, which is between Bohemia and Passaw, at the river of Moldauia
running at the foot thereof; at the top of the said fort, there was a small
sconse about 60. paces long, furnished with two rauelins, square at both
corners, which flanked the curtains of the fort, all furnished with good
ditches and pallizadoes, besides the trenches that were within it. In the fort
there was about 400. men. The Lord Marshall placed his Army about it, and not
long after in the marshie woods, by diligent search, he found out a passage to
get near unto the fort on the bank side, and that evening he sent one of his
Captains with 500 musketeers, to seek to pass through it, and to lie in the
wood behind the fort. The next morning the Cannon was planted, and two pieces
and a murderer, were set on work, to hinder those that were within the fort,
from fortifying the same. About ten of the clock, the Captain got near unto
the fort, and both parts saluting each other with a storm of musket bullets,
they that were below in the half moon, perceiving themselves to be assailed
behind, were in great fear, and running away, saved themselves in the fort;
our soldiers pursued them hotly, and that with such diligence, that presently
they got into the fort, and all the enemies were enclosed in the small sconce,
well entrenched (as I said before) and in an instant all our musketeeres got so
near unto them, that they might join together at push of pike. And in the
meanetime, while the musketeers on both sides, played one against the other, the
Lord Marshall caused a mine to be made, which the next day was blown up with
indifferent good effect, but that notwithstanding, the breach was not great
enough, in such manner, that the next day another was begun to be made, and to
conclude they within were kept at such a bay with Muskets, Cannon shot, and
assaults, that the effects thereof, joining with the apprehension which they
had conceived of another mine, the second day they made composition, and the
third day issued out of the fort, which according to the opinion of Don
Balthazar de Marades, Serieant Mayor, General of the Emperors horsemen, would
have been strong enough to have held our Army before it all that summer. The
taking of this fort procured great joy to them in Prague; but it continued not
long: for in the mean time while we were busied to pull out that thorn, the
Duke of Bauaria, pricked us with another, (having seized upon upper Austria)
which without comparison procured more grief unto us, then ever the other did.
The Lord Marshall advised his Majesty touching the same, giving him counsel
what to do in such occurrents: which because it is of great importance, I will
here particularly set down the contents of his letter.

SIR, yesterday I wrote unto your Majesty to certify you of the heavy news
that is in upper Austria. And for that it does not only continue for certain,
but as it is to be feared, that the Duke of Bauaria will approach unto this
country, to enter therein; I thought it convenient to give your Majesty this
further advise, and therewith to show you what I think requisite to be done in
these occurrents. First, I think it convenient, and most necessary, to
provide for the defense of the country, whereunto we are not sufficient, when
the two Regiments of the Duke de Weinmar, and that of Colonel Gray are come
hither. And therefore it is requisite, that your Majesty should hold Colonel
Grayes regiment there about Prague, for your guard, and for other occasions,
which shall fall out; and also to fortify and keep strongly these four
places, Pilsen, Piseck, Tabor, and Wittignaw; to the which end, it is
requisite, to put my Regiment into Pilsen, because some of my men are therein
already; into Piseck the Duke de Weinmars regiment, with 100. horsemen, and
100. Hungarians; into Tabor, Colonel Francks regiment, with as many horsemen
and Hungarians; and into Wittignaw, Colonel Seitans Regiment, with 50 horsemen,
and 100. Hungarians: and all these to run on that side whither the enemies
shall bend their forces, to take breath, and thereby to stop them (if it be
possible) from victuals. The rest of my horsemen, and of the Hungarians, must
retire toward Pilsen, or to some other part, where occasion shall serve; by
that means, at times, suddenly to do some enterprise, to indamage the enemy.
All these troops being thus divided, it is requisite, that as soon as they
are entered into the said places, they must begin earnestly to labor about the
fortifications of the same; wherein your Majesty must spare nothing, and make
as great haste therein as possibly you can, because it is to be feared, that we
shall be surprised sooner then we think for, and that afterward it will be too
late to remedy the same. For the enemy being strong of horsemen, (as in truth
he is) we may easily be environed by him, before we could avoid it. And our
forces being in that manner overthrown, and having no other places that are
strong and well garrisond; your Majesty may well judge, what danger and loss
may thereby ensue, and whether we may not apprehend the same mischief to fall
upon us, that is happened to those of Austria; specially, considering the mutable
humor of this people, who upon this occasion doing something to the prejudice
of your Majesty, without doubt, to excuse themselves, will after seek to
cover it with the cloak of necessity. But these four places being fortified
in this manner, that storm may be stayed at the brinke, while the Prince of
Anholt comes out of Austria, to aid those that are in extremity. And by this
means we may withstand the enemies forces this year, and in the mean time
your Majesty may have leisure to think upon the means how to repulse them
altogether, better, then you can do now. For the rest, touching other smaller
places, there must be garrisons put into them, to trouble the enemy, and set
him on work, and so to win time. I beseech your Majesty, to take a speedy
resolution herein. For, first to write unto the Army, time will pass away.
And to the contrary, If the Prince of Anholt should not like well of this
advice, there will be time enough to alter it, and to join again. May it
please your Majesty not to think ill of my boldness in aduising you in this
matter, danger and necessity joining with the desire, that I have for the
advancement of your service, have constrained me thereunto, and forced me to
cast all other considerations under foot: as also that neither my self, nor
those that are about me, can see any appearance at all, that with so small
forces, we may win any honor against so puissant an enemy. Therefore
expecting your Majesty's resolution, always unto the last gasp of breath, I
remain your Majesty's

Most humble, most faithful, and most obedient servant, Ernestus Earl of
Mansfield.
From Protowin the 1. of August 1620.
This advice was not followed, but to the contrary it was thought convenient,
to make a Campo formato. Our Army then retired from Protwin, to Thein, and
from thence to Pechin, where we continued all the month of August, increased by
the regiments of the Duke de Saxon Weymars, and of Colonel Grayes, a Scot, and
yet effected nothing, as being not strong enough to withstand so puissant an
enemy. During this unprofitable staying, the coffeehouse of our soldiers,
but specially that of my Lord Marshall, increased more and more: because, that
besides the affront that he had received in Austria, and so many vain promises
that had been made unto him, by the land officers, he had also been
frustrated of means to effect his designs, without being able to do any good
for the Crown of Bohemia in time to come. In the end distasting these things,
and still laden with envy, he determined to withdraw himself from thence. To
that end he wrote unto the King, and to the States, who made him a gracious
answer, exhorting him to continue their friend, and not to abandon them in so
troublesome a time. Whereupon he sent a man expressly again unto the King, to
let him more particularly understand his intent. And in that persute diverse
messages were sent and returned, and in the end it was concluded and decreed,
that the States should in short time cause him to have two months pay for his
soldiers, and that generally his soldiers should be used and dealt withal,
in the same manner that those of the great Army were: that in respect of the
five companies of horsemen that he entertained and paid out of his own purse,
seeing that the Earl de la Tour had discharged him of two of them, that the
land officers would take order, at the next meeting of the States, that he
should also be discharged of the three others; that he should execute his
office of Lord Marshall in the same manner that the Marshall de Fels did, and
that he should not expect any order nor commandment from any other then from
the Lord General, and from such as it appertained unto. Whereupon the Lord
Marshall resolved to continue in his Majesty's service, until the end of the
month of October, and so things rested for that time. In the mean time, this
imposture and scandal was thereby raised, that the Lord Marshall would turn
his coat (as it is commonly said) and serve the Emperor. A most gross
conclusion, and such as deserved to be punished in Schools, to say, he will be
gone and retire himself out of the country, ergo, he will join with the
enemy, and serve the Emperor. But howsoever the bruit thereof having been
once spread abroad in the City of Prague, it afterward ran throughout all
the Realm, and further, specially when it had encountered with impudence, that
met it in the way; and some accidents sympathizing the same. In such manner,
that in consideration of the force which from time to time it recovered, by
support of so many fautors, it was apparent that in the end it would take root
in his Majesty's own chamber. But it was so far from that, that that wise
King would not once give it any place nor entertainment into the cabinet of his
conceit, but to the contrary did encourage and exhort the Lord Marshall, not to
respect such evil reports, assuring him of his Royal favor, etc. While we
were (as I said) about Berkin, the Lord General thought it expedient to send
our Army from thence, to go to Newhats, lest that the Duke of Bavaria (that
was not far from thence) should suddenly surprise it. And when we came
thither, there we stayed eight or ten days. But his Majesty and the land
officers having a great apprehension of the neerenesse of so many troops, that
yet were in Bava^ia, and that the said Duke would do some enterprise upon
Pilsen, he commanded the Lord Marshall to march with all his forces (as he did)
to divert, and assure the frontiers of Bohemia, against the Duke of Bavaria.
And being on the way, he had another charge from the land officers, who (as he
had already past by Tabor) made him make haste, with assurance that his
Majesty had proclaimed the Ban, and that all the country was up in arms, as
also that a great number of horse and foot men were commanded to join with
him, by Glats and Taux, which they believed he should find there when he came
thither. The custom of Bohemia is, that when the King goes forth in person to
the war, the Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen are bound to mount on horseback,
and to follow him; and those that are called Gentlemen in that country, are at
the least 60000 persons, besides the Nobility, which are nothing so great a
number. Now considering these great forces, and the Kings resolution to go
personally into the field, the appearance was great, that they would do some
notable enterprise. These great composed bodies, have their success and
courses as well as men, and are subject to the same alterations and changes. To
behold the countenances of those personages, it seemed that they were already
rowsde out of a profound slumber, specially having such an alarm, as the Earl
of Bucquoy made them with so puissant an Army coming near unto them. We
believed that being assisted and aided by so great forces, we should do
miracles. We did then already imagine nothing else, but an end of the war.
But parturiunt montes; we shall see that these great mountains of promises,
will bring forth nothing but a mouse. In the mean time, the Lord Marshall
under that hope caused his Army to march forward, toward Glats, and from
thence about Taux, to discover the enemies intent, and to govern himself
thereafter. As he marched on the way, and after he arrived there, he caused
that aid aforesaid to be sought for, and nine miles all about on this side to
look where those soldiers might be, but by no means could hear any news of
them: they had quartered themselves in Eutopia, therefore it is no more
speaking of them. Thereupon the Lord Marshall made complaint unto the land
officers, who for an excuse made answer, that they had received a countermaund,
and were sent to Piseck, Vodnian, and the places thereabouts, to secure them
against Don Balthasars forces. Whether that were true or no, we cannot tell,
but it is certain, that the enemy soon after wanne all those places, as if
no forces had been in them. Briefly, the Lord Marshall seeing himself
destitute of succors, and that the enemy followed close upon him: fearing
lest they should take the way of Pilsen before him, resolved to retire, and
lodge there, as indeed he did. And thus ended the month of September. He being
received, found there such wants and defaults, as nothing more: the
fortifications very little furthered, want of laborers, of timber for the
Pallisadoes, and of money to supply all: he once again took pen in hand to
write to the land officers, showing them of all these wants, and the danger
they were likely to be in, if all were not supplied in time: But especially he
requested they would send him in some munition, that he might be competently
provided to hold out a siege, and money to satisfy the officer and soldier:
for otherwise it might be feared, the discontent already they were in, might
burst out into a mutiny, to the great prejudice of the place and cause. Of
these letters he had a fair answer, but to no effect, according to their
custom. In the mean time, the Lord Marshall, who well foresaw, that the
enemy (who had advanced himself daily with a puissant Army, forcing all the
places where ere he came) would not be slack to come and visit him, did not
sleep for his part; but made the Boores as many as he could get, to work in
the fortifications; and caused good store of timber to be brought in, for the
Pallisadoes, and of corn and meal, all that he could puruey. Briefly; he did
all that the time and necessity required, to fortify himself against the
enemy, who was violently coming upon him. Neither was the enemy all this
while idle, but grew stronger daily, by maine force making himself master of
whatsoever might any way oppose him. Then also Vodnian, Prachaditz, Winterberg,
and Pisek, were won with great effusion of blood: Schuttenhofen yielded
without stroke striking. The like had befallen to Taux and Glatta, had not the
Lord Marshall strengthened them with new supplies, which he had sent in thither
to lie in garrison, so that the enemy found more to doethere, then at the
other places. Within Taux there were two or three troops of horse, and some
few foot, all commanded by the Rittmeister, Claudius Linstaw. He is master of
all the Cavaile^^e.
Don Balthazar came hither to asseige it, with a great power of foot and horse,
and with 7. pieces of Cannon began to batter it, first on one side, and then on
the other; they within the Town in the mean time made it good with all their
best endeavors. But the Town being hard laid at on all sides, and not well
provided of munition, and especially wanting powder; after a few days
resistance, by the advice of the said Lord Marshall, gave it up upon
composition. Into Glatta, the Lord Marshall had sent 200 musketeers, with
certain companies of landfolke that were there, under the command of Sir
Thomas Ferenz; who was charged by the Lord Marshall, not to tire out himself,
in regard the place could not be long kept; but to quit it, before he was
driven to extremities, lest they should lose themselves to no purpose. From
Taux, Don Balthazar went to besiege Glatta, batterd it, and took it in by
composition.

His Highness arrived with his Army at Crassitz, five leagues from Prague,
and wrote to the Lord Marshall the 3. of October, that he should come from
Pilsen with such forces as he could draw out, (leaving a sufficient garrison in
it) to join with his Army. The day after he sent him again the same command.
The Lord Marshall doubting his Highness was not thoroughly enough informd of
the estate of the garrison of Pilsen, sent Captain Roy, Quartermaster
general, to show him the necessity the place had to keep still all the
forces then within it, if they meant still to hold it: offering notwithstanding
unto his Highness, that if he would appoint him the express number of men and
cannon, which he would have sent, without leaving it to his discretion, he was
ready to obey him. The 10. of October behold General Bucquoy and the Duke of
Bauaria, with their whole Army, began to show themselves before Pilsen, and
very near the Town. The outworkes were not yet in case to be defended, nor
were there forces enough to man them; besides all other discommodities which
use to fall out, where money is wanting. So as if at the instant, the enemy
with those great forces he drew after him, had attempted the place, he had
certainly either carried it, or at the least driven it to strange extremities.
The Lord Marshall the more leisure he perceived they let him have, the more
diligence he used. He caused all his soldiers to work by course day and night
in the fortifications; he enquired, and borrowed money of his Captains,
wheresoever he could find it, to give the soldier some content; and did so
well and fairly, that within few days, the works were defenseable.

All things going thus on, the King with his Army was arrived at Rokezan, some
two leagues from Pilsen, in the way toward Prague. The Count Bucquoy, a wise
and old Captain, seeing the resolution of the Lord Marshall; and that to force
the place, would both lose time, and many a brave man; cast how to get it by
policy;

Dolus an virtus quis in host requirat? and plotted how to make way into
Pilson, by sending in thither K. Philip of Macedons mule: he had intelligence
from thence, of the ill managing of business, amongst some principal
personages of that party; and of the discontent given to the Lord Marshall:
and well knew, there is nothing that can put a noble spirit sooner from his
posture then envy. Caesar was ambitious, but for that, he had never turned the
point of his sword against his native country, if envy had not overcome him.
And Charles of Burbon had never taken a resolution so contrary to his Countries
good, had he not met with this passion, the most violent of all others, and
which only ouerbeares the greatest courages. He studies therefore how to gain
him that was most potent in that place: and whosoever had voices in this
counsel, held it so easy to be brought about, that they no way doubted of
the issue; yea they were so confident, that a rumor was spread throughout the
Army, as of a thing already done and effected. Now, notwithstanding that the
bare event might testify Ger-contrary, yet for that it is published throughout
all the many, and that there is no biting of calumny, which leaves not behind
it some scarre, to the blemish of his honor, that has once been called in
question, if presently it be not washed off with the pure substance of the
truth; I would not let to set down for the Reader so much as should be
necessary, by the true narration of that which passed about this matter.

Ioachim de Carpzo, Lieutenant Colonel of one of the Regiments of my Lord
Marshall, was yet prisoner with the enemy, ever since the last summer, when he
was taken at Glax in Austria. Him they made choice of to be an instrument of
their design to persuade the Lord Marshall to leave the place to the Emperor,
in consideration of the reward promised him, which was great, as it is commonly
in such a case: in a word, mountains of gold. He, desirous to part from them
to procure his ransom, agrees the willinger to take such a commission upon
him. But as the common proverb says, A thin lining agrees not with a thin
outside. If the Count Bucquoy be honest, the Count Mansfield is just: if the
one be quick of sight, the other is swift of foot. He was not so foolish, nor
so ill a merchant, to make so bad a bargain, and to sell his honor being
inestimable, for a thing that perishes, to loose in one hour, what he had
been so long in getting, with such labors and danger of his life: He had too
staid a judgment, and a spirit better lodged, then to play such a Clerks
trick. The Count Bucquoy thought he had known him; but knew him not. This
messenger then being arrived, and doing what he had in commission, the Lord
Marshall sent him presently to his Highness the Prince of Anhalt, who caused
him to be examined by three persons, set on to sound the depth of this plot.
The Lord Marshall for his part made this occasion of worth, to do his Master
service, by whose consent he gave care to the Count Bucquoy, that he might in
the while gain time, and to make his out-workes defenceable, offers to treat
with him, but upon this condition, that first of all he should see right done
to the Rittmeister, Linstau, whose troops being gone from Heiden, in favor of
the capitulation of Taux, were spoiled by the soldiers of the said Count
Bucquoy, who now the more to further this treaty, endeavored by all means to
give satisfaction to the said Captain Linstau. Diverse ran up and down about
this satisfaction: but so much time was employed about the accessarie, that
they had no leisure to come to the principal. While these things were on foot,
the Prince of Anholt sent for Colonel Pobliz to come to Pilsen, under pretext
to view the fortifications; but his meaning was, as a man may easily discern,
to get a more exact insight into this negotiation: who being returned, and
having made report of his commission to his Majesty, his Highness wrote to
the Lord Marshall, in these terms.

My Lord: the Lord Pobliz has well satisfied the King, who you may assure your
self reposes great confidence in you, and holds you in his good grace, etc.
From Rockelzan the 18. of October 1620.

The next day, he wrote to him again, and amongst other passages, one clause
to this effect:

Furthermore I am advertised, when the enemy shall understand that the treaty
of Pilsen takes no effect, he will make his approach to the place, and entrench
himself about it.

This is to show that the Lord Marshall did nothing in a thing of such
consequence, without the advice and consent of his Majesty, and his General.
The same day of the said month about 9. of the clock at night, he wrote
another, which I will adioyne, to the same end:

My Lord: although I am of the same opinion with you, to gain time; yet so it
is, that his Majesty after he had deliberately considered, that of all that
can happen, this is the most expedient; that you break off the action: and
when it be performed, that you will be pleased to send it; leaving to your
discretion and will the disposing of the two Companies, whereof you wrote unto
me, etc.

This is for substance the true discourse of this treaty, that has cast such
mists over the ignorant, and given such hopes to the enemy. In this time were
presented some fair occasions to the enemy to do us hurt, because of our
want of horse, which were all at Rokelzan in the Camp, whither the Lord
Marshall was gone to find the King, to kiss his hand, and to take leave of
his Majesty: following the Articles of Bechin, as it came to pass. The Count
Bucquoy perceiving at length that golden nets would not take this Lion; and
that it was more necessary to use his iron and steel, resolved to try his
force: for which purpose he caused great store of faggots to be made, entending
without question to give a general assault. But changing his mind, he rose
with his whole Army the twenty one of the said month, to pass the water
above Pilsen, and draw toward Sozergrais, and so toward Prague. When he had
passed the water, his reareward was lodged half an hours march from Pilsen.
The next day the Count Hollach came with all the Kings horse as well Germans as
Hungarians, and with 3000. musketeers, within one hours march of Pilsen: where
the Lord Marshall meeting with him, amongst other discourses, propounded to him
a means how to cut off the Rear of the enemy: That is, if he would please to
advance his troops, himself would join with him, with the best that he had
in Pilsen, and charging thus jointly the enemy, who had also some
disaduantages, they should certainly beat the Reareward, or at least greatly
distress them. But the Count thought it the better way to turn back, and
take the passage, to cut off the enemies way to Prague.

His Highness being possessed for that purpose of Raconiz, the two Armies
houered some time thereabouts with various success, according to the course of
the wars. At the last, coming so near, that it was thought the Count
Bucquoy would hazard a battle; his Highness advised the Lord Marshall and
invited him to come and attend his pleasure, who thanked him heartily, and
assured him, that as this was an occasion he had always sought, so would he
not now slack to put himself forward with all readiness: for that he should
now be assured, there to be entertained in the quality of a Marshall of the
field, to command according to his charge; desiring his Highness that he
would send him word with all speed, and to rest assured that in such a cause he
would fail him in nothing. Therefore to lose no more time, and withal to know
the short and the long, presently after this letter he dispatched Sir Thomas
Ferenz, with charge to solicit his Highness in his behalf, and to draw him
to a speedy resolution. The said Lieutenant Ferenz went thence post; but
because he could not have audience of his Highness all the while he was in
Racoviz, he was constrained to follow him to Prague; where the overthrow of
the Army decided the question, before the said Ferenz could speak with his
Highness, and bring back an answer.

Upon new business (as we say) we must take new consultations. The Lord
Marshall, having before taken his leave of his Majesty, as was said, minded
nothing but his retreat: but this new accident having quite altered all other
things, changed also his resolution, finding himself alone in Bohemia (after
the other Chiefes had withdrawn themselves) and engaged in honor to keep
Pilsen; he cast his eyes round about him, to see if there were any likelihood
of succors from any part. His Highness some days after the battle wrote to
him, assuring him that shortly he would send him new directions: these he
expected with great devotion, still hoping, they would lead him out of these
troubles: but having long waited, and hearing no news from his Highness, who
after that time never wrote him so much as one word, he found himself by so
much the more perplexed. The stopping up of the passage of Germany, from
whence he only hoped to be relieved, doubled all these difficulties, which of
themselves were exceeding great already. For being thus environed on all sides
with enemies, and having small store of munition, and being bare of money, his
soldiers ill paid, discontented, and which is worse, without any hope of
succors, every man may imagine in what estate he was. To be set to the helm
when the wind is good, is but a pleasure, a simple Pilot may then steer the
course: but when the winds are contrary, and the seas high-wrought, and danger
still thrusting upon them, then is the sufficiency of a Master required.

The Imperialists being seized of the Town of Prague; re-establisht (by way of
discharge) the States in their ancient freedoms; and caused them to write to
the Lord Marshall, and to his Captains, and soldiers of the garrison of
Pilsen, to this purpose: That they would be contented with a sum of money
which they should presently receive in hand, with assurance of the rest
hereafter; and for this to render up Pilsen, and other places unto his
Imperial Majesty. Furthermore, that seeing the King was now retired out of
Bohemia, it was in the power of the said States to discharge the said Lord
Marshall, seeing that they had entertained him of themselves into their
service, and it was to them that he had taken his oath. These conditions were
taken into consideration, and to say truth, so it was, that they seeing no
other means to get their pay, suffered themselves to be staggerd with this
offer. But the most part (especially the Lord Marshall) knowing that these were
not the same States that had entertained them into their service; for these
were of the religion, but those, Catholics, thought it not his best not to
hearken to them. The Lord Marshall brought into these streights, wrote to his
Majesty and his Highness, and to all those that might be any way interessed
in the keeping of that place, made truce with the enemy, entered a treaty with
them, and to that end sent Hieronimo de la Porta his Treasurer to Prague. In
the mean time, to ease himself, and to discharge Pilsen of part of the
garrison, he billeted some foot and horse in Heiden, a little Town, where
there is a reasonable good castle. Thus there passed 5 or 6 weeks, without
hearing any news either from his Majesty or his Highness. In the end,
weighing the profit that would redound to the public cause by staying within
Pilsen, with that which might be made by withdrawing into some other place; he
resolved upon a departure, to see if he might either relieve some way the
ruinated estate of the present affairs, or else preserve it from an utter
fall; he went from Pilsen with the rest of his horse, about the middle of
December, leaving the command there to Colonel Frank, and went to take in
Tachaw, then without a garrison, and there to lodge his Cavallerie, as well to
be assured of the passage from thence into the Palatinate; as also to enlarge
himself, and pass over the rest of the winter, so much the more comodiously.
He wrote to Sir de Thilly Lieutenant General to the Duke of Bauaria, and other
Chiefes of the contrary party in Bohemia; to assure them, that this was not
with any intention to break the truce, but the better to accommodate his
Cauallerie, he wrote also to those of Equer, who wauered already, and inclined
to the Emperor, but understanding his pleasure, they returned to their
obedience and held firm afterward.

This being done he takes his way toward Norimberg, with an intention to go
to Wormbs, to see the Lords the Princes; but the time being too short for him,
and fearing to go to far from Pilsen: when he was once returned to
Norimberg, he dispatched one of his Captains, in post to Wormbs: from whence
being returned, and having brought nothing but hopes, the Lord Marshall after
he had sent an express messenger to his Majesty, to advertise him of what had
passed, he turned again toward Bohemia, and before he arrived there he had
notice given how all went.

The enemy prevailing in his absence, and believing perchance he was gone for
altogether, wrought secretly upon his Captains, thinking to corrupt them, or
at least to draw them to a special treaty, contrary to that which the Lord
Marshall had begun with Bucquoy at Prague. Don Martin de Huetta Governor of
Shuttenhofen, first attempted to draw some of them to a private conference, to
which he being not able to bring them, or they at least not at liberty to come
out to him, he wrote again to them all in general, and more openly: That upon
consideration of a sum of money they would yield up themselves and the place
to the Emperor. The Prince of Liechtenstein did second him with letters to the
same purpose. The foresaid Hieronymo de la porta overcome by the large promises
of the Imperialists, in stead of doing for his Master as he was obliged, did
for himself and the adverse party, and wrote also to the same purpose:
endeavoring beside to persuade them that the Lord Marshall was gone never to
return again. This letter coming from the hand of such an Officer, who had
so good reputation with them, and meeting with humors symbolizing somewhat
with his intentions; I leave it to you to judge, whether this did stagger them
or no.

Casta est quam nemo rogauit.
It Is the trial that makes the man known. This is not all. Don Martin goes
further, and mixing rigor with courtesy, the rather to provoke our Garrison,
he breaks the truce, and used brauing menaces and approaches, and so forced
them to break out into open hostility, and made pillage of all he could get,
going and coming to and from Pilsen, and in brief did all he could to
disturb the said Garrison. For all this the said Captains shrunk not for
this blow: but it is well seen, by that which themselves wrote to the Lord
Marshall what they would have done, if he had not opportunely come to them, and
kept up the business. See here the Tenor of their letter in their own words.

My Lord:
WE have received a letter from your Excellency, and understand the effects of
it; whereof we marvel much, that your Excellency will still delay the
return you promised us; seeing we have had a hard time of it till now. And for
this one thing of keeping of good orders; surely it is a thing impossible to do,
without money; as well in respect of the officers as soldiers. Our hopes were
to have received in present pay every Captain 1000. florins, according to your
Exc: promises. And for want of this, what shall we do? seeing the enemy has
sent out some troops of horse on every side of us, and have taken moreover
above 80 of our men; although we yet know not what will be the issue of this
truce. Behold, it is more then time for your Exc: to return home with all speed,
lest the counsel comes after the harm. The enemy threatens to keep us in so
strait, that we shall not safely fetch in our fuel; and if any misfortune
fall out against our wills, we desire to be held excused and blameless before
God and the world. On the other side (my Lord) we have here a letter from his
Royal Majesty of Bohemia directed to your Exc: but we are no ways desirous
to be put upon any service, till we be sure of our pay. Moreover, let it be
taken well or ill, we are desirous to know how the King will pay us our old
arrerages. For the third: though the King would give us one months pay, it will
not serve our turns, we cannot be contented with two. For the fourth:
Forasmuch as neither your Excellency, nor we the Captains, are favored by
the Prince of Anhalt, we will not be commanded by him; considering how he has
dealt with us both in Austria and here: and above all we entreat this; that if
your Excellency would not have too great disorder among the souldierie, let
your Excellency make all haste to come home so soon as possibly, according to
your High: promise at your departure. In thus doing, your Excellency shall
infinitely obligevs. No more at this present, but our prayers to God for the
prosperity of your Exc: etc. And shall ever remain,

My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble and affectionate servants,
Given at Pilsen, the 2 of Ianuar. 1621, stilo novo. Iohann von Pierriz.
Leonhard Syrach. Hartman Alexander von Kronniz. Wolff Sigmund Teuffel. Iohann
Grotte.

Postscript:
My Lord, this day news is brought that the enemy gives chase to our
convoyes, others they disarme, and more they take prisoners.

This letter was presently followed by another of the same tenor, but much
fuller of passion. Mean while, the Lord Marshall took horse to go toward
Tachaw, accompanied with Colonel Gray, and some part of his Scottish Regiment:
being there arrived, he wrote to the said Captains, as follows.

MY Masters: after you had done me the honor to bear Arms under me, upon so
fair occasions, and with such reputation, I was confident you would so well
have observed my actions past, that you would not now have come to this point
to question my sincerity; seeing that every way you had leisure to know me,
that I never sought but the good of every one of you: Yet must I needs with
great vnpleasingnesse take notice of the distrust you have of me, in a matter
of so great consequence as is now in hand: you lightlier give credit to those
who apparently seek your ruin under dangerous conditions; then to him, who
seeks nothing but to preserve that honor, which you have engaged. If I have
given my promise to return, I have kept my word: and see, I am coming, to do
the King service, and what shall be for your good, as I my self shall see
occasion, without receiving law from you, who ought to give it. I am now about
it, nay and have the means now in mine own hands, that shall content you, and
the whole Army: but it is by another kind of way, then to stand to their mercy,
who desire to entrap you. It is I say, a more honorable course. I had once
entered into a treaty with the enemy, that we might have got our pay that way,
if we could not an other, and have drawn our companies out from thence, where
we wanted succor: but seeing there is yet another way to come by it, and that
we have the means to get from thence, and that I otherwhere perceive the
enemy casts about how to ouer-reach us, I will no more of that treaty. And I
cannot believe, that you who are bound in duty to me, would prefer an
uncertain profit before your honor, that so loosely, and in so fair an
occasion you would forsake your Chief, from whom (God be praised) you never
received dishonor. You have in following that way wherein I set you, your pay
assured, your liberties and honors safe. Whereas in place of this, from the
other party you cannot expect your pay when you are once made slaves, and
bound hand and foot, so that you can have no hope of assurance. Add to this
the hazard, whereinto you shall run your reputations. Then if contrary to my
hopes, you have now trodden under foot the respect you owe me, and
notwithstanding my fatherly aduises, you be obstinate to render up Pilsen, why
you may do it: for my part, I will wash my hands, and protest from
henceforward, and hitherto, that if Pilsen be now given up, it is against my
will, my pleasure, and my commandment. It Is you that in this case must answer it
before God, the King, and all his brave soldiers, seeing that you being not as
yet forced of necessity, against all necessity, contrary to the will of the
Chief, you give over a place, which you before gained with so great glory and
reputation. As for the News from Morania and Silesia, with which they would
scarre you, I wonder that like men of Spirit and experience you mark not the
sleights of a Foe, and how easy it is to forge such subtle lies, to make use
of against Enemies. But if the worst happens, what is that to us? It Is our
Honor and our pay we must look after, which we are sure to have, if we follow
good Counsel. For we knowing the means (as I said) I am presently resolved
to fall upon the atchieuement, to which I inuit you also, That we may
hereafter perform some exploit, serviceable to the King and our own selves.
And to this effect I will draw, etc.

From Tachaw, January 16.



The same day he wrote to Colonel Frank as follows.
Sr. the further I go the less I know the resolutions of my Captains: I
thought they had taken a good course, and in the mean time I see them
balanced in uncertainties, as if they were new comers into the world:
trusting to those who endeavor nothing but to ensnare them, as they may well
perceive by the Letters of the Prince of Liechtensteim and Porta. If they
purpose to deliver up Pilsen without my consent, they may do it. But they
shall hazard their own Honors and not mine. I hope as men of Honor they will
have in chief esteem that which ought to be dearer then their very Life, and
that they will consider what may come hereafter; mean while one may see the
fruits of these comers and goers, and what may come of the free access that
is given to Enemies. And I much wonder that you gave addmittance into the
Town, to the Secretary or servant of Porta, and sent him not to me, seeing it
was my pleasure. Thus if my resolution, that Commanding in place of my
Sovereign, I entend to be obeyed, (as reason good) and to entreat you to have
a greater care hereafter, that our business may succeed better. As for going to
Pilsen, I entend it: but it shall be when I think good, and not at the
command of those whom I ought to Command, and who owe me far greater
respect then that, etc.

In brief, the Lord Marshall wrote so often, now to one, and then to another,
and followed them so close, that at last he gave them some assurance. In the
mean while, making his complaints to Count Bucquoy, and Sr. Do Tilly of some
wrongs done him; In that in going against the Truce, they secretly treated with
his Captains, violated his Safeguards, robbed, took and killed his Soldiers:
that the injuries (whereof he chiefly accused Don Martin de Huerta) were
insupportable: that he would make himself amends with the edge of his Sword,
if they as Commanders would not give him satisfaction.

Now considering with himself the quality of the place, the scarcity of money,
and the small Companies of Soldiers where with he was furnished, and that they
had no likelihood so to hold out long; He draws out 3. Companies of Foot
from Pilsen, which joined with the English they had brought with them out of
the Palatinate, and some Troops of Horse; He left Tachaw, and marched toward
Schakenwald, and Elenbogen, purposing to raise men and money, and fortify out
of hand those parts that held good for the King, whereof there were a good
number in those parts, as Sanzen Grais, and other places thereabouts. Arriving
at Ellenbogen, he put to his uttermost endeauours to make provision answerable
to his Enterprises. And it is not to be doubted, that had he been but a little
stronger then he was, and that the Imperialists had given him even but a little
time to Fortify himself, he would have strangely increased his Forces there,
in regard of the good affection of the people thereabouts to his party, and the
Wealth there yet left.

But the Imperialists seeing what was indeed to be feared, and that this fire
must be quenched in the beginning, slept not for their parts, but resolved to
go and set upon, and be Masters even of his person, and so at once to make
an end of the Wars. They drew out their Garrisons and marched directly
toward Heiden and Tachaw, which they took in at last by Composition, they
within being not able to hold out. After that, gathering together from all
quarters all they could, and growing daily stronger and stronger, they aduanct
toward Schakenwald to restore it to the Emperors obedience.

But before they arrived there, the Baron of Greot who commanded those
Troops, wrote to the L. Marshall at Ellenbogen, and vehemently persuaded him,
to bethink himself in time of his Estate, and to make choice, rather of a
good accord, then against such great Forces to weaken himself to no purpose.

The L. Marshall, who knew the benefit of all opportunities; to draw out
business to the full length, answered this Baron: That it was not he who had
broke this Truce, neither should it belong of him, if it were not continued.
And seeing, that he was well persuaded of the observation of it on their
parts, he would willingly harken to any proposition.

But the Baron excusing himself by his want of power, the L. Marshall sent one
of his Trumpets to Prague to Monsieur de Tilly, to obtain safe Conduct for
William Leininger his Auditor of the Camp, whom he had Deputed to attend the
said Sr. De Tilly, about the renewing of the Treaty. In the mean time the
Imperialists increased of all hands, taking in daily some place or other, for
that the L. Marshall could no ways hinder them. In the end, perceiving they
went about to inuest themselves of Ellenbogen, and that it was not a Town of
so great receipt, as to lodge his Foot, much less his Cauallery: and for that
it had been too gross an oversight in him, to suffer himself to be taken in
such a toil, he went thence the 7th. of February in the Evening; leaving 3.
Companies of Foot to guard the place; and withal his Cauallery retired into
the Upper Palatinate: having first given order that the English, and the rest
of the Infantery, (except one Company which stayed in Peska) should retire into
Falkenaw.

Being arrived in the Palatinate, he lodged there his Cauallery, having
purueyed himself of what necessaries he thought good. Thence he went to the
Diet of the Princes and States of the Union at Heilbrun, accompanied with his
ordinary attendance, with some hopes to draw some succors from them. But
having stayed there some time, he was forced to return without any thing,
besides bare hopes.

From thence he wrote to all those that were friends to the Cause; and laid
before them his necessities, and the need he had of succors, which he
afterward still pressed, and continued always with exceeding diligence; hoping
thereby to move some of them, whom the loss of that Kingdom might concern.

In the mean while, the Enemies preuayling by his absence, roued up and down
Bohemia at pleasure; but not being able to continue their Carreere by force of
Arms, by reason of the hardness of the Winter; they betook themselves once
again to their Subtilties, the bad affectioned people of our party, leading
them the way to it; Hieronimo de la Porta, yet resident in Prague in the name
of the Lord Marshall; who in stead of giving account to his Master of his
faithful Service, to which he was by Duty bound, persisted in his detestable
treasons: And as in the former absence of the L. Marshall, he had assayed to
supplant the fidelity of our Captains, by some secret Letters of his, so now
again, he indeauoured totally to overthrow it by his deuillish machinations,
Ambition and covetousness, having so bleard his eyes, that he knew neither his
Mr. nor that Duty wherein he was obliged unto him. And which is worse then all,
he went not alone, but there were others beside better practiced at it then he,
who proiected these mischievous practices.

The Colonel Frank, in stead of obeying the L. Marshals Commands, which
expressly forbad any suspected person, but especially of the Enemies, to come
within Pilsen, did all the quite contrary. All sorts of people of the adverse
party, had free access thither, Messingers, Soldiers, Officers, Captains,
yea and their Colonels too, who all went and came freely. He himself went to
visit Colonel Lindlaw in his Quarters, without leave of the L. Marshall. The
said Colonel Lindlaw coming also diverse times to Pilsen, was there feasted
and entertained by the said Colonel Frank, and the Captains of the Garrison
with as much familiarity as could be devised amongst friends of the same party.
The L. Marshall who never mistrusted the said Colonel Frank, (as indeed he
was not yet sented out of any) being now advertised what quarter he kept with
his Enemies, wrote to him, but kindly exhorting him to abstain hereafter from
such vagaries, as might bring all his Actions into suspicion.

As the L. Marshall was on his way toward Heilbrun, he received Letters from
his Matie. wherein was confirmed unto him the charge of Marshall general of
the field for the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the United Countries: with full
power to do all that he thought would best advance the service of his Matie.
and the profit of the Estates. At his return from Heilbrun to Amberg, he got
the wind of those plots and practices still on foot in Pilsen, whereupon he
wrote first to one, and then to another, to continue constant, assuring them he
would not forsake them: and that he would find the means to get the^ their
Pay, as also to relieve their necessities: Things going thus, came his Auditor
of the Camp, who had bin at Prague, about the business before mentioned: who
told the L. Marshall, that to continue the Treaty, he must have a larger
Warrant from him, then that he had received at Ellenbogen. So that the L.
Marshall caused one to be drawn for him, in the amplest manner that could be
devised, and renewed his Instructions: adding to the rest of the Articles, that
the Upper Palatinate should be comprised within the said Treaty. And with this
Commission sent the said Auditor to Prague; giving him in charge, to sound the
depth of the enemies Designs, in regard of a special Treaty they intended to
have with the Captains; And that he should persuade the said Captains to be
constant in his Majesty's service. And finally to advertise him carefully of
all that passed. This was to make the Wolf the Shepherd. The L. Marshall
having had experience of his faithful Service some years, thought he had
dealt uprightly in his employment, but he had already supt the poison of
infidelity, out of Portaes Cup. This was verily the same Auditor, but changed
within, and quite another man from what he was before. Momus had good reason
(in my opinion) when he had considered the stature of Man's body, to find
fault that Nature had not made a wicket before the Heart of man, that his
thoughts might be discovered. The want of this (if I may call it a want) has
been the cause that a 1000. men have been deceived by these Two men, in whose
sincerity they had good confidence; not being able to see into their inward
parts, which God has reserved to himself.

In brief, the Enemy forwarned by the treacheries of these two perfidious
persons; husbanded this occasion so well, that they conditioned secretly with
the Captains, for the yielding up of Pilsen; while in outward show they seemed
to desire a Treaty with the L. Marshall. So as the Captains having already
left the party, and gone beyond the bounds of their Duty, began now to speak
more openly then before; They wrote, and causde it to be told by word of mouth
to the Marshall, that they purposed to expect no longer, but would either be
presently paid, or at least be assured of their Pay; and that if shortly they
had not a resolution to their minds, and deeds accordingly; they would
provide for themselves. The said Auditor after Conference with Monsieur Tilly
about his last Commission, returned to the Lord Marshall without effecting any
thing, excusing it, that he was sent back with threats and denied Audience:
For that as he alleged, the Enemy took it ill, that the L. Marshall changing
the contents of his first Commission, had inserted this last Article concerning
the Upper Palatinate, which had no depency upon Bohemia.

But the troath is; that they being then assured of the minds of the
Captains, cared no more to hold on the treaty with the Lord Marshall, having
held it with him all this while to no other end, then to stay him from going
forward.

And surely to confess the truth, both parties although they differed in their
desires, yet were they well agreed in this, that one sought to entrap the
other. The Imperialists had two advantages above us; that is to say, Means,
(which we wholly wanted) and the absence of the L. Marshall, (not to speak of
the perfidiousnes of Porta.) And thus they got the game: Now the Auditor by
private Intelligence, assured the L. Marshall of the secret Treaty: and that
his Captains inclined wholly to the Emperors side, making more of every thing
then it was: The L. Marshall upon these tidings dispatched Letters into all
quarters, and did all he could to procure money, in some sort to satisfy the
covetous desire of these Traitors. But all in vain. For that little which he
could get, could not staunch their hunger.

Mean time he omitted no opportunity, which might make for the breaking off of
these treacherous practices; which he thought yet had floated upon the waves of
uncertainties, and not landed at any Port, he imployes all the policies,
which his wisdom or dexterity could furnish him with. And no doubt, it had
succeeded well, had not (so unfortunately) these very agents whom he used,
being before hand corrupted, and made the Enemies, as amongst others, the
Colonel Frank and the Auditor, whom he sent again to Pilsen, as well to
observe more narrowly the actions of the said Colonel Frank, as to hinder the
final Conclusion of the treaty. The L. Marshall assuring himself, that he
being a man known to all the Officers and Soldiers, and of good dexterity,
would do him able service as indeed he might have done, had he regarded Honor
as much as profit. But his ill meaning was to work clean contrary effects.
Moreover, the L. Marshall sent a Corporal of Captain Beck Baslois Company,
with a packet of Letters, directed to diverse Officers; which Packet, had verily
struck the stroke had it been delivered. But this honest Messinger was
betrayed going out of Amberg, by one of Nuremberg; so that entering into Bohemia
he was taken by the Enemies. The Colonel Lindlaw sent the Originals to
Colonel Frank, who read them, and sent them back without delivering them, to
whom they were directed. To conclude, all things went backwards, So that do
what the L. Marshall could, the Impostume burst. This fire that had long been
raked up under the ashes of Dissimulation, brake out into flames of a
mischievous treason.

The 26. of March the Treaty long a working, was Concluded at Mies, between
the Baron of Tilly Lieutenant general of the Dukedom of Bauaria, Agent in
that, as well in the name of his Master, as of the Imperial Majesty on the one
part: and the Captains of the Garrison of Pilsen, namely, John Pieritz,
Leonard Syrach, Wolf Sigismund, Teuffell, John Grott, and Magnus Laurwald, on
the other party. Where amongst other Conditions it was assured, that in regard
of their absolute departure from the said Town of Pilsen, the said Captains
should receive 140000. Florins of his Impetiall Majesty: which was for the 7.
Companies of the Regiment, to every one 20000. Florins. Colonel Frank made
this Treaty a part by himself, and got promise of 30000. Florins, in regard of
the restitution of Tabor.

This treaty of Mies thus Concluded, was put in execution without delay, and
these Merchants received the price of their cursed sale, wherewith every one
departed whether he thought good. It Is true that the L. Marshall wrote to them,
even after the Conclusion of this treaty some kind Letters, thinking by fair
language to draw them into the Palatinate. But it was in vain: their guilty
Consciences had taken away their courages to come before him.

His Auditor of the Camp, having received 4000. Reich Dollers (the wagcs of
his Perjury) which he thought to convey secretly through the Palatinate:
verily believing by the finenesse of his wit so to Justify the rest of his
Actions: that the L. Marshall should receive very good satisfaction.
Covetousness had so hood-winckt his eyes, that he thought all other men blind.

The L. Marshall who had all this while his eyes about him, and being naturally
quick-sighted, presently discovered the money; and by the price, Judged of the
quality of the merchandise: He caused at Hirschaw the man and money to be
Attach't, and sent out his Process by his Captains: by whose sentence he was
Condemned to Death, and Executed according to Martial Law. The Colonel Frank
was strangely astonished at the Imprisonment of the Auditor, and became so
melancholy upon it, that every man perceived a great change and alteration in
him.

The L. Marshall being come to Ambergh, thought good to call the said Colonel
Frank, and brought him before my Lord the Earl of Solmes, Vice Governor of
the Upper Palatinate, and my Lords the Counsel Electorate, to clear himself
of what should be objected against him, concerning the yielding up of Pilsen.

Being summonned by the Lord Marshall, he takes his Caroach and comes thither:
but being there he was surpised with such a fear; that without bidding
farewell he returned hastilyer then he came, leaving his Caroach and baggage
behind him with his Servants. He got to Nurembergh, and having stayed there
some time, he went from thence to Regenspergh, and after to Tabor, where he had
thought to be entertained into the Garrison; But they within, having before
received a Command from the L. Marshall not to receive him, would not admit
him. So that having diverse times attempted and endeavored by all means he
could devise to get in; at last being unable to compass it, after he had
tarryed some time in the Enemies Camp, he went to Prague, there to make his
Apology: where we leave him busied, as well in justifying himself, as
accusing others.

Captain Syrach after the yielding up of the Town, departed out of Germany
toward his own Country: and being come near to Erfurt, certain Horsemen set
upon his Baggage, and took it all away: And it is reported, that he lost the
worth of 30000. Florins, which was all that himself had Pillaged and come
vniusily by in Bohemia, and thus is that lost by Robbing, which is got by
Oppression, that also goes away by the Fyfe, that comes by the Drum.

By these Examples which I show by the way, it evidently appears, that Divine
Justice follows not far off to Disloyalty and perjury: But if their fellows
prosper yet, they are not therefore quite exempted from the punishment they
deserve. He is not quitted, that draws his Halter after him. Every thing will
come in his season, that can but stay his time, though God lets them alone a
time, he shall not yet forgive them the Debt, but they shall pay the
principal, with the arrerages, which it may be will amount to more then they
think of.

Now the Enemies seeing themselves freed of this thorn, and Masters of the
place which so much galled them, resolved for all that to drive all the otber
Garrisons Royal out of Bohemia; that they might be sole and peaceable
possessors of that Crown. To effect this, they went to besiege Falkenaw, (a
little Town situate betwixt Eguer and Ellenbogen) to thrust out Colonel
Gray, who was in it, with certain Companies of his own Nation and others. They
battered and assaulted it diverse times, and plyde it so close, that Colonel
Gray after he had done the part of a brave Soldier many days, was forced to
Treat with them to depart with Bag and Baggage. This place yielded up, none
in these Quarters held out but Ellenbogen; a place verily not great, yet well
and strongly situated by Nature. Besides, the Citizens who were much affected
to the Kings party, there were yet within it three Companies of good Soldiers.
Count Henry of Ortenberg, a young but brave and generous Lord, by the
appointment of the Lord Marshall, Commanded the Town in the Name of his
Majesty.

As Falkenaw was taken in the 1. of April; they planted their siege before
Ellenbogen the 2. of the same Month, where they lay till the 26. of April,
with as much resolution and wilfulnes as could be imagined, putting to all
their Forces, vigor and Stratagems, which their Courages and Passion could
furnish them with. The Cannon played perpetually, Balls of wildfire were
flung in incessantly; they notwithstanding in the Town, encouraged by the said
Lord the Count, to continue the Service of his Majesty, were not wearyed out
for any labor, but the more the Enemy pressed upon them, the more resolutely
they bestirred themselves to beat him off; which they did with such diligence,
that had they not wanted Powder, they had without doubt, made good the place.

The Lord Marshall, all the Siege did what was possible to succor them, he
still giving advice to the said Lord the Count; enioyning him nevertheless
whatsoever befell, that in Case he saw himself pressed, before the succors
came in; to Treat betimes, rather then be brought into extremities, and so
loose the hope of obtaining an Honorable parley to save the Troops, which was
a thing he desired him above all.

At last about the 26. of April, the Lord Marshall went from Turchenreut with
his Army, which was but uery small: with an intent to raise the Siege, at what
rate soever it should be to the Enemies: And whilst his Vantguard was taking
the passage of Koningswart in Bohemia, Ellenbogen was rendered upon Composition,
the said Lord the Count being forced to it, for the wants aforesaid, and some
other inconveniences happening amongst the Soldiers.

The Articles were Honorable, (considering the time) that is to say. That our
Garrison should depart with Bag and baggage, Bullet in the mouth, Matches
light, Drums beating, and Colors flying, etc. But the Enemy (accustomed to
break his Faith to those of the Religion) just as they had served us at
Tachaw, so did they them here, for, as our men went out, they pillaged them
one after another. So that this particular loss to our people, was no less
sencible to our folk, then that was to the public.

Ellenbogen being lost, the Lord Marshall retired again into the Palatinate,
to go on with his leuyes of Soldiers, and to prepare himself for some better
Design: which we leave to others to Discourse off, when time shall serve. And
to conclude this Treatise, which was compiled to no other end (as has been
said) but truly to represent what has passed, under the Command of the Lord
Marshall, that the impartial Reader may Judge, whether rightfully or
wrongfully those ilwillers have taxed his Fidelity.

The desire to make a Discovery of the Truth of these Rumors, has caused me
to make this Apology. And since it is for the Truth, I have endeavored to
follow every where, the Kings highway without straying to slip willingly into
any by pathe of lying. I take to witness all those, that have any knowledge in
these Affairs, without excluding the very Enemies, whose testimony I will not
out of fear refuse in this matter. And if it seems to any, that I have said
too little of these passages, or that I have cut them off too short, let them
know; my intention was no other, then simply to show the Innocence of the Lord
Marshall, by a lively recital of all that co^cerned him: and not to offend
any, by bringing in such matters, as might more prejudice a third person, then
profit the said Lord.

The truth (surely) ought to be spoken, but yet in its due time: She has her
limits and her bounds, which it is not so convenient to exceed. It contents
me to have said that, which may serve to the conservation of the Honor of the
Lord Marshall; whom of all other (without praising him) I desire to touch.

It Is a sign of Poverty to make a man brave with borrowed Clothes; he that is
of himself laden with Honor and Renown; why should I beg for him
otherwhere? Of this if he wants more, he will himself better purchase it
with one blow of his valiant Sword, then I can give him, with a thousand
Dashes of my rude Pen.

But seriously thus much: Behold him on Horseback with his Sword in his hand,
followed by a number of Brave and Noble Caualiers, and ready to rush into the
thickest of his Enemies.

Take heed you Liars and backbiters: If the truth of my Quill cannot make you
look red for shame, the Valor of his Arm shall make you look pale for
fear, yea and burst for altogether: Let us see a little what he will do, and
by the success of his Noble exploits, Judge the sincerity of his Intentions,
seeing it is the End that Crowns the Action.

FINIS.
By S. W.


