SVMMARIE AND SHORT MEDITATIONS touching sundry points of Christian Religion,
gath^^^^ by T. VV. and now publi^h^d for the ed^^^cation an^ profit of Go^s
Saints. Lord Jesus begin and make an end.
TO cloak sin, Confession of sins.
seeing it runs up and down in eu^ry man's mouth, that we are all sinful,
is dangerous and damnable: Dangerous, because the holy Ghost says, he that
hides his sin, shall ^ot prosper. And damnable, because it caus^^h men to lie
weltring and wallowing in iniquity, without repentance. But humbly and
unfeignedly to conf^sse it, is a ready way to obtain pa^don, and forgiveness
of the same, at the hands of Almighty God, because the Scripture tells us,
that if we acknowledge and forsake our sins, we shall find favor. And
again, If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just, to forgive us
our sins, and the blood of Jesus Christ shall purge us from all iniquity.

Four witnesses that we are sinners.
We have sundry true and impartial witnesses, both within us, and without us,
against our selves, to prove this truth unto us, that we are miserable sinners.

1. Our own conscience.
First, the stinging testimony of our own conscience, which though we many
times bleere and blot out, yet does it sundry times tell us, yea almost every
day when we rise up, and every night when we lie down, we have done many
things, that we ought not to have done, and have omitted many things, which we
ought to have done.

2. God himself.
Secondly, God himself, who beside that in his infinite knowledge, he is able
to charge us with a thousand transgress^ons, for every one that we know by our
selves, or others, is also greater, than our heart and conscience, to condemn^
us, because he knows all things.

Yea, this eternal God does by his judgments convince us to be sinners,
whether they be general, or particular. By the general, 3. Gods iu^^^^ments.
his wrath being made manifest from heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of all men: and against all the creatures themselves: And by
the particular, whilst he manifests them either against some Nations, as
Israel, Judah, etc. or some Cities, as Sodom, Gomorrah, Jerusalem, etc. or else
private persons, as Cain, Ham, Judas, and such like.

Beside these judgments, the Lord our God has his blessed word, 4. Gods vvo^^
which charge us vvit^^
which is pure and holy as himself, to convince us of sin, which straightly
charge us, first with the sin and fall of our first parents Adam and Euah,
1. Adams fall^
as guilty thereof unto everlasting condemnation.

Secondly, 2. Original s^^^
with the sin wherein we are conceived and borne, which we call original
sin: which if we had no more upon us, and in us but that, makes us the
children of Gods wrath and displeasure.

Thirdly, with the fruits of that original sin, 3. The fruits of original
sin^
which are all manner of disobediences inward and outward, against Almighty
God and our neighbors.

^ good (...) to bring (...) the fee(...) of Gods (...)ements.
By all this we may see, that al mouths and hearts are justly stopped and shut
up, from clearing themselves, by thought, word, or otherwise, and that all men
are made subject unto the condemnation of God: which that we may the better
feel, it shall be good for us, first, rightly to compare the horrible
filthiness that is in us, (...) comparing (...)ans filthi^^^^e and Gods
^^^^t^ousnesse.
both outward and inward, of body and soul, with the wonderful holiness
that is in God himself, and he requires of us in his law.

The grie^^usnesse of sin ^^mmitted.
Then to consider the greatness and notoriousnesse of our offenses, which may
be justly aggrauated, by looking into the qualities of the parties offending,
as Magistrates, Ministers, etc. and the parties offended, as Gods most
excellent Majesty, and our dear brethren, together with sundry other
circumstances, of time, place, manner of doing^ etc.

3. The multitude of transgressions.
Thirdly, to think upon the multitude of our iniquities, which are more in
number than the hairs of our head, and being as the sand of the Sea, both for
multitude and weight, are become as a burden over heavy for us to bear.

Lastly, to weigh Gods fearful judgments, 4. Gods he^^ judgment which ar^
executed.
both temporal and eternal, which our sins have deserved to be powered
forth upon us, and for our terrifying are set down in his word, and manifested
in the world: which are many indeed, but chiefly these:

First, 1. Upon the creatures.
his heavy hand lying sore upon his creatures, for our transgressions, which
should so much the more terrify us and humble us indeed, by how much
themselves are subject thereto, not for any sin of their own, which they have
not, but for our ini^uities.

Secondly, 2. Upon men this life^ and are either inward or out^vvard.
the adversities and afflictions of our life: which are either bodily, as
sicknesses; or spiritual, as anguish of soul, and torment of conscience,
which also the more heavily they are inflicted upon us, the more mightily they
should cast us down, and work understanding in us, least otherwise God should
have just cause to complain, that he has stricken us in vain.

Thirdly, natural death it self, which is the parting asunder of the soul
and the body for a time, and was laid upon our first parents, (...)
and in them upon us, as a part of that just deserved punishment, that they and
we procured to our selves, because we are all standing and falling together
with them and in them.

^^ternall con^^^nation.
And lastly, the curse of the eternal God, pronounced in his law unto
everlasting condemnation both of body and soul, without unfeigned repentance
and hearty turning to the Lord, this most fitly sorting, both for infinitnes
and weight, with our infinite and innumerable transgressions.

^n being f^lt, ^^liefe must be ^ught.
Whosoever fe^leth himself in such a miserable case, must of necessity (as
other good men heretofore have done) (unless he will wittingly refuse
comfort, and willingly cast away himself) seek some both sure and spe^die
remedy, least continuing in that lamen^able estate, they be swallowed up of
despair and over much heaviness.

If we seek to Angels, ^. Angels.
and would worship them, as some have done heretofore, they cannot stand us in
steed: for howsoever they be excellent creatures, yet they have not that of
themselves: yea God should find imperfection in the^, if they were not
maintained by his power: and besides as they were not ordained or created for
such a purpose: so they are justly our enemies for sin (as whose nature is so
pure, that they cannot abide it) and the armed soldiers of the Lord, by his
special appointment to our destruction, for our ungodliness.

If we would look to dead Saints, 2. Dead Saints.
as in time of superstition and Popery we were taught, and did, as I fear me,
many men yet do, they cannot fit us any whit at all: as well because the
dead know nothing at all: as also for that they themselves have continually
confessed of and against themselves, that they have always stood in need of a
Savior, and if they could not save themselves, much less others.

If we cast our eyes upon men unregenerated, 3. Men unregenerate.
and yet living, the scripture tells us, there is none that does good, no not
one: nay they are all by nature the children of wrath, and firebrands of
condemnation, not only unapt, and unable to good works for themselves, but
most fit to all evil, both against themselves and others.

4. Men regenerate.
If to them, in whom regeneration is begun, yea and it may be also much
advanced, and who are in the word: indeed called the Saints of God, they accuse
themselves of wonderful evils and manifold imperfections, saying from a free
heart, that all their righteousness are^ as filthy and stained clouts, and
again, the good, they should do, that they do not, the evil that they
should not do, that do they, and therefore are not so much as willing to take
such an office upon them, though we would a thousand times give it them.

5. Goods and riches.
If we would give all that we have unto the Lord, for a ransom for our own s^ns
or others: yea if we would give our first borne for our transgressions, and
the fruits of our bodies for the sin of our souls, as many idolators have
done heretofore, it will not avail us, for it is nothing, nay as a polluted
thing in his fight: and besides it has no power to purge away sin, or to
purify conscience.

If we would cleave to outward and feigned holiness, 6. Counterfeite holiness.
as the Pharisees have done, and the hypocrites of all ages do, we must make
this account of it, that though it be never so glittering and glorious in ma^s
sight (which is not able to discern of spiritual colors or things) yet it is
abbomination before God, to whom and before whom both we our selves, and all
our actions must stand and fall.

If we stand upon, the persuasion or practice of superstitious and idolatries
devised by man, we must needs fall: 7. Will worshippings, cannon appease the
cons^i^nce vvounded with the feeling of Gods judgments and sin.
for besides that they are so many corruptions and defilings of Religion and
service, that we perform unto God, which is and ought to be pure and simple
as himself, God himself also rejects them, as things vile and displeasing
in his blessed presence.

Whither shall we then go? to Christ only we must needs come: Christ alone
must be our refuge.
and why to him.

First because, in him dwells the fulness of all goodness, yea chefulnes of the
godhead bodily: and God has given him to us, to the end that believing in him
we should not perish, but have e^erlasting life.

We have Gods own testimony for it.
How shall we know that? By the Lords own word and voice from heaven, who has
said (and therefore we may, nay we ought to believe it) that he is his
well-beloved son, in whom he is well pleased.

Secondly, because our Savior himself so graciously calls us, saying: And
Christ's own word.
Come unto me all ye that travail, be weary, and are heavy laden, and I will
ease you.

But when we come, we shall find nothing in him. Yes verily: for through him,
apprehended and appropriated to our selves by faith, we shall find eternal
peace to Godward, and life and immortality brought unto the believers.

Christ's names full of doctrine and comfort.
In this our Christ, let us for our comfort and instruction consider, first the
names and titles given him, which are not bare or idle, or express graces, in
and for himself only, but are full of fruit and efficacy, and that for us and
our good, specially for spiritual comfort here, and eternal salvation in the
life to come.

He is called Jesus, Jesus.
that is to say Savior: because he alone and no other does and shall save all
his people from their sins.

He is called Christ, Christ.
that is, anointed and sealed by his father, to be our King, Priest and
Prophet.

By his kingdom establishing his double government, 1. Christ's kingdom.
one inward in the hearts of his children, by his holy spirit, and the other
outward in the Church, by the scepter of his word, and his own discipline.

By his Priesthood, 2. Christ's priesthood.
offering himself up once for all, as a full and sufficient sacrifice, for all
the sins of his people.

And his Prophecy, 3. Christ's Prophecy.
he being become, the only lawgiver to his Church, so as the godly now are
not to hearken to any ^oice, doctrine or spirit, but to him a^one, and those
that speak according ^o his truth.

Secondly let us consider his person, Christ's person.
which consists of these two natures, ^he Godhead and the Manhood.

As he is God^ Christ God.
he has power in himself, to do whatsoever pleases him both in heaven and
earth and all deep places, yea to overcome all our enemies, specially
spiritual, which are so many and mighty, as none can encounter with, much
less vanquish but God only, alone belongs mercy and forgiveness of
sinnes^ as the scripture says.

3. Christ man.
And as he is man, he is both sufficiently able, and also very willing, to
endure and suffer for us, whatsoever was for our sins to be laid upon him,
yea and also willing, to have compassion on th^^ that are ignorant, and that
are out of the way, ^^^ng made man like unto us, in every respect, sin only
excepted, and therefore being both compassed with infirmity and tempted
himself, is the better able to pity and succor them, that are infirm or
tempted.

4. Christ: God and man our only Savior.
So that God manifested in the flesh, justified i^ the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory, is he that we must cleave to alone, for the peace and comfort of our
consciences, and the salvation of our souls, because there is none under
heaven given unto us, whereby we must be saved, but only the same of Jesus.

Thirdly, Christ alone takes away sin.
let us earnestly behold what ^ingular effects he works in his children, and
what wonderful graces he free^y bestows upon the^. He is the Lamb of God,
that alone takes away the sins of the world: he is he alone in whom it has
^leased God to reconcile the world unto himself: he is he that is made of God
unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

Wisdom, 1. Christ is our wisdom.
because he is the eternal wisdom of the Father, from before all beginnings:
and because coming out of the bosom of the Father, he has declared unto us
all the councels of God, concerning our instruction and comfort and that in far
greater both plenty and plainnes, specially plainnes, than the Fathers before
his coming had.

Righteousness, 2. Christ is our righteousness.
for these respects: first because he has fu^^y satisfied the justice of God
being wounded for our transgressio^s, and broken for our iniquities, carrying
also the chastisement of our peace upon him, and healing us with his stripes,
bearing upon his back and shoulders the course of the law, due to us for our
sins, and ouerco^ming the same in redeeming us from it: and secondly because
that through his obedience and fulfilling of the law, we have justification
imputed unto us before God, and i^^choated in our selves, and before men in the
world: and so obtain at the last, the blessing of the law, which is eternal
life.

3. Christ is our holiness.
Sanctification or holiness, because it pleased God the Father, in the riches of
mercy, to send his own Son, in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for
sin, cond^mned sin in the flesh, and not only to impute unto us his
holiness, and to cloth us with the same, but also through the mighty working
of his holy Spirit to frame us to walk in true holiness and righteousness
before God and men, all the days of our lif.

Redemption, because that by offeri^g up himself once upon the altar of the
cross, 4. Christ is our redemption.
he has redeemed us from sin, and set us free from the devil, and eternal
condemnation, keeping us so in his hands, that none shall pull us out of the
same, until the full manifestation of our adoption shall appear, even the
deliverance of our bodies from all corruption and sin, at what time he shall
return our redeemer from heaven, and shall change the bodies of our baseness,
that they may be made like unto his glorious body.

To conclude, 5. Christ is all in all.
it has pleased the Father, that in him should be hidden all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, and that in him should all fulness dwell, yea the very
fulness of his godhead bodily, and of all other good things whatsoever, that so
the Church, which is his body, and every particular sound member thereof might
receive of his abundance, as it is written: Of his fulness have we all received,
and grace for grace, that is, grace upon grace, or as a man would say, graces
heaped one upon another, and that so he should be, the beginning and ending,
yea, the very yea and Amen of all Gods Promises.

To know these things, in such sort as before is declared, yea and in more
ample manner, than is here set down, and not to have the particular feeling of
them in a man's own conscience, is to little or no purpose at all, unless it
be more and more to afflict the conscience for want of comfortable feeling of
them, and to plung us into a more great and grievous judgment, because he that
knows the will of his Master and does it not shall be beaten with many
stripes.

Wherefore it greatly behooves us to strive to attain the mean, whereby we
may lay hold of them: and that mean, yea the only mean is nothing else, Faith
and know^ed^e must g^e together.
but a true and lively faith, for by faith Christ and we are lincked together,
he and all his merits being become ours, and we his, whilst he purges our
hearts by faith, yea d^elleth in them, and makes us fruitful ^o all good
works.

This faith seals up in our hearts, forgiveness of past sins. Notable
^ff^cts of true faith.
Freedom from condemnation to come, and assurance of eternal life, pacifying
our consciences toward God, and instructing us to apply particularly unto our
selves, Christ Jesus and all his merits.

1. Faith works peace in our cons^i^nces.
And by this faith, it pleases almighty God, to purify and purge the
corruption of man's heart, and to frame it and fashion it to new obedience.

Yea it is appointed by God to be a necessary instrument, 2. Faith cleanses
our heart
whereby we may overcome the world, and as a shield of steel, by which we may
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: and in which being steadfast, we must
resist and vanquish the devil.

Other singular effects and fruits of this lively faith, 3. Faith overcomes
the world, the flesh and the diu^ll.
are largely reckoned up in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 11.

But this faith is not of all men, that is most true: Faith is the fre^ gi^t of
God.
yea we affirm, that no man has it by nature, art, wit, or any such other
mean in man, but that it is the only free and gracious gift of God, to his
own children alone.

For the effecting of this precious grace in them, Faith f^amed in us two
manner of ways.
the Lord himself uses two effectual instruments to work it in their hearts
by.

The one is inward, and the same most powerful, namely his most ^^ly and
blessed Spirit, speaking for kn^^^^dge, peace, and all good graces, more
effectually to our hearts, than the outward sound does to the ear.

The other outward, and that is the whole ministry of truth, whether it be in
the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, etc. we diligently subiecting our selves
thereto, carefully receiving the same, and daily growing in grace thereby, as
we do in years and strength in the body.

Spirit of adoption.
This Spirit is called the spirit of adoption, because it bears witness unto
our spirits, that God has adopted us to be his children, and heirs of his
kingdom, teaching us also with confidence and boldness, to cry Abba Father.

Spirit, a comforter.
This Spirit is called the Comforter, because he ministers unto the children of
God in all their heauinesses and distresses whatsoever, either outward or
inward, unspeakable joys.

Spirit of truth.
He is called the Spirit of truth, because he alone does not only free us from
the errors of the wicked, and the darkness of our own hearts, but also
inlightneth our understanding, and leads us into all truth.

Spirit of sanctification.
He is called the Spirit of sanctification, because he frames them, in whom he
dwells, to sanctification, and holiness, and fitteth them indeed to all
good works.

He makes us able to search into, Spirit, together with the powers and
effects thereof.
and to understand, the deep things of God, yea such deep and hidden secrets,
as the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither have they entered
into man's heart.

He frames and fashioneth in us unfeigned love to God, and to his people for
his sake, working also in us a sound mind, in all the duties and services that
we do either to God himself in heaven, or to men upon earth.

This Spirit helps our infirmities, teaching yea inabling us (who know not
what to ask or pray as we should) to send forth requests unto God, with
sighs and groans which cannot be expressed.

Also when or wheresoever it be bestowed, it brings with it a most holy and
heavenly liberty, because if the Son by his blessed spirit make us free, we
shall be free indeed.

Lastly, he is (as it were) the very earnest pen^, and assured seal or pledge
of the truth of the gracious promises, which Almighty God has made unto us
in Jesus Christ, generally for all good things, and especially for our eternal
election in Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid.

Gods word generally the gro^nd of faith.
Touching the word, I take it in general to be the ground and foundation of our
faith, and that therefore it is rightly called the arm of the Lord, as upon
which only we must lean.

But most specially the Gospel.
But most specially I mean that part, which contains Gods most loving
promises, made unto us in Jesus Christ, and is rightly called the Gospel.

1. Gospel what it is.
And this Gospel is the glad tidings of great joy, and the mighty power of God
unto salvation, to every one that believes.

2. The message of peace.
Yea it is indeed the message of peace, because it offers quietness of
conscience, through the forgiveness of sins, to those that are far off, and
to those that are nigh.

3. The word of grace.
It is called the word of grace, as well because it is freely bestowed upon us,
as also because it offers unto us the grace of God.

It is the word of truth, 4. The word of truth.
because it manifests to us all truth, both of faith and obedience, and
sets out before us the truth of God, in the acco^plishing of his promises.

It is also the word of life, 5. The word of life.
not only because it offers life everlasting, for that it does to al in the
Church, but also because that being rightly and reverently received, it seals
up the same in our hearts, and frames us in this life to a new life, worthy
our calling, by the which word also our savior Christ has brought life and
immortality to light, 6. A mystery or secret.
which before seemed as it were, to be hidden: in which respect, it is called
in sundry places of the new Testament a mystery or secret, yea such a mystery
or secret, as was hidden since the world began.

This word must be, first reverently esteemed, How the word must be received,
and for what cause.
because if we prize it not as we should, it will grow into contempt. Then
faithfully credited, because otherwise our estimation and regard of it will do
us no good. Lastly, carefully received and profitably practiced, because these
indeed are true testimonies of our reverence and belief: yea it must be
reverenced, credited, and received, not as the word of a mortal man, but as it
is indeed the word of the eternal God.

First, because of him that is the author thereof, which is God only good, who
besides, that he has the fulness of mercy in him, to recompense our labor
and love that way, has also infinite power, to revenge the abuse or contempt of
it, in what sort soever, or in whom soever.

Secondly, because of the matter, or matters rather, that it propounds and
sets out unto us, which are faith in the promises, obedience to the
pre^cepts, and reconciliation and agree^ment between God and us, procure^ for
us, and purchased unto us, in the death of his dearly beloved Son.

Thirdly, because of the persons, who^ the Lord has used in the publishi^^ and
speaking of it, who in times pas^^^ were Prophets and holy men of Go^ yet
notwithstanding inspired by the sp^^rit of God. Prophets. Christ Jesus.


But in this latter time, he has delivered this truth most fully unto us in
the mouth of his own son, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge hid.

And since that time by the blessed Apostles and Evangelists, Apostles,
Euan^gelists, Pastors^ Doctors and Ministers, wha^ manner of men they ought to
be.
whom he sent abroad into all the world, to preach the Gospel to all creatures.

And now in this last age of the world, by the settled ministry of ordinary
pastors and teachers.

Whom God does use, not as though he were not able without them, to work his
own will, both in the saving of them, whom he has made heirs of life, and in
the condemning of the wicked; but that he might in their labors, have a more
ready entrance, by his word, into men's hearts, he having appointed to season
men by them, and to inlighten their dark and ignorant hearts, because they are
the salt of the earth, and light of the world, indeed to season men's cor^upt
hearts, and to deliver them from the power of darkness, and to translate them
into the kingdom of his dear Son.

Who bring also with them the embassage of peace, and reconciliation, God
himself, as it were by them, entreating us to be reconciled unto his Majesty.

^he ends of the holy Ministry.
And are indeed the effectual in^^^^^ments of God, for the gathering together
of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the ed^fication of the
body of Christ, until we all meet together, in the unity of faith and
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the
age of the fulness of Christ, that we henceforth be no more children, wavering
and carried about, with every wind of doctrine, by deceit of men, either
others, or our selves, or by the exercised subtilties of our spiritual
adversaries.

Ministers and Ministry must be much made of.
Wherefore good reason is it, that they that bring us such glad and acceptable
tidings of such good things, taking continual care for us, and watching for
our souls, should not only be reverently esteemed, as the ministers of
Christ, and disposers of Gods secrets, but also religiously and lovingly
received, because he that receives them, receives God the Father, and God the
Son, that has sent them: whereas on the other side, whosoever do contemn
them, thrust from them the blessed Godhead, and refuse the means that the Lord
has ordained and sent abroad for their salvation.

The doctrine delivered by these men, 1. The doctrine preached, painteth out
Christ^ death and passion.
specially the Gospel preached, is a most lively painting out of Christ before
our eyes, and as it were a visible crucifying of him in our sights, who died
for our sins, and rose again for our righteousness.

And though they that perish, 2. It seals to us our salvation.
count it foolishnes; yet is it that mighty power of God unto salvation, and
the excellent wisdom of the Lord, by which it pleases him through the
foolishnes of preaching, to save them that believe.

And it is that effectual instrument, 3. It works our regeneration.
whereby the Father of his own good will begets us again unto himself,
that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures, being borne anew, not
of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word of God, which word end^reth for
ever.

At our first receiving of it, How the word is milk.
it is sincere milk, which as newborn babes we should long after, that we
may grow up thereby and come unto Christ, who is the living stone, that w^^^
our selves also as living stones, may be made a spiritual house, and a holy
Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God, through Jesus
Christ.

^ow and when ^he word is ^rong meat.
And when we are passed the age of our infancy in Christ, it is become our
^ound and steadfast meat, wherewith the Lord continually feeds us in his
family, until that having laid down th^^ our earthly house of this
tabernacle, we obtain the building given us of God, that is an house not made
with hands, but eternal in the heavens, whose builder and framer is God.

Gods goodness. Man's frailty.
The Lord knowing whereof we be made, and remembering that we are but dust, has
not only given us his word, to work faith in our hearts, but has also l^ft us
for the more strengthening and confirming of the same, in the truth of his
promises, the use of two holy Sacraments only, The two Sacram^nts, aides ^o
our faith.
and no more, namely Baptism, and the Lords Supper, both of them being
instituted by him, to whom alone indeed it belongs to ordain Sacraments ^n
his Church, because he alone has power to give and work the grace that is
meant, signified, or set ou^ thereby.

Baptism witnesses and pledgeth unto us diverse things, 1. Baptism se^^leth
our ingra^^ting into the Church.
as first that we are ingrafted into the body of Christ's Church, whereof Christ
is the head, from whom alone the body receives increase, unto the building up
of it self in holy love.

Then that regeneration is begun in us, 2. Our regeneration.
and we become as it were newborn ^abes unto God, our heavenly Father, the
Lord saving us according to his mercy, by the washing of the new birth, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost.

It seals also unto us, 3. Remission of sins.
the forgiveness and washing away of our sins, in the sacrifice of Christ's
death, water no more effectually taking away the spotts and filth of our
flesh, than Christ's blood does the guilt, power, and punishment of our sins.

And it pledgeth this unto us, 4. Our adoption.
that we are the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, because all that are
baptized into Christ have put on Christ, even to this end, that so they might
become sons, yea heirs of God, and fellow heirs with our Savior himself.

5. Our spiritu^ll unity.
It teaches us also, that we should endeavor, to keep the unity of the
Spirit, in the bond of peace, having the same love, being of one accord, and of
one judgment, no man seeking his own, but every man one another wealth,
seeing that we are one body in Christ and every one, one another members, as
we are all by one sacrament of baptism, coupled unto one head which is Christ,
and joined together too in one ^ody, which is his Church.

6. Our mortification, and sanctification in Christ's death and resurrection.
It represents unto us also thus much, that we being baptized into Christ's
death, shall by the power thereof die unto sin, and that by the virtue of his
rising again, we should walk in newnes of life.

7. Our resurrection.
Lastly that we shall be raised up at the last day out of the dust of the
earth, and meet the Lord in the air, and dwell with him for ever and ever.

1. The supper pledgeth our eternal life.
The Lords supper seals unto our consciences, that Christ is that living bread
which came down from heaven, of which whosoever truly eats shall live for
ever, because he does not nourish us to death, for that is contrary to his
nature, nor for a time, because he lives for ever and cannot die (and such are
the effects that flow from him) but unto everlasting life.

Also it sets out unto us, 2. Christ's death and passion.
Christ's death and passion, with the benefits we reap thereby, and namely the
remission and forgiveness of our sins, because as he never did any thing in
vain, so much less died fruitlessely, but that he might purchase for us,
eternal peace with God, through the work of our reconciliation with him.

Further it preaches unto us that Jesus Christ himself God and man, 3. Our
spiritual nourishment in and by him.
with all his spiritual and heavenly treasures, is fully and wholly given us
by the Father, that in him and through him, taken hold of by faith, we may be
fully nourished in the inward and outward man, to the hope of everlasting life.

It does also confirm unto us, 4. The union betwixt Christ and his church.
the mystical union which is betwixt Christ and his Church, he dwelling in our
hearts by faith, and we thereby made members of his body, of his flesh, and of
his bones.

5. The unity amongst the members of the Church.
Lastly, it teaches us what unity and love ought to be amongst us, because
that thereby we that are many, are one bread and one body, in as much as we
are all partakers of one bread. Examination before the Supper.


Two parts of it, ^aith and r^pentance toward God, and sincere love toward
men.
To the worthy receiving of this sacrament, there is necessarily required an
earnest examination and true trial of our selves, which chiefly consists,
as I take it, in effectual steadfast faith, and hearty repentance toward God,
and unfeigned love toward men.

Faith what it is.
Faith is a certain persuasion, and steadfast assurance, which every true
christian man ought to have, that God the Father loves him, for Jesus Christ
his Sons sake, he by the means of that faith, particularly applying unto
himself all Gods promises, specially those that concern forgiveness of sins,
and eternal salvation, made unto us in the same his son Jesus Christ, in
whom all his promises, are yea and amen.

Repentance what it is.
Repentance is an earnest hatred of all manner of sin, inward, outward, past,
present or to come, all proceeding from a right and reverent fear of Gods
eternal Majesty, which works so far in us, that it makes us to forsake
our selves, and to strive to the mortification of our corruption, to the end
we may wholly give over our selves to be altogether governed by the holy
Spirit of God, in the service of his Majesty.

Love contains in it, Love, and what it comprehends.
not only a sound affection to our brethren and friends, but also the unfeigned
reconciliation of our selves unto those whom we have offended, and a ready
forgiving of others the offenses they have committed against us, even as
willingly, gladly, and freely, as we would the Lord should forgive us, for his
Christ's sake.

That faith that is outwardly wrought in us by Gods word, True faith is not
fruitless.
and confirmed by the partaking of the holy Sacraments, is not an idle, vain,
or dead faith, but steadfast, unfeigned, and working by love, yielding forth the
fruits of blessed obedience, not according to the darkness and corruption of
our own will, 1. Natural corruption.
lusts, and affections; for they evermore rebel against God. Neither according
to men's manners and examples, 2. Other men's manners.
because they are no sufficient warrants for our conversation: 3. And the
fashions of this world, no rules to ^rame our lives by.
nor yet after the customs and fashions of this present evil world, for we
are forbidden to fashion our selves thereby: 4. But Gods wor^ only.
but according to that good, perfect and acceptable will of God, set forth and
commanded unto us in his law, which is and must be always a light unto our
feet, and a lantern unto our paths, and is indeed the only, true,
sufficient, and right rule of all righteousness and well doing.

This large volume of Gods will, plentifully and plainly revealed in the
Canonical Scriptures of the old and new Testament, God the Father has in
great mercy for our weakness sake, abridged into two tables, containing ten
Commandments.

Two tables, ten commandments.

We must fly from evil, and do good.


Wherein we are specially to mark these two things: First, that it is the
mind of the Lawgiver, in commanding good things, to forbid the contrary
evils: and in forbidding evil things, to command the contrary good, the
Almighty therein meeting with man's corruption and the frowardnes of his heart,
who supposes that if he do no evil, though he lead an idle and unprofitable
life from goodness, thinks notwithstanding that he has performed his duty.

Secondly, that the Lord by his law minds to teach us to bridle and subdue,
not only the act of sin, 1. Act of sin.
as the Pharisees imagined; 2. Consent to the same.
nor the consent to the same in our hearts and affections alone, as the
Sorbonists, and Popish school Divines dream a^ this day, but also the least
lust and motion that may prick us thereto, 3. Yea, lust or motion must be
avoided.
or rise up in our mind against the same.

We must know further that this law of God is observed and broken, 1. Gods law
is observed or broken after two sorts.
inwardly and outwardly: for the inward breaking or observing thereof, because
^o man knows what is within man, but ^he spirit of God and the spirit of man
himself, every man must be left unto himself: and yet all are bound both by
the ^ertue of Gods holy Commandment, and also by that excellent profession,
^^ter which they are named, not only ^eeply to enter into the consideration of
themselves, but also to know that they walk in his presence, before whose eyes
all things are naked and plain.

Outvvard breach.
Touching the outward breaking o^ observing thereof we must know, that the
breach of it is then done, when any thing forbidden by that law is committed,
or any thing commanded by that law is left undone: and on the other side that
obedience is then yielded, when any thing commanded by that law is performed,
or any thing forbidden by that law, Inward and outward obedience.
is left unaccomplished. For good reason is it (whatsoever man's wit can
cunningly dispute, or say against the same) that these only should be allowed
and done as good works, which he himself has commanded, and those fled
from as evil, which he himself has forbidden, because he has al light and
soundnes of true judgment in himself, and is not carried away with partiality
of affection, to pronounce a wrong sentence, a matter very common amongst all
men.

Things forbidden by the first commandment.
Wherefore no good or godly Christian should allow, use, or defend any
Idolatry, Soothsaying, Coniuring, Sorcerie, Witchcraft, Charming, false
doctrine, fear, love, or estimation, of any whatsoever creature, above God or
equally with him, or the persons which shall use such things.

None must make, or cause to be made, By the second.
either allow of, use or defend any Images to express or counterfeit God by,
or to seek him or worship him in the same, or any other manner of superstition
whatsoever, abstaining altogether in his holy service, from our own inventions,
blind devotions, men's doctrines, and other men's examples or rules.

None ought to use or abuse the name of God, By the third.
either in vain or rash swearing, be the oaths as men account them never so
small, or in blasphemy, sorcerie or witchcraft, or in cursing, forswearing and
such like: yea none should talk or speak or think of God, his word, his
works, or whatsoever else he is made known unto us by, without some urgent
and weighty cause, and that with great reverence and fear of his Majesty.

By the fourth.
None should abuse the Lords day, or any other day in doing of their own wills,
or in any wicked and ungodly exercise whatsoever, as dancing, dicing, carding,
table-playing, Tavern or Alehouse haunting, resorting to the beholding of
Enterludes, Beare-baitings, and such like.

By the fifth.
None should rebel against, disobey, or speak evil of Magistrates, Ministers,
Masters, Mistresses, fathers and mothers, or any other person, whom the Lord in
his wisdom and goodness has made their superiors, either by age,
authority, wealth, office, or any other manner of way whatsoever.

By the sixth.
Al hatred, malice and envy; al braulling, chiding, quarrelling, fighting,
bloodshed, murder and such like, yea al manner of desire to do hurt or
revenge, must be avoided.

By the seventh.
All whoredom, fornication, adultery, together with bawdie and filthy talk,
loue-songs, tickings and toyings, and all other wanton and light behavior, and
other unseemly gestures, in body or countenance (which indeed are nothing
else, but violent prouocations to filthiness and evil) yea and all uncleanness
both of body and mind must be avoided.

All theft and stealing, By the eighth.
either openly or secretly, either by force, fraud, or otherwise, together with
all deceiuable buying or selling, all usury, all extortion, all briberie, all
uncharitable getting, and keeping of other men's goods, and to conclude, all
manner of false dealings whatsoever, by cousenage, weight, measure, etc. ought
to be shunned.

Not only manifest perjury, By the ninth.
and breaking of lawful oaths and promises, but also all lying, slandring,
backbiting, flattery, and dissembling, together with all evil speaking
against others, either in words or writing, proceeding from the malice,
corruption, and naughtiness of man's heart, must be avoided.

The very pricks and motions to sin in man's mind (which the holy Scripture
sometimes calls the lusts and concupiscences of our cursed nature) must so
far forth, By the tenth.
as God shall enable us, be subdued, and that in their first assault, least
otherwise temptation further prevailing upon us with delight, we be carried on
forward by the subtlety of sin, both to consent unto the evil, and to
strive for the attempting and accomplishment thereof.

Unlawful vvishes.
And here, because unlawful wishes be dependents of this sin of lust and
coveting, men must learn to bridle and master the same, and not to have them
so often and common in their mouths, as, I would I had this, I would I had
that, etc.

On the other side, because the life of a true Christian is not an idle life,
and we are commanded by Gods holy word not only to fly from evil, Things
commanded by the first precept.
but to do that which is good, every godly faithful man must earnestly strive,
according to the power that the Lord has given him, to render unto him his due
honor and service, that is, to obey him in all things, and above all, to
worship him only, to put their whole trust in him only, in all fear and
dangers to fly unto him, and to call upon him only, acknowledging him to be
the Creator, preserver, and governor of all things, in heaven and earth.

To give unto him that manner of worship and service only, By the second.
which he himself in his word requires, without adding thereto, or taking
from it, and withdrawing themselves from al superstitious and carnal
imaginations.

To take an oath (but yet using therein with great reverence the fearful and
glorious name of our God only, By the third.
and of no creature whatsoever) when there is just occasion, as to affirm or
maintain a truth (specially if the Magistrate require or command it, Three
ends of an oath.
to set forth the glory of God, and to preserve mutual agreement and
brotherly charity among men.

To spend the Sabbath, By the fourth.
as in ceasing from the honest labors of their lawful callings, so in
frequenting of godly exercises, in joining themselves to public assemblies,
reverently and quietly there to behave themselves in diligent hearing of the
word read and preached, in prayer and singing of Psalms, and as occasion shall
serve, and is offered, in communicating in the holy Sacraments, and afterward
to bestow the rest of the time in private reading of Gods word and meditating
therein, and in the earnest consideration of his most noble and wonderful
works.

By the fifth.
And because all authority, either of Magistrates, officers, Ministers,
Masters, Mistresses, Fathers, Mothers, and others, is of God, and that there is
a like consideration of them al in that respect, every one must use humble
obedience toward them, bearing a reverent mind to them, being ready to
relieve, assist, and aid them, and willing to do after their commandments,
in all things in the Lord, and for the Lord, according to their duty.

By the sixth.
Unfeigned love, patience, humility, humanity, keeping and making of peace,
saving and helping all such as be in danger, gentle words, soft answers, and
all duties of compassion, must continually be exercised.

By the seventh.
And because they are the temples of the holy Ghost, all pureness and chastity,
not only as touching the act, but also in heart, word and behavior, must be
profes^ed and practiced.

There must be put in ure all true and faithful dealing, By the eight.
due payment of debts, diligent service, together with all careful and
friendly saving and delivering of other men's goods.

All must witness, judge, and speak the truth, By the ninth.
yea the whole truth, and nothing else but the truth (as occasion shall be
offered) without any respect touching all men, and matters whatsoever.

Lastly, By the tenth.
when the Lord puts good motions into their minds, men must diligently take
heed, that they do not suffer them to die in them, or to be quenched,
through the corruption and naughtiness of their own hearts, but must
carefully strive by all holy means, and the diligent and often use of the same,
with earnestnes to pursue them, and to bring them to good effect.

But we cannot perform these holy duties. That is true indeed, Our want of
ability is supplied by earnest prayer to God.
for we are not sufficient of our selves, as of our selves to think a good
thought, much less to do any good deed, but all our sufficiency is from
God, to whom alone we must have recourse by earnest supplications and hearty
prayers, that by him we may be made able not only to know, what that good,
holy, and acceptable will of his is: but also be strengthened from him ( from
whom alone comes every good and perfect gift) to accomplish and perform the
same.

Spurs to prayer specially four.
And because we are very dull and sluggish to perform this, as all other holy
duties, 1. Gods commandment.
the Lord has ^ot only given us certain sharp spurs to provoke us thereto
(as his holy commandment, which we ought carefully to obey; 2. Gods promises.
his comfortable promises, which we ought steadfastly to believe; the pledge of
his blessed spirit, 3. The assured pledge of the spirit.
which assures our spirits that we are his children, and stirs up in us
those groanings, that no tongue is able to express; a true taste and feeling
of our own miseries and wants, 4. Our own wants.
and of the miseries and wants of our brethren, both in respect of our bodies,
and of our souls) but also has taught us such a short, and yet
notwithstanding so sufficient a form of prayer, as does briefly comprehend in
it, al such points and matters as be meet and lawful for us to demand:
therefore we should continually labor, rightly to understand it, and
carefully to put it in practice, all the days of our lives.

But before we enter into this, Seven points to be marked before we pray.
or any other prayer, it shall be good for us to consider some circumstances,
and to observe certain rules, to the end that we, and our prayers, may by that
means be found more acceptable in Gods ^ight.

As first, 1. Our wretchedness.
how great and wonderful our wretchedness, misery and poverty is, without the
which as we may easily be puffed up with pride in our selves, so cannot our
prayers be piercing, because a full belly despises a ho^y comb, as the holy
Ghost says.

Also what is the excellency, majesty, 2. Gods greatness.
power and goodness of Almighty God, to whom we pray: for if that be not settled
in our hearts, we shall without re^erence, yea in a certain kind of
hypocritical and superstitious boldness, rush into his maiesticall presence, as
the horse does into battle.

(...)od will, an^ ^ods great power mu^t not be sundered in prayer.
The earn^^t and deep weighing of both which points, may work in us true and
unfeigned humbling of our selves in his presence, and also a certain assurance
that our prayers and requests shall be granted (so far forth as shall be
expedient for his glory and our comfort) because we come to him that has the
fulness of all will and power in himself to perform any thing that we shall
demand, according to the same.

3. That God only must be called upon.
Besides, we must know and believe that we must pray unto this alsufficient
God only, as well because he alone knows the things we stand in need of,
as also because he alone can help us, and yield relief and supply, when and
as best pleases himself.

4. I^ the name of his ^onne Christ only.
And that our prayers must be made unto him in the name of his dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ only, because it pleased the Father by him alone, to
reconcile all things to himself, both which are in heaven and in earth^, and
to appoint him to be the only Mediator between God and us.

5. Good things only must ^e asked.
Also that we must ask good things only: for it is unreasonable, yea
irreligious, to make the most good and holy God, a slave to satisfy our
corrupt affections, now we have said before, that nothing is good, but that
he allows and likes of, by his will revealed in his word.

And we must ask these good things to good and holy uses only, 6. And that to
good ends only.
as the advancement of his glory, the help and comfort of our brethren, and
our own good, and not to consume them on our lusts; as wantonness, gluttony,
drunkenness, envy, abominable idolatry, and such like.

And lastly, 7. Mouth and heart must be joined together.
that we must not pray only with our mouth and lips, after the manner of
hypocrites, but must yield consent to the same in our understandings, having
indeed the sum of every petition in our hearts, as we readily have the words
thereof in our mouths, otherwise all that we do in this behalf, will be but
lip-labor, yea lost labor.

For outward behavior in our prayers, Outvvard behavior in prayer must
plainly preach reverence of Gods majesty.
it is seemly and meet that we should order our selves reverently and
religiously, in humble kneeling upon our knees, in steadfast holding up of our
hands, and earnest lifting up of our eyes to heaven ward, and in disposing
every part and member both of our bodies and of our minds, in such sort that
we our selves may feel, and others that be present with us, may sensibly
perceive that we reverence his Majesty, before whom we appear, and rightly
use that exercise that he has enjoined us, as a special piece of his service,
even for our own health and welfare, as well ^s for his glory.

Men may not be tied of necessity to that or any form of prayer, or to any
sort of gesture therein.
Understand me as I mean. My purpose is not to tie men to that form of prayer
alone, or to te^^^ them to use only those gestures above prescribed: for that
were to limit the Spirit, and to repress occasions and prouocations given us
from God, and felt in our selves, to holy prayer, but that every one should
strive (because of that rebellion that is in our hearts) as much and as
effectually, both in word and deed, to humble our selves before God, as
possibly we can, least otherwise God resist us ( for he resists the proud)
and reject our prayers.

Now let us come to a short opening of that prayer, which the Lord himself
has taught us. The preface or beginning thereof is this. The preface to the
Lords prayer expounded.
O our Father which art in heaven.

Out of which words we may learn many things, 1. Earnest in prayer.
as first in this word O, the earnest affection that ought to be in them that
pray, who must bring with them minds, not only far removed from earthly and
carnal things, but so sted^astly set upon those heavenly and spiritual
graces, that at that present they demand, that they mind nothing but those
alone.

Secondly, in (...) word, our, the unfeigned love and feeling that ought to be
amongst Christian brethren, 2. Unfeigned love.
no man praying for himself only, but praying as carefully for others as for
themselves.

Thirdly, in this word, Father, his fatherly providence and assured favor and
good will, 3. Gods providence, and our obedience.
toward his children in Christ, on the one side, and their sincere love and
hearty obedience toward him on the other side, according to that of the
Prophet: If I be your Lord, where is my honor, and if I be your father, where
is my love?

4. Gods power.
Fourthly, in these words, which art in heaven, the exceeding Majesty, power
and glory of God, above all things: which if we respect not in prayer, and
feel in our selves to appertain to us, the fruits of our lips will fall
down, as water spilt on the earth.

The first petition, what we pray for.
The first petition is: Hallowed be thy name: wherein we pray for the knowledge
and reverence of God, so to be in our hearts, that all our thoughts, words and
deeds, may in all godliness only so shine before men, that God our heavenly
Father may thereby be glorified.

What we pray against.
And on the other side, we pray against ignorance and contempt of God, and of
all these means whereby he has made himself known unto us, as his word,
works, etc. Also we pray against all loose life and ungodly behavior
whatsoever.

The second petition, what we pray for.
The second petition is: Thy kingdom come: wherein we pray for the effectual
feeling and working of Gods blessed spirit, and all his gifts in us, as
righteousness, peace, comfort, etc: also for the sincere preaching, reverent
hearing, and right receiving of Gods holy word and discipline. We pray for
Magistrates and Commonwealths, and for the Church of Christ wheresoever
dispersed, and we pray for the glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
either particularly to visit every one of us, or generally to judge the quick
and the dead, with wonderful glory and majesty, in that great and last day.

On the other side we pray against all the illusions, What we pray against.
suggestions and assaults, either of Satan, or of our own corruption; we
pray against the bondage of sin, the kingdom of Antichrist, and the contempt
and forgetfulness of Gods either particular, or general judgment.

The third petition is, The third petition, what we pray for.
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: wherein we p^^y for wisdom,
will, power, and grace, that we may yield our selves, our souls and our
bodies, with every part and member, both of the inward and outward man, and
that all other things also together with us, may be made conformable here upon
earth, unto the obedience of Gods will declared by his word, as his Angels,
which be his heavenly creatures, study nothing but to please him, without any
motion to the contrary.

What we ^ray against.
On the other side, we pray against presumption, wilfulnes, ignorance,
rebellion, muttering, grudging, or repining against his good will and pleasure,
together with all such inordinate and fleshly desires resting in us, as are
contrary to his blessed will and ordinance.

The fourth petition, what we pray for.
The fourth petition is, Give us this day our daily bread: wherein we pray for
meat, drink, apparel, health, wealth, liberty, peace, good order, and all
other good things whatsoever, that God knows to be meet for us in this
world, to sustain, keep and defend our bodies and li^es by.

On the other side, we pray against hunger, nakedness, scarsitie, pestilence,
What we pray against.
^icknes, poverty, bondage, wars, disorder, and all manner of evils
whatsoever, tending to the hurt of our bodies and lives.

And let us mark the words, 1. Merits overthrown.
with which we utter this petition. We rather say give, than pay, because we
cannot require bodily things (much less spiritual things) for any desert that
is in us, but for Gods ^ree and gracious goodness only. And we say, Give us,
2. Self-love evil.
rather than me, to teach us, that in charitable love we are bound, both to
pray and labor for others, and not of self-love only for our selves, as
worldlings do.

And we require rather this day daily bread, 3. Gods providence, our only stay.
than every day dainty fare, because we should learn rather to stay our
selves upon, and to content our ^elues with Gods continual providence,
^inistring unto us always sufficient, for ^resent necessity, than to incomber
our ^^lues with worldly care and carking to ^et by indirect means, or to keep
any ^^perfluitie.

(...) pray for.
The fifth petition is (...) trespasses, as we forgive (...) against (...):
wherein we pray (...) feeling of Gods (...), pur^ha^ed ^^to us by Christ, an^
^is obedience only, to put away all our sinnes^ we p^^y also for peace and joy
of conscience, (...) for unfeigned love and bro^herly r^co^^ciliation amongst
men, which is an assured pledge of the fre^ ^ardon and full ^orgiuenes of all
our iniquities before God.

What we pray against.
On the other side, we pray against wrath, vengeance, despair, and many strong
illusions, that may be and are raised up in us unto condemnation in sin:
also against hatred and hard hartednes toward men.

The sixth petition, vv^ at we p^ay for.
The sixth petition is: And lead v^ not into temptation, but deliue^ us from
evil: wherein we pray for Christian patience, strength, and continuance
against all temptation, and suggestions whatsoever, to sin: also for contemp^
of the world, mortifying of the (...) and quickening of Gods holy Spirit


