A new Interlude, never before this time imprinted, entreating of the Life and
Repentance of Marie Magdalene: not only godly, learned and fruitful, but
also well furnished with pleasant mirth and pastime, very delectable for those
which shall hear or read the same. Made by the learned clarke Lewis Wager.

The names of the Players.

Infidelity the Uice. Marie Magdalene. Pride of life. Cupiditie. Carnal
Concupiscence. Simon the Pharisie. Malicious Judgment. The Law. Knowledge of
sin. Christ Jesus. Faith. Repentance. Justification. Love.
Four may easily play this Interlude.

Imprinted at London, by John Charlevvood, dwelling in Barbican, at the sign
of the half Eagle and the Key. Anno. 1566.

The Prologue.
Nulla tam modesta felicitas est
Quae malignantis dentes vitare possit.

NO state of man, he it never so modest,
Never so unrebukable and blameless,
No person, be he never so good and honest*
Can escape at any season now harmless,
But the wicked teeth of such as be shameless,
Are ready most maliciously him for to byte,
Like as Ualerius in his fourth book does write.
We and other persons have exercised
This comely and good faculty a long season,
Which of some have been spitefully despised,
Wherefore I think they can allege no reason,
Where affect rules, there good judgment is geason.
They never learned the verse of Horace doubtless,
Nec tua laudabis ^^^dia, aut aliena reprehendes,
Thou shall neither praise thine own industry,
Nor yet the labor of other men reprehend,
The one proceeds of a proud arrogancy,
And the other from envy, which does discommend,
All things that virtuous persons do intend.
For evil will never said well, they do say,
And worse tungs were never heard before this day.
I marvel why they should detract our faculty:
We have ridden and gone many sundry ways,
Yea, we have used this feate at the university,
Yet neither wise nor learned would it dispraise:
But it has been perceived ever before our days.
That foles love nothing worse tha^ foles to be called,
A horse will kick if you touch where he is galled.
Does not our faculty learnedly extol virtue?
Does it not teach, God to be praised above al thing*
What faculty does vice more earnestly subdue?
Does it not teach true obedience to the king?
What godly sentences to the mind does it bring?
I say, there was never thing invented
More worth, for man's solace to be frequented,
Hipocrites that would not have their fautes reveled
Imagine slander our faculty to let,
Feign would they have their wickedness still concealed
Therefore maliciously against us they be set,
O (say they) much money they do get.
Truly I say, whether you give halfpence or pence,
Your gain shall be double, before you depart hence.
Is wisdom no more worth than a penny trow you?
Scripture calls the price thereof incomparable.
Here may you learn godly Sapience now,
Which to body and soul shall be profitable*
To no person truly we covet to be chargeable,
For we shall think to have sufficient recompense,
If ye take in good worth our simple diligence.
In this matter which we are about to recite,
The ignorant may learn what is true believe,
Whereof the Apostles of Christ do largely write,
Whose instructions here to you we will give,
Here an example of penance the heart to grieve,
May be learned, a love which from Faith does spring,
Authority of Scripture for the same we will bring.
Of the Gospel we shall rehearse a fruietfull story,
Written in the.vii. of Luke with words plain
The story of a woman that was right sorry
For that she had spent her life in sin vile and vain,
By Christ's preaching she was converted again,
To be truly penitent by her fruictes she declared,
And to show her self a sinner she never spared.
Her name was called Mary of Magdalene,
So named of the title of her possession,
Out of her Christ rejected.vii. spirits unclean,
As Mark and Luke make open profession.
Doctors of high learning, wit, and discretion,
Of her diverse and many sentences do write,
Which in this matter we intend now to recite.
Of the place aforesaid, with the circumstance,
Only in this matter (God willing) we will treat.
Where we will show that great was her repentance,
And that her love toward Christ was also as great.
Her sin did not her conscience so grievously freate,
But that Faith erected her heart again to believe,
That God for Christ's sake would all her sins forgive.
We desire no man in this point to be offended,
In that virtues with vice we shall here introduce,
For in men and women they have depended:
And therefore figuratively to speak, it is the use.
I trust that all wise men will accept our excuse.
Of the Preface for this season here I make an end,
In godly mirth to spend the time we do intend.
The end of the Preface.
An Interlude of the Repentance
Here enters Infidelity the vice. Infidelity. WIth heigh down down and down
a down a,
Saluator mundi Domine, Kyrieleyson,
Ite Missa est, with pipe up Alleluya.
Sed libera nos a malo, and so let us be at one.
Then every man brought in his own dishe,
Lord God we had wonderful good fare,
I warrant you there was plenty of flesh and fish,
Go to, I beshrew your heart and if you spare.
A gods name I was set up at the hye deace,
Come up sir, said every body unto me:
Like an honest man I had the first meace,
Glad was he that might my proper person see.
When we had dined, every man to horseback,
And so up unto the mount of Caluarie,
I trow you never heard of such a knacke,
Much woe had some of us to escape the pillorie.
But when we came to hye Jerusalem,
Who then but I master Infidelity?
Mary I was not so called among them,
No, I have a name more nigher the verity.
In Jury, Moysaicall Justice is my name,
I would have them justified by the law,
It is plain infidelity to believe the same,
What then? from the faith I do them withdraw.
There is one come into the country of late,
Called Christ the son of God, the Jews Messiah
Of the kingdom of God he begins to prate,
But he shall never bring his purpose to pass,
No, I Infidelity stick so much in the Jews hearts,
That his doctrine and wonders they will not believe,
I warant that the chief rulers in these parts,
Will devise somewhat his body to mischeue.
Infidelity, no beware of me Infidelity,
Like as Faith is the root of all goodness,
So am I the head of all iniquity,
The well and spryng of all wickedness.
Mary sir, yet I convey my matters clean,
Like as I have a visour of virtue,
So my impes, which unto my person do lean,
The visour of honesty does endue.
As these, Pride I use to call cleanlynesse,
Envy I color with the face of prudence,
Wrath puts on the coat of manlynesse,
Couetise is profit in every man's sentence.
Sloth or idleness I paint out with quiet,
Gluttony or excess I name honest chere,
Lechery used for many men's diete,
I set on with the face of love both far and nere.
How say you to Infidelity once again?
Infidelity all men's hearts do occupy:
Infidelity now above true Faith does remain,
And shall do to the worlds end, I think verily.
Yea, that same Messiah does many things,
Yet I will so occupy the rulers minds,
Both of bishops, phariseys, elders and kings,
That few or none of them shall be his friends.

Here enters Mary Magdalene, triflyng with her garments. Marye Magdalene. I
beshrew his heart naughtye folishe knave,
The most bungarliest tailers in this country,
That be in the world I think, so God me save,
Not a garment can they make for my degree.
Have you ever seen an ouerbody thus sytte?
Now a mischief on his dronken knaves ear*
The knaves drink till they have lost their wit,
And then they mar utterly a bodies gear.
I had liefer than.xx. shillings by this light
That I had him here now in my fume and heat.
What, I am ashamed to come in any man's sight,
Think you in the waste I am so great?
Nay by gis twenty shillings I dare hold,
That there is not a gentlewoman in this land,
More propre than I in the waste I dare be bold,
They be my garments that so bungarly do stand.
Beshrew his heart once again with all my heart,
Is this gear no better than to cast away?
Let him trust to it, I will make him to smart.
For marryng of my gear he shall surely pay.

Infidelity. God forbid mistress Mary, and you so tender and young
For marryng of your gear he is greatly to blame.

Mary. What have you to do, hold your bablyng tongue,
Have you any thing to do with the same?

Infidelity. These unhappy tailors I trow be acurst,
Most commonly when they make gentlewome^s gear
In the mids they set the piece that is worst.
Yea that is the fashion of them every where.
The worst piece is in the mydst of your garment,
And it is pieced into it so unhappily,
That by my truth it is past amendment,
Meddle with it, and you spyll it utterly.

Mary. Speak you in ernest, or I pray you do you mock*
Trow you that my garment can not be amended?

Infidelity. Mock? I know that you come of a worshipful stock
He that mocketh you ought to be reprehended.
Of taylers craft I tell you I have some skill,
And if I should meddle with ye piece that is in the midst,
I should make it worse or at the least as ill:
Therefore to let it alone as it is, I judge it best,
Naught it is, and so you may wear it out,
Though it be new, it will be soon worn.

Mary. It were almose to hang such a foolish loute,
All they that see me now, will laugh me to scorn,
No gentlewoman is ordered in this wise,
My maidens on the other side are such sluts,
That if I should not for mine own clothes devise,
Within a while they would not be worth a couple of nuts

Infidelity. Of my troth it were pity in mine opinion
But that your gear should be well trimmed,
For you are well favored, and a pretty mynion,
Feate, clean made, well compact, and aptly lymmed.
In Jerusalem there is not I dare say,
A sweter countenance, nor a more loving face,
Fresh and flourishyng as the flowers in May,
I have not seen a ge^tlewoma^ of a more goodly grace
Your parents I know, were very honorable,
Which have left you worshipfully to live here,
And certainly I judge it very commendable.
That with your own you can make good chere.

Mary. I thank you for your good word gentle friend,
And forasmuch as you did know my parents,
I can no less do than love you with all my mind,
Ready to do you pleasure at your co^mandementes.

Infidelity. Verba puellatum foliis leuiora caducis,
The promise of maidens, the Poet does say,
Be as stable as a weak leaf in the wind,
Like as a small blast blows a feather away,
So a fair word truly changes a maidens mind.
Forsothe I thank you, O loving worm, good lord,
Yea, I knew your fathers state and condition,
The nobility of Jury can bear me record,
That he was a man of a worshipful disposition.
I wis mystresse Marie, I had you in mine arms,
Before you were.iii. years of age without doubt,
I preserved you many times from sore harms,
Which in your childhode your enemies went about.
A gentlewoman of noble birth as I do think
Should have servants alwais at her commandment,
You are able to give to many both meat and drink,
Yea honest wages, and also necessary raiment.

Mary. I perceive right well that you owe me good will,
Tendryng my worshipful state and dignity:
You see that I am young and can little skill
To provide for mine own honor and utility.
Wherefore I pray you in all things counsel to have,
After what sort I may lead a pleasant life here,
And look what it pleases you of me to crave,
I will give it you gladly, as it shall appear.

Infidelity. Say you so mistress Mary, will you put me in trust
In faith I will tell you, you can not trust a wiser,
You shall live pleasantly, even at your hearts lust,
If you make me your counselor and deviser.
Remember that you are young and full of dalliance
Lusty, courageous, fair, beautiful and wise.
I will have you to attempt all kinds of pastance,
Usyng all pleasure at your own hearts devise.
Do you think that it is not more than madness,
The lusty and pleasant life of a man's youth,
Miserably to pass away in study and sadness,
It is extreme folly mistress Mary for a truth.
Be ye merry, and put away all fantasies,
One thing is this, you shall never be younger in deed,
Your bodily pleasure I would have you to exercise,
Sure you are of worldly substance never to need.

Mary. Certainly my parents brought me up in chyldhod,
In virtuous qualities, and godly literature,
And also they bestowed upon me much good
To have me nourtred in noble ornature.
But evermore they were unto me very tender,
They would not suffer the wind on me to blow,
My requests they would always to me render,
Whereby I knew ye good will that to me they did owe.
At their departing, their goods they distributed
Among us their children, whom they did well love.
But me as their dearlyng, they most reputed,
And gave me the greatest part, as it did behoue.

Infidelity. Puellae pestis, indulgentia parentum,
Of parents the tender and carnal sufferance,
Is to young maidens a very pestilence.
It is a provocation and furtherance,
Unto all lust and fleshly concupiscence.
O mistress Mary, your parents did see,
That you were beautiful and well favored:
They did right well as it seems me,
That so worshipfully they have you furthered.
As I understand, you have in your possession
The whole castle of Magdalene, with the purtena^ce,
Which you may rule at your discretion,
And obtain thereby riches in abundance.
O what worldly pleasure can you want,
What commodities have you of your own?
About Jerusalem is not such a plant,
As to me and many other is well known,
It were decent I say, to use the fruition
Of such richesse as is left you here,
You never heard in any erudition,
But that one with his own should make good chere.

Mary. By my troth so would I, if I perfectly knew
Which way I should good chere making begin,
A lusty disposition from me does ensue:
But without council, I am not worth a pyn.

Infidelity. Council? in you shall want no council in deed,
I know where a certain company is,
Which can give such council in time of need,
That you following them can never speed amys.

Mary. Now I pray you help me to that company,
And look what I am able to do for your pleasure,
You shall have it I promise you verily,
Yea, whether it be lands, gold, or treasure.

Infidelity. The truth is so, they whom now I speak of,
Are persons of great honor and nobility,
Fellows that love neither to dally nor scoff,
But at once will tell you the verity.

Mary. Men of honor say you? tell me I you desire,
Can you cause them trow you shortly to be here?
I will go and provide some other attire,
That according to my birth I may appear.

Infidelity. Birth? faith of my body, you are well arayde,
I warrant you with these clothes they will be content
They had liefer have you naked, be not afraid,
Then with your best holy day garment.

Mary. You are a merry man in deed, you are a wanton,
I will go and return again by and by,
As I am, I would with all my heart be known,
So that I might be pleasant to every man's eye.

Infidelity. I pray you heartily that I may be so bold
To have a kiss or two before you do depart,

Mary. If a kiss were worth a hundred pound of gold,
You should have it even with my very heart. Exit.

Infidelity. I thank you mistress Mary by my maydenhood,
Lord what a pleasant kiss was this of you?
Take her with you, I warant you will never be good
She is given to it, I make God auow.
And I trow I shall help to set her forward.
Shortly my ofspryng and I shall her so dress,
That neither law nor prophets she shall regard,
No though the son of God to her them express.
Infidelity is my name, you know in deed,
Proprely I am called the Serpents sede,
Look in whose heart my father Satan does me sow
There must all iniquity and vice needs grow,
The conscience where I dwell is a receptacle,
For all the devils in hell to have their habitacle,
You shall see, that Mary's heart within short space,
For the devil him self shall be a dwelling place,
I will so dress her, that there shall not be a worse.
To her the devil at pleasure shall have his recourse.
I will go and prepare for her such a company,
As shall poison her with all kinds of villainy.

Here enters Pride of life, Cupiditie, and Carnal Concupiscence. Pride.
Whether art thou going now Infidelity*

Infidelity. Pride of Life now welcome, the spryng of iniquity,
O pride of life, thou never use to go alone,
Give me your hands also I pray you one by one.
Welcome pride of life with my whole heart and mind,
And thou art welcome Cupiditie mine own friend:
What, mynikin carnal concupiscence,
Thou art welcome heartily by my conscience.

Pride. To see thee merry Infidelity I am right glad.


Cupiditi When Infidelity is in health, I can not be sad.


Carnal concupiscence. Infidelite? O Infidelity, mine own infidelity,
I am glad to see thee merry now for a surety,
I marvel what thou do in this place alone,
I thought that out of Jury thou had ben gone.

Infidelity. Out of Jury? no carnal lust to thee I may tell
That with the chief princes now I do dwell:
The bishops, priests and pharisees do me so retain,
That the true sense of the law they do disdain.

Pride of life. In faith there is some knavery in mind,
That here by thy self alone we do thee find.

Cupiditi Infidelity in our fathers cause is occupied,
As within a while it shall be verified.

Infidelity. Am I* you would say so if ye knew all,
I was going forth you to call,
Know you not a wenche called Mary Magdalene?

Pride. Do I know her? she is a pretty wenche and a clean.
Since she had discretion her have I known,
Mary Magdalen (quod he) in deed she is mine own
It is as proud a little gyrle truly I think,
As ever men saw in this world eat or drink.

Cupiditi And somewhat to do with her now and then I have
I allure her for her own profit always to save.
I have dressed her so well truly I believe,
That already for Gods sake nothing she will give.

Earnall concu. For my part in her I have kindled such a fire,
That she begins to burn in carnal desire.

Infidelity. Tushe, as yet you have but her mind moved,
Whom she may forsake if she be reproved:
But I would have her cleave unto you so fast.
That she shall not forsake you while her life does last

Pride. If thou be once rooted within the heart,
Then may thou make an entrance by thy craft and art
So that we may come into her at pleasure,
Fillyng her with wickedness beyond all measure.
In us toure without fail be contained
As many vices as ever in this world reigned.
Now if we by thy means may in her remain,
She shall be sure all kinds of vices to contain.

Car. con Within my self you know that I contain a sort,
Which by name before you here I will report.
My name is carnal concupiscence or desire,
Which all the pleasures of the flesh does require.
First the flesh to nourishe with drink and meat
Without abstinence like a beast always to eat,
To quasse and drink when there is no necessity,
Ioying in excess, bealy chere, and ebrietie.
I contain in my self all kind of lechery,
Fornication, whoredom, and wicked adultery,
Rape, incest, sacrilege, softness, and bestialitie,
Blyndnesse of mind, with every such quality,
Inconstancy, headiness, and inconsideration,
After the hearts poison and filthy communication,
So then to the hate of God I do them bring,
Causyng a love in himself inordinatly to spryng.
These and such like I contain in my person.
Thus you see that carnal lust goes never alone.

Infidelity. Thou have reckned an abominable rabble,
Where thou dwell, the devil may have a stable.

Cupiditi With thee I may boldly compare I trow,
For as many vices in me as in thee do grow.
You know that my name is called Cupiditie,
Whom Scripture calls the root of all iniquity,
Infidelity in deed is the seed of all syn,
But cupiditie opens the gate, and lets him in:
I conteyne theft, deceate in sellyng and bying,
Perjury, rapine, dissimulation, and lying.
Hardiness of heart otherwise called inhumanitie,
Inquietnesse of mind falshode and vanity,
In me is all vengeance envy rankor and ire.
Murder, war, treason, and gredie desire.
I conteyne the wicked vices of usury,
Dice and card playing with all kind of injury.
What mischief was there ever yet or sin,
But that cupiditie did it first of all begin?

Infidelity. There can not be a more fylthy place in hell,
Than that is, where as cupiditie does dwell.

Cupiditi Yea, there is impiety, the contempt of Gods law,
His word is no more regarded than a vile straw.

Pride of life. You contain vices very wicked in deed,
But how wicked is he, from whom al syn does proceed:
The beginning of syn, which does man from god divide
Scripture calls it nothing else but pride.
For I my self not only conteyne you three,
But all vices in you, and that in every degree,
Pride despises God, and commits idolatry
To God and man Pride is a very adversary,
I am full of boastyng, arrogancy, and vainglorie,
Envious, and of all other men's wealth right sorry:
Pride causes obstinacy, and disobedience,
Yea, it engenders idleness and negligence,
The truth of Gods prophets through tira^ts of pride
Has ever unto this day ben cast aside:
The men of God pride has spitefully reputed,
And with tirants always the same persecuted.
Pride would never suffer any virtue to reign,
But oppressed it with great malice and disdain.
In a short sum and few words you shall know all,
Pride caused Lucifer from heaven to hell to fall.
Yea pride lost mankind, and did him so infect,
That God from his favor did him away reject,
Where as pride is, a token it is evident,
That all other vices be even there resident.

Infidelity. Where as you and all your ofspryng does dwell,
There is a place for all the devils in hell:
And plain it is, where as is such fylthy sin,
There even in this world their hell does begin.
By such time as with us Mary be furnished,
With the devil him self she shall be replenished.

Pride. In our tragedy we may not use our own names,
For that would turn to al our rebukes and shames.

Infidelity. Pride with all thy abominable store,
At this time must be called Nobility and honor.

Cupiditi Uery well, for these women that be vicious,
Are alwais high minded and ambicious.

Concupiscence* Never woman that could play a harlots part,
Was either humble, or yet meke in heart.

Infidelity. Yea and the same loved always cupiditie,
Therefore thy name shall be called Utilitie.

Pride. For him a better name you could not express,
For ill disposed women are always mercylesse.

Car. concupisce^ce They are alwais scraping, clawing, and gathering,
To maintain their lives in wickedness and sin.

Infidelity. Carnal concupiscence shall be called pleasure,
And that pretty Marie loves beyond all measure.

Pride. Infidelity may not be called infidelity.


Infidelity. No, we will work with a little more austeritie,
Infidelity for diverse respects has names diverse,
Of the which some of the^ to you I purpose to rehearse
With bishops, priests, scribes, seniors and pharisees,
And with as many as be of the Jews degrees,
I am called Legal Justice commonly:
For why by the law them selves they do justify.
It is plain Infidelity so to believe:
Therefore there, such a name to my self I do give.
I have a garment correspondent to that name,
By the which I walk among them without blame.
With publicans and sinners of a carnal pretense,
I am sometime called counsel, and sometime Prudence.
I cause them the wisdom of God to despise,
And for the flesh and the world wittily to devise,
Prudence before Marie my name I will call.
Which to my suggestions will cause her to fall:
A vesture I have here to this garment corresponde^t,
Lo here it is, a gown I trow convenient.

Pride. For our honor I pray thee heartily do it wear.


Infidelity. Mary did talk with me before in this gear,
But because she shall the sooner to me apply,
put on a gown and a cap. I will dress me in these garments even by and by.
How think you by me now in this array?
Mary loves them I tell you, that use to go gay.

Cupiditi Then had thou need to mend thy folysh cou^tena^ce
For thou look like one that has lost his remembrance

Car. concupiscece With the one eye overmuch thou use to wink,
That thou meanest some fraud thereby they will think
He that looks with one eye, and winketh with an other,
I would not trust (say they) if he were my brother.

Infidelity. Like obstinate Friars I temper my look,
Which had one eye on a wench, and an other on a book
Passion of God, behold, yonder comes Marie.
See that in your tales none from other do vary.

Pride. It is a pretty wenche that it is in deed,
Much to entreat her, I think we shall not need.

Cupiditi No, for I think she is ill enough of her self,
She seems to be a proud little elfe.

Car. concupisce^ce I pray you behold how she trimmeth her gear?
She would have all well about her every where.

Mary. Maide^s (quod she?) there is no ge^tlewoma^ I wene
So accumbred as I am, for such were never seen:
Fie on them in good faith they are to badde,
They would make some gentlewoman stark mad.
Like as I put of my gear, so I do it find,
And I can not tell how often I have told the^ my mind,
By the faith of my body if they do not amend,
To lay them on the bones surely I do intend.

Infidelity. Maxima quaequae domus, seruis est plena superbis,
Every great house, as the Poet does say,
Is full of naughty servants both night and day.

Mary You say truth sir in deed, what old acquaintance?
Now forsooth you were out of my remembrance:
You have changed your array since I was here,
I am glad to see you merry and of a good chere.

Infidelity. And I of yours mistress Mary with heart and mind
It is a joy to see a gentlewoman so loving and kind
Shall I be so bold to kiss you at our metyng?

Mary. What else? it is an honest manner of greetyng.


Infideli* Pleases it you to bid these gentlemen welcome?


Mary. Yea forsooth, are they heartily all and some.
I will kiss you all for this gentleman's sake,
He is a friend of mine as I do him take.

Pride. He is in deed, you may be sure mistress Mary,
There is no man living can say the contrary.

Cupiditi He has been diligent to seek us together,
And for your sake he has caused us to come hither.

Car. concupisce^ce I dare say thus much, that he is your friend,
For he loves you with his whole heart and mind.
He has been diligent about your cause,
As it had been his own, and would never pause,
Till he had performed his desired request.

Mary. Which I am able to say is very honest.
A gentle friend at so little acquaintance,
Will you ^ooke so much unto my furtherance?
It seems then if by me you had been benefited,
You would have my kyndnesse gently requited.

Infidelity. Quo magis tegitur, magis aestuat ignis
The more closely that you keep fire, no doubt
The more fervent it is when it breaks out.

Mary. Well friend, I know what you mean by that verse
What I will do for you at this time I will not rehearse
But in one thing truly I am much to blame,
That all this time I have not inquired your name.

Infidelity. Sweet mistress Mary, I am called Prudence,
Or else Counsel, full of wisdom and science,
Here unto you, honorable Honor I have brought,
A person always to be in your mind and thought,
And this person is named Utilitie,
Uery profitable for your commodity,
Pleasure is the name of this Mynion,
Convenient for you forsothe in mine opinion.

Mary. Prudence, Honor, Utilitie, and Pleasure,
Oh who would desire in this world more treasure,
Gramercy heart of gold for your great pain,
Truly of necessity, I must kiss you once again.

Infidelity. Will you so? that is the thing that have I would,
Every kiss to me is worth a crown of gold.

Pride. Leave kissyng, and treat we of matters more ernest.
Let us reason of things concerning your request.
Honor is my name, a quality for you requisite,
Or rather of honor I am an appetite:
On the which must be all your meditation,
With the hearts courage and minds elevation:
I tell you this desire must be ever next your heart.

Infidelity. Nay hoa there, backare, you must stand apart,
You love me best I trow, mystresse Mary.

Mary. For a hundred pound I would not say the contrary
And in token Prudence that I love you best,
Here I ioyn you next unto my heart and breast.

Cupiditi If ye embrace one, you must all embrace,
For our use is to dwell all in one place.

Concupiscence. Tushe from our purpose always we do digress,
Let every one of us his qualities express.

Infidelity. Agreed, mistress Mary hear you my counsel.
First, all thought from your heart you must expel.
Trouble not your self with any fantasies,
Never attend you to the law nor prophecies.
They were invented to make fools afraid,
Hear them not, for they will make you dismayed.
God? tushe, when was God to any man seen,
I had not ben now alive, if any God had been.

Pride. Homo homini Deus.
Man, is God to man this matter is plain,
And believe you that none other God does reign.

Cupiditi Man is the beginning of his own operation:
Ergo then of none other gods creation,
Man is his own God therefore with utility,
Let him labor here to live in felicity.

Concupiscence: Of many ladies I am certain you have hard,
Which the people as goddesses did regard:
And why* this was the cause truly in my judgment,
They had all pleasure here at their commandment,
So that they lived in joy wealth and prosperity,
Usyng all pleasures for their own commodity.

Infidelity. To be a goddess your self truly you must believe,
And yt you may be so, your mind thereto you must give
All other gods beside your self you must despise,
And set at naught their Scripture in any wise.

Pride. How say you M. Mary do we not gree all in one?


Infideli. Surely M. Mary we will make you a Goddess anon.


Mary. You please me excedingly well verily,
Persons you are of great wit and policy.

Pride. You must be proud, lofty, and of hye mind,
Despise the poor, as wretches of an other kind:
Your countenance is not ladylike enough yet.
I see well that we had need to teach you more wit.
Let your eyes roll in your head, declaryng your pride,
After this sort you must cast your eyes aside.

Mary. How think you by this manner of countenance?


Pride. Convenient for such as be not of your acquaintance.


Cupiditi I doubt not but she will do right well her part,
By that time that all we be fast within her heart,

Carnal concu. Mark the garments of other in any wise,
And be you sure of one of the newest guise.
Your hair me think is as yelow as any gold,
Upon your face laid about have it I would.
Sometime on your forehead the breadth of an hand,
Sometime let your attire upon your crown stand,
That all your hair for the most part may be in sight,
To many a man a fair hair is a great delight.

Infidelity. In summer time now and then to keep away flies,
Let some of that fair hair hang in your eyes:
With a hot nedle you shall learn it to crispe,
That it may curle together in manner like a wispe.

Mary. By my troth you are a merry gentleman,
I will follow your counsel as much as I can.

Pride. By your ears sometimes with pretty tusks and toys
You shall fold your hair like Tomboyes.
It becomes a young gentlewoman be ye sure,
And young men unto your love it will allure.

Cupiditi If the color of your hair begins for to fade,
A craft you must have* that yellow it may be made,
With some Goldsmyth you may your self acquaint,
Of who^ you may have water your hair for to paint.

Concupiscence. Besides Goldsmythes water, there is other gear,
Uery good also to color again the hear,
Yea, if you were not beautiful of your vysage,
A painter could make you to apere with a lusty courage
And though you were as aged as any creature,
A Painter on your face would set such an ornature,
That you should seem young and very fair,
And like one whose beauty does never despair.

Infide. M. Mary, had you never ye small por in your youth?


Pride. You are a mad fellow Prudence, of a truth.


Marie. I pray you M. Prudence* wherefore ask you that?


Pride. It is l^ke that in you he has spied somewhat


Car. con Alas good gentlewoman, she blushes like coals.


Infidelity. In deed about her nose there be little pretty holes,
Therefore I thynk that she has had the pockes,
I mean good faith without any gaudes or mockes.

Mary. If there be any fautes in my face verily,
For money I trust shortly to have remedy.

Pride. Mistress Mary there is not a fayrer in this town.


Infideli. Yea by saint Anne she is lovely in color, but brown.


Car. concupisce^ce If she be not content with that native color,
A painter will set on one of more honor.

Infidelity. I have known painters that have made old crones
To appear as pleasant as little pretty young Jones.

Pride. Let us return again to our ornaments,
I would have you pleasant always in your garments
Upon your forhead you must wear a bon grace,
Which like a penthouse may com far over your face,
And an other from your nose unto your throat,
Of velvet at the least, without spot or moate,
Your garments must be so worn always,
That your white pappes may be seen if you may.

Cupiditi If young gentlemen may see your white skin,
It will allure them to love, and soon bring them in.

Concupisce^ce. Both damsels and wives use many such feats,
I know them that will lay out their fair teates,
Purposely men to allure unto their love,
For it is a thing that does the heart greatly move.
At such sights of women I have known men in deed
That with talking and beholding their noses will blede*
Through great courage moved by such goodly sights*
Laboring the matter further with all their myghts.

Mary. Your words do not only provoke my desire,
But in pleasure they set my heart on fire.

Infideli. Sometime for your pleasure you may wear a past*
But above all th^n is gyrd your self in the waste,
Upon your over body you may nothing else wear,
But an vnliued garment without any other gear.
Let your body be pent, and together strained,
As hard as may be, though thereby you be pained.

Pride Use will make the thing easy there is no doubt.


(...) Yea pardie gentlewomen use it now all about.


Infi^^^litie Your nether garments must go by gymmes and joints
Above your buttocks they must be tied on with points.
Some women a doublet of fine lynnen use to wear
Unto the which they tie their other nether gear,
With wiers and houpes your garments must be made,
Pleasure your mynion shall show you in what trade.

(...) In the wast I will have ye as small as a wand.
Yea so small, that a man may span you with his hand.

Infideli It skilleth not though in the buttocks you be great


Car. con No for there she is like many times to be beat.


Marie. Well wantons well, are ye not ashamed?


Pride. In deed mistress, they are worthy to be blamed.
You must rejoice in your richesse and good,
And set much by your kynrede and noble blood:
Boast of them, and when of them you do talk,
Of their co^mendatio^s let your tongue evermore walk.
Daily thus, my lord my father, or mi lady my mother
My lord my uncle, and my master my brother.

Mary. I promise you I come of a stock right honorable,
Therefore my talk of them can not be to commendable.

Infidelity. It is a stock (they say) right honorable and good,
That has neither these nor whore in their blood.
No more words: how say you M. here by pleasure?

Mary. Forsooth sweet heart. I love him beyond al measure.


Infideli Body of god, for this all this while have I wrought?
By your smirking look ofttimes on him so I thought
What do you love him better than you love me?

Mary. Which of you I should love best truly I can not se.


Infidelity. This is a true proverb, and no fained fable,
Few women's words, be honest, constant, and stable.

Concupisce^ce. Truly M. Mary if ye love me, there is nothing lost,
Love they say, ieopardeth all, and spares for no cost.
Voluptas autem est sola quae nos vocet ad se,
Et aliciat suapte natura,
Pleasure says one man, of his own nature,
Allecteth to him every humayn creature:
Now what person soever does pleasure hate,
As a beast is to be abiected both early and late.
Let me have a word or two in your ear.
How say you by that, like you not that pretty gear?

Mary. Ha, ha, ha, you are a fond body pleasure verily.


Infidelity. Does he not move you to matrimony?
Take heed that he bring you not to such dotage,
For many incommodities truly be in marriage.

Cupiditi Semper habent lites, alterque iurgia lectus,
In quo nupta iacet minimum dormitur in illo,
The bed wherein lies any married wife,
Is never without chidyng, braulyng, and strife,
That woman shall never sleep in quiet,
Which is married contrary to her diete.

Pride. Of all bondage truly this is the ground,
A gentlewoman to one husband to be bound.

Car. con Tushe mistress Mary, be ye not in subjection,
Better it is to be at your own election.
What thing in this world excels liberty?
Neither gold nor treasure for a surety.
Take you now one, and then an other hardely,
Such as for the time will to you louyngly apply.

Mary. That will be a mean truly to lose my good name.
And so among the people I shall suffer blame.

Infidelity. Ye shall not keep my counsel, if ye can not keep your own
Can you not make good chere, but it must be known?

Concupiscence. As touching that, I will be to you such a mean,
As shall teach you alwais to convey the matter clean

Pride. Take you none but gentlemen with velvet coats,
It is to be thought, that they are not without groates

Cupiditi In any wise see that your lovers be young and gay,
And such fellows as be well able to pay.

Mary. Nay truly if I should attempt any such gear,
I would take where I loved always here and there.

Concupiscence: Spoken like a worthy sweet gyrle by the mass,
I warant all this gear will well come to pass.

Infidelity. You must ever have a tongue well fyled to flatter,
Let your garments be sprinkled with rose water.
Use your ciuet, pommander, musk, which be to sell,
That the odor of you a mile of, a man may smell,
With sweet ointments such as you can appoint,
Use you evermore your propre body to anoint.

Concupiscence. With fine meats and pure wines do your body norish
That will cause you in all pleasure to florishe:
And when one for your mind you can espy,
Use a smylyng countenance and a wanton eye.

Pride. Upon all such as ye mind not, look you aloft,
To them that be not of your diet be you not soft.

Mary. Ha, ha, ha, laugh* now I pray God I dye if ever I did se,
Such pleasant companions as you all be.
You speak of many things here of pleasure,
Which to use truly requires much treasure.

Car. con If you can wisely occupy this pretty gear,
I will warant you to get an hundred pound a year.

Infidelity. Hold up the market, and let them pay for the ware,
Be ever catchyng and taking, do you not spare.

Mary. I may use daliance and pastyme a while,
But the courage of youth will soon be in exile.
I remember yet since I was a little fool,
That I learned verses when I went to school,
Which be these: Forma bona fragilis est, quantum acce^^t ad anno^*
^^t minor, and spacio carpitur illa suo,
Nec semper viola, nec semper lilia florent,
Et riget amissa spina relicta rosa.

The pleasure of youth is a thing right frail,
And is yearly less, so that at length it does fail,
The sweet violets and lylies flourishe not always:
The rose soon dries, and lasts not a day.
I see in other women by very experience,
That the time of youth has no long permanence.

Infidelity. In good faith when ye ar come to be an old maude,
Then it will be best for you to play the baude.
In our country there be such old mother bees,
Which are glad to cloak baudry for their fees.
This is the order, such as were harlots in their youth
May use to be baudes evermore for a truth.

Pride. When the courage of them is altogether past,
In age they use to get their living with such a cast.

Cupiditi Tushe, your friends have left you honest possessions,
Which you may employ after such discretions,
That a worshipful state you may maintain,
Besides that, with the other feate you may gain.
Oppress your tenantes, take fines, and raise rentes,
Hold up your houses and lands with their contents.
Bye by great measure, and sell by small measure,
This is a way to amplify your treasure:
Sell your ware for double more than it is worth,
Though it be stark naught, yet put it forth.
A thousand castes to enriche you I can tell,
If you be content to use always my counsel.

Mary. Yes by the faith of my body, else I were not wise,
For my profit is your counsel and devise.

Infidelity. How say you mistress Mary, tell us your mind,
To embrace us and love us can you in your heart find?

Mary. Truly heart rote I love you all.iiii. with all my heart,
Trusting that none of us from other shall depart.
In token whereof, I embrace you in mine arms,
Trusting that you will defend me from all harms.

Pride. Will we? yea we will see so for your prosperity,
That you shall live in joy and felicity.

Cupiditi I will see that you shall have good in abundance,
To maintain you in all pleasure and daliance.

Concupisce^ce. And new kinds of pastyme I will invent,
With the which I trust ye shall be content.

Infideli. Mistress Mary can you not play on ye virginals?


Mary. Yes sweet heart that I can, and also on the regals,
There is no instrument but that handle I can,
I think as well as any gentlewoman.

Infidelity. If that you can play upon the recorder,
I have as fair a one as any is in this border,
Truly you have not seen a more goodly pipe,
It is so big that your hand can it not gripe.

Pride. Will you be so good as to play us a dance?
And we will do you as great pleasure it may chance.

Mary Alas we have no such instrument here.
I know where you may have all such gear.
No instruments nor pastime that you can require,
But I can bring you unto it at your desire.

Cupiditi Will you take the pain to go before thither?
And mistress Mary and we will come together.

Infideli. How say you mistress Mary, are you content?


Mary. Look what you will do, I will thereto assent.


Pride. I think it best that we.iii. depart hence,
And let mistress Mary com thither with Prudence.

Infidelity. Be it so, then you and I will come alone,
I trust that by the way we will make one,
Nay M. Mary we must have a song of.iiii. parts
At your departing to rejoice our merry hearts.

Cupiditi The treble you shall master Pleasure sing
So freshly that for joy your heart shall spryng.
Utilitie can sing the base full clean,
And Noble Honor shall sing the mean.

Infide. Mistress Mary will you help to sing a part?


Mary. Yea sweet heart with you with all my heart.
In faith we will have a song of your name.

Infideli. Come syrs, help I pray you to sing the same.

The so^g
Hey dery, dery, with a lusty dery,
Hoigh mistress Mary, I pray you be merry.
Your pretty person we may compare to Lais,
A morsel for princes and noble kings,
In beauty you excel the fair lady Thais,
You excede the beautiful Helene in all things,
To behold your face who can be weary?
Hoigh mystresse Mary, I pray you be merry.
The hair of your head shyneth as the pure gold,
Your eyes as gray as glass and right amiable,
Your smylyng countenance so lovely to behold,
(...) all is most pleasant and delectable,
Of your commendations who can be weary?
Huffa mystresse Mary, I pray you be merry.
Your lyps as ruddy as the red Rose,
Your teeth as white as ever was the whales bone,
So clean, so sweet, so fair, so good, so fresh, so gay,
In all Jury truly at this day there is none.
With a lusty voice sing we Hey dery dery.
Huffa mistress Mary, I pray you be merry.

Mary. Such pleasant companions I have not seen before,
Now I pray you let us dwell together evermore.

Pride. To your heart we are so fast conglutinate,
That from thence we shall never be separate.

Cupidit* Yet from your sight at this time we will depart,
Assuryng you to remayn still in our heart.

Car. concupisce^ce We three will go before some thing to prepare,
That shall be to your commodity and welfare.

Mary. Fare you well my hearts joy, pleasure, and bliss.
It is good manner at our departing to kiss. Exeunt All three:

Infide. I must kiss to, if I tarry still.


Marie. You shall have kisses enough, even when you will.


Infidelity. Gramercy in deed mine own good loving Judge
It does me good in mine arms you to hug,
How say you now by these mynions?

Mary. I say as you say in deed they are mynions,
And such persons as long time I have desired,
I thank you, that for me you have them inquired.

Infidelity. You must think on the counsel that they did give,
They will perform their sayings you shall believe.

Mary. I am not obliuious I warant you my freinde,
For I have printed all their words in my mind,
I have determined by them to direct my life,
So that no man shall be able to set us at strife.

Infidelity. Will you resort with me unto Jerusalem?
There we shall be sure in a place to find them.
A banquet they have prepared for you I dare say,
Such a one as has not ben seen before this day.

Mary. Alas why do they such great cost on me bestow?


Infidelity. Truly because you their good hearts should know.
There is nothing lost that is done for such a friend,
I wis mistress Mary, I would you knew al my mind

Mary. Gentle Prudence if you have any thing to say,
Break your mind boldly to me as you go by ye way.

Infidelity. Will you come? you had need to go but softly,
Take heed, for the way is foul and slipperie:
If never so little backward you chance to slip,
Up into your saddle forsooth I am ready to skippe.

Mary. Go wanton, get you forth with sorrow,
We shall be at Jerusalem I think to morrow. Exeunt.

Here enters Simon the Pharisie, and Malicious Judgment. Simon ye pharisie. I
thought surely yt here we should have found him,
It was showed me that he was here about in deed.

Malicious judgment The last weke he was at the City of Naim,
And from thens I wot not whether he did proceed.

Simon. He did a marvelous act there, as we heard say,
For the which the people do him greatly praise:
Maruels he works almost every day.
At Naim a dead child again he did raise.

Malicious judge. All things he does by the power of the great devil,
And that you may see by his conversation,
He keeps company with such as be evil,
And with them he has his habitation:
A friend of sinners, and a drynker of wine,
Never conversant with such as be honest,
Against the law he teaches a doctrine,
All holy Religion he does detest,
The reverend bishops and you the pharisees,
He calls hipocrites, and does you revile,
So he does the doctors and scribes of all degrees*
Beside that, the Saboth also he does defile.
He uses as great blasphemy as ever was,
The son of the living God he does himself call,
He says that he is the very same Messiah,
Prophesied before of the Prophets all.
I promise you right worshipful Simon,
Your temple, law, and people shall be made captive,
If in this sort he be suffered alone,
And you shall lose all your prerogative.

Simon We the fathers of the clergy diverse seasons,
About him have consulted together,
To destroy him we have alleged reasons,
But many things therein we do consider.
His doctrine is marvelous this is true,
And his works are more marvelous doubtless,
If as yet we should chance him to pursue,
Much inconvenience might chance and distress,
The people do him for a great Prophet take,
He does so much good among them that be sick,
That they wot not what on him to make,
For he heals both the mad and the lunatike.

Malicious judge. Me think verily, that it does you behoue,
Which are men of learning and intelligence,
His doctrine and miracles wisely to prove,
And whence he had them to have experience.

Simon. By my faith I will tell you what was my pretense,
To have bidden him to dinner this day I thought,
Where we would have examined his science,
And by what power such wonders he wrought.
But if I can not have him in my house this day,
I will appoint an other day for the same cause.
Then will we appoint for him some other way
If we find him contrary to our laws.

Malicious judge. Ne credas tempori, trust not the time he does say,
I fear that you will permit him to long:
There is ever peril in much delay,
Never suffer you to reign ought that is wrong.

Simon. Well, seeing that at this time he does not appear,
I will return hence as fast as I may,
Take you the pain a while to tarry here
To see if he chance at any time to come this way,
Or if you here where he is resident,
Let us have word as fast as ever you can.

Malicious judge. As concerning your request I will be diligent,
To do you pleasure evermore I am your man.
It shall cost me a fall I promise him truly,
Except I bring him shortly to an end.
Watch for him will I, in all places duly,
I will know what the merchant does intend.
A beggarly wretch, that has not of his own,
One house or cabyn wherein he may rest his head:
His parents for poor laboring folks ar well known,
And have not ye things which should stand the^ instead
No man knows where he learned and went to school
And yet he takes upon him to teach men doctrine.
But within a while he will prove him self a fool,
And come to utter destruction and ruin.
Is he able, think you, to withstand,
So many bishops, priests, and pharisees,
Great learned men, and seniors of the land,
With other people that be of their affinites?
His folly by his presumption he does declare,
A while we are content that he does reign.
But I trust to make him weary of his welfare,
If I may see him in this country again.

Infidelity. Ha, ha, ha, laugh quod he? laugh I must in deed,
I never saw a bolder harlot in my life,
To prompt her forward we shall not need,
No point of sin but that in her is rife.

Malicious iugem^t Infidelity? what a devil do thou here?
I had not known thee but by thy voice.

Infidelity. Malicious judgment I pray thee what chere,
To see thee merry at my heart I do rejoice.

Malicious judge. What a devil meanest thou by this gear?
This garment is not of the wonted fashion.

Infidelity. For every day I have a garment to wear,
According to my work and operation,
Among the Pharisees, I have a Pharisees gown,
Among publicans and sinners an other I use,
I am best I tell thee now, both in city and town,
And chiefly among the people of the Jews.
This is the cause their Messiah, who^ Christ they call
Is come into the world, sinners to forgive.
Now my labor is both with great and small,
That none of them do him nor his words believe.
The bishops and pharisees I make ye more hard hearted
The sins of them that are disposed to sin,
I augment, so that they can not be converted,
So that hard it will be any grace to win.

Malicious judge: Among them Malicious judgment is not my name
The true intellection of the law they do me call,
Carnally I cause them to understand the same,
And according to their own malice to judge all.

Infidelity. Thou know that among the^ I am Justice lega.
For by the deeds of the law they will be justified,
So that the doctrine of the Messiah evangelical,
Shall Be despised, and he therefore crucified.

Malicious judgment The reverend father Simon the Pharisie,
To have spoken with him, even now was here:
Under the pretense of friendship and amity,
He would bid him to diner, and make him good chere,
Not for any good will that to him he does owe,
But to prove his fashion, learning, and power.
Good will quod he* No, no that I do know.

Infidelity. For if they durst, he should die within this hour.
But let this pass, I will tell thee what I have done,
Know thou not a wench called Mary Magdalene

Malicious judge. Yes mary, I did see her yesterday at noone.
A pretty wenche she is in deed and a clean.

Infidelity. I have brought her now into such a case,
That she is past the fear of God and shame of man,
She works privily in every place,
Yea and provoke other thereto now and than,
I would thou dydst see her disposition,
Thou have not seen her like I think in thy days.

Malicious judge. If she have tasted of thy erudition,
I doubt not but she knows all wicked ways,
To se her fashion I would bestow my forty pence,
But at this time I can no longer tarry here,
About my business I must depart hence,
Seeking for the same Christ both far and nere.

Infideli. Uery little I hope for his commodity.
To do him any good do thou intend?
Thou know my mind right well Infidelity*
What need we any more time to spend?
Farewell, thou will come to ^^^er to day,
Master Simon will have him if it be possible.

Infidelity. Thou know that I dwell with such men always,
For in his heart I am even now invisible.
Well remembered, yet I must provide a garment
Against that I come to my master Simon,
About the which the precepts of the testament
Must be written in order one by one.
Now will I return to my minion again
I may not from her be away absent.
If her company I should a little refrain,
I know well that she would not be content.

Mary Horeson, I beshrowe your heart, are you here?
I may do what I will for you.

Infidelity. Huffa mistress Mary, are you so near?
I thought otherwise I make God auowe.
I pray you let me have a word in your ear,
I promise you he is a mynion fellow.
By my faith I thought that you had been there,
For I saw when you did him follow.

Mary* By my faith Prudence you have a false eye*
A body can never so secretly work,
But that their daliance you will epsy,
I trow for the nones you lie in corners and lurk.
But sir, how say you to him in the flaren beard?
That is a knave that horeson, wot you what he did*
In my life was I never worse afraid,
When I came to bed, I found him there hid.
Out alas, quod I, here is some ill spirit,
A sweet savor of musk and ciuet I smelt,
Come and lie with me Mary quod he, this night,
Then I knew who it was, when his beard I felt.,

Infidelity. I beshrew your hearts, whore and thief were agreed
You knew the spirit well enough before you came there
I am sure, that so honestly he had you feed,
That the reward did put away the fear.

Mary. Good lord, who is this that yonder does come?
What mean the tables that be in his hand?

Infidelity. Come aside a little, and give him room,
And what he is anon we shall understand.
The Law. The Law of God at this time I do represent,
Written with the finger of God in tables of stone,
Whereby the people might know their lord omnipote^t
And how that he is the Lord God alone.
A peculiar people to him self he had elected,
Coming of the stock of faithful Abraham,
Whom by the law he would have directed,
After that out of Egypt from Pharao they came.
In me as in a glass it does plainly appear,
What God of his people does require,
What the peoples duty is, they may see here,
Which they owe unto God in pain of hell fire.
In me is declared the same justice,
Which unto God is acceptable,
Man's sin is here showed, and proud enterprise,
Whereby he is convicted to pains perdurable.
It was necessary and it did behoue,
Considering man's pride and temeritie,
Which was drunk and blind in his own love,
To make a law to show his imbecillitie.
Except the law had rebuked his vanity,
So much he would have trusted in his own strength
And believed, that through ye power of his humanity,
He might have obtained salvation at length.
Wherefore as I said to a glass compared I may be,
Wherein clearly as in the sun light,
The weakness and sin of him self he may se,
Yea and his own damnation as it is right.
For the curse of God follows sin always,
And damnation follows malediction:
By this it appears as clear as the day,
That my office is to fill the mind with affliction,
I am a ministration of death workyng ire,
I show Gods request, and man's inability,
I condemn him for sin unto eternal fire,
I find not one just of man's fragilitie.

Mary. O Prudence, hear you not what the law does say,
Excedingly it pricketh my conscience.
I may cry out alas now and welaway,
For I am damned by Gods own sentence.

Infidelity. Prick of conscience, quod she? it pricketh you not so sore
As the young man with the flaxen beard did I think
What a devil about him here do you poare.
If ever I see any such, I pray God I synke.
The more you look on him, ye worse like him you shall.
Come away, come away from him for very shame.
And in deed will you be gasyng on him still?
If you repent not this, let me suffer blame.

Mary. O friend Prudence, do you see yonder glass?
I will tell what therein I do see:
I can not speak for sorrow, now out alas,
All men for sin by Gods sentence damned be.
The spirit of God speaks by king Solomon,
That no man on earth lives without sin.
David says there is none good, no not one,
No not a child that this day does his life begin.
Now sin I see requires eternal damnation,
If a child be damned that is but a day old,
Alas, where then shall be my habitation?
Which has done more sins than can be told.
The Law. Yea woman, God does not only prohibit the deed,
But he forbids the lust and concupiscence,
Therefore thy heart has great occasion to blede,
For many lusts and deeds has defiled thy conscience.

Infidelity. Body of God, are you so mad him to believe*
These things are written to make folks afraid,
Will ye to him or to me credence give?
Or to your friends, by whom you were never dismayed*
And I put case that the words now were true,
He speaks of men, but no women at all,
Women have no souls, this saying is not new,
Men shall be damned, and not women which do fall.
the Law By this term man, truly in holy Scripture,
Is undertake both man, woman, and child in deed,
Yea as many of both kinds as be of man's nature,
Which proceed of Adam the first parents sede.
Enter knowledge of Sin. By the Law comes the knowledge of sin,
Which knowledge truly here I represent,
Which freate and byte the conscience within,
Causyng the same evermore to lament.
I am evermore before the conscience sight,
Showing before him his condemnation,
So that by the deeds of the law, or by his own might
He can not attain unto salvation.

Infidelity. Lo Mary, have ye not sponne a fair threde?
Here is a pocky knave, and an ill favored,
The deulll is not so evil favored I think in deed,
Corrupt, rotten, stinkyng, and ill sauoured.
It is not possible truly to declare here, Knowledge of sin.
The horrible, loathsome, and stinkyng vilitie,
Which before the eyes of God does appear,
Committed by this wretched woman's iniquity.

Mary. Now woe be to the time that ever I was borne,
I see that I am but a damned devil in hell,
I know that there with devils I shall be torn,
And punished with more pains than my tongue can tell
O blessed Law show me some remedy,
The Prophet calls thee immaculate and pure,
Thou of thy self in many places do testify,
That the kepers of thee are always safe and sure.
He that observes all things written in me, the Law
Shall live in them, as Moses does express:
But never man yet in this world I did see,
Which did not the contents in me transgress.
It is beyond all man's possibility,
To observe any commandment in me required,
Thereby appears his weakness and fragilitie,
Happened through sin, that against God he co^spired.
The power of the law is man's sin to declare, Knowledge of sin.
And to show his damnation for the same,
But to give salvation for the souls welfare,
The law does no such promise any time proclaim.

Mary If there be no more comfort in the law than this,
I wish that the law had never ben made:
In God I see is small mercy and Justice,
To entangle men, and snarle them in such a trade.

Infidelity. I can you thank for that Mary in deed:
Well spoken, an unjust God do you esteem.
Even from the heart that sentence did proceed,
Fear not, their unjust God do you blaspheme:
You see no remedy but utter damnation.
Follow my counsel, and put care away,
Take here your pleasure and consolation,
And make you merry in this world while you may.
Of one hell I would not have you twain to make:
Be sure of a heaven while you dwell here,
Refresh your self, and al pleasure do you take,
Pluck up a lusty heart, and be of a good chere.

Mary. O this knowledge of sin is so in my sight,
That if I should dye truly I can not be merry.

Infidelity. We will rid the knave hence anon by this light.
Or else of his life I will soon make him weary.
the Law O sinner, from thy heart put that infidelity,
Which has drowned thee already in the pit of hell,
Trust thou in Gods might and possibility,
Whereof neither angel nor man is able to tell.
Knowledge of sin. That thing in deed, which to man is impossible,
Is a small thing for God to bring to pass,
This mercy to all senses is comprehensible,
Which he will declare by his holy Messiah.
the Law That thing which I ca^ not do through my infirmity
God is able by his son to perform in time appointed,
All my contents be shadows of his majesty,
Whom now in this time God has anointed.
Knowledge of sin. That Messiah alone only shall the law fulfill,
And his fulfilling shall be in such acceptance,
That God for his sake shall pardon mankyndes ill,
Acceptyng his offering for a full contentation.
the Law That Messiah is the stone spoken of before,
Which of vain builders should be refused,
Yet he shall be the corner stone of honor,
Which in the building of gods temple shall be used.
And all that trust in him with true believe, Knowledge of Sin.
That he is very God and man, into this world sent,
God will all their sins for his sake forgive,
So that they can be contrite and repent.

Mary. I ever believed yet unto this day,
That God was able of nothing all things to make,
And as well I believe also that he may,
Forgive, and mercy upon sinners take,
But seeing that he has made a determination,
By a law that none shall be saved good or badde,
Then he that would look for any salvation,
Truly I take him ten times for worse than mad.

Infidelity. He that will not the kepers of the law save,
Which observe diligently his commandments,
Much less truly on them mercy he will have,
Which have contemned all his words and judgments.
Well Mary, I have condemned thee unto hell fire, the Law
Yet not so condemned thee, but if thou can believe
In that Messiah, which for thee does enquire,
There is no doubt but thy sins he will forgive.
Thy sore is known, receive thy salve and medicine,
I have the sick to the leache, give good ear,
Hearken diligently unto his good discipline,
And he will heal thee, do nothing fear. Exit.
Let me feel your poulses mistress Mary be you sick

Infidelity. By my troth in as good te^pre as any woman can be
Your veins are full of blood, lusty and quick,
In better taking truly I did you never see.
The body is whole, but sick is the conscience, Knowledge of sin.
Which neither the law nor man is able to heal,
It is the word of God received with penitence,
Like as the book of wisdom does plainly reveal.

Infidelity. Conscience? how does thy conscience little Mall?
Was thy conscience sicked, alas little fool?
Hooreson fools, set not a pynne by them all,
Wise enough in deed, to follow their foolish school,
You bottell nosed knave, get you out of place,
Avoid stinkyng horeson, a poison take thee,
Hence, or by God I will lay thee on the face,
Take heed that hereafter I do you not see.
Though I appear not to her carnal sight,
Knowledge of sin. Yet by the means that she knows the law,
I shall trouble her always both day and night,
And upon her conscience continually gnawe.

Infidelity. What chere? now is here but we twain alone,
Be merry mistress Mary, and away the mare,
A murreyn go with them, now they be gone,
Pluck up your stomach, and put away all care.

Mary. O master Prudence, my heart is sore vexed,
The knowledge of sin is before me always:
In my conscience I am so grievously perplexed,
That I wot not what to do truly nor say.
Here enters Christ Jesus
Infidelity. Benedicite, art thou come with a vengeance*
What will thou do? Mary, do you love me?
My words print well in your remembrance,
To yonder fellows saying do you never gree.

Christ Jesus. Into this world God has sent his own,
Not to judge the world, or to take vengeance,
But to preach forgiveness and pardon,
Through true faith in him, and perfect repentance.
The son of man is come to seek and save,
Such persons as perish and go astraye,
God has promised them life eternally to have,
If they repent, and turn from their evil way,
The kingdom of heaven is at hand, therefore repent,
Amend your lives, and the Gospel believe,
The son of God into this world is sent,
To have mercy on men, and their sins to forgive.

Mary. O here is the Messiah, of whom we have hard,
What say you Prudence is not this same he?

Infidelity. A Mary, do you my words no more regard,
You have a waueryng wit now well I do see,
Is not this a like person, the son of God to be,
And the Messiah which the world should save?
He is a false harlot you may believe me,
Whom you shall see one day handled like a knave.
If the law of God published by Moses,
Be not able to bring men to salvation,
Much less such a wretched man doubtless,
Can do ought for your souls consolation.
Tushe take one heaven in this present world here,
You remember what before to you I have said:
Pluck up your heart wenche, and be of good there,
Never regard his words, tushe, be not afraid.

Mary. The law has set my sins before my sight,
That I can not be merry, but am in despair:
I know that God is a Judge, equal and right,
And that his law is true, pure, clean and fair,
By this law am I condemned already to hell.
The words he has spoken must be fulfilled:
Of mirth and joy it is but folly to tell,
For I perceive that both body and soul be spilled.

Christ Like as the father raises the dead again,
And unto life does them mercifully restore:
So the son quickens the dead it is plain,
And gives them a life to live evermore,
Uerily verily I say, he that hears my voice,
And believes on him that has me sent,
Shall have everlasting life therein to rejoice,
And shall not come into damnable torment.
But the same pass from death unto life,
Repent, and trust in Gods mercy for my sake.
With the sins of the world be at debate and strife,
And unto grace my heavenly father will you take.
All they whom the law condemns for sin,
By faith in me, I save and justify,
I am come sinners by repentance to win,
Christ speaks to Mary Like as the Prophet before did prophecy.
Thou woman, with mercy I do thee prevent,
If thou can in the Son of God believe,
And for thy former life be sorry and repent,
All thy sins and offenses I do forgive.

Infidelity. Who is the son of God sir, of whom do ye talk?
Which has this power whereof you do boast,
It is best for you out of this country to walk,
And never more be seen after in this coast.
The son of God quod he? This is a pride in deed.
Trowest thou that the father can suffer this?
They come of Abraham's stock and holy sede,
And thou say that they believe all amiss.

Christ. Avoid out of this woman thou Infidelity,
With the.vii. devils which have her possessed,
I banish you hence by the power of my divinity,
For to salvation I have her dressed.
Infidelity runs away. Mary falls flat down. Cry all thus without the
door, and roar terribly.
Devils. O Jesus the Son of God ever living,
Why come thou before the time us to torment?
In no person for thee we can have any abidyng,
Out upon thee the son of God omnipotent.

Christ. Arise woman, and thank the father of heaven,
Which with his mercy has thee prevented,
By his power I have rei^cted from the spirits seven,
Which with unbelief have thy soul tormented.

Mary. Blessed be thy name O father celestial,
Honor and glory be given to thee world without end,
O Lord, do thou regard thus a woman terrestrial?
To thee what tongue is able worthy thanks to repend?
O what a sinful wretch Lord have I been?
Have mercy on me Lord, for thy names sake,
So grievous a sinner before this day was never seen
Uouchsafe therefore compassion on me to take.

Jesus Christ. Can thou believe in God, the maker of all thing,
And in his only son, whom he has sent?

Mary. I believe in one God, Lord and heavenly king,
And in thee his only son with hearty intent.
Good Lord I confess that thou art omnipotent,
Help my slender belief and infirmity:
My faith Lord is waueryng and insufficient,
Strength it I pray the with the power of thy majesty.
No man can come to me, that is, in me believe, Christ* Faith: repe^ta^ce
enters.
Except my father draw him by his spirit.
Behold Faith and Repentance to thee here I give,
With all other virtues to thy health requisite.
Note well the power of Gods omnipotency:

Faith. That soul which of late was a place of devils,
He has made a place for him self by his clemency,
Purging from thence the multitude of evils.

Repentance. The mercy of Christ thought it not sufficient,
To forgive her sins, and devils to pourge,
But gives her grace to be penitent,
That is, her soul ever after this day to scourge.
The virtue of Repentance I do represent,
Which is a true turnyng of the whole life and state,
Unto the will of the lord God omnipotent,
Sorowing for the sins past with displesure and hate.
That is to say, all the inward thoughts of the heart
And all the imaginations of the mind,
Which were occupied evil by Satan's art,
Must hence forth be turned after an other kind.
David my father on his sins did always think,
How horrible they were in God almighties sight,
Tears were his sustenance, yea both meat and drink,
His hole meditation was in heaven both day and night
So that Repentance is described in Scripture,
To be a returnyng from syn with all the soul and heart,
And all the life time in repentyng to endure,
Declaring the same with the senes in every part.
As thus, like as the eyes have been vaynly spent
Upon worldly and carnal delectations,
So henceforth to weeping and tears must be bent,
And wholly given to godly contemplations.
Likewise as the ears have been open always
To here the blasphemyng of Gods holy name,
And fylthy talkyng evermore night and day,
Now they must be turned away from the same.
And glad to hear the Gospel of salvation,
How God has mercy on them that do call,
And how he is full of pity and miseration:
Raisyng up such again as by sin did fall.
The tongue which blasphemy has spoken,
Yea and filthily, to the hurt of soul and body:
Whereby the precepts of God have been broken,
Must hence forth praise God for his mercy daily.
Thus like as all the members in times past,
Have been servants of unrighteousness and sin,
Now Repentance does that service away cast,
And to mortify all his lusts does begin.
True repentance never turns back again:
For he yt lays his hand on the plough, and looks away,
Is not apt in the kingdom of heaven to reign,
Nor to be saved with my saints at the last day.

Mary. O Lord without thy grace I do here confess,
That I am able to do nothing at all,
Where it pleases thee my misery to redress,
Strength me now that hence forth I do not fall.
Grant me Lord such a perfect repentance,
And that I look no more back, but go forward still,
Put my misery evermore into my remembrance,
That I may forthinke my life that has been so ill.

Faith. The holy virtue of Faith I do represent,
Joined continually with repentance:
For where as the person for sin is penitent,
There I ascertain him of health and deliverance.
Wherefore I am a certain and sure confidence,
That God is merciful for Christ Jesus sake:
And where as is a turnyng or penitence,
To mercy he will the penitent take:
Faith therefore is the gift of God most excellent,
For it is a sure knowledge and cognition
Of the good will of God omnipotent,
Grounded in the word of Christ's erudition,
This faith is founded on Gods promission,
And most clearly to the mind of man revealed,
So that of Gods will he has an intuition,
Which by the holy ghost to his heart is sealed.

Repentance. This Faith with the word has such propinquitie,
That proprely the one is not without the other,
Faith must be tried with the word of verity,
As the child is by the father and mother.

Jesus Christ. Yea truly, if this faith do from Gods word decline,
It is no faith, but a certain incredulity,
Which causes the mind to wa^der in strange doctrine
And so to fall at length into impiety.

Faith. The word to a glass compare we may,
For as it were therein, Faith God does behold,
Whom as in a cloud we look upon always,
As hereafter more plainly it shall be told.

Mary. My heart does believe, and my mouth does publish.
That my lord Jesus is the son of God eternal.
I believe that my soul shall never perysh,
But reign with him in his kingdom supernall.

Repentance. The operation of Faith is not to enquire
What God is as touching his propre nature,
But how good he is to us to know faith does desire,
Which thing appears in his holy Scripture.

Faith. It is not enough to believe that God is true only,
Which can never lie, nor deceive, nor do ill:
But true faith is persuaded firmly and truly,
That in his word he has declared his will.
And also what soever in that word is spoken,
Faith believes it as the most certain verity,
Which by his spirit he does vouchsafe to open
To all such as seek him with all humility.

Repentance. Christ the son of God here has promised,
Forgiveness of sins to you sister Mary,
Of his own mercy this to do he has devised,
And not of your merits, thus you see plainly.
If in this promise you be certain and without doubt.
Believing that the word of his mouth spoken
He is able, and also will do and bring about,
Then that you have Faith it is a token.

Mary O Jesus, grant me this true faith and believe,
Lord I see in my self as yet imperfection:
Uouchsafe to me thy heavenly grace to give,
That it may be my governance and direction.

Christ Mary my grace shall be for thee sufficient,
Go thy way forth with faith and repentance,
To hear the Gospel of health be thou diligent,
And the words thereof bear in thy remembrance.

Faith. Though in person we shall no more appear,
Yet inuisibly in your heart we will remain.

Repentance. The grace of God shall be with you both far and nere,
Whereby from all wickedness I shall you detain.

Mary. Honor, praise, and glory to the father eternal,
Thanks to the son, very god and very man,
Blessed be the holy ghost, with them both coequall,
One god, which has saved me this day from Satan Exeunt.

Christ I thank thee O father, O lord of heaven, earth, and of all That thou have hidden these things from the sapient,
And have revealed them to the little ones and small,
Yea so it pleased thee O father omnipotent.
All things of my father are committed unto me,
And who the son is, none but the father does knew
No man but the son knows who ye father should be,
And he to whom the son will reveal and show.
Come unto me all you that with labor are op^^essed,
And are heavy laden, and I will you comfort,
Despair not for that you have transgressed,
But for mercy do you boldly to me resort.
My yoke upon your necks do you gladly take,
And learn of me, for I am low and meke in heart,
And you shall find rest for your souls never to slake,
My yoke and burden is light in every part.
I came not into the world, the righteous to call,
But the sinful persons unto repentance:
The whoale have no need of the physician at all,
But the sick have need of deliverance.
Uerily I say unto you, that the angels,
Have more joy in one sinner that does repent,
Than in many righteous persons else,
Which are no sinners in their judgment.
Here enters Simon the Pharisie, and malicious Judgment, Simon bids Christ
to dynner.
Simon. God speed you sir heartily, and well to fare,
I rejoice much that I chance you here to find,
In good soth I was sorry, and took much care
That I had no time to declare to you my mind.
We know that you do much good in the country here
Wherefore the living God is glorified:
You heal the sick persons both far and nere,
Like as it has been credibly testified:

Christ. My father even unto this time works truly,
And I work according to his commandment and will,
The son can do nothing of him self duly,
But that he sees the father doing always still.
Whatsoever the Father does, the son does the same,
For the father does the son entierly love,
And shows him al things to the praise of his name,
And shall show him greter works tha^ these as you shall prove

Malicious judge. Lo sir, what need you have more testimony
You hear that he does him self the son of God call,
Does not the law condemn that blasphemy:
Commanding such to be slain great and small?

Simon. For a season it behooves us to have patience,
I showed you the reason wherefore of late:
At this season I pray you do your diligence,
And semble rather to love him than to hate.
Shall it please you sir, this day to take pain
With me at my house to take some repast,
You shall be welcome doubtless I tell you plain,
No great puruiance for you I entend to make.

Christ. My meat is to do his will that has me sent,
But sir I thank you of your great curtesy,
To come to you I shall be very well content,
So that you will appoint the hour stedily.

Simon. All things be in manner ready I think verily,
In the mean season in my gardein we will walk.
Take the pains to go with me, I pray you heartily,
Till dinner be ready, of matters we will talk.

Christ With a good will I will wait upon you,
Pleases it you to go before, you know the way.

Simon. Sirr^, you see how that we are appointed now,
Make all things ready without delay.

Malicious judge. Sir I will go about as fast as I may,
In good faith I would that I might have my will:
I would prepare for him a galowes this day,
Upon the which I desire his blood to spill.

Infidelity. A vengeance take him thief, is he gone?
From Mary Magdalene he did me chase:
From Simon the Pharisie he will drive me anon,
So that no where I shall be able to show my face.

Malicious judge. Nay, we are so surely fixed in the Pharisees mind,
That his blasphemous words can not drive us thence
Women's hearts turn often as does the wind,
And again of the law they know not the sense,
In malice I have made them all so blind,
That they judge nothing in Christ aryght:
To the letter of the law so fast I do them bind,
That of the spirit they have no manner of light.

Infidelity. I will tell thee Malicious Judgment,
His words be of such strength and great power,
That the devil him self and all his rablement,
He is able to expel, and utterly to devour.

Malicious judge. Tushe hyde thy self in a Pharisees gown,
Such a one as is bordered with the co^maundeme^ts
And then thou may dwell both in city and in town.
Being well accepted in all men's judgments.

Infidelity. As for a gown, I have one convenient,
And lo here is a cappe agreing to the same.

Malicious judge. As thou say, that gear is very ancient,
I warant thee now to escape all blame,
Mary of one thing thou must take good head,
As nere as thou can let him not behold thy face,
Doubt thou not, but he shall have his mede,
If I remain with the Jews any space.

Infidelity. And as for the reverend bishop Cayphas,
With all the Aldermen of Jerusalem.
Will help to bring that matter to pass,
For I am like for ever to dwell with them.

Malicious judgment The same Christ dineth with Simon to day,
Who commanded to prepare the table in all have,
Help to make all ready, and the cloth to lay,
For surely here he purposes to take his repast.

Infidelity. By God he shall have sour sause it may hap,
Do thy part, and surely I purpose to watch,
It shall be hard, but we will take him in a trap,
He shall find him here that will him match.

Malicious judge. Go and fetch trenchers, spoones, salt and bread,
See whether the cooks be ready also I pray thee.
They will come to dynner I dare lay my head,
Before that all things prepared well shall be.

Infidelity. A straw, all this gear will quickly be done,
The cooks be ready also I am sure.
Let me see, byr lady it is almost noone,
I marvel that they can so long fasting endure.

Malicious judge. Yonder they come, turn thy face out of sight,
Thou must make curtesy down to the ground.

Infidelity. I would he were hanged by God and by this light.
For never before this day was I thus bound.

Simon. Sir now are you welcome, I pray you come nere,
Fetch in meat syrs, I pray you quickly.
I promise you I bid you for no good chere,
But such as it is, you ar welcome heartily.

Infidelity. Pleases it you to wash sir, here is water,
Let not yonder beggarly fellow wash with you,

Simon. Can you not a while dissemble the matter?
It is no time to talk of such gear now.
Will you sit sir, bring hither a cushion and a stool.
Set it down I say there, there at the tables end.

Infideli. Here is a business with a beggarly fool.
It greueth me the time about him to spend.
Go to, you are welcome hitherto my master Simon
Think your self at home in your own place.

Christ. I thank you sir, I will sit down even anon,
But first we will praise God, and say our grace.
Blessed art thou heavenly father, which of thy mercy
Have made man to thine own image and similitude
Which through Satan's wicked malice and envy
Was spoiled of thy grace and of ghostly fortitude.
But at this time of thy mercy appointed,
Thou have looked on man, of thy compassion,
And sent thine own son with thy spirit anointed,
Which for his sin shall make satisfaction.
Let all creatures praise thee for their creation,
Glory to thy name for their preservation,
Laud and honor to thee for their restoration,
All thanks to thee for eternal salvation,

Simon. I pray you sit down, I pray you heartily,
You are welcome, I pray you eat such as is here,
Go to, I would not have you to make any curtesy,
I am sorry that for you I have no better chere.

Infidelity. It is simple chere as you say in deed,
It is to good for him by the Mass,
Haie is good enough for him thereon to feed,
Or for any such foolish ass.

Malicious judge. Mark you not what in his grace he did say?
Thou have sent thy son anointed with the holy ghost
By these words evidently understand we may,
That to be the son of God of him self he does boast.

Simon. Whereof do you.ii. talk what is the matter,
Is there any thing that does grutch your conscience?

Malicious judgment This is the truth of our talk yea I will not flatter,
Your gest said a word whereof I would have i^tellige^ce
He thanked God at this time now appointed,
That on men's sins he had pity and compassion,
And has sent his son with his spirit anointed,
Which for his sin should make satisfaction.
Has God into this world sent his own son?
Or who is the son of God I would be glad to know
Like as now he speaks, so often times he has done,
The time and place I am able to show.

Simon. I pray you my guest his mind do you satisfy,
It is said, that the son of God you do your self call.

Christ. I am come into this world the truth to testify,
Whereof the scripture and the Prophets do witness all
If I of my self should bear testimony,
My witness of you should not be taken as true,
But there is an other that witnesses of me verily.
And I know that his testimony is true.
Of man truly no testimony do I take:
But I speak these words that saved you might be.
The son of God is sent hither for your sake,
Whom in the glory of his majesty you shall se.
The works which to me the father does give,
That I may do them, those works to you I say,
Bear witness, if you have the grace to believe,
That the father has sent me into the world this day.
Besides these works, the father that has me sent,
Has by many scriptures of me testified:
By the which the matter is evident,
That my words spoken before are verified.
But the father you have never heard speaking,
And what he is by faith you have never seen:
His word you have not in you remaining.
Therefore to him whom he has sent faithful you have not be^
Search yt scriptures, for you think in your mind
That in them you shall obtain life eternal,
Them to bear witness of me you shall find,
How I am the son of the living God immortal.

Simon. Well sir, you ar welcome, I would not have you to think
That I did bid you hither to tempt or to prove,
But that I would have you both to eat and drink,
Even as my entier friend, and for very love.
Wherefore any thing that is here done or said,
Shall Be laid under foot, and go no further,
For surely if your words should be betrayed,
As a blasphemer the people would you murder,

Christ. You know that there is.xi. hours in the day
And night comes not till the.xii. hours be expired
It is not in man's power my life to take away,
Till the hour comes of my father required.

Infidelity. Under the foot quod he if I keep counsel,
I would I were hanged up by the very neck.
Fie on him horeson traitor and very rebel,
Hear you not how god him self he begins to check?

Malicious judge. Though master Simon does but few words say
Yet I warrant you he bears this gear in mind,
Doubt thou not but he will find such way,
That he shall be ryd and as many as be of his kind.

Simon. Go to I pray you, alack you eat no meat:
You see that at this time we have but plain fare.

Christ When we have sufficient before us to eat,
Let us thank God, and put away all care.
Mary Magdalen sadly apparelled. The more that I accustom my self with
repentance,
The more I see mine own sin and iniquity,
The more knowledge thereof, the more greuance,
To a soul that is converted from her impiety.
To all the world an example I may be,
In whom the mercy of Christ is declared,
O Lord, what goodness dydst thou in me see?
That thus mercifully thou have me spared.
What goodness? nay rather what a rabble of evils,
Full of wickedness, like one past all grace,
Replenished with a multitude of devils,
Which as in hell in my soul had their place.
These were the merits and deeds that I had,
Only thy unspeakable mercy did me prevent:
And though that my life has been so bad,
Yet thou will no more but that I should repent.
O who shall give me a fountain of tears,
That I may shed abundantly for my sin?
This voice of the Lord alwais sou^deth in mine ears
Repent, repent, and thou shall be sure heaven to win
He says also, do the fruictes of Repentance.
O Lord, who is able those worthy fruictes to do?
I am not able to do sufficient penance,
Except thy grace good Lord, do help me thereto.
But like as the parts of my body in times past,
I have made servants to all kind of iniquity,
The same iniquity away for ever I do cast,
And will make my body servant to the verity.
This hair of my head which I have abused,
I repute vile and unworthy to wipe my lords fete,
No obsequie therewith of me shall be refused,
To do my Lord Jesus service, as it is most mete.
These fleshly eyes which with their wanton looks,
Many persons to sin and vice have procured.
They have been the devils volumes and books,
Which from the service of God have other allured.
Now you sinful eyes shed out tears and water,
Wash the Lords fete with the^ who^ you have offended
To show such obsequie to him it is a small matter,
Which by his grace has my sinful life amended.
O wretched eyes can you weep for a thing temporal,
As for the loss of worldly goods and parents,
And can you not weep for the lord celestial?
Which loss incomparably passes all detrimentes.
With this ointment most pure and precious,
I was wont to make this carkas pleasant and sweet
Whereby it was made more wicked and vicious,
And to all vnthriftynesse very apt and mete.
Now would I gladly this ointment bestow,
About the innocent feet of my savior,
That by these penitent fruictes my lord may know
That I am right sorry for my sinful behavior.
All my worldly substance abused before,
And through unbelief of sin made instruments,
Now will I bestow them only to his honor,
In helpyng him, and for his sake other innocents.
I shall not cease to seek till my lord I have found,
He is in the house of Simon I heard say,
The house stands on yonder same ground:
It was told me that he dines there to day.
I was not ashamed to sin before the Lords sight
And shall I be ashamed before man the same to confess?
To my Lord Jesus, now forth will I go right,
Acknowledgyng to him my penitent heart doubtless

Let Marie creep under the table, abydyng there a certain space behynd, and
do as it is specified in the Gospel. Then Malicious Judgment speaks these
words to Infidelity. Malicious judgment Lo sir, what a fellow this is, it does
appear,
If he were such a prophet, as of him self he does say,
He would know what manner of woman this same is here.
A sinner she is, he can not say nay.

Infidelity. A sinner quod he? yea she is a wicked sinner in deed
This is she, from whom he did me expel,
Behold, how boldly after him she does proceed,
A harlot she is truly I may tell you in counsel.

Malicious judge. Yea and yet to touch him he does her permit,
Which is against the law for persons defiled,
Ought not among the just to intromit,
But from their company should be exiled.

Malicious judge. I pray you see, how busy about him she is,
She washes his feet with tears of her eyes,
Heigh, mary yonder is like to be nothing amiss.
Behold, she anoynteth him to drive away flies.
Trow you ye master Simon thinks not somewhat?
Yes I hold you a groate, though he say nothing.

Malicious judge. He is not content I warant you that,
Which thing you may see by his lookyng.

Simon. Syrs, take away here, we will no more now,
This first: Are you in such things to be tought?
What mean you, wherabout do you look,
I marvel wherabout you do occupy your thought.

Jesus Christ. Simon, the truth is so, I have a thing in my mind
Which unto you I must needs express and say.

Simon. Master, say what you will, words are but wind,
I will hear you truly, as patiently as I may.

Christ There were two detters, whom I did well know,
Which were in debt to a lender that was thriftie:
The one five hundred pence truly did owe,
And the other ought not above fifty:
Neither of these debtors had wherewith to pay,
Wherefore the lender forgave both, as it did behoue.
Now according to your judgment I pray you say,
Which of these detters ought the lender most love*

Simon. Mary, he to whom most was forgiven I suppose,
In few words truly you have heard my sentence.

Christ. You have rightly judged, and to the purpose.
Absoluyng my question like a man of science,
See you this woman? I know that in your hertes
You condemn her as a sinner very unmeet
To enter among you, and to touch any parts,
Of my body, yea either head or feet:
Saying among your selves, if this were a Prophet,
He would know what manner a woman this is
Which thus comes in while we be at meat,
A sinner she is, and has done greatly amiss.
I say unto you, that into this world* I am come
To call such great detters unto repentance,
The just, which in their co^ceits owe but a small su^me
Have no need of their creditours deliverance.

Infidelity. What a thief is this? he judges our masters thought,
If we destroy him not, he will surely mar all.

Malicious judge. I ever said that he was worse than naught,
But among us puruey for him we shall.

Simon. Sir, you take upon you very presumptuously,
I have bydden you unto my house here of good will,
And you reason of matters here contemptuously:
But take your pleasure, it shall not greatly skill.

Christ. I say unto you, that for this cause was I borne,
To bear witness unto the verity,
I see who be hypocrites full of dissemblyng scorn,
And who be persons of faith and simplicity.
Where as you think you have done me pleasure,
In bidding me to eat and drink with you here,
Your intent was to show your richesse and treasure,
And that your holiness might to me appear.
But this woman has showed to me a little obsequie:
For these gestures which she shows to me,
Proceed from a true meaning heart verily,
As by her humilite plainly you may see.
When I came into your house the truth to say,
You gave me no water to wash my feet withal,
This woman has washed them here this day,
With the tears of her eyes which on them did fall,
With the hair of her head she has wiped the same,
Thinking all other clothes thereto over vile,
Horrible in her fight is her sin and blame,
Thinkyng her self worthy of eternal exile.
You gave me no kiss as the manner of the country is
But this woman since the time that I came in,
Would not presume my head or mouth to kiss,
But my feet, lamenting in her heart for her syn.
My head you did not anoint with oil so sweet,
As men of this country do their guestes use,
But with most precious balm she anointed my fete,
No cost about that ointment she does refuse.
Blessed are they, as the Prophet does say,
Whose sins are forgiven and covered by Gods mercy,
Not by the deeds of the law as you think this day.
But of Gods good will, favor and grace freely.
At this woman's sin you do greatly grutche,
As though your selves were just holy, and pure,
But many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much
And of the mercy of God she is sure.
He to whom but a little is remitted in deed,
Loves but a little, we se by experience:
All have sinned, and of Gods glory have need.
Therefore humble your selves with penitence.
I say to thee woman, thy sins are forgeuen all,
God for my sake will not them to thee impute:
For strength to continue, to him do thou call,
And see that thanks thou do to him attribute.

Mary. The mercy of God is above all his works truly,
What is it that God is not able to bring to pass?
I thank thee Lord Jesus for thy great mercy,
Thou art the son of the living God, our Messiah.

Malicious judge. Now say you by this, here is a greater matter yet,
He forgiueth sins, as one with God equal.

Infidelity. And he may perceive truly, that has any wit,
That he is but a man wretched and mortal.

Christ. Woman I say, thy faith has saved thee go in peace:
Now art thou pacified in thy conscience,
Through thy faith, I do all thy sins releace,
Assuryng thee to have mercy for thy negligence.

Mary. O joyful tidings, O message most comfortable,
Let no sinner be he never in so great despair.
Though he were sinful and abominable,
Let him come, and he will make him fair.
Blessed be the Lord of such compassion and pity,
Praise we his name with glory and honor,
I shall declare his mercy in town and city.
Thanks be to thee my Lord now and evermore.

Simon. I see the words which I have heard, proved true.
Men say that you are new fangled, and frivolous,
Going about the law and our rulers to subdue,
Introducyng sects perilous and sedicious.

Malicious judge. I can no longer contain, but must say my mind,
In deed it is so, for by his diuelishe erudition,
Which he sows among the people of our kind,
At length they will make a tumult and sedition.
Such blasphemy since the beginning was not heard,
That, a man shall call him self Gods natural son,
To condemn the law of God he is not afeard,
Despisyng all things that our fathers have done.

Infidelity. Pleases it you reverend father, to give me license
To say my mind to this blasphemerand thief,
In few words you shall have my sentence:
Of all heretics I judge him to be the chief.
Perceive you not how he does begin?
He comes to none of the princes and gouerners,
But a sort of sinners he goes about to win:
As publicans, whores, harlots, and unjust occupiers.
Them he prefers before such men as you be,
Saying, that they before you shall be saved.
An honest man in his company you shall not see,
But even them, which have them selves ill behaved.
Much good do it you, here is sause for your meat.
Master Simon, look upon this fellow in season,
For in continuance he will work such a feate,
That you shall not release with all your reason.

Christ. O Simon, put away that Malicious judgment,
Which in your heart you do stubbornly contain,
You shall not perceive Gods commandment,
As long as he in your conscience does remain.

Malicious judgment Lo sir now that God he has blasphemed,
Now his law he does contemn and despise,
The Justice thereof of him is nothing esteemed,
To destroy the same utterly he does devise.

Simon. Think you us ignorant of gods law and will,
Which upon our garments do them wear.
Who but we do the law of God fulfill,
For his precepts with us in all places we bear.

Christ. To fulfill the law requires Gods spirit,
For the law is holy, just, and spiritual,
Of love to be observed it is requisite,
And not of these obseruances external.
As long as you have this malicious judgment.
Accompanied with Infidelity,
I say you can not keep Gods commandment,
Though you show an outward sanctity.

Infidelity. Lo sir here he calls me Infidelity,
And you know that I am called Legal Justification
You hear that it was spoken by Gods majesty,
That a man shall live by the laws observation.
An honest guest, come out dog, yea mary,
Good manners thus to taunt a man at his table:
But with fools it is folly to vary,
His words be taken but as a tale or a fable.

Simon. Away with this gear, how long shall we sit here?
At once: We have somewhat else to do I think.

Christ. Thanks be to thee O Father, for this chere,
Thanks be to thee for our repast of meat and drink.
Now sir, you shall license me to depart,
And the heavenly Father might illumine your mind
Expellyng this infidelity from your heart,
Which with Malicious judgment keeps you blind.

Simon. Fare ye well: for me you shall no countes render,
All shall be laid under the feet that is here spoken.

Infide. Though you forget it, yet we purpose to remember
Exit. You know the way, go I pray you, the door is open.

Malicious judge. For Gods sake sir, you and such as you be,
Look upon this fellow by mine advise:
For what he goth about all you may see,
Yea you have had warnyng of him twice or thrice.

Infidelity. All the multitude begins after him to run,
You see him and know his doctrine and opinion,
If you suffer him till more people he has won,
Strangers shall come and take our dominion.
Have you not heard his open blasphemy?
The son of God he presumes him self to name,
The Justice of the law he condemns utterly,
To suffer him to live will turn to your shame.

Simon. It shall behoue you to dog him from place to place,
Note whether openly he teach such doctrine:
If he do, accuse him before his face,
For I will cause the bishops him to examine.
And where as he wills you us to expel,

Infidelity. Calling us wicked nicknames at his pleasure,
He goes about to make you to rebel
Against God and his laws, as he does without mesure

Malicious judgment For my part I will watch him so narowly,
That a word shall not escape me that does sound
Against you the fathers, that live so holyly,
But to accuse him for it a way shall be found.

Simon. Well the time of our euenyng service is at hand,
We must depart, the sacrifice to prepare.

Infideli. Exeunt. If you depart, we may not here idle stand,
For to wait upon you at all times ready we are.
At my being here even now of late,
It pleased my Lord Jesus of his great mercy Mary: enters with Justification
To speak sentences here in my presence.
Of the which I have no perfect intelligence,
The first is: Many sins are forgiven her said he,
Because she has loved much, meaning me,
I pray you most holy Justification,
Of this sentence to make a declaration.

Iustificaion. A question right necessary to be moved,
For thereby many errors shall be reproved,
It were a great error for any man to believe
That your love did deserve that Christ should forgive
Your sins or trespasses, or any sin at all:
For so to believe is an error sanaticall.
And how can your love desire forgiveness of your ill
Seeing that the law it is not able to fulfill?
The law thus commands as touching love:
Thou shall love thy Lord God as it does behoue,
With all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with al thy strength,
And thy neighbor as thy self. He says also at length:
There was never man borne yet that was able,
To perform these precepts just, holy, and stable,
Save only Jesus Christ, that lamb most innocent
Which fulfilleth the law for such as are penitent:
But love follows forgiveness of sins evermore,
As a fruict of faith, and goth not before,
In that parable which unto you he recited,
Wherein he declared your sins to be acquitted,
He called you a detter not able to pay.
Then your love paid not your dets perceive you may
The forgiveness of your sins you must refer,
Only to Christ's grace, then you shall not err.
Of this thing plain knowledge you may have
In these words go in peace thy faith does thee save.
So by faith in Christ you have Justification
Freely of his grace, and beyond man's operation,
The which Justification here I do represent,
Which remayn with all such as be penitent.
Here comes love a special fruicte of Faith,
As touching this, hear mekely what he says.

Mary. O how much am I unto Jesus Christ bound,
In whom so great mercy and goodness I have found?
Not only my sinful life he has renewed.
But also with many graces he has me endued,
Love enters. I am named love, from true faith procedyng,
Where I am, there is no virtue nedyng,
Love coming of a conscience immaculate,
And of a faith not fained nor simulate,
Is the end of the law as Scripture does say,
And unto eternal felicity the very path way:
This love grounded in Faith, as it is said,
Has caused many euyls in men to be laid.
For where as the love of God in any is perfect,
There in all good works is his whole delight.
This true love with Mary was present verily,
When to Christ she showed that obsequie,
But this love did proceed from believe,
When Christ of his mercy did her sins forgive,
Love deserved not forgiveness of sins in deed,
But as a fruit thereof truly it did succeed.

Justification. Of this matter we might tarry very long,
But then we should do our audience wrong,
Which gently has heard us here a long space,
Wherefore we will make an end now by Gods grace,
Praying God that all we example may take
Of Mary, our sinful lives to forsake:
And no more to look back, but to go forward still
Following Christ as she did and his holy will.

Love. Such persons we introduce into presence,
To declare the conversion of her offense.
First, the law made a plain declaration,
That she was a child of eternal damnation:
By hearing of the law came knowledge of sin,
Then for to lament truly she did begin.
Nothing but desperation did in her remain,
Lokyng for none other comfort but for hell pain.
But Christ whose nature is mercy to have,
Came into this world sinners to save,
Which preached repentance sins to forgive,
To as many as in him faithfully did believe.
By the word came faith, Faith brought penitence,
But both the gift of Gods magnificence.
Thus by Faith only, Marie was justified,
Like as before it is plainly verified,
From thens came love, as a testification
Of Gods mercy and her justification.

Mary. Now God grant that we may go the same way,
That with joy we may rise at the last day,
To the salvation of soul and body evermore,
Through Christ our Lord, to whom be all honor.

FINIS.

