EXPOSITION of the two first Verses of the sixth CHAPTER to the Hebrews, in
form of a Dialogue.

WHEREIN YOU HAVE A Commendation of Catechizing, ALSO A declaration of the six
fundamental Principles wherein the Christians of the Primitive Apostolical
Church were Catechized.

By T. W. Minister of the Word.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Snodham, for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster Row
at the sign of the Talbot.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and worthy Knights, Sir John Bois Recorder of the
City of Canterbury, Sir Edward Bois the Elder, two of his Majesty's Justices
of Peace in the County of Kent, to Sir Edward Bois the younger, and to their
three religious and virtuous Ladies: T. W. wishes increase of all happiness,
present and to come.
OFten have I desired some opportunity of testifying thankfulness to you. I
have had many comforts for my body and mind from you. Gold and Silver have I
none, neither do I lack any; and had I, it is a requital which you need not,
nor do look after: For God has well blessed your Family and whole stock as
with the note and credit of Religion, so with increase both of persons and
wealth above any (for the number and quality) that I know in these parts; but
such as I have I do give you. Which is such, as you do value above all gold
and silver, being the saving Truth, even that truth which brings to life them
that believe and practice it. Being therefore moved upon some respects to
publish an Epitome or Abridgement of all my doctrines which I ever taught in
six principles, I thought withal by this occasion to dedicate to you these two
short Sermons: One the Practice of the Saints, preached at the Funeral of your
kinsewoman Mistres Francis Perker: the other, the Perseverance of the Saints,
first copied out at the earnest request of one of your kinsmen; and thereunto
have joined two short Treatises of the Sacrament of the Supper; one touching
the doctrine thereof, the other touching the duty of Communicants; the one
informing the judgment in the truth of that Mystery; the second working the
affections to a reverend love and regard, and to a careful use of it. Accept
them as poor loue-tokens, pardon my presumption in presenting them unto the
world under your names; use them to your best benefit; and he, whose truth it
is, write it in your hearts to your eternal good.

Your Kins-man T. W.

TO ALL HIS CHRISTIan Friends in the East-part of the County of Kent; namely,
to them of the City of Canterbury, and therein more especially to the
Parishioners of Saint Georges, T. W. wishes the knowledge and grace of Christ
our Lord to be increased.
THough the Sea do not more ouerflow with water, than this age does with
Books, so as to bring forth more, it were, as if one would cast water into the
Sea, or (as we say) to light a candle at noone day to help the light of the
Sun: the light and Sun of the truth already being so bright and so
resplendent by such writings as be already extant, as there is little hope of
bringing any more cleernesse to it, especially by my most dim candle: yet I
had some reasons to move me to set it (such as it is) upon the table, not only
by preaching now many years, but by this simple writing. First, my doctrine
has been calumniated and charged by some to be erroneous, and by others to be
humerous; for the quitting of this I have sent these few Papers abroad to speak
for me, comprehending an Epitome and sum of all which I have delivered in my
public Teaching. I have taught nothing at any time, which for the substance of
the matter, is not contained in my six principles: if there be in them error
or schism, then I am culpable: if all here be sound and Orthodox, let men
content themselves to blame the weakness of my teaching, but not the
unsoundness of my doctrine. I may err in some particulars, for who is now
privileged from errors, that is but a mere man ( at Haereticus esse nolo,) I
will be no Heretick^ if it be declared, to me it shall be disclaimed. Secondly,
such as have been my hearers, having let slip many things taught (our memories
being like siues or broken pitchers) it cannot well choose, but much is slid
from them, yet by this short abridgement, they shall be helped to remember much
of that which before they had heard in the enlarging of these matters Lastly,
albeit others have set forth these very things more distinctly and soundly,
(for to do it more learnedly it is very easy) yet happily these things may
come to some hands into which the other shall not come, and serve as a mark in
their way to direct them to their country, and as half a loaf in stead of an
whole, somewhat to refresh them in their journey. Now to you I offer these
things, how mean and homely soever (as they are indeed very course and mean,
though not in respect of the substance of food brought you in them, for it is
Gods truth; yet for the cooking and dressing of them) both because you have
long afforded me your presence in hearing, and obliged me unto you with many
and great kindnesses, and for some poor recompense thereof, as also to leave
with you a remembrance of that truth which was more fully opened, I betake
these things to your good courtesy and use: hoping, as some of you were pleased
to be pleased with them when they were spoken to your ears, now coming to
your eyes to be read, they may prove grateful, and through Gods blessing prove
fruitful too: Fare ye well.

Yours T. W.

AN EXPOSITION OF the two first Verses of the sixth Chapter to the Hebrews, by
form of Catechizing.
HEBREWS. 6. Ver. 1.2. Therefore leaving the doctrine of the beginnings of
Christ, Text.
let us be led forward unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of
Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God;

Of the doctrine of Baptismes, and laying on of hands, and of the resurrection
from the dead, and of eternal Judgment.


Question.

FIrst, open to us the words of the Text, Interpretation of the words.
What is meant by Beginnings?

An. The Catechism^, or catechizing instruction, or the doctrine of Christ
delivered in a plain and familiar manner.

Qu. Why is this familiar Catechizing doctrine called Beginnings? Beginnings.


An. Because it contains the Principles, and as it were the Elements, and ABC.
of Christianity; so as it is a borrowed speech from humane Arts and Sciences,
where the Elements are first to be taught unto those which covet the perfect
skill of any Science.

Qu. Wherefore does he call the doctrine of the Catechism a Foundation?
Foundation.


An. This also is a figurative speech taken from earthly affairs, as from
buildings, where the foundation or ground-vvorke uses first to be laid, that
the walls and roof may be reared and raised upon it: Even so in the
spiritual building up of men's consciences to God, the doctrine of Catechism
is first to be laid as a foundation, and afterward the mystery of Christ is
more highly and deeply to be handled, as it were the rearing of the walls,
roof, and loouer.

Qu. What means the Apostle to say that he will leave this doctrine of the
beginning of Christ, and that he will not lay again the foundation? etc.

An. That toward the Hebrews he will not observe this form of Catechizing,
or delivering doctrine plainly and familiarly.

Qu. Why so?

An. Because it became them by reason of their time and long continuance, to be
rather teachers then such as needed the principles: and this is employed in the
illatiue particle, therefore.

^^^fection.
Qu. What is meant by perfection?

An. The teaching of Christ more perfectly, in such a manner as might be
sitting for them that were of age, and expert in the word of righteousness.

^^^ode or ^^alysis, order and disposition of the Text.
Qu. Now tell us what does the Text contain.

Ans. A promise of the Apostle to teach the Hebrews, and in them all
Christians the doctrine of Christ more exactly and perfectly.

Qu. How does he illustrate and declare this his promise of delivering the
doctrine in a more perfect manner?

An. By the contrary, as thus, that he will now omit and let pass the first
rudiments of Christianity, to the end he may follow a more perfect course.

Qu. How is this set forth?

Ans. By an enumeration or rehearsal of certain particular rudiments and
principles, wherein Christians of the primitive Church were wont at their first
(...) Religion to be catechized and instructed, as repentance from dead works,
faith toward God, etc.

Qu. Gather us now the sum of this whole Scripture?

An. It is thus much, Sum collected.
as if the Apostle should have said whereas the doctrine concerning Christ, as
touching the manner of teaching and delivering it, has two parts, Heb. 5
verse. 12.13. one part which has more perfection, and belongs to such as are
strong and have more profited; the other part belongs to weak ones which are
nouices, and consists in the first elements and beginnings of Christ, such as
repentance from dead works, etc. I am determined to leave and forsake this
latter part, not to meddle with it, and to prosecute the former, bringing forth
doctrines in such manner as is fit for strong men which be of ripe judgment
and understanding in heavenly mysteries.

Qu. What may be learned from this Text of the Apostle, Instructions.
thus opened and expounded?

An. That there is a great deal of skill and wisdom required in the
ministers of Christ, First Instruct.
to be able to discern by what degrees they ought to proceed in the
dispensation of the secrets of the kingdom. An other example whereof see 1
Cor. 2.6. and Chap. 3. ver. 1.2. Also Christ our Lord requires in his stewards
to be both faithful and wise, to know how to speak a word in season, and that
every one in the family may have such a portion as is fit, and as he for his
age and strength is capable of. This proves them foolish stewards that cannot
distinguish of the manner of teaching, and of the persons toward whom each
manner must be used.

Qu. What things may be further gathered from hence for our instruction.

An. The authority, antiquity, excellency, Second inst^.
fruit and necessity of teaching the Catechism, or doctrine of beginnings.

Qu. How may the antiquity of this manner of teaching be collected? Antiquity
of Catechizing.


An. Thus, If could be no new thing but very ancient, being used in the time
of the primitive Church, even so far off as in the age and time of the
Apostles. And that it was used in those times is plain, not only by this
place where it is clear (for they could not leave that which they never used,
nor be said to lay again that which had not ben once laid) but also by 1 Cor.
3. verse. 1.2. The learned ^hinke that this (...) of teaching is meant by Paul
in his pattern, or form (...) wholesome words which he wills Timothy to
have.
Also there is some shadow of it in Christ catechizing his Apostles, Mat.
16.13. and Phillip his catechizing the Eunuch. Acts. 8.

Qu. But ye can fetch the antiquity of Catechizing further off than Christ his
time, or the primitive age?

An. It is true. In the Jewish Church being before the coming of Christ, it
was practiced both in families, as in Adams, Abraham's, Genesis 3.18. and others
charged so to do by Moses, Deu. 5.7. and in public assemblies, whereunto the
words of the Apostle Romans 2.18. seem to have reference (being instructed by
the Law) or catechized in the law, so the words are in the 1 Timothy 4.13. (...)*
notes that the word in Deuteronomy. 5.7 ^^anslated, Re^earse the law to ^hy
Children, ^^orts, whet, speech borrowed from vvarriours, who sharpen their
weapons, that they may better pierce tho^^vv: so the doctrine is to be
propounded with such easiness, as it may ^est enter into ^^ch tender ^indes.
greek meant of such an instruction as is by catechizing fit for Children.

Qu. Of what authority is catechizing doctrine?

An. Not any devise and invention of men, but of divine authority, because the
Apostles were by divine inspiration guided both for the matter and manner of
their teaching, 2 Pet. 1.21. also as the matter and manner of their doctrine
was of God, so the writing and putting into scripture both the one and the
other was done by divine Beza. authority of Catechism.
motion, that 1 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is inspired of God ^erse. 17. To make
perfect, (...) to furnish ^he man of God.
Ministers of the Church in all ages might not only see what to teach, but how
to proceed in their teaching, according to the will of God, so far as might
fit and further the edification of their flocks.

Qu. Now show us how the Excellency of Catechizing.
excellency of catechizing doctrine is raised from the text?

A. In this it appears, first, that it comes from God being taught by his
spirit: Secondly, in that it is a part of the holy ministry, even of the Paul
is thought to have done this office, (...) Cor. 9.14. Mark did Catechize at
Alexandria, with great profit, (says Eusebius) (...) is commanded to feed,
not the sheep only, but the Lambs also, the ^ather, for (...) says, the
increase of the flock (...)
Apostolical ministry* Thirdly, in that it tends and helps forward unto
perfection of the Saints in knowledge of godliness: how must not that be very
excellent which is an ordinance of God, for so excellent an end as the good and
eternal salvation of the Elect? Lastly, in that it is so much resisted by
Satan, this conuinceth both the great worth, and the singular fruit of this
kind of teaching: for he would not so much stir and labor to keep it out
of Church and families, were it not a work and exercise both of much dignity,
and manifold utility.

Qu. What may be the fruit and utility of this kind of teaching? Profit of
Catechizing. Heb. 6.1.


An. First, it Clemens calls catechism a base of ground plot.

Athanasius a Synopsis or first draught of a picture.

Rubbius says it is an hedge to general doctrine.

See Greenham. No kingdom of note in the world but by Catechizing received
the Gospel within 40. years after Christ's passion says Aegisippus.
Necessity of Catechizing.


prepares to ripeness and perfection in knowledge of God: Secondly, It
fitteth us to discern and try out truth from error. Romans 2.18. Thirdly, it
makes Christians more meet for the receiving of the blessed Communion, which
without some fundamental knowledge cannot be received worthily. 1 Cor. 11.29.
Lastly, it causes us to hear the word preached more profitably, even as
Masons build up more easily when the groundwork is well laid.

Qu. What difference is there between preaching, and the Catechizing doctrine?

An. The one is but short, the other a more large treatise: the one belongs to
weak ones, the other both to strong and weak: the one is as the laying the
foundation, the other a building to perfection: also in Catechizing there is
delivery by the Minister, and redeliuery by the Children; not so in preaching
which is not exacted to be repeated.

Qu. What other instruction does arise of these words?

An. The great necessity of Catechism, and catechizing doctrine both in
Church and families, because there will always be such rude and ignorant ones
as will need the principles, and must have precept upon precept, and line upon
line, now a little and then a little, sometime informing them by Catechism,
sometime refreshing them by History.

Qu. Declare this necessity further?

An. A foundation is not more necessary to a building, nor beginnings and
rudiments more needful to the perfection of an Art, then catechizing doctrine
is unto the ripe and sound knowledge of Christianity: for as there can be no
good building perfected where the groundwork is not first well laid; nor any
profiting in any faculty or Science without the skill of the elements of that
Science: so neither can there be any growth in Christian doctrine where
catechizing is neglected.

Qu. How was this point further laid open?

Cor. 3.2. Io^. 5.12.13.
An. By the similitude of bodily milk which is not more behouefull and
requisite for infants, who without it cannot grow strong and able to digest
hard meats; then is Catechizing for young beginners, who cannot be able to
conceive the deeper and higher mysteries except they be first nourished with
spiritual milk of the doctrine of the beginnings of Christ: and there will
always be weak ones which need this milk.

Qu. What use was made of all these instructions?

^
A. They serve to these two purposes: first, to reprove such as have charge of
others, especially Ministers of the word, which for lack either of ability
cannot, or of good affection will not take pains in this most good and
necessary course, without which there is no hope of any good to come by their
labors.

Qu. Does it not argue and check them with foolishness, as well as with
negligence, who teach without Catechizing?

An. It does so: for it is all one as if a Mason would imagine to finish a
firm building without a foundation; or as though one should think to read
well, and never to learn his Letters; or to speak and write Latin with good
congruitie, and not once to look upon his Rules of Grammar; or finally, as if
a Nurse would feed a young Infant that is tender, with solid hard meat, as
Bacon, Brawne, Beef, or such like, which all would condemn for an indiscreete
course.

Qu. What was the second use?

An. It serves, to Seeing it has god the author and is commanded by him,
practiced by the Church old and new, used by the Apostles, and Fathers also;
ignorance increases without it, knowledge abounds by it, and many other good
things come of it; Papists, nay, Heathens have allowed it: see Greenham. fol.
311.
exhort and provoke such as have not begun this exercise in their charges, to
take it up without further delay, and to encourage such as have made a good
entrance therein, and some good proceedings, to hold on and persist as they
purpose to see any good to come of their endeavors; and as they will give an
account to Christ with joy.

Q. Now reckon up unto us the Catechizing Doctrines of Catechism (...)
fundamental doctrine used in the primitive Church.
doctrines taught by the Apostles to the primitive Church, how many, and what
they be?

An. There is some diversity of judgment amongst learned men, about the
number and nature of these doctrines.

Qu. Report unto us this diversity, and then deliver unto us what you think of
this matter.

An. Mr. Iunius makes five parts of this Christian sum, which he names thus:
first, Repentance from dead works: Secondly, Faith in God: Thirdly, doctrine of
Baptismes: Fourthly, Imposition of hands: Fifthly, Resurrection of the dead, and
eternal Judgment, which two he joins in one.

Mr. Greenham refers them all to two heads, Repentance, and Faith.

Mr. Piscator he reduces them all to three heads, First, Repentance from dead
works: Secondly, Faith toward God: Thirdly, Resurrection unto eternal
judgment: of these two he makes one principle as Iunius does: now for the
third and fourth, to wit, the doctrine of Baptismes, and imposition of hands,
these he esteems not as peculiar points of doctrine, but therefore to be
mentioned here, to declare the circumstance of time, when those three
foundations aforenamed were wont to be taught and propounded unto them, namely,
either at the time when such as were (adulti) men of years before they
embraced the profession of Christ, were to be admitted into the Church by
Baptism, as Mat. 3. Act. 8. or when such as being baptized in their infancy
were to be confirmed before the Church by imposition of hands.

Mr. Beza, accounts five heads of catechizing doctrine, as Iunius does, but
differs in the particulars: for he seuereth the two last, which Iunius and
Piscator do join: and he seems to join the third and the fourth which
Piscator seuereth.

Qu. But what do you think of the distribution of these doctrines?

An. Holding the judgment of these and other learned men in reverent regard,
and leaving freedom (as is meet) to every man to follow what he deemeth most
sound and fit: I do divide these doctrines into six heads, or into six
several parts, which I name thus: First, Repentance from dead works: Secondly,
Faith toward God: Thirdly, Doctrine of Sacraments, by a Sinecdoche of the
part: Fourthly, the doctrine of Chruch-order and Officers, by a Metinomie of
the sign: Fifthly, the Resurrection of the dead: Sixthly, the last and general
judgment, with the eternal estate of all reasonable creatures after the same.

Qu. What is the reason why you follow this distinction?

An. Because it has a more full institution, and (...) neither ^hrase, nor
^^^pe, nor cir^umstance hinder, scripture is to be taken in the largest meaning.
we are to take the Scriptures in the largest sense, when there is nothing to
hinder it.

Qu. Before you do particularly and distinctly handle these doctrines, let me
know why these How these doctrines be f^^damentall, and yet doctrines of
perfection, with milk and strong meat.
doctrines are termed beginnings and foundations, since these are all which
the most skillful Christian need to know: in the understanding of these, the
great mystery of Godliness does consist: All that a man can know, is but to
know these, why then do you term them milk and beginnings?

An. These self same The same doctrine (says (...), is both a ^^ord and gulf
according to the handling of it easily or (...)
doctrines are both principles and perfections, both milk and strong meat,
both foundation and roof, according to the diverse manner of handling and
delivering them to the Church: As for example, the doctrine of Repentance or of
Faith being propounded in few and plain words, as children in years or
knowledge may perceive it, is milk and a principle or foundation: but the very
same doctrine being taught more copiously and profoundly is strong meat, and as
it were the roof of the building, these doctrines being like a river, in which
both the Lamb may wade, and the Elephant may swim.

Qu. Now its time ye come to the first Article of this Catechizing doctrine,
what is it? First doctrine of the Catechism.


An. Repentance from dead works.

Qu. What things do you consider in this article?

An. Two things: first, what dead works be. Secondly what it is to repent from
those dead works.

Qu. What do ye call dead works?

An. Our sins of what kind soever they be, Dead works.
whether original or actual.

Qu. What do ye call original sin?

An. That guilt of our Original sin, so called because it begun in our first
parents, and from them de^iued into all their posterity in whom it is before
their nevv-birth.
first parents, imputed to us, Romans 5.19. Secondly, that corruption of sin
which has ouerspread our whole nature, whereby it is prone to nothing but to
evil, and not at all prone to good: this may be called birth sin. Psalm.
51.3. Genesis 6.5. The frame of man's heart is only evil continually.

Qu. What do ye call actual sin?

An. All thoughts, words, Actual sin, Cogitata, dicta, facta, contra ^egem,
August.
and deeds being contrary to the will of God, issuing from that bitter root of
birth-sin. Also all omission of duties, either toward GOD or our neighbors.
Mat. 25.42. Lastly, all imperfections either in manner, or measure, or end of
doing good duties; Dead works, Why sins so called.
for whatsoever transgresses the law is sin. 1 John 3.4.

Qu. For what respects are these sins called dead works?

An. For two respects; First, because they proceed from those who be
spiritually dead. Ephesians. 2.1. Secondly, because they tend to If all sins be dead
works, what becomes of the distinction of mortal and venial sins?
Creation of man in Gods Image.
death and deserve it. Romans 6.23.

Qu. Seeing our works are dead, and we dead in them, does not this imply that
we did once live?

An. It does so, and the truth is, we did once live an holy and an happy life.
Genesis 1.26.

Wha^ is Gods image.
Qu. Wherein stood our holiness?

Righteousness (...) holiness of truth.
An. In the uprightness of soul and body, Eccles. 7.31 called Gods Image.
Genesis 1.

Qu. Wherein stood our happiness?

Ephesians. 4.24. Man's fall.
An. First, in our enjoying of Gods presence and favor: Secondly, in the
excellency of our person. Thirdly, in our Lordship over the creatures. Genesis
1.26.

Qu. How fell we from this estate?

An. By the malice of Satan suggesting, and by the Adam abusing (...) free
vvil (...) himself (...) it.
free will of our first parents, obeying his temptation, Genesis 3 ver. 1.2.3. etc.
Eccles. 7.3. God made man righteous, but they found out many inventions.

Qu. What followed hereupon?

An. Our first Our first Parents after their (...) had blindness in
understanding, (...) in their will, fear in their conscience, ^ebellion in
the whole man.
Parents became sinful and most miserable. Genesis 3. throughout.

Qu. Does their fall any thing This misery was either common to (...) as curse
of the creature, ^^^^alitie, de^^ction of the ^^^aturs, eiecti^^ out of (...)
or proper, (...) Adam (...), to (...) sorrovv in child- birth. ^^^ovv Adams
^^ll pertaines (...) us.
appertain unto us?

An. Yes surely, for in Adam we all sinned. Romans 5. ver. 12.19. they being the
head and root of our All men were (...) stand or fall ^ith Adam, he ^^^ng the
head of our kind by Gods ordinance, had grace and bliss to keep or to loose
for himself and all others, which came of him.
kind, have wrapped all their offspring in the guilt and hurt of their
transgression.

Qu. But are we not also under death through our own natural corruption and
actual sin?

An. We are so by nature servants of sin, and the children of Gods wrath.
Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 6.20.

Qu. What is meant by Repentance?

An. An utter Repentance what it is* Two parts of repentance: first, ceasing
from evil, called mortification of the old man, putting off (...) ^ld man, and
the body of sin. Secondly, doing good, called putting on the new man* (...)
Titus. 2. ver. 1^. Psalm. 1.^, ^.
renouncing of our selves, and our own works, in which there is nothing but
matter of death: and a returning to God to do his works.

Qu. Wherein stands this renouncing of our selves and works?

An. In these two things: First, that we never have either affiance or liking
to any thing which comes from our selves. Secondly, that both in purpose and
practice, in desire and deeds we endeavor to cease from our own works. Esaias.
1.16. to do the works of God.

Qu. What call ye returning to God.

An. When both mind and will are changed from blindness and malice, to the
sound knowledge and love of God and his works.

Qu. What works do ye call the works of God?

An, Such works as God in his moral Law appoints to be done. Works of God


Qu. What does the moral Law teach us?

An. To love God with all our soul, Sum of the Law.
might, and heart: and our neighbor as our self. Mat. 22. Romans 13.

Qu. Wherefore is Love made the sum of the Law?

An. Because our duties to God and man are nothing worth, unless love beget
them. 1 Cor. 13.1.3.^ 1 Timothy ^.4.


Qu. In how many commandments is the moral Law contained?

Ans. In ten: Division of the Law.
whereof four concern the love and worship of God, and the other six
concern the love and welfare of our neighbor.

Qu. Tell us briefly what do the first four Commandments require? A short
exposition of the law.


An. The first, The first table of the Law expounded.
that the true God alone be worshipped of us; this shuts out false Gods.

The second, that we yield him such a worship for the; matter and parts
thereof, as himself in his word commands this shuts out false worship of
the true God.

The third, that for manner and end he be worshipped with all holy and
religious reverence, referring all to his glory; this shuts out
profaneness in his true worship.

The fourth, that he be worshipped at such a time as he has prescribed, the
seventh day under the law, now one day in seven.

Q. Now show us summarily what the six latter do require? The second table
expounded. Maxima debetur puero reuerentia*


An. The fifth, that the excellency of our neighbor be duly respected without
all contempt to any Superior, Equal, or Inferior.

The sixth, that his life be carefully preserved without all cruelty.

The seventh, that the chastity of his person be purely kept without all
uncleanness.

The eight, that we increase and maintain his substance, without wrong, by
deceit or violence.

The ninth, that his name be tendered without any infamy and reproach done to
it, by lies, slanders, or false-witnesse.

The tenth, that our very thoughts be free from desiring the least good thing
which he has, rejoicing in his good as in our own.

Rules to guide the full exposition of the ten commandments. A Synecdoche
(...) every comm: (...) affirma^^^^ comman^emen^ has a (...).

(...) negative (...) an ^^firmatiue.


Qu. What rules can you give for the further and fuller understanding of the law?

An. First, where any one virtue is commanded, all of that kind, with the
means and occasions are also commanded. Secondly, where any vice is forbidden
all of that kind, with the means and occasions are forbid. Thirdly, where any
good is commanded, there the sin contrary to it is forbidden, and where any
sin is forbidden, there the good contrary to it is commanded. Fourthly, the
Law being spiritual, every commandment is spiritual, requiring Rom 7.14.
obedience from the thoughts and motions.

Qu Can any Christian by the help of grace, keep the whole Law in every part?

An No surely, because our Before the (...) of (...) we break all: after
(...) we keep all, and every part of the law, (...) imperfectly, we have a
(...) section of (...), but not of measure.
sanctification is imperfect. Rom 7. ver. 14.15.

Qu. Whereunto then serves the Law?

An. First, to utter what is sin. Romans 3.1.2. Secondly, to reveal the anger
of God against sin. Romans 4.15. Thirdly, to convict and terrify the
conscience for sin, and so to be a Schole-maister The Law (...) justify
(...), because of our disablenesse to fulfill it. Romans 8.2. Neither do we
seek justification from the law, because we have it by grace. Romans 3.
to Christ. Gal. 4.24. Fourthly, to be a lantern and light to direct the
steps of such as come to Christ. Psalm. 119. ver. 105.

Qu. What is the beginning of repentance and returning to God?

An. A displeasure and grief conceived for fear of gods vengeance hanging
over us for sin. Acts, By what degrees repentance is wrought. Preparation to
repentance.
2.37. called there a pricking of the heart.

Qu. Whence comes this grief and fear?

An. From the spirit of God working in the preaching of the Law, and is thereof
called the spirit of fear and bondage. 2 Timothy 1.7. Romans 8.15. because by the
Law truly expounded and wisely applied, the spirit is forcible to terrify
men's consciences, and Thus far many reprobates go in repentance, and (...)
come never so far.
pierce them with grief upon the sight of their several sins, and the great
condemnation due to them, as happened to Foelix and Judas.

Qu. You do judge then that the right understanding of the ten commandments,
is requisite to prepare unto repentance: but how is the grace of repentance
wrought?

An. As the word of the Law does prepare and begin repentance: Grace of
Repentance how effected.
so it is effected and wrought by the word of the Gospel, wherein the same
spirit of God is mighty to stir up in the Elect a love of Gods will, with a
loathing of every thing which is against it, upon the This is that is called
Faith.
sight of Gods marvelous mercy toward them in the forgiveness of all their
sins by Christ. Mark. 1. ver. 14.15. Luke. 24.47. where repentance is made a
part of the Gospel.

Qu. Belike then there is something in repentance which goes before faith, and
something does accompany the work of Faith?

An. It is true: for as Repentance legal, when a man has no more but a
knowledge of his sin and danger, with a grief and fear thereof, the Greeks
call this (...).
touching the sight and knowledge of sins, and of the dreadful accursed
state we are in through them; together with a great fear and certain grief
of mind, for our sinful and woeful condition, all this does proceed and go
before faith, but the Repentance euangelical, when one believing his sin to be
forgiven him, now fears and flies sin, not only for the danger of it, but
for the displeasure of his good God: this (...) (...)
turning and changing of the heart, that it may for Gods sake and glory love
God and his law, and hate that evil which is contrary to his will, even to the
killing of it at the root, this follows the work of faith in order of
nature, though it be wrought at the same time.

Qu. Tell us now what be the special affections, whereby repentance appears
to be truly wrought?

Signs of E^angelicall and ^hristian repen^^nce.
An. Those seven mentioned, 2 Cor. 7.11. First, a true sorrow for sin, as it
is the offense of a most gracious God; called godly sorrow. Secondly, a
clearing of our selves from all suspicion of sin, by avoiding all apparances
of evil, or by humble confession of our faults. Thirdly, an holy indignation
and anger for all evils past. Fourthly, a fear least such things by our
corruption should break forth again. Fifthly, a great and ardent desire to
prevent them. Sixly, a zeal against all evil in our selves and others, and of
doing all good we can in our general and special callings. Seventhly, a godly
revenge and punishment by brideling our lusts and refraining not only from
things forbidden, but even from some things which are indifferent, and be under
our liberty, if either they be an offense to others. 1 Cor. 8.13. Romans 14. or
occasion of sin to our selves.

Qu. Why is this article of repentance put in the first place?

A. Because it is in vain to hear ought of God or Christ, of grace or
salvation, until we be taught to know our own miserable estate by sin

Thus far of the first Principle, the second follows.
Second doctrine of the Cate^hisme.
Qu. WHat is the second article of the Catechism?

An. Faith toward God.

Qu. Why is this article of faith toward God, the second fundamental article?

An. Because having learned and believed that our works are dead, and our
selves through their desert under condemnation, we should surely be plunged
into despair, if the eye of our mind should not he raised up to look upon God
as a merciful God in Christ.

Qu. What things are to be handled in this second article?

An. First, the object of faith, to wit, God. Secondly, the nature and office
of faith.

Qu. How many things are we to know and believe touching God?

An. Five: first, his existence, or that he is ^ Secondly, his essence, or what
he is: thirdly, his persons, how many they be: fourthly, his actions or works:
Fifthly, of God incarnate and crucified, or of God made man.

Qu. Is it necessary to know that God is? That there is a God.


An. Yea, for without this all religion fails. Heb. 11.6.

Qu. How may we be persuaded that God is?

An. First, By the Scriptures, which every where witness of him that he is.
Secondly, by the works of creation. Romans 1.20. Psalm. 19.1.2. for the creatures
which be in the world cannot make the world, and the world could not make it
self, therefore it must have a maker, which is God. Thirdly, by the testimony
of our consciences, which accuse us and terrify us even for secret sins,
whereof the world can take no knowledge, which is an evidence that there is a
divine judge to whom we must give account of our secrets.

Qu. What judge ye of his essence or nature? Of the essence of God.


An. That none The essence of God is so unsearchable as it is easier to say,
what he is not, then what he is.
can utter it as it is. 2. Cor. 12.4. or if any could declare it, yet we cannot
be made to know it, because it is incomprehensible. 1. Tim. 6.16.

Qu. May not God be described to us in any sort?

An. Yes, by his Properties of God.
properties, which be twofold: First, incommunicable, which agrees properly
and only to himself. Secondly, communicable, which may be and are attributed
to other creatures, men and Angels.

Qu. What be the properties of the former rank?

An. First, Omniscience, whereby he perfectly knows himself and all other
things. Psalm. 139.1.2. Secondly, Psalm. 94.1*
Eternity, without beginning of days, or end of years. Rel. 1.8. Thirdly,
Omnipotency, whereby he is able to do what he will, and more things then
ever he will do, and to hinder whatsoever he will not have done. Reu. 1.8.
says the Lord almighty. Fourthly, Vnchangablenesse, being always one and the
same in his nature and will. James 1.18 Fifthly, Vnmeasurablenes, being of
infinite extension filling heaven and earth. Acts 7.48. Psalm. 145.

Qu. What be the properties of the second rank?

An. Power, Mercy, Goodness, Truth, Love, Wisdom, Justice, Holiness.

Qu. How do these agree to created natures?

^ From God. (...). 1.16.
An. First, by participation, and from another: Secondly, in measure, not
infinitely: Thirdly, as qualities, which may be separated from them, as
appears in the Angels which fell, and in sinful men.

Qu. How do these properties agree to God?

An. First, from himself, I am that I am, Exodus 2. Secondly, There is nothing
in God, but it is God. (...).
above measure. Thirdly, as essential to him, his mercy is his essence, so of
the rest.

Qu. You can give us some description of God, by this which you have spoken.

What God is.
An. Yea, God is a spirit, or spiritual substance, being of himself, and
cause of being to all his creatures, eternal, immutable, infinite in
knowledge, power, mercy, truth, justice and holiness: or thus, God is a most
perfect selfe-being, or an infinite perfection: or thus, God is an almighty
and eternal Spirit, most holy, most wise, most righteous, maker and governor
of the whole world, and every thing therein: these discriptions being diverse in
words, are yet one in substance.

Qu. But for the ignorant sake speak yet more plainly what God is?

An. God is such a nature as is of himself, and by himself, from everlasting
without dependence of any other, the sovereign cause of all things which be,
himself not subject to any change or alteration, seeing and knowing all things
before ever they come to pass, infinitely loving all goodness, and hating all
vice and evil, full of all power to reward the one, and to take revenge on the
other, most merciful toward his creatures, to pity and relieve their misery;
but especially, toward his children, in keeping that promise most constantly,
which he in great goodness, and mercy made and gave to them for their eternal
happiness by Christ.

Qu. What use is to be made of this description of God?

An. Manifold, first to correct all those godless fancies and imaginations
which arise in men's brains contrary to that which God has thus revealed of
himself. Secondly, to help men in their secret prayers unto and in the
meditations of God, to think and judge aright of him, as of an infinite and
most glorious being, that is all goodness power, and wisdom. Thirdly, to
move men to love him for his great goodness. Fourthly, to trust him on his word,
who is of such truth. Fifthly, to fear him whose power and justice is so
fearful. Sixthly, to suffer him to govern them whose wisdom is so perfect.
Seventhly, to be obedient to please him whose majesty and authority is so
excellent and glorious. Eighthly, to depend upon him who is the author and giver
of our being and all other good things. And lastly, to labor to imitate this
God in such his properties, wherein we may and ought to be like him, striving
to bea^e the image of his truth, love, mercy, goodness, justice and wisdom,
studying to be wise and merciful, good, just and loving, as God is.

Qu. What hold ye touching the persons in the Godhead? Unity of Godhead.


A. That the Godhead being one, is yet distinguished into three persons.

Qu. How prove ye that there is but one God?

An. First, by Scriptures, 1. Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. Secondly, by reason,
because there cannot be two eternals or infinits. It may also be declared by
these similitudes: As every body has but one soul, and no kingdom can endure
two kings, so the world has but one sovereign governor which is God: this
overthrows plurality of Gods, or the opinion of many Gods.

Qu. How are the persons named and distinguished? Trinity of persons.


An. 1. The Father. 2 The Son. 3 The holy Ghost: The Father begets; the
Son is begotten; the holy Ghost proceeds from them both. 1 John. 5.7. Mat.
28.19.

Qu. What be the actions of God?

An. Either inward which rest in himself, Actions of god inward.
as to know, contemplate, to love himself and his own wisdom. Prou. 8.30.
or outward with respect to his creatures. O^^vvard.


Qu. What be his outward actions?

Decree.
An. First, his decree Ephesians. 1.11. which works all things after the counsel
of his will: here is his decree called the counsel of his will: Execution.
Secondly, the execution of his Decree, Ephe. 1.11. there called a working
after or according to that counsel.

Qu. What is his decree?

Decree what (...).
An. It is his purpose or counsel concerning the making and governing of the
world, and all things in it to certain ends. Reu. 5.21.

What manner (...) it is.
Qu. What be the qualities of his decree?

An. First, it is free depending upon his will, Ephesians. 1.11. Secondly, it is
eternal before all worlds: Thirdly, it is unchangeable and cannot be altered.
Parts of his ^^cree.
James. 1.17. Fourthly, it is wise, righteous, and holy, even an himself is.

Qu. What be the parts of his decree?

An. ^^cree how (...), the act (...) his decree (...), diverse (...)
consideration. God decrees (...) doing of ^^od* and suffe^^ng of evil for
(...) ends.
Two: first, foreknowledge whereby all things were by his eternal wisdom
foreseen at one view. Acts 15.18. God knew all his works from the beginning.
Secondly, fore-appointment, whereby he ordained before all things which should
be done or not be done, Act. 2.23.

Qu. But if all things be decreed of God, how is not God the author of sin?

An. Somethings are good, as graces and good works, and these God has decreed
himself to do them. James. ^.17. Some things be evil, as sin and
afflictions, and these he has decreed to suffer them to be done by others and
to direct them to (...) sins had not (...) ^onsidera^^^^ of good they sh^^ld
not be. Though there (...) extreme (...) which is so good as it (...) no
respect (...) eui^^, to wit, (...); yet there (...) extreme (...), which is
(...), as it is (...) respect (...).
good ends. Genesis 45. ver. 5.7. to the declaration of his mercy or justice.

Qu. What be the kinds of Gods decree?

An. Two: first, general touching all creatures, reasonable and unreasonable
in heaven and earth: Secondly, special, which concerns the chief creatures,
as Angels and men.

Qu. What call ye these kinds of decrees?

An. The former is called providence, which is his fore-determination of all,
even the least things, that fall out unto the falling of an hair, or a
Sparrow, Mat. 10.29.30. The latter is Predestination, Predestination what it
is.
which is his fore-determining of the everlasting estate of Angels and men.
Jude. 4. Romans 8.29.30.

Qu. Are all Angels and men fore-appoynted to one estate? 2 Parts of
predestination.

1 Decree of Election. 2. Decree of Reprobation.



An. No verily, some are fore-appoynted to life eternal, these are called
Elect, Tit. 1.2. Others, fore-appointed to eternal death, which are termed
reprobates. 2 Cor. 1.3.5. 1. These. 5.9. Romans 9.2.

Qu. What is the end of Gods Predestination?

An. Gods glory in the manifestation of his mercy toward the Elect: and of his
justice toward the reprobate. Ephesians. 1.6.14. To the praise of the glory of his
grace
Romans 9.22.23. This which is spoken of the decree of God overthrows the fond
and false conceit of Heathenish and Christian Atheists, who attribute all
things to fortune and nature, and of Papists who ascribe so much to free will.

Qu. Is election of all men?

An. No, but of a certain number only, as it is written, How many be elected.
Many are called but few are chosen.

Qu. They err then which think the grace of election to be common?

An. They do so: for the Scripture speaks of vessels of wrath, prepared to
destruction. Romans 9.22. Jude. 4.

Qu. May a man know his own election? Whether Election may be known.


An. Every elect person may and ought to be By the graces and fruits of the
spirit of sanctification, such as be reckoned up. Gal. 5.22. and 2 Pet.
^.5.6.7. Properties of Election.
assured of his own, and must judge charitably of others election. 2. Pet.
1.10. 1. Pet. 1.2. It is an error therefore to hold that the Elect ought
always to doubt and be uncertain o^ their salvation, and a sin too rashly
to judge of the final estate of others. Romans 14.

Qu. What is further to be noted of Election?

An. That it is eternal, Ephesians. 1.4. therefore it differs from effectual
calling, which is done in time. Secondly, Unchangeable, Math. 24.24. Therefore
once Elect can never become Reprobate. Thirdly, most free, having no other
cause but the good pleasure of God, Ephesians. 1.5. therefore not depending upon
foreseen faith or works: Fourthly, most righteous and holy. Psalm. 145.17.
Fifthly, it is not of the end only* but also of the means which bring us unto
eternal life, as faith and good works. 1. Pet. 1.2. 2. These. 2.13. Ephesians. 1.4.

Qu. What use of this point?

An. Unbelievers and wicked livers do in vain boast of their election, as the
Jews. John 8. Secondly, it contains the marks of our Election, faith and
love. Ephesians. 1.4. 2 These. 2.13. Thirdly, it confuteth them who say, if they be
elect, they may live as they list: and fourthly, them also which say faith and
good works come of our free will, whereas they flow from the free grace of
election. Ephesians. 1.4. Act. 13.48.

Qu. How is Gods decree executed?

^^^cution of Gods decree.
An. By his works of creation, and government.

Qu. What things are to be known touching creation?

Creation.
An. First, the author, the whole Trinity. Genesis 1.1. Gods made the world, in
the plural number, to note the Trinity of persons, and afterward, Let us make
man, etc. Secondly, the matter, of nothing. Heb. 11.3. Thirdly, the manner, not
by tools but by his word. Psalm. 148.5. Fourthly, the order, first, a rude
heap, or vast chaos without form, then a distinct distribution into several
kinds of creatures. Genesis 1. ver. 1.2.3.4.5. etc. Fifthly, the time, in Within
which (...) days, we (...) the An^^^ (as being ^is chief and ^hoice
work) (...) made. (...). ^.1. the ^hole army of creatures made within six
days: on which day ^hey were ^^de we (...) not, (...) Scrip^^^^ therein
(...) silent, (...) open enough at least to my understanding.
six days. Exodus 20.11. Sixthly, the end, Gods glory. Prou. 16.4. Romans 11.36.
Seauenthly the use, that we might stir up our minds to behold, and open our
mouths to praise his eternal power, wisdom and bounty. Romans 1.19.20.22.
Psalm, 148. throughout.

Qu. What is the Government, called his temporal ^^idence to distinguish it
from his fore-determination, and eternal providence.
government of God?

An. That whereby he administreth all things according to his decree.

Qu. What be the parts of it?

An. Preservation, Parts of government.

1 Preservation. 2. Rule.

whereby he preserves and vpholdeth every particular thing and creature so
long as pleases him. 1. Tim. 4.10. Heb. 1.2.3. Secondly, In the ruling and
preserving of humane creatures God uses kings and other Magistrates, as his
vicegerents, of whose authority, dignity, degrees, office, and commodities
of their government ye may read. Psalm. 82. Romans 13.
Rule, whereby as Lord of heaven and earth he orders and disposes every
thing most mightily, wisely and justly, to his own glory and good of his
Church. Ephesians. 1.11. Romans 11.36.

Qu. How does he preserve and rule the world?

An. Either by Amongst the means, Angels are principal, serving to the
effecting of Gods decree in the greatest works thereof, the safety of good
men, and destruction of the wicked. Heb. 1.14.
means, or without, or against means.

Qu. What follows hereof?

An. That the Lord God the fountain of nature, is not tied to the Law of
nature, means are rather in respect of us, then of God who works as he will
even contrary to means.

Qu. What use is to be made of this doctrine, of Gods governing all things?

An. First, it teaches contentment in every estate: in adversity to be
patient, in prosperity to be thankful. Psalm. 39.9. Secondly, also it teaches
in all necessities and dangers to seek to God by prayer, Act. 4.24. Lastly,
because he preserues and rules by means, therefore we are not to neglect
them least we tempt God. Mat. 4.7. nor to trust in them least we deny God,
this was the fault of king Asa who trusted in the Physician.

Qu. What learn ye hereby that God works against means?

An. We learn this, that when means are wanting or be against us, yet we
ought still to trust in God for help, as Danyel and Sydrach, etc.

Qu. Amongst all the works of divine government which is chiefest?

An. The work of Redemption. Work of Redemption. Why greater then the work
of Creation.


Qu. Does it excel the work of our Creation?

An. Yes, sundry ways: first, in Creation God brought something out of
nothing; in our Redemption he brought life out of death, and saved them which
were worse then nothing. Romans 5.6.7.8. Secondly, Acts 2^ 24.
the world was created with a word: he said, Let it be light, and it was light,
Genesis 1.4* But redeemed with most horrible sorrows and pains. Mat. 27.
throughout. Thirdly, in creation God made known his power and wisdom: Romans
1.20. in Redemption he manifested his justice and mercy. Fourthly, in creation
God made man: for our redemption God was made man, Gal. 4.4. Lastly, by our
creation we are sons of God, but by Redemption members of Christ, and he is
of heaven.

Qu. From what things are we redeemed?

An. From sin, (...) these (...) very elect (...) bondage (...) prisoners
(...) their will. ^ Tim. 2.26. Christ's life (...) the ransom or price which
brought (...) to such ^s believe.
Satan, hell and eternal death, and restored to righteousness, Gods favor,
and a greater happiness, than we lost in Adam.

Qu. In what respect is our happiness by Redemption greater than our
happiness by Creation?

An. This was after a sort (...) 2.4. Who gave him (...) a ransom, (...) was
paid ^o Gods judgment, which ^^ing satisfied, (...) lost his (...)*
earthly and changeable: that is constant and heavenly.

Qu. What things are we to know concerning our Redemption?

An. Three things: first, the person of our Redeemer: Secondly, his office:
Thirdly, his benefits.

Qu. What do ye believe touching the person of our Redeemer?

Ans. That he is God and man in one We should (...) ^iued in (...) subject
(...) ^hange, but (...) Christ we (...) steadfast and heavenly ^^ndition.
(...), a (...) of his (...), God ^^ith ^s.
person. Romans 1.4.5.6.

Qu. Was God turned into man?

An. No verily, but man was assumed unto God. Heb. 2.16. God took in to the
fellowship of person man's nature.

Qu. Are these natures of God and man in Christ, so From this (...) of person
(...) c^mmeth to (...), that in ^^^ipture that ^^hich is (...) the one (...) is
assumed of the other, as where it is said, that God purchased the Church with
his blood. Act. 20.28. And the Lord of glory was crucified. 1. Cor. 2. And he
that de^^ended, is the self same that ascended, Ephesians. 4. where that which
Christ did as man, is ^^^^^buted to his Godhead, by the unity of the person.
joined, as they remain distinct and unconfounded?

An. These two natures, with their properties, and actions though they be
united in one person of our blessed Savior, yet they abide unconfounded, so as
the Godhead is not the manhood, nor on the contrary. Also the manhood is not
eternal, infinite, almighty, etc. nor the Godhead is not mortal, finite,
subject to hunger or thirst: The Godhead did not speak, walk, obey, suffer
death; the manhood did not cast out devils or do other Miracles, or support
it self in suffering, or give merit to his obedience, but in the work of our
Redemption each nature did that which is proper to it, their properties and
actions concurring to effect the glorious deliverance of the Elect.

Qu. How is this union wrought?

An. By the incredible operation and infinite virtue of the holy Ghost. Luke.
1.35. How this union is wrought.


Qu. Was this union necessary for our Redemption?

An. Yes, most necessary; for Christ our Redeemer, Why needful. The Godhead
is impassible. Mere man cannot merit of God.
as God only could not be subject to the Law, to fulfill it; nor to be bear
the punishment of our offending against it: and as man only, he could not have
made the obedience of his life, and suffering of miseries at his death
meritorious for our salvation. Secondly, as God only he could not have This
required a mortal nature.
dyed, and as man only he could not have This required an infinite power.
overcome death. Lastly, as God only he could not have made a satisfaction,
for that by justice must be made in the same nature which offended: and as man
only, he could not have applied it to us, and made it effectual in us, for
this is the work of the spirit which he gives unto us as he is God.

Qu. Is this union of two natures in one person inseparable?

An. It is This union never dissolved not by his death, wherein his body
separated from his soul, but neither body nor soul divided from the person of
the Son of God.
inseparable and perpetual, or else the covenant of mercy and life between
God and us, could not be everlasting, hereof called in Hebrews, an eternal high
priest, and said to have purchased eternal redemption.

Qu. Why so?

An. Because our Redeemer was not only once to dye for the taking away of
sins, but for ever to appear in the sight of God for us. Heb. 9.24. to make
intercession for sinners.

Qu. What is the office of our Redeemer?

An. His office is to be a mediator of Sin had made (as Esaias says) a
separation betvveene God and us, so as we were enemies. Romans 5.6.7*
reconcilement between God and man. 1 Timothy 2.4.

Qu. Is he not called Christ a name o^ his office, as (...) of his (...).
Christ in respect of his office?

An* He is so, and it is as much as Gods anointed, to show that his Father
did consecrate him to the office of a mediator* and did furnish him with all
meet gifts, Ioh. 6.27 Act. 10.38

Qu. What be the parts of his Mediatorship?

(...) prophet.
An. Three: first, Prophetship, whereby he declares God his Father, and his
counsel touching man's salvation. John. 1.18. Our highpriest
Secondly, his Priesthood, whereby he works the matter and merit of our
Redemption: first, in his holy conception: ^uke. 1.35* ^ Cor. 5.^1.
secondly, in his innocent and righteous life: thirdly, in the oblation of
himself upon the Cross at his death. Our king.
Heb. 9.28. Thirdly, his kingdom whereby he does effect all this in us. Luke,
1.32.33. and apply it to us.

Qu. How does he apply to us the effects of his Prophet-ship and Priesthood?

An. First, by the (...) of his ^ingdome.

Work of his spirit.


inward operation of his spirit, whereby as he hardens the reprobate, so he
enlightneth and draws the Elect. Secondly, by an outward divine policy,
whereby he rules his Church till the last and great judgment.

Qu. Rehearse the benefits of our Redeemer.

An. The Church poli^ie in laws and officers ^ith their gifts (...) ^^nctions
all depending upon the disposition (...) this eternal ^ing Reu. 2.1. ^ph. 4.7
8.9.10*
benefits Benefits from (...) Redeemer. (...) a Savior o^ giver of salvation*
which comprehends (...) his benefits ^word named and ^^^^soeuer else.
are innumerable, every one more worth then a world, signified in his name
Jesus.

Qu. Which is the first?

An. Incorporation, whereby we are ingrafted into him, to become one with him.
Ephesians. 5.30.

Qu. Which is the second?

An. Reconciliation, whereby we are delivered from the wrath of God, and
restored more perfectly into his favor. 2. Cor. 5.19. Col. 1.20.

Qu. Which is the third?

An. Remission of sins, which is the removing of the guilt and punishment
from us by his sufferings. Col. 1.12:

Qu. Which is the fourth?

An. Imputation of righteousness whereby our sins are accounted his, and his
obedience is accounted ours, 2, Co. 5.21

Qu. Which is the fifth?

An. Intercession whereby he appears in the heavens presenting our selves and
prayers which we make in his name, and other good works spotless unto his
Father. Romans 8.34. Heb. 9.24.

Qu. Which is the sixth?

An. Acceptance to eternal life whereby we are accepted as worthy of life,
for Christ's worthiness. Ephesians. 1.5.

Qu. Which is the seventh?

An. Adoption, whereby of the Children of wrath by nature, we are become the
children of God by grace. Gal. 4.4.

Qu. Which is the eight?

An. Sanctification, whereby we dye to sin, This gift being imperfect in this
life is therefore accompanied with a co^bat betvveene the old man and the new
vvherof Romans 7.1^. our spiritual armor being named. Ephesians. 6* 13.14.15.16.
and live to righteousness. Romans 6. throughout. 1. Pet. 2.25.

Qu. Which is the ninth?

An. Corrob^ration, whereby we are kept in holiness to the end. Ephesians. 6.10. 1
Pet. 5.10.

Qu. Which is the tenth?

An. Glorification, whereby holiness here begun by Grace is fully perfected in
the kingdom of heaven. Romans 8.30. the Saints living now the life of glory.

Qu. What use is to be made of these benefits?

An. First, they minister cause to consider of the manifold love of Christ, and
the unsearchable riches of his grace. Secondly, we may give an aim how
abundantly fruitful the Lords Supper is to such as rightly partake it seeing
such things so many and great are there offered and assured, even Christ
himself with all those benefits we have named. 1. Cor. 10.16. Mat. 26.28.
Thirdly, they occasion us more earnestly to love and praise our The more and
the more excellent we see his benefits to be tovvard, the more it inflameth
our hart^ with his love.
Redeemer and more heartely to obey him. Ephesians. 1.3. Romans 12.1.

The means how to obtain Christ with righteousness and all other benefits
which belong to life eternal, where, of Faith, and the office thereof.
But seeing we have learned before that by nature we are the children of Gods
wrath and under death, how shall we become pertakers of eternal life, (...)
our con^^^^^tion with (...) by Christ through faith in him*
and of Christ with these benefits which bring to it?

An. By being joined to God who is that life himself, John. 5.26.

Qu. But we sinners cannot attain to the most just God.

An. True, therefore God in the person of his Son descended to us, and took
flesh of our flesh. John 1.16. 1 John. 5.11.12.

Qu. But has this flesh of Christ life in it?

An. It has so from the Godhead the fountain of life. John. 6.65.

Qu. Is this life communicated from Christ to the Elect?

An. It is so, by his flesh which is the God the Father is as the ^^^^^aine of
(...)* Christ as (...) conduit, (...) word as (...) pipe, our ^^^^^uing hearts
(...) ^^sterne.
conduit to convey it to them, John. 6.54.

Qu. Must the Elect have conjunction with Christ that they may be pertakers of
this true life?

An. They must have a real conjunction such as is between the head and the
members, the Vine and the branches. John. 15.1 Ephesians. 4.15. 1 Cor. 12.12. husband
and wife, Ephesians. 5.25.26.

Qu. What is the band of this conjunction and knitting?

An. The spirit of Christ by his infinite virtue. 1 Cor. 6.17. and 12.13.

(...) faith, the (...), and parts o^ it.
Qu. By what means does the spirit knit us and Christ?

An. By the means of faith, which the spirit through the word preached creates
in our hearts that we may receive Christ and his benefits. Ephesians. 3.17. Romans
10.17.

Qu. What do ye call Faith?

^^ith what it is*
An. That This is the de^^^ition of a (...) and a lively ^^^tifying faith.
(...) of other as historical, miraculous, and ^^mporarie faith, all which may
be in reprobates.
gift of God whereby the soul is enabled to apprehend Christ as he is set
forth in the word and Sacraments.

Qu. Is not this common to all other gifts of the spirit?

An. No verily, it is proper to Faith as it looks to Christ the work of i^
is to receive him, as it looks to the Saints it works by love. Gal. 5.6.
faith only to receive Christ. John. 1.12. Gal. 3.14.

Qu. Is it not in this sense said that we are justified by faith?

An. It is so, not because faith as a virtue, quality, or work is any part of
righteousness, which is wholly in Chirst his obedience and sufferings. 1. Cor.
1.30. but because it is a spiritual hand to receive his justice to be ours.

Qu. Is Christ and his righteousness ours to justify us, before it be
received by faith?

An. Our righteousness is perfectly and fully wrought before, and it is ours
in the purpose of God, who has decreed to give it us, but till we believe we
have no profit by Christ but are as the reprobates be, that is, sinners,
ungodly, enemies, children of wrath, Romans 5.6.8. Romans 3.6. Ephesians. 2.2.3. Saving
that the Elect are under the decree of Gods love, and are preserved from the
downe-fall mentioned, Heb. 6.4.5.6. whereinto some reprobates fall.

Qu. It seems to me ye will have faith coupled with Christ to make us
righteous?

An. No, my meaning is that Christ's The robe of Christ's justice as a garment is
without us, inherent in Christ's own person, till it b^ put on us by faith
then it is ours.
justice only makes me stand righteous, but it is not allowed me to be my
justice until I believe, and so apply it to my self. Romans 4.3.4. and ver.
23.24.

Qu. By what similitude may this be expressed?

An. By the similitude of a pardon, a gift, a plaster, of the Sun, of the
brazen serpent, which do benefit none till they be received, accepted, applied
and looked upon. Ioh. 3.14.15. so Christ our soule-plaister, that unspeakable
gift of God, the Sun of righteousness, does not benefit any till they
believe in him.

Qu. What think ye of their opinion which say Christ and his obedience are
ours, to justify us before we believe?

An. It is senseless, absurd, impious, heretical and damnable.

Qu. Why say you so?

An. Because it fights against sense, reason, scripture, Romans 3. and 4. and
10. consent of the Church, Gods decree. John. 6.40. Christ's glory. Romans 4.20.
and brings in a false Christ, which should be a iustifier of unbelievers whiles
they be such.

Qu. But the Elect are accounted just with God in his eternal counsel,
therefore justified before and without faith?

An. This is an absurd reason, for justification or accounting just is
distinguished from eternal predestination as an effect from the cause, a
timely effect issuing out of an everlasting cause. Romans 8.30. Again, even in
Gods eternal counsel, he does so decree to justify the Elect as it was
ordained to be by faith in Christ, Gal. 3.8.

Qu. What use is to be made of this doctrine?

An. First, it admonishes us above all things to labor for a lively faith:
secondly, it confuteth Papists who set up other means to apply Christ, and
them which will have Christ and all his good things without application.

Qu. Be there not degrees of faith?

^^grees of ^^ith.
An. Yes, there is a little and a great faith, a weak and a strong faith. Romans
4.19.20. O ye of little faith. Mat, 6.30. Woman great is thy faith. Mat. 15.28.

Q. What difference is there between a weak and a strong faith?

An. None in the nature of the thing, but in the measure of apprehending
Christ: for the weak faith being true and lively, ^om. 4.20. (...) ^.1.
is sufficient to lay hold on Christ, as a weak hand can hold a stone as
sufficiently, though not so firmly as a stronger. Again, the strong faith is
that which Scripture calls Those Catechismes which generally (...) faith to
be (...) assurance (...) persvvasion ^^ey define not (...), but one ^^^sure of
faith, (...) vvi^, the strong faith.
full assurance, whereas a weak faith works but an assurance of the promise
concerning Christ.

Qu. Is any faith so strong, as altogether to be without doubting and unbelief?

An. None, because all faith, (as all other graces) has Mark. 9.24. ^. Cor.
13.9.12. Seeing our knowledge is ^mperfect, so is ^he faith to, for (...)
believe as (...) know.
imperfection and is mingled with some doubting, fear, ignorance or unbelief,
which yet the stronger faith does sooner overcome then the weak.

Qu. By what means is faith engendered?

An. Ordinarily by the word preached, Romans 10.17. Romans 1.16. by the word not of
the law, which engenders terror, but of the Gospel.

Qu. By what means is it increased.

A. First, by the word both read and preached: secondly, by the use of the
Sacraments: thirdly, Faith as a mother begets works, and they as a daughter
strengthen their mother. Mark of faith.
by prayer and godly meditations of Gods works and promises: fourthly, by
careful keeping of a good conscience. James. 2.22. fifthly, by long experience
of Gods mercies. Psalm. 23. throughout.

Qu. How shall we know whether we have faith?

An. First, by the feeling and striving against our unbelief. Mark. 9.24.
Secondly, by traveling to settle our faith, Psalm. 42.5.9.11. Thirdly, by
removing all lets of faith, fears, distrusts, etc. Fourthly by unfeigned love
to God, his people, his word and sacraments, 1 John. 3.14. Fifthly, by
repentance and amendment of life present, and willingness to dye in hope of a
better life.

Qu. What be the fruits of faith?

An. All good works, Iam. 2.22. Gal. 5.22. Fruits of faith.


Qu. What do ye call good works?

An. All virtues and duties either toward God or man, Of good works. Which be
good works.
which be required in the ten Commandments; contrary to the common opinion of
men, who think only alms deeds to be good works.

Qu. What things are needful to a good work?

An. These things: first, that it be commanded of God, What required to good
works.
Mat. 15.9. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Secondly, that it proceed and come from faith. Heb.
11.4. Thirdly, that it be referred to his glory, or done with a desire to
glorify God. 1. Cor. 10. Whatsoever ye do etc.

Qu. Have good works any power to They merit not and why. 1 They are not
ours. 2. A debt to God, to whom we owe them. 3. No proportion betvveene them
and heaven



merit with God?

An. They have not, Romans 4.1.2. because they are not done in perfect love, and
also (as they come from us) with their imperfection they have their spots and
stains, All our righteousness is as the menstruous cloth, etc, Esaias.

Qu. How then can they please God?

A. They How good works please God.
please God as fruits of his own spirit through forgiveness of the wants and
spots which cleave to them, and by the imputation of Christ's righteousness to
the working believers.

Qu. Rehearse some principal good works?

An. Patience under the cross, Romans 5.4. Confession of God before men. Romans
10.9. hope of eternal glory, Romans 5.5. Mercy to the poor, called in Mat. 6*4.
Alms. The chief (...) of this (...) in (...) com^^ny, exhortations,
informa^^^^s, and such (...) works, as ^^^cerne the (...) the rule (...) guide
these ^^orks ye have (...) Mat. 7.3.4 (...) Gal. 6.1. (...)* 18.15. (...)
5.1.2. (...) spirit of (...), love, (...), comp^ssion (...)*
Love of our neighbors, friends, and enemies. Luke 6.7. And Prayer. Romans 10.15.

Qu. What do ye call prayer?

An. It is a work of the believing soul, desiring things needful of God,
with confidence of obtaining through the mediation of Christ, Psalm. 25.1.2. 1 Timothy 2.3.4.

Qu. What do ye call things needful?

An. They be either things that concern Gods glory, as in the three former
Petitions of the Lords Prayer: or our own welfare, as in the three latter:
either of our bodies all necessities for this life, Petition 4. or of our
souls, forgiveness of sins past, Petition 5. or protection and deliverance
from sins to come, Petit. 6.

Qu. Why must these things be desired of God?

An. First, because God only is to be trusted in. Romans 10.1. Secondly, Prayer
is a religious service of God, and God only is to be served Mat. 4.10.
Thirdly, God alone knows the desires of our hearts, Acts. 1.26. Fourthly, God
alone is all-sufficient to help. Genesis 17.1.

Qu. Is not voice needful in prayer?

An. Prayer may be without sound of words, as in Moses, ^^y voice be^^^eful in
prai^^ seeing it is a (...) of the (...).
Hannah, Exodus 14. 1 Samuel 1. Yet there is great use of the voice in prayer.

Qu. What use?

An. For the expressing and exciting of our own devotion and feruencie if we
pray alone, and for the same end as also for edification of others if we pray
with others, John. 17. throughout.

Kinds of prayer
Qu. What be the kinds of Prayer?

An. Prayer is of diverse sorts, either in respect of the place, or of the
things asked in prayer.

Qu. How is Prayer distinguished in respect of the place?

An. It is either private, if the place of prayer be That is, not ^ppointed
common for all to (...) to.
private, or else public, if prayer be made in a public place.

Qu. How is prayer distinguished by the things asked in prayer?

An. First, when we desire to have evils either sins or afflictions,
Deprecation.
taken from our selves, this is deprecation, example hereof Psalm. 25.7. and
Psalm. 6. throughout. Secondly, if we desire to have these evils removed from
others or any good done to others, Intercession.
then it is called intercession. Psalm. 25.21. Psalm. 51.20. Thirdly, when we
would have good things (graces or benefits inward or outward) given to our
selves, this is called prayer, or petition. Psalm. 25.4.5. Petition.
Fourthly, if we desire that God should have praise either for deliverance
from evils, or for bestowing good things toward our selves or others, this is
called thanksgiving. Thanksgiving
1. Tim. 2.2.

Qu. What graces are chiefly to be used, and set on work in prayer?

An. First, Graces needful to true christian prayer Knowledge (...) direct us
to ask what we shold^ humility by sight of our vileness and vnvvorthinesse
compared with Gods majesty zeal of Gods glory: faith to believe the promise
of being heard: constancy to hold out, if we be not heard presently: godly
sorrovv for those sins whereof we ask pardon, and of those wants whereof
we ask forgiveness and supply: spiritual joy in the feeling of mercies
already received, and hope of more: compassion of others sins and miseries
for whom we pray: sobriety, that the body being kept under by abstinence,
the spirit may be free to pray: vvatchfulnesse, in moderate sleep of the body:
vigilance of the mind: singleness, desiring things prayed for from our hearts
not from our lips only.
sound knowledge of God and our wants: secondly, humility: Luke, 10.13.
thirdly, zeal: James, ^.16. fourthly, faith: James 1.6. Romans 10.14. fifthly,
love: Mat. 6.14.15. sixthly, constancy: Luke* 18.1. seauenthly, godly sorrow:
eighthly, spiritual joy: 1 These. 5.16, 17. ninthly, compassion or
fellow-feeling: tenthly sobriety: eleauenthly, watchfulness, Mat. 26.41. 1
Pet. 4.7. twelfthly, singleness of heart. 1. Tim. 2.

Qu. Does not this prove that no hypocrite or wicked man can pray aright?

An. True, it does so, because they have but the shadow and appearance, without
the truth and substance of these graces. Also this proves prayer to be one of
the hardest works of a Christian, contrary to the common opinion of ignorant
men, who take prayer to be but a moving of the lips, and repetition of certain
words.

Qu. But are not hypocrites and evil men which live within the Church bound to
pray?

An. They are bound by virtue of the Commandment of God to all external works
of Religion, and their prayer though not made aright, yet prevails for many
temporal blessings and deliverances, this is proved by the story of Simon
Magus, Act. 8. and Achab. and Psalm. 107.

Qu. Why is Christ's mediation needful?

Christ's (...).
An. Not only for the commandments sake, which bids us pray in his name,
but because our best prayers have their wants and faults, and therefore cannot
be accepted, except they be purged by the death of Christ. Heb. 13*15. Christ
is that other Angels who standing before the Altar, and having his golden
(...) of odors offers them ^ith the prayer^ of the saints which by that
(...) are a sacrifice of svveet smelling (...) to God.
Reu. 7.3.4.

Qu. What is it to pray in Christ's name?

An. First, to desire to be heard for his love and merit: Secondly, to trust
that our prayers shall please God through Christ's merit.

Qu Why do ye require that both desire and confidence or trust should be had
in prayer?

An. Because these are the two wings, upon which the soul of a Christian in
prayer must mount, and soar up to heaven, as Christ says, whatsoever ye
desire in prayer, believing in my name it shall be done for you. Mark. 9.

Of Patience under the Cross.

Qu. YOu reckoned up patience under the Cross amongst the fruits of faith,
tell us I pray you, what is it that you call the Cross?

An. Every tribulation or affliction which befalls us in this life, but
namely, and more especially such as befalls us for righteousness sake: so as
there be both general crosses which happen for sin, and be common to all,
and special crosses which happen for righteousness sake, and be peculiar to
the godly.

Qu. Who sends these afflictions?

An. They all come from God, as it is written, No evil is in the City but God
has done it, Amos. 3.6. and they are sent of God for most just and good ends.

Qu. What be the ends for the which common afflictions are sent?

An. The end of them as God intends in respect of evil men, is to inuit
them to repentance, that is, to give them occasion of turning; or to leave them
without excuse, Romans 2.4. but the event of them in respect of the men
themselves to whom they are sent, it is the hardening of them in sin. Romans
2.5. but in respect of the godly, the utmost end of Gods counsel in afflicting
them in respect of themselves, it is to preserve them from perishing with this
unrepentant world, 1. Cor. 11.32. Ye are chastised least ye perish with the
unrepentant world. There be also other ends, which sue and lead to this end: as
first, the humbling and meekning them under Gods hand: Secondly, the amendment
of their lives, Even to hide the pride of man, and to turn him from his
enterprise, as Job speaks. Job. 33.17*


Qu. What do ye call the Cross sent for righteousness sake?

An. Such an affliction as is sent either for any well-doing in respect of doing
any good or hindering any evil; or such as comes to us for our love and
profession of the Gospel, as any rebuke, injury in word or deed, in name or
goods for Christ sake, and amongst these martyrdom is chief, which is a
willing and constant suffering of death, or torment for the truth of God.

Qu. What is the end of these kinds of Crosses?

An. First, they come for a notable trial of the faith and constancy of the
Godly: secondly, for the confirmation of the Church by their constant
suffering. Phil. 1. Romans 16. thirdly, for a testimonial against the wicked
world, Mat. 10. Lastly, after they be tried, they shall have a crown of glory
in heaven. James. 1.12.

Qu. Now define unto us what patience is?

An. It is the grace of the spirit whereby the Christian soul is made able to
endure the shame and smart of the cross.

Qu. What be the extremes of this virtue?

An. Blockish senselessenes, whereby the bitterness of affliction is not felt.
Secondly, impatiencie when men rage under the heavy hand of God, patience walks
in the middle and feels the grief and pain of afflictions in such sort, as
yet with good contentment it keeps us quite under it, waiting by hope for a
good and happy end in Gods blessed time according to his promise.

Qu. By what consideration does God use to work patience in the hearts of his
Children?

An. By these and such like: first, that it is his will to afflict his
children, Heb. 13.6.7.8.9. Secondly, that their brethren which be in the world
taste of the same cup. 1. Pet. 5 Thirdly, that God will not afflict his own
above their strength, but will minister sufficient strength to bear. Fourthly,
that he will at last grant a very good issue, making all things turn to
their best in the end. 1. Cor. 10.13. Fifthly, that the Son of God was not
free from afflictions, and that is a great mercy to be conformed and made like
to Christ in suffering, that they may be like him in glory. 2. Tim. 1. If we
suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Sixthly, that the afflictions of
this life be both short and momentary, but the glory which follows this life
has both perpetuity and weight. 2. Cor. 5. Lastly, because afflictions
through Gods blessing bring forth patience, and patience, experience, and
experience hope, and this makes not ashamed.

Qu. What do ye call hope?

An. It is that grace whereby the Christian soul in regard of Gods mercy and
truth certainly expects the performance of all good things promised, but
especially of life eternal.

Qu What difference between Faith and Hope?

An. Faith assures us of the truth of Gods promise, hope looks for the
accomplishment thereof.

Of the Of Sacraments the seals of faith, and outvvard testimonies of Gods
love in Christ.
Sacraments.
Qu. WHich is the third Article of the Catechism?

An. The doctrine of Baptismes.

Qu. What is meant by the doctrine of Baptism?

An. The doctrine of the Sacraments, both being comprehended under one, by a
Synechdoche of the part for the whole.

Qu. Wherefore is the doctrine of Sacraments the third fundamental article?

An. Because our faith in God being infirm and little, we were to be taught
next after faith, whence to fetch strengthening and support of our weakness.

Qu. Why does he say Baptismes?

An. To note a double washing: first, outward by the Minister: secondly, inward
by Christ. Mat. 3.11.

Qu. What do ye call a Sacrament? Of Sacraments in general.


An. An outward visible sign and seal, What a Sacrament is.
ordained of God to admonish and assure our minds of the truth of Gods The
covenant not of works which promises life on condition of fulfilling the
law: but of grace which promises Christ and all other good things belonging
to earthly or heavenly happiness, on condition we believe the Gospel.
covenant concerning the free salvation of our souls by Christ Jesus. Romans
4.11.

Qu. Who is the author of the Sacraments?

An. Christ himself the Son of God is author of the Sacraments in the new
Testament, Mat. 26.26. and 28.19.20.

Qu. Why must Sacraments be of divine appointment?

An. Because it is requisite that as God made the covenant of grace and
salvation, so he should confirm that covenant by what tokens himself thought
meet: Also this persuades Christians of the necessity and profitablenesse of
the Sacraments, because Christ ordains nothing in vain. Lastly, this warns
all men with obedience and due reverence to resort unto the use of them, as
unto the ordinances of Christ, which cannot be injured and profaned without
injury to Christ the author. 1. Cor. 11*27.

Qu. To what use do Sacraments serve? Whereunto Sacraments serve.


An. First, to be marks of our profession to sever Gods people from all
strangers: Secondly, to instruct and teach our minds in the truth of the
Covenant; as Baptism teaches us that we come into the world full of
uncleanness, and that all holiness is to be fetched from Christ: and the
Lords Supper teaches us that eternal life in part and in whole, consists in
the pertakeing of Christ: Thirdly, to confirm and establish our minds in the
promise of righteousness. Romans 4.11.

Qu. Are the promises uncertain and doubtful?

An. No, the promises are in Christ, yea, and Amen, most sure and undoubted,
but our faith having great (...) con^ir^^^ion not of (...) promise of (...) but
of our (...) which is (...).
infirmity in it, needs strength by the help of the Sacraments.

Qu. How Number of (...) how (...).
many be the Sacraments of the new Testament?

An. Only two: Baptism, and the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 10.1.2. and 1 Cor. 12.13.

Qu. What think ye of the five Sacraments added by the Romish Church?

(...) things (...) to make (...) Sacrament.
An. They are no Sacraments, first, lacking divine institution: secondly, being
no seals of the covenant: thirdly, they want outward signs, which three
things are required unto Sacraments.

Qu. Which is the first Sacrament?

(...) Baptism.
An. Baptism: the Sacrament of our incorporation or ingrafting into Christ.
Romans 6.2. Gal. 3.27.

Qu. What things are to be considered in this Sacrament?

An. First, the outward sign, Water, and the action of washing with water:
secondly, the inward thing, Christ his blood and spirit: thirdly, the
proportion or agreement between them both: That as the body is cleansed
outwardly from filth by water, so is the (...) soul is (...) in Bap^^^^ both
to (...) of (...), and unto Sanctification.
soul purged by the blood and spirit of Christ.

Qu. What be the (...) of ^^ptisme.
benefits assured to us in Baptism?

An. First, remission of sins: secondly, Repentance. Mark. 1.3.

Qu. Whence has Baptism all this efficacy and virtue?

An. Not from the Minister, nor from the creature of water, or any action about
it, but from the spirit of Christ, applying to us Christ and his merits, Tit.
3.5.6. Mat. 3.11.

Qu. What is the form of Baptism?

An. To dip into the water, or Whether action of sprinkling or dipping be used
is indifferent, so as the child be under water, to signify death and burial
of sin, even as the vviping off or taking out of water seals rising up to
nevvnesse of life. Romans 6.2.3.
sprinkle with water in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
Mat. 28

Qu. Who are the parties to be Baptized?

An. First, infants, borne of Christian Parents, because they belong to the
covenant, 1. Cor. 7.14. Secondly, men of years which having been strangers
from God and converted, do now make profession of their faith in God, and of
repentance from sin. Mat. 3.4. and desire Baptism.

Qu. What use are we to make of Baptism? If Infants under the Law were
circumcised on the 8 day should it not fare worse with our infants under the
new covenant if they should be denied Baptism.


An. First, to keep us from committing sin, by remembering our vow made to
God. Eccles. 5.5. Secondly, to comfort our faith after we be fallen into sin,
with the meditation of Gods promise to us touching the remission of all our
sins sealed up in our Baptism.

Qu. Which is the next Sacrament?

A. The Sacrament of Bread and Wine, called the Communion. 1 Cor. 10.16.

Qu. How do the two Sacraments differ?

An. Both seal up the Covenant of salvation by Christ, The two sacraments
vvherin they agree and differ.
but the one does it in respect of entering into covenant, the other, in
respect of continuance in it, and growing in Christ. Also they differ in the
signs, and parties to whom they are given: the Lords Supper being given only
to men of years, the other to children also.

Qu. Wherefore is it ministered in bread and wine and called a Supper?

An. To betoken our being nourished by Christ to grow up in him in all things
which concerns our everlasting salvation in heaven.

Qu. Is Christ then truly joined to us in this supper, to be our food and life?

An. He is so according to the The end of Christ's ordinance is to knit us more
nearly to himself. 1. Cor. 10.6. and there is his faithful promise to ye church
for this end. 1 Cor. 11.24.25* so the^ we make not this sacrament a bare sign
though we deny the popish real corporal presence.
ordinance and promise of Christ. Mat. 26.22.27.

Qu. But there is great distance between Christ and us, he in heaven, we below
in earth?

An. Yet by the incomprehensible virtue of the holy Ghost, and through faith we
are truly pertakers of Christ, and all his merits and graces, in the right use
of this Supper. 1 Cor. 10.12.

Qu. What call ye the right use of this Supper?

An. When it is delivered and received according unto Christ his institution.

Qu. What do ye consider in this institution?

An. First, the outward ^.
Signs of bread and wine: Secondly, the consecration of the Signs by prayer,
as also rehearsal and exposition of Christ's words spoken at his supper:
Thirdly, the actions about the signs, as breaking, blessing, distributing,
giving, taking, eating, and drinking: Fourthly, a commandment to do these
actions for this end; to be put in remembrance of Christ: Fifthly, a promise
offering to us the thing signified, this is my body, this is my blood.

Qu. Who are to approach to this Supper?

An. Only such as have true faith and are touched with repentance for their
sins. 1 Cor. 11.26.27.

Qu. After what manner are we to partake of this Supper?

An. We are to partake of this supper upon an examination of our selves, 1.
Cor. 11.30.

^
Qu* Wherein consists this examination?

An. In searching till we find out these two things: first, the truth of
saving graces, that we be indeed endued with a lively faith and unfeigned:
secondly, with diligent and effectual love: (...) 3.4.5. (...)
and thirdly, with hearty earnest repentance according to such marks and
signs as before are set down in the doctrine of repentance and faith.
Secondly, the measure of these graces, with what defects and fearful wants we
possess these graces, having and holding faith with such blindness,
doubtings, and unbelief: Love with such unkindness, wrath, envy, revenge,
heart-burning, coldness, and unfruitfulness: Repentance with such little
sorrow and loathing of our many and ugly sins, with such poor endeavor
against them, with so small love and care of yielding obedience to the Law in
good things commanded. And this is the I call it proper to this supper, because
the former examination of graces which we have belongs to other times also,
but this examination of our wants, and what we should have and yet have not,
is more peculiar to this time of our coming to the supper, which being given
for our souls nourishment, and want breeding desire of nourishment, our best
preparation is the due sight and feeling of our great and manifold vva^ts,
whence will arise humility, with an earnest desire after the right merits
and graces of christ, as the sight of graces received breeds tha^k^fulnesse
and joy.
proper examination of communicants, serving to this purpose, that in the view
and sense of so great and fearful weaknesses, as be mingled with their graces,
they may be truly humbled, and have their hunger and thirst after the
perfections of Christ offered and given in this Supper greatly stirred up and
increased, and be moved with more reverence and feruencie to call upon God by
Christ for the sitting of them to some measure of worthy pertaking in so great
mysteries.

Qu. What is the least measure of worthiness required in Communicants?

An. Some knowledge and sense of their particular sins, discovered by the
witness of the ten commandments, and of their own conscience. Secondly, some
true faith, at least a true and constant desire of believing the remission of
them all by Christ. Thirdly, a sure purpose of amendment of their sinful lives
in time to come, and framing them after the word of God, not in some but in all
things. Fourthly, some readiness and will to love even enemies that hate and
hurt them, and to do them good, with an inward sorrow that these graces are in
them in so mean a measure, and a firm resolution by all good means to seek
the continuance and increase of them: where these things are found let them not
doubt to come to him that calls the heavy laden and sorrowful, the thirsty
and hungry soul, and promises comfort, rest, and refreshing to such. Mat,
5.4.6. also 11.28. John. 7.37.38.

Of Imposition of hands, and of the Church-ministery.
Qu. WHerefore does this fundamental point of the ministry follow that of
Sacraments?

An. Sacraments were appointed to the Church in vain if there were no
ministry to dispense them.

Qu. This ceremony of laying on of hands whence came it? Of imposition of
hands.


An. From the Jews who used it in two cases: first, of public sacrifices:
secondly, of solemn benediction, and prayer. (...) pr^est (...) put his hand
upon the Bullock to be sacrificed. (...) 4.4.
Leu. 4.4. Genesis 48.17.18.20. Jacob put his hands on Ephraim and Manasses, and
blessed them, and prayed for them.

Qu. Was this ceremony continued in the Christian Church, and by whom?

An. It was continued by Christ put his hands on the children and blessed them,
Mark. 6* that is, he prayed for (...) to his father
Christ and his Apostles in time of prayer and bestowing spiritual graces, and
of admitting church officers. Mat. 19.13. Act. 8.6. and 13.1. Tim. 5.24

Qu. What was the end of this Ceremony?

An. To declare that such persons were offered to God as had hands laid on them.

Qu. What is meant in this text by laying on of hands?

Of Church-^inisterie.
An. The ministry of the Church, and the whole order of Church-gouernment, by
a Metonomie of the sign.

Qu. How many kinds of Ministers be there?

An. Five kinds of those which serve for the instruction of the Church. Ephesians.
4.7. Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Teachers, and Pastors.

Apostles.
Qu. Wherein did the Apostles differ from other Ministers?

An. In four things: first, in the manner of their calling, which they had
mediately by Christ himself. Gal. 1.1. Secondly, largenes of their commission.
Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15. Thirdly, measure of graces. Act. 2.1.2.3. Fourthly,
singular assistance of the spirit to keep them from error in this doctrine.
John. 16.1.

Qu. What were the ^^^^gelists, ^her are others called Evangelists, because
they vvrote the story of the Gospel, as Matthew, Mark, ^uke and John. (...)
1.3. (...). 4* 5. (...). Prophets.
Evangelists?

An. Certain Ministers joined with the Apostles as companions of their labors
in planting the Gospel and constituting Churches, such were Timothy, and Titus.

Qu. What were the Prophets?

An. They were men of marvelous wisdom and dexterity in expounding the
Prophesies concerning Christ, also some of them had the gift of foretelling
things to come, as Agabus, Act. 12. Act. 21.10. this gift being imparted there
to some women, as Act. 21.9.

Qu. Were these three sorts of Ministers to be continued?

An. No longer then till the foundation of the Christian Church were laid, then
to The gifts being ceased, the (...) cease ^ithall.
cease, unless God do extraordinarily raise up some in the ruins of the
Church, as it is thought Luther was.

Qu. What be the other two sorts of Ministers?

An. Pastors and Teachers, Pastors and Teachers.
these be ordinary and perpetual, till the coming of Christ.

Qu. How many things are to be considered about Pastors?

A. First, their Calling: secondly, Qualities: thirdly, Work: Of Pastors.
fourthly, persons toward whom: fifthly, their presence with their flocks:
sixthly, the duty of the flocks toward them.

Qu. What be the parts of their Calling?

An. Two: first, First let him be proved, then let him minister.
Election: secondly, Ordination. 1. Tim. 3.10. Act. 14.23. they ordained
Ministers by election.

Qu. What be the qualities of a good Pastor?

An. Three: first, integrity of life: Secondly, competent knowledge of the
Scriptures: 1 Timothy 3.2.3.4.5 Tit. 1.5.6.7.8.
Thirdly, aptnes to teach and to utter their knowledge, ablenes to convince the
gain-sayer.

Qu. What is the work of the Pastor?

An. First, feeding which contains instruction, 1 Pet. 5.2.3. Act. 20.
and ruling, as shepherds both feed and rule their flocks: secondly, Prayer:
thirdly, ministration of the Sacraments. Act. 6.2.3.

Q. Who be the persons toward whom this work is to be done?

An. The flock of God, a company of men professing the true God and his
worship. Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2.

Qu. Must every Pastor feed all the flock of God?

An. Not so, but every Pastor his several portion, partly for the Quod
co^munite curatur communite negligitur.
good of the flock, and partly to avoid confusion: lastly, because of the
commandment. 1. Pet. 5.2.3. Act. 20.28 The flock whereof the holy Ghost has
made you the overseers.

Qu. Must a Pastor dwell with his flock?

An. Yea, Of presence of the Pastor with his flock.
for else he cannot preach so profitably to the consciences except he be
acquainted with their manners: secondly, nor keep hospitality: 1 Timothy 3.2.
thirdly, nor be an example to his flock. 1 Pet. 5.2. fourthly, nor keep out
the Wolf. Act. 20.29. Fifthly, nor perform private duties of advertisement,
admonition, and comfort. Act. 20.20.

Qu. What be the duties of the flock toward their Pastor? Of the peoples duty.


An. These three: first, reverent love: secondly, obedient submission. He.
13.17. Thirdly, thankfulness in a competent and cheerful maintenance. 1. These.
5.12. Gal. 6.6.

(...) of their Persons.
Qu. Wherefore are the people to love their Pastors?

An. First, for their gifts sake: secondly, for their office sake: thirdly, for
their work sake. 1. These. 5.1.2.

Qu. But Ministers are men, why should the people The gifts are from God, their
office is (...) God, their (...) brings (...) God:

Submission to their ministry and doctrine.


submit to, and obey them?

An. Not as they are men, but as they are the Servants of Christ they are to be
obeyed.

Qu. Why would not God teach men in his own person?

An. First, to bear with our weakness: Exodus 20.19.20 secondly, the better to
try our obedience.

Qu. For what reasons are people to submit themselves to the ministers of the
word?

An. First, because they are ouer-seers: secondly, they watch for our souls:
thirdly, they must give an account: Fourthly, if the people be obedient it will
cause the Ministers to be more cheerful in their labors. Heb. 13.17.

Q What other reasons may move and persuade this submission?

An. First, the ready obedience of the people to their doctrine, turns to the
credit of their Teacher: secondly, to the honor of their heavenly Father, and
of their holy profession: and their disobedience will turn to the contrary:
lastly, to their own destruction. Act. 3.23.

^hankfulnesse (...) maintenance (...) their estate.
Qu. How prove you that the people were bound to mainetaine their Pastor?

An. God commands it Gal. 6, reason requires it. 1. Cor. 9^7.8.9.10.11.12.
Examples of the godly do incite us to it. Luke 8.3. Phil. 4.18.

Qu. But the people grutch the Minister his duty, and use much fraud and guile
in paying their Tithes.

An. It is against all conscience, and reason so to do.

Qu. Why so?

An. Besides gods express precept, the Minister sows better things then he
reapes. 1. Cor. 9, 11.

Qu. What is the use of all this?

An. To direct the people to maintain their Teachers not of custom or because
of law, but upon conscience to God willingly and uprightly.

Of the Resurrection.
Qu. WHerefore is this the next fundamental point?

An. Because when the Ministry cease, the Resurrection begins.

Qu. Does not the Resurrection argue that men do first fall by death?

An. It does so, and truth it is, that it is appointed for men once to dye.
Heb. 9.29.

Qu. What be the causes of death?

An. First, Gods decree pronounced it in Genesis. 3. Dust thou art, and to dust
thou shall return: Secondly, man's sin, The wages of sin is death: Romans
6.23. These two causes bewray the necessity of dying.

Qu. Shall all men dye?

An. All are subject to death and mortality, but yet many shall be found alive
at the coming of Christ, whose sudden change shall be instead of a death to
them.

Qu. But seeing Christ dyed for believers, wherefore shall the faithful die?

A. 1 To obey Gods ordinance. 2 Because otherwise they cannot be gathered unto
god to be with him in his kingdom.

Qu. What difference is there between the death of the wicked and the Godly?

An. Very great, even as there is great difference between the wicked and the
godly in and at their death.

Q. Show us both these things, and first, in their death what difference?

An. Death unto the one is a curse and stipend of sin. Romans 6.23. unto the
other, the curse is removed, and death is become to them an advantage and
blessing, Phil. 1. Reu. 14.13.
they are blessed in their death. Secondly, death to the wicked is an entrance
to eternal death, the suburbs of hell, the beginning of endless misery through
sin, whereas death to the godly is an entrance to eternal life, the porch and
gate to heaven, a beginning of never ending bliss and glory through Christ.

Q. Now what difference is there between themselves and their death?

An. Exceeding great, the wicked in their death are either blockish or
impatient, and full of despair, impenitent and comfortless: the godly (though
with great difference amongst themselves) yet all do give up their spirit in
faith of the promise, under hope of glory and with repentance for their sins,
for they all dye in the Lord. Reu. 14.13, and fall a sleep in Christ. 1. These.
4.14.

Qu. What comforts have the godly against the force of death?

An. Though they fear it, and ought so to do, being a dissolution of nature,
and a judgment of god, yet the fear of it is moderated and tempered with
comforts, especially, from the hope of an happy and glorious resurrection. 1
These. 4.18.

(...)
Qu. What is the efficient cause of our resurrection?

An. Even God himself, for Scriptures teach that it is a work of divine power.
Acts. 26.8.

Qu. What is the outward means of the Resurrection?

A. The voice and word of Christ, Ioh. 5.28. 1 The. 4.16

Qu. Whereof shall the Resurrection be?

An. Not of our souls but of our bodies, for they fall into the ground. 1.
Cor. 15. throughout.

Qu. Shall the same bodies rise again?

An. Yea, the same in substance, but of another quality, ^
This corruption shall put on incorruption. 1 Cor. 15.

Qu. With what qualities shall our bodies arise?

A. 1. With ^
incorruption. 2. Power and honor. 1. Cor. 15.42.

Qu. What does this teach us?

An. Seeing our bodies shall rise to such glory, we may not apply them to the
base service of sin.

Qu. What is the comfort we may reap hereof?

An. Very much, both for the death of our friends, and for our own departure,
because we shall return again into better case, as a man that puts off rags to
cloth himself with a robe.

Qu. By whose means shall the Resurrection be?

An. By the means and ministry of Angels, who shall gather the Elect from
the four winds.

Qu. What is the end of the Resurrection?

A. The nearest end in respect of men, is their shame or glory. Dan. 12.2. the
utmost end in respect of Christ, is the manifestation of his mercy and justice,
to the glory of his name.

Qu. Now tell us the use we are to make of this doctrine of the Resurrection?

An. First, it is a bridle to stay from sin, to remember that evil doers shall
rise to their condemnation. Secondly, it is a spur to godliness. Act.
24.15.16. Thirdly, it moves to constancy to know that we shall reap a full
reward, if we continue in godliness. Heb. 11.35. Fourthly, it ministers comfort
against death, seeing our bodies shall return again in far better condition.
1. These. 4.18.

Of the general and last Judgment.
Qu. WHy is the doctrine of eternal Judgment the last Article in the
Catechism?

A. Because Judgment is the period and winding up of al.

Qu. How is the word Judgment used in the Scripture?

An. Either for governing generally, Of the last judgment.
Ioh. 5.22. or for one special act of governing; namely, for the iudgeing of
the world at the last day. Heb. 6.3. 2. Tim. 4.1. Eccles. 12.14.

Qu. How do ye prove there shall be such a Judgment?

A. By the temporal Judgments of God, That there shall be a judgment
and the earthly Judgments of men, which are shadows and forerunners of the
other. Secondly, by the testimony of our consciences, which tremble at secret
sin, and at hearing of the judgment day, and by reason, because otherwise God
were not Gods justice requires that it should be well with good men and ill
with ill men: so it does not in this world: ergo there is a judgment. Esaias.
3.10.11. 2 The. ^.6.7.
just nor omnipotent, seeing many live euilly, which yet escape punishment
here. Thirdly, by plain texts of scriptures. Eccl. 12.14. Dan. 7. Mat. 19. Act.
17.31, Mat. 25.32.33.34. Re. 20.12.

Qu. What use may be made of this point?

An. It serves to teach the godly patience, seeing their troubles shall
determine in joy and bliss. 2 These. 1.4.5.6. secondly, it terrifieth the
wicked, whose pleasure shall end in pain, Luke. 16.25. thirdly, it warnes all
men to repent and turn from sin. Act. 17.30.31.

Qu. What is the general Judgment? What the last judgment is.


A. It is a solemn divine action wherein God shall render to every man his due
according as he has done Romans 2.6.

Q. What is the use of this that God shall judge every man?

An. It should cause us to forbear to judge our neighbors. Romans 14.10.11.

Qu. May not Christians judge at all?

An. First, not except we have a calling: secondly, not rashly: Mat. 7.1.2.
thirdly, not to determine of the final estate of any man. Romans 14.4.10.

Qu. But is not every man judged at the time of his death?

A. ^
True, yet the general Judgment must be, first, to clear the truth of the
Scriptures which foretell it: secondly, to manifest the justice of God before
all men: thirdly to increase the glory of the Elect and shame of the reprobate.

Qu. Which be the parts of Judgment?

An. ^
Two: first, laying open all things, thence it is called a day of revelation.
Romans 2.5. Secondly, giving sentence upon all things and persons, Mat. 25. Come
ye blessed, go ye cursed?

Qu. How shall this laying open of all things be?

An. By the Books of men's consciences. Reu. 20.12.

Qu. What does this warn us of?

An. To keep our books fair and clean.

Qu. How may this be done?

An. First, if we believe in the death of Christ: secondly, if we wipe our
books with the sponge of daily repentance.

Qu. Shall not secret things come to light?

An. Yes verily, even the most secret thoughts of our hearts, and most close
actions of our life shall be opened. 1. Cor. 4.5.

Qu. What does this put us in mind of?

An. To avoid even secret sins, and to purge our hearts from evil desires.

^
Qu. What is the sentence?

An. It is that whereby it shall be awarded every man, whereto he may and must
stand.

Qu. How shall it proceed?

An. According to works, because they bear witness of every man whether he
have true faith or not. Mat. 25. Romans 2.6. Reu. 20.12.

Qu. What does this teach us?

An. To labor for a working faith, such a faith as works by love. Gal. 4.6.

^
Qu. Who shall be the Judge?

A. Christ Jesus as he is God and man* (...)

Qu. What is the use of this thing.

An. First, a comfort to the faithful, that their Redeemer shall judge them:
Secondly, a discomfort for the wicked to have him their Judge in whom they have
not believed, yea, whom they have pierced with their sins. Reu. 1.7.

Qu. After what manner shall the Judge come? Manner of his coming.


A. Gloriously and terribly, because the presence of God shall appear. Mat.
24. and 25. Revel. 1.7.

Qu. What use are we to make of this?

An. First, toward our selves that we be found in peace: secondly, toward
others that they may be awaked out of sin, or kept awake.

Q. In what sense is it said that the Saints shall judge. The Saints assistants
to Christ.
1. Cor. 6

An. As assistants to Christ and approuers of his sentence. 1. Cor. 6.1.

Qu. In what place shall the judgment be?

An. Not in heaven, Place of judgment.
nor in the valley of Iehosaphat, nor upon the earth.

Qu. Where then?

An. Partly in the air, and partly on the earth. 1. These. 4.16. The reprobate
standing on the earth: the elect shall meet Christ in the air. Thus Zanthino
judges.


Qu. When shall the judgment be?

An. The very day and hour is known to God only, Time of the judgment.
and unknown to all creatures. Mark. 13.32.

Qu. What use are we to make hereof?

An. First, it serves to bridle our curiosity, that we This, one calls a
learned ignorance.
search not into that which is hid: Secondly, it must awake us out of the sleep
of sin, and keep us Christian vvatchfulnesse.
watchful. Mat. 24 42. and 25.13.

Qu. By what similitude was this declared?

An. Of a Servant, whose master is gone to a wedding, Mark. 13. waiting for
his coming: Secondly, of the good man of an house, watching when the thieves
should come to break through. Mark. 24.43.

Qu. Wherein stands this Christian watchfulness?

A. In living every day as one would live upon the judgment day: doing or
leaving undone those things every day, which one would do or not do at the
last day.

Qu. Is there difference herein between the godly and the wicked?

An. Very great, the wicked live securely, having their minds drowned wholly in
the pleasures of this life, because they put this day far from them. Luke
17.28.29.30. Mat. 24 45. The godly mind their duty chiefly, because they look
every hour that Christ shall come to judge them. 2. Cor. 5.10. 2 Timothy 4.1.
(...) of the judgment*


Qu. What signs shall go between the first and second coming of Christ?
Pr^ceeding ^ignes.


An. First, bloody wars for the Gospel. Mat. 24. Secondly, the preaching of
the Gospel to all the world. Mat. 24.13. Thirdly, a general corruption of
manners. Mat. 24.9 Fourthly, an universal defection or falling from the faith
of the Gospel. Luke 18.8. Fifthly, the revealing of Antichrist, the head of that
defection. 2 These. 2.3. Sixthly, The calling of the Jews unto Christ: Romans 11.
Of which signs all are fulfilled save the last, which may quickly and speedily
be done.

Concurring ^ignes.
Qu. What things shall go together with the judgment?

An. Three things: first, the destruction of the world by fire. 2 Pet. 3.
Secondly, the glorious appearing of Christ. Mat. 24.30. Thirdly, the separation
of the sheep from the goats. Mat. 25.32.

^ings subse^
Qu. What shall follow the judgment?

An. Eternal bliss or eternal misery. Heb. 6.3. hence it is called eternal
judgment.

Qu. What should this work?

An. Speedy and earnest repentance in the wicked Mat. 3.8.12. Secondly,
constancy in the godly, and contempt of transitory things. Heb. 11.5. 1 Cor.
15.24.

Of the estate of men after the judgment.
(...) of men (...) the iudge^^nt.
Qu. IN what estate shall the Godly live after the judgment?

(...) of the ^odly: Blessedness is in the (...) of God.
An. In a most blessed estate.

Qu. Wherein shall their blessedness consist?

An. In the vision or beholding of Gods infinite and glorious Majesty, Mat.
5.8. 1 Cor. 13.12. Reu. 21.1, 2, 3, 4.

Qu. What manner of sight or beholding shall this be?

An. Such as shall join us to God, and God to us. Revel. 21.3.

Qu. Are we not here Our conjunction here is such as of a man and virgin after
the betrothing; our conjunction in heaven, such as betvveene a man and virgin
after marriage.
joined to God?

An. We are so, yet imperfectly, and by means. 1 Ioh. 1.3 but our fellowship
with God in heaven shall be perfect and immediate and without means. 1 Cor.
13.8.

Qu What be the particulars of our blessed estate in heaven?

An. First, Parts of heavenly bliss.
perfect knowledge of God: 1 Cor. 13.12. secondly, perfect love of God, both
for manner and measure: Thirdly, unspeakable joy, Enter into thy masters joy:
Fourthly, inseperable fellowship with Angels and Saints: He. 10 Fifthly, absence
of all evil from mind and body: Reu. 7.16. Reu. 22.2. Sixthly, presence of all
good to both: Revel. 7.17. Seauenthly, perpetual service of our Creator,
consisting in praise and thanksgiving, for so great and free salvation, Revel.
4.10, 11.

Qu What use should we make of these heavenly benefits?

An. First, we should have our desires inflamed after the full possession of
them, Phil. 2.20.21. Secondly, it should make us learn out, and walk in the
way that leads to such a kingdom and life. Romans 6.22.23.

Qu. Wherein stands the punishment of the wicked after this life? Of the
wicked


An. First, in the good they shall forgo: secondly, Two parts of their
punishment.
in the evil they shall feel, poena damni and sensus.

Qu. What good shall they forgo?

An. Gods most comfortable favor, presence, 1. Punishment of loss, this
called shutting out of the kingdom. 2 Punishment of sense.
kingdom and glory, 2 These. 1.9.

Qu. What evil shall they feel?

An. Exceeding great, both bodily and spiritual as they have sinned in body
and soul.

Qu. What pain shall they feel in their bodies?

Ans. A most grievous torment in all parts, Bodily pain^.
members and senses, which shall be infinite for measure and continuance,
admitting neither comfort nor hope by mitigation or end. Luke, 16. The Parable
of Dives.

Qu. How may the greatness and horror of this bodily pain be conceived?

An. By thinking sereously of those speeches of the holy Ghost, touching flames
of fire, fire and brimstone, unquenchable fire, burning lake, etc.

^pirituall and soul pain.
Qu. What is their spiritual evil which they shall suffer?

An. It is either mere pain, or pain mixed.

Qu. What call ye mere pain?

(...) pain.
An. That which is pain and no sin, as extreme horror of conscience,
called the gnawing worm: intolerable sorrow and anguish of soul for the
things they have lost, and might have enjoyed, and perplexity of spirit for
their desperate estate being out of all hope of recovery, dread and
astonishment of mind by the apprehension and full sense of Gods infinite
wrath, Revel. 6.17. whence shall arise gnashing of teeth, weeping and wailing,
hedious outcries and hellish roarings.

(...) pain.
Qu. What do ye term their mixed pain?

An. That which is both pain and sin, as devilish hatred of God, despair,
blasphemy, deprivation of all goodness possession of all vice.

^^rcumstances (...) ^^nishment.
Qu. What be the circumstances of their pain?

An. First, the place, a bottomless dungeon and pit: secondly, darkness
thicker and blacker then the darkness of Egypt, called utter darkness:
Thirdly, companions, the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. Fourthly, perpetuity,
that it is for ever and for ever, even so long as God endures.

Qu. What use may be made of these matters?

An. It admonishes us to beware of all the ways which lead to such a doleful
estate.

Qu. Rehearse the most common and beaten ways which bring thither?

(...) which (...) to the pla^e of pun^^^ment
An. First, Ignorance of God, and unbelief: secondly, Atheism: thirdly,
worldliness: fourthly, hypocrisy: fifthly; profaneness: sixthly, security:
seventhly, unthankfulness: eighthly, pride: ninthly, Idolatry: tenthly, heresy:
eleventhly, presumption.

FINIS.
An advertisement to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, after the Printing of this Catechism, which begins with
that principle of repentance from dead works at the ninth leaf of this book, I
called some few things to mind whereof I thought good to advertise thee;
First, though the former Catechism seem somewhat long, and our sluggish
natures best like short work which is quickly done: yet having numbered the
Questions which I find to be fourteenescorce in the whole, I desired to
certify thee of this thing, that if either other Catechismes be not at hand
with thee, or if this shall like thee better then others, either for
clearenesse of order, or for easiness of matter, that thou may go four
times through it in thy family in one year, and yet put them to learn but four
Questions every day: and by learning two every day, it will twice be run
through; or if they be catechized but twice a week, and rehearse but three
Questions at a time, it will be once overcome yearly, the fruit may quit the
cost. Things which at first view seem great and hard, being well and
circumspectly dealt in, are found more easy, then they seem for. As in an
army, to subdue a great number of men well appointed seems a matter of great
hazard (as it is indeed) yet single them out by two or three, it will be
nothing to vanquish them. The new Testament has show of a great work, yet
read but five Chapters a day, (and thou will spend much time worse) thou shall
go through it once in two months and less, six times in one year. Also the
Psalms (being one hundred and fifty) in appearance a long work to peruse,
yet read but two a day, and thou shall four times a year over read that
precious book of the psalms, and have diverse play days cast in: so is it
with sundry Catechismes which carry a face of some difficulty to learn,
howbeit by a good order being constantly followed, in short space they will be
learned, and grow very familiar.

In the second place I am to entreat this of thy curtisie, that if thou find
in the foresaid Catechism any thing either imperfect or unsound, (for the
former it cannot be otherwise as all men's works are; for the latter I hope it
is otherwise, yet we are all men) and wilt certify me thereof privately by
word or writing, I will thank thee for thy good will and will trust if God
will to give thee satisfaction.

Lastly, whereas I have drawn the former large Catechism into a very little
sum, hereunto affixed, containing not above forty short Questions: the
reason of my purpose herein, was for the favor and ease of such as be weak,
as well in years as knowledge, who having first with delight sucked in, and
digested this sum, (through the good care of their parents or governors)
they may become stronger, and better able to set upon an harder and greater
work.

Farewell.
A BRIEF SVMME OF the whole Catechism: for the help of the younger sort.
The first Principle: Repentance from dead works.
Abraham. MY Son, what do ye call dead works?


Isaac. All sins, whatsoever they be.


Abra. How many sorts of sins be there?


Isaac. Two: first, birth-sinne, which is the root of all the rest: Secondly,
all evil thoughts, words, and deeds, as bad fruits of a bad tree.


Abra. How many things do ye consider in original or birth-sinne?


Isaac. These four things: first, the want of that righteousness wherein Adam
was created: Secondly, the guilt of his disobedience imputed to us: Thirdly,
desert of punishment thereby: Lastly, corruption of nature being prone to all
evil.


Abra. Why are these things called dead works?


Isaac. Because they come from men dead in sins and trespasses: also because
they do in justice deserve eternal death and destruction, even the least
sinful thought.


Abra. How so?


Isaac. Because an infinite and eternal God is offended by every sin.


Abra. But seeing we were all created in righteousness in Adam, how did sin
and death enter into the world?


Isaac. First, by the temptation of Satan, deceiving our first parents:
secondly, by their willing obedience yielded to the temptation.


Abra. Let me now hear you tell me what it is to repent from dead works?
Repentance.



Isaac. To renounce and utterly to depart from our sins, with grief and hatred
of them: and to return unto God to do his works commanded in his law, with
love and delight in them.


Abra. How is this repentance wrought?


Isaac. The word of the law prepares us to it by engendring


The second Principle: Of faith toward God.
Of God.
Abra. SEeing we are all dead and miserable through the guilt of Adams sin,
and our own, where is the remedy for us?


Isaac. By believing and looking up to the merciful goodness of God through
Christ.


Abra. What are we to know concerning this God? Of God the Creator.



Isaac. First, that he is, and that he is but one: Secondly, that there be
three persons in the Godhead; the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. Thirdly,
what God is, even a most perfect spiritual substance, infinite in mercy,
justice, truth, wisdom, goodness and power. Fourthly, that he purposed in
himself from everlasting what things he would do, and what things he would
not do; in that purpose freely choosing some Angels and men to life, and not
others. Lastly, that according to this eternal purpose, God created the world
in six days out of nothing, by his word, and continually vpholdeth and
governs the same; and every particular in it* most wisely to the glory of his
name.


Abra. But are ye not bound to know some thing else concerning God?


Isaac. Yes, namely this, that in the person of his Son he was incarnate and
made man, and so became God our Redeemer.


Abra. ^
What are we to learn touching God our Redeemer?


Isaac. First, his person, that he is God and man in one person: ^
Secondly, his office, which is three-folds first, our Prophet to teach us Gods
will, both for our duty and salvation: secondly, our High Priest, once to
offer himself in earth a sacrifice of atonement for our sins; and then to
make continual intercession for us in heaven: ^
thirdly, our King, first, to rule: secondly, to protect: thirdly, to enrich us
with his gifts and spiritual blessings.


Abra. ^
What is the last thing to be known of our redeemer?


Isaac. His benefits, all which are signified by that one word of salvation;
and more particularly in those two words of Justification and sanctification:
the one removing from us the guilt and curse of our sins, the other
destroying the power and rule of it.


Of Faith.
Abrah. BY what means are we made partakers of Christ our Redemer?


Isaac. By the means of a true and a lively faith.


Abra. What is a lively Faith?


Isaac. It is that gift of God, whereby we receive Christ with all his merits
to be our own.


Abra. How is this faith made known to our selves and others?


Isaac. By love, and practice of good works.


Abra. Of these works which do ye hold chief?


Isaac. Fervent prayer unto God the Father in the name of Jesus Christ.


Abra. How do we attain to this faith ordinarily?


Isaac. By the word of the Gospel soundly opened, and wisely applied to the
conscience of a sinner.


Abra. Is this faith perfect in us in this life?


Isaac. No surely: but very weak and little, needing daily increase and
strengthening.


Abra. By what means may it be increased?


Isaac. First, by reading and preaching: secondly, by prayer: thirdly, by
Sacraments.


The third Principle: Doctrine of Baptismes.
Abra. WHat is a Sacrament? Sacraments.



Isaac. A Sacrament is an outward sign and seal of the covenant of Grace.


Abra. What do ye call the Covenant of Grace?


Isaac. An agreement which God has made with elect sinners, freely to give
them his Son, and with him righteousness and life eternal, so they believe.


Abra. How many be the Sacraments of the new testament?


Isaac. Two only: Baptism and the Lords Supper.


Abra. What is the chief use of these two Sacraments?


Isaac. To confirm and assure our minds of our fellowship which we have with
Christ, and all his merits unto salvation.


Abra. How many things are required in each Sacrament?


Isaac. Three: first, an outward sign: secondly, an inward thing: thirdly, an
agreement or likeness between the sign and the thing.


Abra. Show these three things in Baptism.


Isaac. In Baptism the outward sign is water and washing: secondly, the thing
signified and sealed is Christ, for our justification and sanctification by his
word and spirit: thirdly, the likeness is this, that as water washes, to the
outward cleansing of the body: so the blood and spirit of Christ washes to the
inward purging of the conscience from dead works.


Abra. Show us also these three things in the Lords Supper?


Isaac. First, the signs here are bread and wine, and all actions about them
both in Minister and people: secondly, the thing signified and sealed is
Christ, for our further grouth by him in our justification and sanctification:
thirdly, the likeness between sign and thing is, that as bread and wine
nourishes up our bodies unto a natural life: so the body and blood of Christ
being received by faith nourishes up our soul to a spiritual life.


Abra. When are we said to be nourished up to a spiritual life by the Lords
Supper?


Isaac. When the soul is thereby more and more assured of remission of sins
by the death of Christ, and of perfect justice by his obedience to the Law,
together with a greater mortification of sin, unto the quieting of the
conscience, and the greater hope of eternal life.


Abra. Whence have Sacraments power to signify and assure Grace?


Isaac. First, from the words of Christ's ordinance and promise: and secondly,
from his holy Spirit which works by them as he will.


Abra. Who are to be Baptized?


Isaac. First, Infants of Christian parents: secondly, men of years, which
first be infidels, and afterward are converted to Christianity.


Abra. Who are to approach to the Lords Supper with comfort?


Isaac. ^^^gination.
Such as are able and do endeavor to examine themselves.


Abra. Of what things must they examine themselves?


Isaac. Of the truth and measure of saving graces; faith, hope, and love:
whether we have these, and with what imperfections we have them.


Abra. When may one know himself to be fit for the Lords Supper.


Isaac. First, when he has some understanding of the principles of Religion
and a desire to know more. Secondly, when the doctrine of the Lords Supper is
in some measure known to him. Thirdly, when one begins somewhat to know his
particular sins, and to mourn for the offense of God in them, being sorry he
is so little sorry. Fourthly, when upon sight and feeling of them, and of his
want of Christ's blood and every drop of it; and of his spirit and all the
graces thereof, he can hunger and thirst after these things.


The fourth principle: Imposition of hands.
Abra. Do not the Sacraments require a Ministry to dispense and minister
them? Ministry.



Isaac. They do so: for being public tokens of our religion, they are to be
ministered in a public place, and by public persons appointed thereunto.


Abra. May not so much be signified here by imposition of hands?


Isaac. Yes, by this ceremony is noted persons set apart for the public
ministry of the Church, to minister the holy things thereof.


Abra. What do ye call the Church?


Isaac. The invisible Church is the whole number of the elect: but the visible
Church is a company of persons called out of the rest of the world, to know and
worship the true God, according to his word.


Abra. Wherefore has GOD ordained a ministry in his Church?


Isaac. First, for the gathering of the elect to the faith and profession of
Christ. Secondly, for the building them up unto salvation in heaven. Lastly,
for the wicked which live in the Church and are not of it, to take from them
all excuse, and to make their condemnation more just and heavy.


Abra. Who are to be thought meet for the ministry?


Isaac. Only such as be endewed with a good measure of knowledge and wisdom,
to be able to interpret and apply the Scriptures, to the several uses of the
Church, by doctrine and exhortation.


Abra. What duty do the people owe to the true Ministers of Christ?


Isaac. First, a love and reverence to their person and calling: secondly,
obedience to their doctrine: thirdly, maintenance of their charge and estate.


Abra. How long lasts the Ministry?


Isaac. Even until the second coming of the Lord Jesus.


The fifth Principle: The resurrection from the dead.
Abra. ^
MVst men once dye?


Isaac. Yea they must so, because all men have sin, therefore they are
mortal by gods appointment.


Abra. Shall the dead be raised again to life?


Isaac. Resurrection.
The dead shall be quickened at the end of the world by the power of Christ.


The sixth principle: Of eternal Judgment.
Abra. WHat shall follow the Resurrection?


Isaac. The great and general judgment, wherein all men and all their works
shall be judged.


Abra. ^
What be the parts of this judgment?


Isaac. Two: first, the laying open of all persons and things as they are.
Secondly, the giving of an upright sentence upon them.


Abra. By whom shall this judgment be held?


Isaac. It shall be held by the authority of God the Father; but the sentence
shall be pronounced and executed by Christ the Mediator.


Abra. What shall be the end of this judgment?


Isaac. The manifestation of Gods glory, both in his mercy toward the elect,
and in his Justice toward the reprobate.


The estate of men after Judgment.
Abra. (...) of men (...) Iudge^^^^.
WHat shall be the estate of the godly after the Judgment.


Isaac. Most blessed: first, presence of all good: Secondly, absence of all
evil, and that everlastingly.


Abra. What shall be the estate of the wicked and impenitent?


Isaac. Most accursed: first, the presence of all evil: Secondly, the absence
of all good, and that for evermore; hereof called eternal judgment.


To the God eternal be praise for ever in the Church.

Amen.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS:

The first, The Practice of the Saints, Preached at a Funeral, on the 28. of
December. 1608.

The second, The Perseverance of the Saints: Preached on the 29. day of
January. 1608.

By T. W. Minister of the Word.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. S. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster Row at the
sign of the Talbot. 1609.

THE FIRST SERMON, called The Practice of the Saints, preached at a Funeral,
on the 28. of December. 1608.
The Text. Romans 6. Verse 12. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal
body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof.


THE holy and blessed Apostle Saint Paul, The scope and method of this sixth
Chapter unto the 13. Verse.
in the eleven former verses of this Chapter had taught, that such as be
justified by faith in the blood of Christ, were partakars also of the Spirit of
Christ unto their sanctification, whereby they were freed, not from the
corruption, yet from the tyranny and dominion of sin, even as justification had
freed them from the guilt and condemnation of sin, whereupon he concludes
that since the gift and grace of righteousness in the forgiveness of sin,
is accompanied with a new grace of holiness unto amendment of life, therefore
the doctrine of free justification does give no liberty to live licentiously
in sin: How can they which are dead to sin live yet therein: Verse 2. then
in the 3.4. and 5. Verses, our sanctification is declared both by the several
parts thereof, as also by the cause and testimony of it. The parts are three:
first, death of sin: secondly, burial of sin, Verse 3.
which is the progress of mortification: thirdly, newness of life. The cause
is a virtue or power derived and conveyed into the members of Christ, from his
death to the beating down and keeping under the strength of sin: (...). 4.
and also from his Resurrection, to the quickening and raising them up in their
understandings and wills unto the study and love of Godliness; all which he
sets forth by an excellent similitude of grafting or planting: (...). 5.
Verse 5. like as the grift translated from an old stock to a new, lives,
grows, and fructifieth by the juice and vigor which it draws from the
stock into which it is set: so it is with the elect, being taken out of the
old rotten stock of Adam, and thence planted into that noble stock Christ
Jesus, they participate of his Spirit, by virtue whereof applying the death and
Resurrection of Christ unto them, they receive power against corruption to
keep it down and subdue it, as also to love and do in some measure the will
of God: and of all this their Baptism is no idle and naked, but an effectual
pledge and testimony, the water sanctified by the word, as also the dipping or
sprinkling the child with water, according to Christ's ordinance and
commandment, and the coming out of the water, being a powerful instrument of
the holy Spirit, not only to represent and seal the grace of the covenant,
but also to effect in all the elect their nearer and straighter conjunction
with Christ, in his death and resurrection both for justification and
sanctification.

After this, from the sixth Verse to our Text, this communion of believers with
Christ is proved and amplified by comparison of contraries and equals, and at
this twelfth Verse he falls unto exhortation, which he deduceth out of, and
builds upon the former doctrine, as appears by the illatiue particle (
therefore, (...) Text.
let not sin reign,) which is as much as if he should say, seeing the
members of Christ are vouchsafed this mercy, to have fellowship with Christ's
death, to the killing and destruction of sin in them by little and little,
even as his crucified body dyed and languished by little upon the Cross, and
also with his resurrection, that as Christ being dead and raised up, now dies
no more, but lives for ever to God, likewise we may perpetually live the life
of grace, till we come to glory: therefore in this knowledge of this great
grace we should endeavor all that is in us to master and subdue those
remainders of corruption which still stick in our nature, that sin reign not
in us as a king, and as a Tyrant trample upon us, and triumph over us.

In this Verse consider the exhortation it self, Division of the text into
two parts.
and the explication: the exhortation is to stir up all Christians to hinder
the power and reign of sin in themselves, let not sin reign in your
mortal bodies. The explication teaches how this reign and kingdom of sin is
to be hindered, namely, by not obeying the lusts of sin.

In the exhortation the words are first to be made plain, Of the exhortation.
then the matter to be handled.

Let not sin.] The word sin in this place, and through this whole Chapter
does signify that natural corruption called original Which is the
inclination of our nature to all evil.
sin, which sticks both to the reason and will, and has depraved and
corrupted them both. Ephesians. 2.23. This natural corruption is here termed sin,
not only because it is the fruit and consequence of our first parents sin,
as also the matter and cause of all other sins, Peccatum, causae peccati,
poena peccati. August.
but moreover because it keeps the proper nature of sin, even in the
regenerate.

The Papists in their Remish notes deny this, and say that it is not properly a
sin, nor forbidden by commandment till it reign in us, and we obey and
follow the desires thereof. Which their opinion appears to be false by these
reasons: first, Not only actual concupiscence, when lust is consented to,
but natural and habitual concupiscence, which is the inclination of our
nature to evil is sin, though it be resisted by the spirit and grace.
natural concupiscence is repugnant to the law of God, as it is written, I had
not known This must be meant of natural concupiscence because the Apostle
knevv actual corruption to be sin without the law, and the 7.8. and 9.
commandments forbids concupiscence with consent.
lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not lust. Romans 7.7. But whatsoever
is repugnant to the law is sin, as it is written, the transgression of the
Law is sin. 1. John. 3.4. Therefore natural concupiscence is sin.
Secondly, natural concupiscence rebelleth against the government of the spirit
in the minds of the regenerate, There was (says Paul) a Law in my members,
rebelling against the Law of my mind: therefore it is sin properly. Thirdly,
it both comes from sin, and begets all other sins, and bears the
name of sin: therefore it is properly sin, (...) facit ta(...) est magis
(...).
according to that rule, That which makes such, is more such. Fourthly, young
children are known to dye which have no other sin but natural
concupiscence: now death is the wages of that which is properly sin,
therefore natural concupiscence has the proper nature of sin: and whereas
some say it is not properly sin, because it is not voluntary, this reason
holds not but in actual sins only, howbeit original sin in some sense
may be avouched to be voluntary, insomuch as Adam voluntarily and freely
disobeyed the commandment, and we all sinned in him, his sin is ours by
imputation, as Christ's merits and righteousness is ours by imputation, Romans
5.12. etc.

And whereas some of the Fathers say it is not sin in the regenerate, they
must be understood, first that it is not ^
accounted to them as a sin, to whom all sins are forgiven: secondly, that in
them it is no reigning sin, but peccatum inhabitans, a dwelling sin. Romans
7.17.

Now the word body by a Synechdoche of the part for the whole, ^
is taken here for the whole man, as the soul which is but one part of man, is
sometimes put for the whole person; as in that saying of Ezekiel. 18. The soul
that sins shall dye, and where Paul says, Let every soul be subject, Romans
13. so on the other side, the body is here put for the whole man, which
appears by this reason, even for that our sins do principally reign in
the soul, as it is written, From within, even from the heart, comes
adultery, murder, debate, etc. The body being but the executioner to fulfill
the devises and desires of the soul, yet for good reasons the Apostle uses
here the word Body, rather then soul: first, because in the propagation of sin
it is conveyed by the body into the soul, according to that of Job, how can
one draw a clean thing out of unclean seed? Secondly because howsoever the
first motion of sin comes from the soul, yet it is perfected by the body,
which executes that evil which the mind has conceived, and the will
embraced. Thirdly, having before spoken of the crucifying of Christ, which was
touching his body, he willingly retayneth this term of body both here and in
the sixth verse. The meaning then is this, let not corruption or natural
concupiscence reign in your selves, but keep down the power of it both in
your souls and bodies.

Now for the word (reign) it signifies here an absolute rule in commanding
without resistance and opposition, Reign, what it signifies.
such as kings have in a kingdom where the people are subdued under them, and
do freely execute and do their will and pleasure: Thus the Apostle himself
expounds it in the next part of this verse, where it is said (That ye should
obey it in the lusts thereof) whereof the meaning is, Regnat peccatu^, cum id
sponte exequimur, quod peccatu^ imperat.
that then sin reigns, when that which sin lusts, wills or commands
is readily obeyed and done without controulement. The Apostle likeneth sin to
a Monarch or Emperor, whose lusts are laws and commands, the yielding
whereunto by ready obedience, is the suffering of sin to play the Rex. There
are four steps, whereby sin climeth into his throne, that it may reign in a
man.

The first is ignorance of the commandments, which How sin gets a kingdom
when any do not know what is displeasing to God, and what will please him,
either because they are not taught, ot care not to learn, or if they have some
knowledge of the law, it is confused, and without application: of the former it
is true which is commonly said: the blind eat many a fly: and of the latter,
that is verrified, As good never a whit as never the better.

The second step is distrust of heart, or unbelief, when Radix omnium vitiorum
infidelitas.
sin may do any thing where Gods word is distrusted. Let faith of the word
be shaken out of the heart, then look what sin will command it is presently
done, whereof there is lamentable experience in the fall of our first parents:
when they were once won to this, but to doubt of Gods threatening, ye know what
followed, they became vassals to sin and Satan.

The third step is custom in sin, whereby the sense of sin is lost.
Physicians say, that diseases not looked to in the beginning, do afterward in
time grow incurable and desperate. (...) est (...) natura. (...).

^.


Philosophers teach that custom is another nature, and that of many actions
there arises an habit, and Deuines affirm that by often practice of sin,
the very feeling of sin is taken away, and when men are blinded by ignorance
and unbelief and withal hardened by custom of sin, it will be as easy for
sin to lead such whither it will, as it was for Elisha to lead the army of
the Aramites whither he thought good, being stricken with blindness. 2 King.
6.19.

The fourth step is security, whereby the danger of sin is neither feared
nor suspected, as in such men, who have made a league with death, and a
covenant with hell; and when it comes to this, then is sin in the roof and
at the height: for such as once wax secure in sin, and though they sin often
and grievously, yet are they without all fear of Gods threatenings and
judgments, presuming and bearing themselves bold upon his goodness and
lenity, they will excuse sin in themselves, and defend sin in others: they
neither in themselves resist sin, nor can abide others to reprove their
sin, but hate them rather, yea, and appoint praises and reward to sinners, as
Romans 1.31. they sin and favor such as do it. Thus we see what it is for
sin to reign in our bodies, and how it comes to his kingdom.

And here this is first of all to be noted, that the Apostle says not, let not
sin be in you, but let it not reign in you: for it is impossible that sin
should not at all, be in us, for besides the testimony of every man's
conscience against himself accusing him of sin, and the manifold judgments
of God against all sorts of sinners in this life, we have the Scriptures in
very many places affirming that none can be without sin in this world;
Beatitudo nostra non in perfectione virtutum, sed in remissione peccatorum.
Bernard.
our blessedness standing not in being void of all sin, but in having our
sins forgiven us, Psalm. 32.1. and he being the best man not that has no
sin, but the fewest sins. This exhortation then is like to that prayer of
the Prophet David, in the 19. Psalm, Lord deliver me from presumptuous sins,
let them not reign over me: Also like to that other prayer of his, in the 119.
Psalm, Let not sin get dominion over me: And to that petition in the Lords
Prayer, which is not, Lord tempt us not, but Lord lead us not into temptation,
that is, give us not up to be carried away as captives to sin and Satan: So
here we are exhorted not to clear and quit our selves from sin, but that we
suffer it not to reign over us, to hold us as vassals subject to his beck.

It may be thought that this exhortaion is superfluous, the whole word of God
is inspired from above, and is profitable to teach, etc. 2. Tim. 3.16. and
secondly, for this exhortation, a part of the word, it is behouefull for all
sorts of men: for touching the unregenerate which yet are under the power of
sin, if they be not elect, this and such like exhortations will take from
them all excuse, so as they shall be unable to allege for themselves that they
were not called upon to resist sin: and for such unregenerate as be of the
elect, this exhortation will serve to provoke them to abstain from the outward
act and work of sin, which is in their power to do, even by the strength of
restraining grace, the which prevails in many natural men, not only to
keep them from external evil actions, but to the staying somewhat of the
inward rage of sin, though they cannot kill it at the root, for lack of
reforming grace. And least of all may this exhortation be held unprofitable for
such elect as be already regenerate, who are greatly helped to the
mortification of sin by the work of the spirit, through this word of
exhortation. We are taught from the word, that such as once receive the grace
of regeneration, though they may grievously fall, yet that it is impossible
they should fall away; because the seed whereof they are begotten anew is
immortal and permanent, 1. Pet. 1.23. And Christ Jesus which prayed for Peter's
perseverance in grace, has prayed for the stabilitie of all true believers:
John. 17.20.21. Yet that exhortation in Romans 9. Let him that stands, take
heed least he fall: and that Phil. 2. Work out your salvation in fear and
trembling is not in vain for them, because it may move them to fear and
vvatchfulnesse, which is one mean whereby they stand. In like manner albeit
sin cannot ever have dominion in the elect, being once effectually called and
turned to God, yet it is good for them to be called upon, to resist and strive
against the reign of sin, because by such exhortations being blessed from
heaven, and put in practice, the course of sinning is stopped in them, and the
strength of sin daily lessened and abated, till it be wholly abolished and
brought to nothing.

Moreover observe from this exhortation of our Apostle, that it is the duty
and part of every faithful man and woman, to take pains to preserve and
increase their own mortification, and that they may not look that Christ and
his grace will bear and carry them through against all assaults of their
sinful lusts: without their own care, travail and endeavor, and this is the
very thing which is here called, for that they be helpers to the grace of
Christ in the suppressing of sin, for howsoever in our first conversion we
are mere patients, not working any thing toward it, only suffering the spirit
to work that blessed change and conversion of our souls to God, and howsoever
it is the grace of God which still does all our works for us, the beginning,
middle or end of our sanctification, being from grace, which both begins and
finisheth, yet the grace of God works not in those which lie asleep and
snort in their sins being careless and idle, but in them which put to their
own care and diligence; as in husbandry all the increase is from God, the
earth fructifieth by his blessing, yet God uses the hand of the husbandmen in
plowing, sowing and manuring the ground: and albeit in war the victory
depends upon God, yet as Paul said in the Acts, Acts 27.
Except these Mariners stay in the ship we cannot be safe, so men may say in
time of battle, Except the warriors do their parts, we cannot look to
overcome: Thus it is here, howsoever the power which beats down and keeps
under the strength of sin be divine, and it is Gods grace that does all,
Phil. 2.
the power both to will and to do is from him, without whom we can do
nothing; yet so as we are not to expect that Christ should give us victory
over sin, if we sit still and do nothing; here is that true; He that made
thee without thee, Qui fecit te sin^ te, non seruat (...) sine te.
does not save thee without thee. Hence it is, that we are so often exhorted
in sundry forms of words to put to our hand and help, as to give all
diligence to labor to stir up the grace of God, To mortify our earthly
members, To cast away from us the works of darkness, To put on the armor of
light, etc. and here let not sin reign in you: to admonish us that our God
though himself effect all good in us, and hinder all evil, yet he is pleased
to use us as fellow workers with his grace, as instruments and means of our
own good, and keeping of evil things from us; for though in our regeneration
we are mere patients, non agimus, sed agimur, yet in the practice of
regeneration, we must be agents, agimur and agimus.

After these things thus opened and delivered, we are now to see and consider
for what reasons all believing christians stand bound to embrace this
exhortation, and as the Apostle Heb. 11. having alleged innumerable examples
to show the property and power of faith, in the beginning of the 12. Chapter,
says, we are compassed about with a cloud of witnesses, so I may say of this
duty here exhorted unto, that it has a cloud of reaso^^ to enforce it, I
mean, to press us forward unto the resistance of sin, to keep it from
exercising rule and kingdom in us.

These reasons, some of them grow without the Text which we will draw hither,
and some are bred within this our Scripture.

^
Of foreign reasons the first is, the certain hope of victory if we resist
sin in the temptations thereof: for certain it is upon the word of our
Apostle, verse 14. that sin cannot reign if it be resisted. Sin shall not
have dominion over you: for believing Christians they are under grace, both
their sins past are graciously forgiven them for Christ's death, and they have
the grace and aid of his spirit, to strengthen them against evil desires and
lusts for the time to come, so as if ye do your own best endeavor sin cannot
reign over you, but you shall domineire over it. Therefore as Soldiers do
fight more courageously where they have but likelihood and hope of victory,
this animates and whets their stomach to battle, how much more ought ye to
strive against sin, being before hand assured to overcome, so ye strive
lawfully.

How valiantly and resolutely did weak and young David set upon Goliath a
mighty man, (...) 37.
being persuaded by the holy Ghost, of an happy issue of the combat; now
Christians have as much certainty for conquering sin, so they ^ight, as
David had: the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Sin shall not have dominion
over you; therefore were your sins as Goliath for strength and power, and your
selves weak and feeble, yet setting upon them with trust and confidence of Gods
help, ye cannot but prosper: Especially since sin which ye strive against, ^
it is mortified and dead, Romans 7.6. that being dead in which we were holden,
sin has already received from the death of Christ, such a deadly blow, that
though it draw breath and stir, yet it cannot recover former strength, but
remains as a man wounded to death. Insomuch as it was easy for David to kill
Goliath, to cut off his head, when by the stone cast out of his sling he had
already amazed and ^^unted, or rather dashed out his brains; so it will be no
hard matter for you to destroy utterly the body of sin, having taken a
mortal wound, by the virtue of Christ crucified, Romans 6.6. Therefore quite
your selves like men, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, and
let not sin reign over you. Thirdly, 3. Reason.
call ye to mind, when ye were the servants of sin, how ye endeavored to
do the will of sin, then taking part with your lusts against Christ, and
setting your selves with might and maine, tooth and nail (as we say) against
the kingdom of grace, Romans 6.19.
giving your members as weapons of iniquity to commit iniquity, is it not
equal and most reasonable, that being now freed by grace from the tyranny of
sin, and become the servants of Christ, ye should with all your might
endeavor to hinder and pull down the kingdom of sin in others, especially
in your selves; and with great care and labor strive to please and serve your
new Lord, giving your members, that is, the faculties of your soul; and organs
of your bodies, as weapons of righteousness to holiness? Were it not a great
shame now ye are brought unto such a king as Christ, so glorious in himself,
to you so gracious, which has done such things for you already as to quit you
from the guilt of sin by remission, from the dominion of sin by
mortification, and from whom ye expect such and so great things in heaven, were
it not a great fault and reproach to be less willing and diligent in
performing his will, then ye were to execute the lusts of sin, whiles ye were
under it? Moreover what a matter were it, if being delivered from such a tyrant
as sin is, whose bondage is a thousand times worse then the bondage of Egypt,
which was bodily and temporary, this being spiritual and tending to eternal
ruin, if ye should suffer it again to usurp and get an hand over you for
lack of resistance? What prisoner ransomed from slavery of Turk or other,
would be so unthankful to his ransomer, or so harmefull to himself, as to
return backward to his former cruel Lord? and let it be far from you which
are by Christ drawn out of the hands and power of sin, once to look back
again, but now ye are free from sin, and become the servants of
righteousness, encourage your selves to depart more and more from the damnable
works of sin, to do the honorable works of righteousness, and so much the
rather, seeing of sin and the service thereof no other fruit but shame, ^
no other end but death to be reaped and expected.

Therefore as ye covet to avoid confusion of conscience and shame of face, and
to be free from that death that knows no end, see ye depart from the service
of sinful affections which have no other harvest but shame and destruction,
applying your selves by doing that which is righteous to serve Christ, the
fruit of whose service is sweet and precious, ^
and the end happy and glorious: for ye shall have your fruit in holiness,
and your end everlasting life.

^
Let it yet be further wayed; that ye cannot suffer sin to reign and bear
swing in you, but ye shall loose the protection of God the Father, Psalm* 34.
whose eye is only upon the righteous, which fight against sin, to care for
and protect them against their enemies and evils; ^
as for sinners which live in the service and practice of sin, God hears
them not, that is, he neglects them in their necessities and dangers, yea,
though they call upon him, yet he denies them his protection and succor, and
what a matter this is may partly be conceived by those who are out of the
protection of their temporal Kings, such are exposed so innumeble
inconveniences and mischiefs, better not to live at all, then not to live
under the Kings protection: Even so the sinner that serves sin as his king,
he loosing the protection of the King of heaven, lies open to the malice of
Satan, every moment to be devoured and destroyed of that roaring Lion. And
add hereunto that by serving sin we loose all the merits of Christ the
Son: for when the Apostle writes to Titus. 2.11. that Christ has redeemed
us from all iniquity, and tells us, that this is the end and purchase of his
passion, that we should be zealous of good works, and Peter likewise, (...) 24.
that Christ bare our sins in his body, that we should dye to sin and live
in righteousness: hence it plainly appears, that whosoever licentiously
cherishing their sinful lusts and abandoning the care of a godly life do
serve sin, they void themselves (as much as in them is) of the virtue and
power of his death, and of all the merits of his passion, both touching
justification and sanctification. And as this is no small thing, so yet
consider further that whatsoever they be that through not striving against
sin, shall subject themselves unto the reign and power of it, they deprive
themselves of the comfortable working of the spirit; for where the good motions
of his grace are repelled, and sin followed, there the spirit is grieved and
quenched, even as water cast upon fire slaketh and puts it out; and as a
guest is driven from that Inn where he is not regarded, but basely entreated:
so the spirit will not there abide, where the lusts of sin are entertained,
and his own inspirations rejected. Unto all these former reasons join these
considerations, that if ye should start from Christ to go after your lusts and
put the bridle again into the hands of sin, ye shall break and violate
first your vow and promise made unto God in your Baptism, and afterward
renewed in the Lords Supper, Eccles. 5.5.
and better were it never to have made vow, then not to keep it: also ye make
your selves unfit to do any good either to God or men, nay, ye defile all
your actions both natural, civil, and religious, all which become unclean
and odious to God, if your selves be unclean through sin: for as in the Law,
holy flesh was polluted by touching a person polluted with any ceremonial
uncleanness; so whatsoever comes from a person spiritually polluted, whose
mind and conscience is unclean, it is all hateful to God and abominable.

But we are entered into an Ocean of matter, which would quickly ouer-flow the
bancke of a Sermon, if we should not observe some mean, therefore to leave the
further search of reasons, scattered every where in this present Chapter, and
else where in Scripture, let us attend now to the reasons couched in this
present text, which are but two: the former reason is contained in the particle
(Therefore) which implies thus much, that since Christ has put in us his
grace of sanctification, to crucify our sinful nature, (as he had taught
before) therefore let us not be wanting to our selves, to whom Christ has not
been wanting, if he has already broken the yoke and strength of sin by his
death, now it is pulled down, let us keep it down, and never suffer it to
arise and get head again. When David had smitten Goliath to the ground, he
presently run upon him, drew out his sword and beheaded him: likewise Christ
having subdued unto us our sin by his virtue, let us do our part and fall
upon it, take it by the throat, stifle and choke it, never leave it till we
have driven out the breath of sin. It was the fault of the Israelites that
God having put them in possession of a good land and destroyed many of the
inhabitants, daunting the rest, they by their negligence and cowardice did not
prosecute these good beginnings, but suffering the Cananites to live amongst
them, they proved thorns in their sides, and pricks in their eyes; even so it
will come pass, if you foreslow the continual mortifying of sin, which
Christ has already conquered in you, and disarmed, if ye make way and give
place to remaining lusts and evil affections, they will prove tedious and
perilous: therefore let not sin reign.

(...), ^hy so called.
Finally, this must encourage us to fly the service of sin, and mightily to
strive against it, because our bodies being mortal, that is, subject to
mortality and death, the strife against sin will quickly be at an end. And
surely, this may encourage any good Christian to resist sin seriously to
consider that we are mortal here, where sin does assault us, and that there
we shall be immortal, where we shall be free from sin: as we would not be
mortal then, when sin shall not hurt us, so we would not be immortal here,
where we are subject to sin.

Let this meditation then help us against the lusts of sin, that we are not
like to wrestle long with it; for our years may lack months, our months may
lack weeks, our weeks may lack days, our days may lack hours, our
hours may lack minutes. Do we not know by Scripture, that death steals
upon us as travail upon a woman, or as a thief in the night, which gives no
warning? and experience shows the truth of this plentifully: He in the
Gospel that boasted of store for many years, was threatened to have his soul
taken from him that night; two in London dyed suddenly as they walked in the
streets; also one found dead in the fields at Allington, who went well out of
his house at Dover; likewise one dyed in his sleep who went well to bed; in the
city of Canterbury one well and abroad at eight of the clock, and dead by ten^
and even in this Church one fell down dead, between the great gate and the
porch: the Kings court is not free from such examples of sudden death.

Now seeing that that which falls to any one, Quod cuiquam, cuiuis contingere
potest.
may fall to every one, it is wisdom for all men to make a short account, and
so much the more to labor mortification of sin, by how much this mortality
is certain, and the time uncertain: and yet such dullness is in us that we
are so far from thinking of the sodainnesse of our death, and shortness of life,
as that we seldom remember that we shall dye; wherein our forgetfulness is
more blame worthy, because every thing serves to put us in mind that our
bodies which we bear about us are mortal: for even on our table we have
monuments of death; for we eat not the creatures till they be dead; our
garments are either the skins or excrements of dead beasts, we often follow the
dead corpse to the grave, and we often walk over their bodies: and in this
place especially, men that use to walk here shall do well to remember that
they tread upon the dead, and others shortly must tread upon them. Moreover,
we in this City have almost every day death roung in our ears, the deadly
knell telling us that dust we are, and to dust we must go. Lastly, our nightly
sleep being to us a shadow and resemblance of death, yet for all this men live
as if they were immortal, drowned in worldly pleasures, and carnal delights,
because they do not seriously remember their last end, which if it were
carefully thought upon, it would mightily prevail to keep men from doing
amiss, causing them to imitate that good servant in the Gospel who knowing
his master would come, yet not knowing at what hour in the night, he girded
his loins and kept his lamp burning, that he might be found ready when his
master should come: whereof we have a good example in this Gentlewoman our
sister, to whom as it pleased God in the weakness of body, to give her a
remembrance of her mortality and end before it came: so she received grace to
make true use for dying to sin, and living to God; she spent her time during
her sickness, as I have been credibly certified, in reading, prayer, and good
meditations, and at her end (as my self was a witness) she applied the
sentences and promises of Scripture to her own souls comfort, praying with
the Church, Lord Jesus come quickly, ^
come quickly. And with David professing that as the Heart panted after the
rivers of water; so her soul longed after God, and laying hold on Christ's
promises, that she should be satisfied because she mourned for her sins,
assuring her heart according to that that was pronounced to Paul, that
howsoever she was weak, yet the grace of Christ should be sufficient for her,
and that by the power of his might she should overcome and find death to be
her advantage. Thus continuing in holy motions and good speeches, till her
soul removing from her earthly tabernacle, was received into the heavenly
inheritance (as we may trust) there to reign with Christ for ever. Thus far
of the exhortation, not to suffer sin to reign, the first part of our Text.

^
That ye should obey it in the lusts thereof?
THese words contain the second part of our Text, which is the explication,
declaring to us how this may be brought to pass, namely, by withdrawing
obedience from the lusts thereof. Where first of all, there be two words to be
interpreted. Lusts, and Obedience.

Lust of sin.] (...) when (...) as (...), etc (...) heavenly things are
desired. 3. Carnal, when things forbid of God are desired.
Lust is that stirring of our natural corruption, egging and soliciting us
against the will and Law of God, or the first motion of our sinful corrupt
nature: for it is here distinguished from sin, to show that here lust is not
the root, but the fruit. Whereas he speaks in the plural number, not lust,
but lusts, it is because the motions or desires of our depraved nature, are of
sundry kinds; some are the will of the mind, so called Ephesians. 2.3. as errors,
heresies, false opinions, wicked conceits, evil imaginations, corrupt
reasonings, wicked counsels, devises and thoughts either against God, or men,
or our selves: some are the will of the flesh, thus termed in the former
place, Ephesians. 2.3. whereby is meant all the evil affections which be in our
unreasonable part, in our will, appetite and senses; as anger, pride,
covetousness, envy, revenge, contention, and such like. And 2. Cor. 7.1. these
lusts are divided into lusts of the flesh, and the spirit, where flesh being
set against spirit, is either the body or the inferior part of the soul; and
spirit signifies the principal faculty of the understanding and reason; all
which are corrupted by sin, and have their several lusts. Which as they be
sundry and not of one sort, so are they very many. Col. 3.8.9. 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
Romans 1.29.30.31
Gal. 5.19 The works of the flesh are manifest, as Adultery, etc.

To obey these lusts, it is willingly to go after them, and of our own accord
in our wills and works to follow evil motions, which when it is done of us,
then we do (as it were) put a scepter into the hands of sin, that it may as
a king subdue us and reign over us. Thus all hypocrites and wicked men do
obey sin, freely serving it as their Lord, whiles they do in their will
consent to the lusts of sin, and in outward work commit it as occasions be
offered. We are here commanded not to do thus, but contrariwise to disobey,
or not to obey any sinful motion or affection either by consent of will, or by
committing them in deeds.

The thing then which here is taught us, A notable mean how to hinder the
kingdom of sin.
it is an excellent mean how to keep sin from reigning over us, even this,
to withdraw our obedience from sin, in our will and heart resisting the first
motions of our rebellious nature: and this certainly is a special point of
Christian wisdom, by the grace which is in us to strive against the first
mouings and ticklings of sin, (...) birth of (...) often (...)*

^


when as it begins to take hold of our thoughts, then to repel it ere even
it get consent and obedience from our will and affections, as it will quickly
do, if it be not well looked to; for sin is headlong, and will soon pass
into lust, and from lust to consent, and from consent to practice, if it be not
stopped and snubbed betimes; whereas if it be disobeyed and refused in the lust
and motion, it is more easily maistered: for sin while it is yet in thought
and motion, it is young and weak, and sooner subdued, as a young child which
is easily ruled, by reason of his weakness; but if it grow to consent and
action, especially if actions of sin be often iterated, then sin has
gotten not only (as it were) sinews, and veins, and bones, but is grown to
the strength of a man in us, and so will with great difficulty be overcome*
therefore as it is the policy of Gardiners to nip and pull up their weeds
being newly come up, to cut and pair away the twigs which spring in their
trees, and by drawing the juice to them would hinder their growth and
fructifying: so Christians are to deal with their lusts, which do cause the
graces of God to dry and wither, and are as weeds to stay their growing in
Godliness: therefore whiles they are but lusts and motions, let them snub and
mortify them.

Men will look to the beginnings of hurt in their body, to provide remedy for
a wound or sore before it do fester or rancle: and while a disease is but now
fresh they look out for medicines: the like or greater care would be taken of
the soul, even at the first betimes, and while sin does begin to stir then to
oppose unto it and make head against it, applying remedies before the evil by
continuance grow desperate and incurable: herein finally, imitating the
practice of warriors, who espy advantages to take their enemies while they are
yet weak, before their forces be joined, and their powers come together; in
like manner the Christian Soldier ought to set upon sin while it is yet
weak, and has least strength, ere by our obedience to it, and practice of it,
it grows to a power, when it will prove a more troublesome and tough piece of
work to quell and keep it down. That therefore which the spirit pronounces
in the 137. Psalm, to encourage Gods people against the Babilonians their most
pernicious enemies: Blessed is he that shall take their children whiles they
are young, to dash their brains against the stones: the same I say to all the
Israel of GOD which is in continual conflict with the Babylon of their
confused lusts: blessed and happy is the man that whiles they are but budding,
can nip them in the head, and by the might of grace dwelling in him does
speedily crush them; thus it will come to pass that he shall not obey sin, by
doing that evil which sin would have done.

Now this way and means commended here in the text, has sundry under means
as help unto it, that the grace whereby we resist the lusts of sin may be
strengthened and enabled to this resistance. Word of God.
The first of these is the Word of God, rightly understood: for Dagon can no
more stand before the Arc, then sin can stand before the word of God, being
planted in a faithful heart, and applied against the stirrings of sin.
Therefore as Christ repelled the suggestions of Satan by this word of God:
Mat. 4.5. so are all Christians to beat back the motions of sin by the same
means, and by the two edged sword of the spirit, which is sharp, to cut
asunder the sinews and heart strings of sin. See then ye have this word
always in readiness to draw it out upon all occasions, whenever ye feel
your selves to be tempted by any sin: be not like unto them that carry about
them a sword and know not how to use it, but put the word unto use, and as often
as any motions of sin arise, presently call to mind such Scriptures as
forbid, threaten, and condemn them, remembering also such examples of such
judgments as have been executed upon such sins as ye be tempted unto, that
ye may inure your heart not only to hate and abhor, but to tremble at the
thought and cogitation of sin. (...) and (...) prayer.
And if at any time the assaults of sin grow stronger then that grace and the
word in thee can be able to resist them, in this case especially do according
to the counsel of our Savior Christ, Watch and pray, that ye fall not into
temptation. Mat. 26.41. As Peter when he walked on the water, and felt
himself ready to sincke, said, Lord Jesus save, or I perish: likewise when the
waves of sinful temptations beat so hard against your souls as that ye
fear sincking and drowning, cry out with faith, and say, Lord lead us not into
temptations. It is not only your set prayers at ordinary times with your
families and with your selves, but the sudden and secret (...) vvishes (...)
of the heart, (...) cast strongly (...). ^ These. 5.17.
eiaculations of the heart upon every stirring of sin which helps against
the rule and sway of sin, and this is it which we are called upon to do, in
that exhortation of the Apostle, to pray continually, charging us that
wheresoever we are, and whatsoever we are doing, if occasion be offered by
the rebellions of our corrupt nature or otherwise, to send up our desires unto
heaven for strength and help, also for pardon and forgiveness; for our
continual desires are continual prayers.

^
Now to the end that our prayers may be the more humble and fervent, unto the
former means must be joined Fasting, which being severed from opinion of merit
and superstition, and being religiously used, avails not a little to the
taming of our stubborn and rebellious hearts. And this the Apostle Paul by his
own experience found to be true. I beat down my body (says he) least
whiles that I preach to others, ^
my self prove a cast away: 1. Cor. 9.27. where the word which the Apostle
uses, imports as much as to beat down with clubs, to note the great
obstinacy of sin, and the great endeavor which is to be used that the lusts
of it, may be suppressed and kept down. And how convenient an help fasting is
for that purpose, and certainly as a moderation in eating, and drinking, and
other lawful pleasures of life, when there is a mean kept in the use of them,
that we temper our selves, rather coming short of that we may well have, then
going so far as our ability and the custom of the place where we live will
suffer us, as I say this continual and daily sobriety is no little help to
the mortification of our sins: so the utter abstinence from all delights of
life for a certain time, as for the space of one day in a week or fortnight,
is a very good means for the furtherance of this work in us, if diligent
reading of Scriptures, godly meditations, and earnest prayers be coupled
therewith: 1 Cor. 9. 1 Timothy 5.23.
for if such excellent and rare men as Paul and Timothy, had need to use such
moderation and abstinence for the subduing of sin, shall any man think that
he can want these means, and be in good case, or that he shall not tempt God
if he neglect them?

But amongst other things we are not to forget the fellowship of the brethren;
Brotherly fellowship.
by whose admonitions and prayers we may be much confirmed against the power
of sin: therefore we are commanded to love God and to love brotherly
fellowship. 1 Pet. 2.17.
The Apostle James would not charge us to confess our sins one to another,
and to pray one for another, James. 5.16. unless in the counsel, James 5.16.
comforts and prayers of the Godly, there were great help against the strength
of sin: neither would the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, exhort us
to consider one of another, to whet on to charity and good works, if there
were not a blessing given to the right use of such means, for the staying us in
every good duty, and causing us still to go forwards in our works of
sanctification. As it fares with brands or coals when they are almost extinct
and put out, by laying them close together, the fire is kept in and made the
hotter: so by the conferring of graces mutually by Gods children to the
strengthening one of another, their zeal against sin and for God is kept alive
and more increased. And to give you another similitude; as they who have a
journey to go in a way which is unknown, are glad to join themselves to such
as are expert in the way: so the fellowship and conversation of such as are
well acquainted with the paths which lead to our celestial country, does
much further us in our spiritual wayfaring. Therefore if ye desire to get to
your selves an especial advantage against sin, and a blessed mean to guide
and confirm you against all whatsoever hindrances in your way, see ye ever
make conscience as on the one side of eschewing all needless^ familiarity with
all such whose hearts are seen not to be right, by the crooked steps of their
life, saying unto them with the Prophet, away from me ye wicked: so on the
other side be inward with some godly Christians which walk wisely in a perfect
way, to whom as occasion is offered you may reveal your secret corruptions,
and wants, to have aid from their prayers, and Christian advise, saying of
such, I will be companion to them which fear God.

^
But ye are here to be advertised that it is not sufficient to use all these
good means against inward lusts and motions of sin, there must also be a
very great care and earnest purpose of avoiding the outward occasions whereby
these lusts are raised and stirred up in us. The obedience to sin is very
much crossed and let by our careful removing and shunning of such occasions
as we are wont to be provoked by unto evil: therefore let the proud man
avoid flattery, and foolish praises; the drunkard strong drink; the glutton
delicates; the covetous let him avoid the often sight and much fingring of
money; let not the angry man meddle much with contentious persons and such as
love contradiction; nor the fearful man come amongst threatners; nor such as
cannot yet rule their tongue amongst such as are given to much talk; nor the
effeminate amongst wantons: at a word, Whosoever will no evil do, must
refrain whatsoever belongs thereto. Remember Joseph, he would not endure
either the speech or company of his lewd alluring Mistress; and it had been
good for Peter that he had not come into the high Priests hall; and for David
he had not so wantonly cast his eye upon fair Bathsheba. One says truly,
occasion makes a thief, and occasion will make an adulterer, a liar, a
rayler, and so in other sins, they are drawn on by occasions: it is therefore
to no great purpose to war against inward (...) except we watch over our
selves to beware and fly the outward occasions of sin.

Hitherto I have mentioned only private means, which serve to withold our
obedience from the lusts of sin, to which if ye do add the frequent use of
public means in the ministry of the word, prayer, and Sacrament, in
humbleness of a sincere heart, with constancy and perseverance therein, by the
mighty blessing of God there will grow much strength against all manner of
rebellious lusts.

Finally, since it will serve to no other end, Conclusion.
but to justify and increase our condemnation, to know the reasons why the
kingdom of sin is to be resisted, and the way and means also how it is to
be done, unless there be hear^ repentance for our faylings heretofore, and a
falling to a more through practice hereafter: therefore ye are to be most
earnestly exhorted so to do, that even as ye desire to sign over sin, and
that it may not reign over you; as ye will show your selves thankful to
Christ who has de^^uered you from sins tyranny, and has put grace into ^ou,
that you may obey from your hearts the doctrine of godliness; as you judge it
meet to endeavor so much the ^eruing of Christ now that you are regenerate, as
before you were careful to serve sin when you were unregenerate; as you covet
to attain and reap the fruit of spiritual holiness in this life, and of
eternal happiness in the life to come; ^o eschew shame in this world, and death
in the next; as the safe protection of God the Father, the most precious merits
of Christ his Son, the comforts and graces of his holy Spirit, are of any
price or esteem with you; as you would be found faithful in your vows and
promise keeping; and to have the works of your callings and lives blessed and
accepted of God; as you are resolved that you are mortal, and must shortly
dye, when your strife of sin must end; as you would have peace in your death,
and the crown of lawful striuers after your death, then look to it, that in
no wise you suffer sin to reign but for your selves against the lust (...)
you all the help (...) a principij^*
of all these good means private and public that have been spoken of, giving
your selves to meditate in the word day and night, praying in the spirit,
humbling your selves by religious fasting, loving brotherly fellowship, being
watchful against the occasions of sin, and over your own senses, and
submitting your selves to the holy ministry, in every part thereof laboring
what ye may, to do all these things with lowliness, uprightness and
continuance, and if at any time ye fall by being obedient unto the lusts of
sin, rise again by renewed repentance, and then as sure as God reigns in
heaven, sin shall not reign in you; but grace shall reign in you whiles ye
abide in this pilgrimage, and the days of your mortality being ended, ye
shall reign in eternal glory with Christ, to whom be thanks and praise now
and for evermore. Amen.

THE SECOND SERmon: called The Perseverance of the Saints, Preached on the 29.
of January. 1608.
Psalm. 15. Verse. 7. He that does these things shall never be removed.


THis short sentence is the conclusion of the whole Psalm, and contains both
the substance of the Psalm: He that does these and a gracious promise
annexed; shall never be removed.

First, unto the substance of the Psalm belongs a question and an answer:
the question is propounded in the first Verse, O Lord who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle? that is to say, O Lord, whereas there be many that resort unto thy
Tabernacle to worship thee, certify me who they are which be thy true
worshippers, whom thou will account to be members of thy Church militant in
earth, and triumphant in heaven.

This is the greatest question in all divinity, for though there be other
questions of deeper search, yet of all other this question is of greatest use
and consequence. The reason that caused David to move this question was this,
he marked many to frequent the Temple to worship, which yet proved but
hypocrites, therefore very worthily he enquired of God, the judge of the heart,
by what tokens his sound worshippers and servants might be known.

Secondly, the answer begins at the second Verse, which contains a full
description of true worshippers, by three essential inseperable notes, to wit:
first, Integrity: secondly, Innocence: thirdly, Verity; unto which three
graces are referred all the particular duties in the Verses following.

(...) of (...) Verse.
Now in this seventh Verse he concludes, and the effect of his conclusion is
thus much, as if he should have said: Whosoever he be that embraces
uprightness. innocence and truth, he is the true worshipper of God, so
steadfastly rooted in the Church here upon earth, as when the course of this
present life is ended, he shall remain for ever a Citizen in heaven: He that
does these things shall never be moved.

^
The doctrines which arise from this Verse are two: the foremost is this, The
blessed estate of the true worshippers of God is certain and unchangeable,
from which they shall never be removed: the second doctrine is, who be these
true worshippers and how to be known. The first doctrine is built upon many
undoubted grounds: the first ground is from the Authority of Scripture,
expressly affirming this truth in many places, ^
Psalm. 1.6. The Lord knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the
wicked shall perish. Psalm. 37.24. Though the righteous fall, he shall not be
cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand. Also Psalm 125. He that trusts in
the Lord shall be like mount Sion, that cannot be removed: Also Solomon says
in his Proverbs: The hope of the righteous shall not perish: And to be short,
in the 54. of Isaiah the Lord has sworn to his people by an oath, that with
everlasting love he has embraced them. We see in these Scriptures that God
has passed for the stablenesse of his people, not his single word only, but
his promise, which is his double word, and if this be not strong enough, it
has pleased him for more surety to add his oath, a threefold cord which
cannot be broken.

The second ground is Gods free election, upon which the firm steadfastness of
the faithful is grounded, as upon a sure rock and mountain of brasse^ which
causes our Savior Christ to say, Simile.
that it was not possible for the Elect to be deceived. Mat. 24. True it is
that in some things the elect may be deceived, and for some time: but to be
deceived universally, and for ever, that is not possible. And in the 8. to the
Romans, Paul respecting the constancy of Gods election, avouches of the
predestinate, that they must be glorified. Romans 8.30. Moreover in the 2. Tim.
2.19. having spoken of Hymineus and Phyletus, which themselves denied the
faith, and destroyed the faith of others, by saying the Resurrection is past,
the Apostle fearing least some believers of weak minds should be troubled to
hear two such pillars of the Church to be shaken: he does comfort them with
this persuasion, that their own standing is firm because of Gods election,
which for the assurance and certainty of it is there likened to a foundation
and a seal: two such things then which amongst men there is no stronger,
Simile.
The foundation (says he) of God is sure, having his seal: the Lord knows
who are his.

The third ground is the free and unchangeable covenant that God has stricke
with his elect touching grace and salvation by Christ. The tenor whereof is to
be found in Jeremy. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will never turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear into
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, (says the Lord.) These are
the words of the covenant, from which observe two things: the first is, that
he calls it an everlasting covenant: which teaches that it is not made for
hours, days, weeks, months, years, or any term of time, but for all
eternity. The second is the means how this covenant becomes everlasting,
because it is every way sure and constant both on Gods part who never alters
his good will toward his chosen people; and on his peoples part, who have
their hearts so seasoned with his fear as they can never have a will to depart
from him. This third ground from the covenant is further strengthened with the
consideration of gods infinite power and truth, which makes him able and
careful to perform unto the elect his most merciful covenant: Thus Abraham
assured himself of the fruit of Gods covenant, looking to the power of God,
who was able to do what he promised* Romans 4.21. And Paul 1. Cor. 1.9.
confirms the minds of the godly by the truth of God, faithful is he who
promises, and he will do it.

The fourth ground is the intercession of Christ, who as Peter that his faith
might not fail, Luke. 22.32. So in John the 17. he prays not only for Peter
and the other Apostles, but for all that should believe their doctrine to the
end of the world, that they might be kept to everlasting life. Whereof it
follows necessarily that the true children of God must for ever stand in the
favor of God unremoved, or else the prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ must be
unheard and cast out, which were great wickedness once to imagine: especially
seeing Christ himself has said, Father I know thou hear me always. John.
11.42.

John 14. my Joy shall none take from you. Also in the 16. verse he says, my
spirit which I give to you shall abide with you for ever. And Saint Peter in
his first Epistle 1.13. calls the seed whereof we are begotten anew,
immortal seed: and Saint John says, it remains in them which are borne
anew: and Saint Paul says, that the gifts of God are without repentance, Romans
11. All which places do serve to teach us thus much; that the saving grace of
God is of an incorruptible nature, such as never dies where it once quickneth.
The reason whereof is, because God who gives it does still preserve and
confirm it, as it is written, Jude 1. sanctified of God the Father, and
reserved to Jesus Christ. Which shows that whom God sanctifies by one grace,
he confirms by another.

They therefore are deceived which think that the grace of God though it
cannot finally be lost and for ever ye that it may be lost wholly for a time,
whereas contrariwise the Apostle teaches in the sixth to the Romans, that the
elect having once the life of grace from the spirit of Christ can no more
return to the death of sin, then Christ being raised from the dead can
return to the grave again, verse 9.10.11. read and consider the place.

Besides all these grounds already named, there remain some other, as the
constancy of the love of God, who never John 13.1. Moreover the faithful are
committed John. 10.28. Our salvation was once in our own keeping for it was
committed unto Adam, who quickly lost it, but now God having trusted his son
with it, and made him the guardian of it, it is in a most sure hand: for he
being both almighty and faithful, can and will save all that be of his father
committed to him, as himself says, I will raise them up at the last day and
give them eternal life. Finally, it cannot be that any of

This steadfast condition of Gods children besides these substantial grounds of
it fetched from the word, it is also in the same word illustrated and set forth
by many sensible and fit similitudes. Simile.
The first is of a tree planted by the rivers of water, which has such
continual supply of plentiful Psalm 1.2. The second is of a Cedar in
Libanon, which as Psalm. 92.12. Thirdly, of an huge, of war, nor by any are or
labor of man can be won and prevailed against: Such is the estate of him
that trusts in God, Psalm 125.1.2. The last similitude is of an house built
upon a rock, against which though the winds and waves do blow and beat, yet
it stands sure, because it is founded upon a rock: so it is with every one
that hears the word of GOD (...) said to (...) the word (...) promises (...)
and does it; such shall be sore tempted and weather beaten, yet they shall
never be removed. Mat. 7.

Furthermore, the word that thus speaks of the steadfastness of Gods true
worshippers, does also direct us to the means by which they are maintained in
it: and these are either public or private. The public means are the
ministry of the word and Sacraments, ^
and prayer and discipline. The private means are private prayer, meditation
and reading, fellowship of the godly, conference, and careful practice of the
word. By these means used and followed with sincerity, humility, and
unwearied constancy, it pleases the most merciful God to keep all his
children from falling away though they take some deep and dreadful falls.

Now it will be requisite briefly to answer some such objections as are made
against this doctrine, which is much gainesaid, as all other divine truth is:
the truth of the word being herein like the word, the truth, Christ I mean,
who was spoken against by sinners.

These objections are either first by examples of the Saints: secondly, by
texts of Scripture: or thirdly, by show of Solomon, he being once a true
worshipper of God, he felt so grievously from piesie to idolatry, from
temperance to wantonness from God to pleasure, as that some have thought, yea
spoken, and written that he perished. To this we answer^, it is true he fell
most grievously, and did long lie (...) his sin (...) it is also more then
likely to be true (...) in his sin, but recovered himself (...) these few (...)

First, that he is of the holy Ghost entitled the beloved of God. 2. Samuel
12.24.25. which was never affirmed of any reprobate. Secondly, he was one of
the penmen of the Scripture, even an holy Prophet: and of all the holy Prophets
Christ says they are set down in the kingdom of God. Luke 13.28. Thirdly,
Gods promise was made especially touching the person of Solomon, that howsoever
his sins should be corrected with the rod of men, yet his mercy he would
never take from him, nor remove his loving kindness. 2 Samuel 7. Fifthly, he
was by repentance restored to God and to his Church, and none can perish that
truly repent. Now that Solomon repented may appear both by the title of his
Book, called Ecclesiastes, which is as much to say, Thus Tremelius expounds
it.
as a person united again to the Church upon his repentance done and published
in the Church: and by the argument of that Book, which is a large condemning
of those vanities wherewith he had been ouer-taken, and a plain retractation
of those follyes wherein he had offended. And if Solomon were not wholly removed
from God; there is less doubt to be made of David and Peter, because neither
their fall was so grievous, for Solomon to other great sins added the gross
sin of Idolatry, and yet their repentance is more certainly revealed, the
one in the 51. Psalm. the other in the 27. Chapter of Matthew* of whom it is
truly said by one of the Fathers, that faith did not fail in his heart, when
the confession of it failed in his mouth. As for the remouings and falls of
Esau, Saul, and Judas, they appertain nothing to this purpose, because they
were but hypocrites, and never the true worshippers of God, and they fell only
from such gifts of the Spirit as were common both to the elect and reprobate.

The texts of Scripture that are brought in against this Heb. 6.4. Heb. 10.29.
and Mat. 13. The words of Heb. 6. are these: For it cannot be that they which
were once lightened and have tasted of the heavenly gifts, and of the power of
the power of the (...) to come, that they falling away should be renewed by
repentance, etc. To this I answer, it is true such as taste only, may; but the
true believer which eats and digesteth, and receives the word cannot fall
away. Now whereas the second text says, that they which be sanctified by the
blood of Christ may fall away. The answer is this, the sanctification which
the Apostle here speaks of, is such a sanctification as stands in
profession only, and not in power and practice, and works only a light and
slender change, which may be lost again, and not an effectual alteration of
the mind and will, which being begun in this life, is perfected in the next,
and so endures for ever. ^
And whereas the Apostle says, they receive the truth, he means that they
receive the knowledge of the truth by their judgment and not by their
affection, into the brain, and not into the heart. Now as for the joy spoken
of in Mat. 13. it is not to be meant of the fruit of the spirit, in a truly
sanctified heart rejoicing in the sense of Gods peculiar love under the hope of
his glory, Romans 5. 2. but a tickling of the mind delighted with knowledge of
new and strange things, which may be in an hypocrite and be lost.

^
because the Scripture which teaches their steadfastness, does also teach that
their own care and watchfulness is required thereunto: as in that saying of
Paul, let him that stands take heed least he fall. 1. Cor. 10.12. and that
in the 11. to the Romans, Be not high minded but fear: also that in the Phil.
2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: unto these we may
join the counsel of our Savior unto his Apostles, that if they would be safe
they must give themselves to watch and pray. Mat. 26. And finally, the Apostle
John says, that they that be borne anew, ^
preserve themselves. John. 5.18. that is to say, they take all care, and use
all good endeavor for their own preservation. In all which places of
Scripture it is manifest that whomsoever God has purposed to keep to himself
immovable, in all them he engenders a great heedfulnesse to look to
themselves. But such as perish they are given over to gross and dead
security, not to fear any peril in the abundance of great sins.

It is now high time that we come to the profit and uses that be to be made of
this doctrine: Use 1.
whereof the first is to stir up our hearts unto a very earnest desire to be
in such a permanent and steadfast condition. In all other things we do love
certainties, Simile.
and cannot abide to be at vncertaintyes: no Master will keep a servant so,
as having him to day, he cannot be sure to have him to morrow; neither will any
man hold a farm as tenant at will, and look to be put out at an hours
warning: all men prefer a fee-simple before an annuitie, and wish rather to
have a thing by perpetuity then by term, and why then should we not in
matter of religion rather desire to be true worshippers of God, which shall
abide for ever, then Christians in name and profession only, which be always
at uncertainty, living in continual hazard, and exposed every hour to some
fearful judgment of God? Simile.
being in this behalf like unto a condemned person, who has received the
sentence of death for high treason against his Prince, howsoever such an one
may be spared and respited by the favor of his Prince, yet he lives at
uncertainty and may look every hour when he shall be called forth to
execution: even thus it stands with all unsound Christians, Hypocrites, and
wicked men, they are condemned persons both in gods decree, in the testimony
of Scripture, and in the witness of their own conscience, though they mark
not the check of it, and albeit the patience of God respite and spare them, and
his bounty prosper them that they be fat and well liking, yet their state is
unsteady, ever subject to a downfall, having no other stay to uphold them but
Gods lenity and sufferance, the time whereof when it is expired, then
suddenly in a moment they sincke into hell: Simile.
though they flourished like a green Bay Tree, Psalm. 37.36.
and spread abroad then leaves, yet they vanish quickly and their place is no
more found: whereas the godly are so established as that in death they are not
removed, ^
but be more firmly and nearely knit unto God thereby, with whom they enjoy a
never withering bliss and glory. How should this move all men most egerly to
desire to be in so firm and certain estate, and never to give themselves rest
until they know themselves to be entered into it? ^
that as Isaac in the 26. of Genesis having dug diverse wels to water his
cattle, which he could not keep, because the people of that land strove with
him, and took them from him one after another, at the last digging a Well for
which they did not strive, but suffered him quietly to enjoy it, he found rest
and was well satisfied, and acknowledging the Lords goodness (he said,) He
has enlarged my room, and will make me fruitful: so we having lost much time
in treading the paths of an outward hypocritical service of God, and at the
length finding Christ and meeting with the way of true Christianity, our
souls may find rest and be satisfied with it, saying: Praised be the Lord,
he has brought me forth into a large room, and set my feet upon a rock.

(...) can (...) is one (...) sign (...) they are (...) this (...) estate
^^^^^nesse.
humbly and heartily to thank God for such a mercy, that when they bless God
for other things, as good health, food, liberty, peace, etc. they forget not
to praise him for this, that he has set his seal upon them, and has put
them in such an happy condition as shall never be removed. When the Apostles of
Christ were sent forth to preach, they rejoiced that the devils were subdued
unto them, but our Savior bids them rejoice in this rather, that their
names were written in the Book of life: teaching us hereby, that howsoever
there is great cause of joy and thanksgiving unto God, when any one is made the
means to pull any soul out of the snares of the Devil, yet the chiefest
cause of joy and praise is herein, when any one understands of himself, that
he is the Elect of God, and sure to be saved. Hereof we have a notable
president in the example of Paul, who being delivered from his woeful estate in
which he lived whilst he was a blind superstitious Pharisee, served God in
shows and external observations, and at length translated into this
immovable estate of faithful worshippers of God, he brast forth into most
thankful acknowledgment of Gods goodness herein, Now (says he) to the
immortal and only wise God be praise and honor for ever. 1 Timothy 1.12.

Thirdly, from this doctrine arises a comfort to Gods Mat. 16.
the gates of hell, even the strongest assaults of Satan, cannot prevail
against them; heaven and earth shall sooner be removed then any of Gods
servants. For if Gods election be unchangeable, if his covenant be everlasting
and unviolable, if his truth cannot alter, nor his mercy fail, nor his power
be weakened, if the prayers of Jesus Christ cannot be refused and cast out, if
his Scriptures cannot lie and deceive, if his sanctifying grace cannot dye and
perish, then believe it though sinful lusts rebel, the vain world entise,
the Devil tempt and rage, raising up troubles without and terrors within, yea
though our selves in our fears and faintings sinck and be ready to give over,
yet being once his we are ever his, and though we be down, we shall be raised
up, though we be shaken, we shall never be removed: as David said out of his
own experience touching temporal provision for this life, I have been young
and now am old, yet I never knew the righteous forsaken, nor their seed
begging their bread: so I may appeal to the experience of all that ever have
been young and are become old concerning eternal preservation, if ever they
knew a man truly fearing and trusting in God (how weakly so ever it were) to
be confounded.

The fourth and last profit to be made of this doctrine, is to stir up every
one of us to a marvelous great care to This also is another mark that a man
is in this immovable condition.
considering that God who made us without our selves, yet does not preserve us
without our selves, but uses our own wariness and endeavor thereunto. This
is that which one of the Fathers has well and truly said, tutus si attonitus,
securus si cantus, that is to say, thou art safe so thou be wary, thou art
sure so thou be astonished and tremblest: agreeable to that in the second
Psalm, serve the Lord in fear; and to that in the second of the Philippians,
work out your salvation with fear and trembling. It is a rule of policy by
Philip de Commines in his French history, namely, that mistrust is safe: and
surely it is a good rule in divinity, a Christian is most safe that is most
mistrustfull. First, the Devil is much to be mustrusted, considering his deep
subtilitie and long experience, and so much the more to be mistrusted because
he is an invisible enemy, and therefore the harder to espy his assaults, or
to avoid them: and blessed is the soul that is always jealous and
mistrustfull over that cursed fiend, which casts his baytes and his snares to
catch us in every thing, in our apparel, meat, and company, etc. in hearing,
reading and prayer, in speaking and doing. Secondly, it is good to be
mistrustfull of men, both friends and enemies, both ignorant and profane, that
we be not corrupted by their evil example, wicked company, indiscreet or evil
counsel and persuasion: ^
even Peter will give ill advise, and Nathan may give counsel which God will
check. Lastly, and above all, it behoues us to be mistrustfull over our
selves, and over our own corrupt reason and affections, as wrath, pride,
covetousness, and such like, which are ever ready to betray us into the hands of
our enemy Satan: and they are so much the more to be mistrusted, by how much
they are nearer unto us, being in the midst of us (as it were) within our
bowels, and bearing a great show of being our friends, fawning upon us whiles
secretly they give us the stab at the heart. In which respect they are of the
Apostle worthily termed deceitful lusts. Ephe. 4.

Thus far of the first doctrine, concerning the immovable steadfastnesse of
Gods true worshippers. Now a few words of the second doctrine, which is this:
The marks whereby the true worshippers of God may be known who they be, to
themselves and to others. He that does these things, he is the true worshipper,
and shall never be removed.

The marks then whereby they are known, are the things set down in this
Psalm: He that does these things, what things? not superstitious works
devised by men, not ceremonious works, though commanded by God, for these
things may be done of hipocrits: but the works and fruits of true
sanctification they are the marks by which Gods true worshippers and children
are known. In the eight to the Romane's, the Apostle teaches that Gods
children may be known by the witness of Gods spirit: the spirit it self
(says he) bears witness to our spirits that we are the sons of God. This
certainly is most true because it is written in the Scriptures, the word of
truth: howbeit it is no easy thing even for the very sons of God to find
out this testimony in themselves, and many have been deceived by taking a
carnal presumption instead of the testimony of the spirit: Therefore if there
be any to whom it is certified by an evident and lively witness of the spirit,
that they are the sons of God, they have much to praise God for it: but if
there be any in whom this witness is feeble and dark, let them not be
discouraged: Simile.
for as true fire is well discerned from painted fire by the heat it gives,
though there be neither light nor flame; so it may be as well known who be the
children of God by the works and fruits of the spirit, as by the witness of
the spirit: they which want this latter may have cause to be glad if they have
the former. For the Apostle Peter in the first chapter of his second Epistle,
having exhorted the Christians to join to their faith knowledge, to knowledge
virtue, to virtue temperance, to temperance patience, to patience brotherly
kindness, to brotherly kindness love, he assures them that if these things
be in them and abound they should never fall, but have their election sure, and
have an entrance made into the blessed kingdom of God. And to conclude, our
Prophet in this Psalm, unto that question (who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle?)
makes this answer, even he that deals uprightly toward God and man, he that
lives a just life, he that thinks the truth, and speaks as he thinks,
he that hurts not his neighbor in name, body, goods or soul, he that
neither spreads nor receives false report against his brother, he that
loves godly men though they be hated in the world, and flattereth not wicked
men though they be honored in the world, he that faithfully keeps his
promises, even to his own damage and loss, especially such promises as are
confirmed with an oath, he that auoydeth usury and briberie, and whether he
lend of courtesy, or judge of duty, as led by love and not by lucre, he, he,
whosoever he is, rich or poor, learned or simple, high or low, even he that
does these things, and all these things, and not only knows them and likes
them, but does them and performs them, and does them constantly and sincerely,
out of love to God and men, though weakly and imperfectly, and desires in the
doing of these things to advance Gods glory, being heartily sorry that he does
these things so faintly and feebly, this is he that may assure himself to be
the person that now truly serves God, and hereafter shall remain in heaven
with him for ever.

FINIS.

