The Examination of John Walsh, before Master Thomas Williams, Commissary to
the Reverend father in God William bishop of Excester, upon certain
Interrogatories touching Wytchcrafte and Sorcerye, in the presence of diverse
ge^tlemen and others.

The. xx. of August. 1566.

Imprynted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Britain street without
Aldersgate. 1566. The. xxiij. of December.

()

The Printer to the Christian Reader.
HEre have thou (gentle Reader) the examination of John Walsh of Netherbery in
Dosetshiere, touching Sorcerie and Witchcraft, which he learned (as hereafter
is showed) of a certain Priest named sir Robert of Dreiton. Wherein thou
may see the fruits of Papists and papistrye, and their ill exercises of
their idle lives, which has been no small hurt to all commonweals. For
hereby not only the simple people have been falsely seduced and superstitiously
lead: but all estates have been sore grieved and troubled by these their
practices of Sorcery and Witchcraft.

It would be to tedious to show but a few histories of their devilish
practices, and to to horrible factes in murders and other mischiefs: which
not only the fat belly fed Moonkes, flattering Friars, and idle lusty Priests
practiced and used: but also the holy fathers them selves Popes, Cardinals, and
Bishops were chiefly and wholye given to the study and exercise of these most
wicked and devilish sciences, and by these means did work to come to the
Papal seat, hie dignities, and great wealth. Which was (as the histories
declare) with the murdering and poisoning privily one of anothrr.

As first Pope Alexander the sixth, having societis with wicked Sprites and
Devils, gave himself body and soul unto them, upon condition he might attain
to the Popes seat, and dignity: which they promised him and fulfilled, but he
enjoyed it not long, contrary to his expectation. For he being privily
conveyed into a chamber in a certain place called Mount Cauillus, and there
questioning with his Demon how long he should raygne Pope, was answered that
he should reign. xi. and. viij. which this holy father understood to be so
many years: but he was deceived. For after he had reigned Pope xi. years and.
viii. months, this Devil would no longer be without his pray, but straight
came to the Popes court decked like a Courtier, and at the Popes chamber door
did knock very loudlye, saying that he must needs speak with his Fatherhood.
The door being opened, he came and spoke with the Pope, al others being bid to
avoid. But they were so earnestlye talking together, that many did rightly
confect that they were at contention. For the Pope stoutlye affirmed his time
not to be expired. For (said he) I had promised me. xix. years (for. xi. and.
viij. is. xix.) and of these. xix. years, I have raygned but. xi. years and.
viij. months. But this courtierlike Devil replied and said, that he mistook
his words, for I said not (said he) xix. years, but I meant. xi. years and.
viij. months, and therefore now thou must needs dye. Whereat the Pope being
abashed, fall to entreating, but all was in vain. For as soon as this Devil
was gone, the soul of this Pope departed miserably from his body with horrible
cries, fearful groninges, and deadly bewaylinges. In this sort dyed this
horrible Sorcerer (as says Hieronimus Marius in his work entitled Eusebius
Captiuus.) In which work the history of this wicked Pope Alexander is very
lively set forth, both as touching his wicked living and horrible factes.
Whose terrible end may be an example to all Sorcerers, Cuniurers, and Witches.

Like unto him was Pope Gregory the. vij. otherwise called Hellybrand
(Hildebrande I should say) who was also a great Sorcerer and Nigromancer, as
Benno the Cardinal does declare in his work of this Gregory's life. Saying
that he also had a Familiar sprite, whereby he wrought many mischiefs in the
common weal of Rome, as well for the satisfieng of his fleshly and beastlye
lust, as also for to increase his riches and dignity.

Platina also writes the like of Pope John. 8. Pope Siluester, Pope Bennet. 8.
with diverse others, which were better practiced in those devilish sciences,
then in godly divinity.

Much like to these was Pope Paul the third, who as Sleidan declares,
exercised sorcerye and Witchcraft, and thereby committed. ij. horrible murders,
and poisoned his Moother and Neuew, that he might enjoy his inheritance the
sooner. He poisoned also his own Sisters husband, that he more freelyer might
have her at his wicked commandment.

Pope Clement the. 8. was also of this Fraternitis, as in the Comentaries upon
the Articles of the Doctors of Paris is declared: where his style is thus set
forth: that he was a Bastard, Empoysoner, Homicide, Bawd, Symoniacke,
Sodomite, Periurer, Whooremaister, Nigromancer, Church robber, and a practiser
of all kind of wyckednes.

These with a great many more of that abominable sea of Rome were thus occupied,
whose ends were most terrible, as their lives were most wicked. And these
faculties their inferior sort, as Moonkes, Friars, and Priests also used,
and would teach the same witchcraftes and Sorceries to such men and women, as
they had committed evil with. As of late was confessed of a woman which used
Witchcraft and Sorcerye, that she learned the same of a priest, whose harlot
she had been many a year. I exhort all men therefore to flee from them and
these dyuelish practices, as from Devils incarnate, least in following them
with living here pleasantly a little while, they be tormented with the^ in hell
perpetually. Which God for his Christ's sake wythdraw and let now and ever.

Amen.
Finis.
The examination of John Walsh of Dorsetshere, touching Witchcraft and Sorcerie.
THe Tewsday being the. xx. day of August. 1566. there was examined before
master Thomas Williams (Co^missary to the reverend Father in God William
Bishop of Excester) one John Walsh, upon certaiue Interrogatories touching
Wytchcraft, in the house of Master Thomas Sinkeler, keeper of the Shiriffes
ward, in the presence of John Butler, and Robert Buller Gentlemen, William
Blachford and John Bordfield.

He being first demanded of his habitacion, he said that he dwelt in a parish
called Netherberry in Dorsetshere.

Secondly, being asked whether he were ever sir Robert Draitons man, he said
that he was retaining unto him by the space of. vii. years.

Thirdly, being demanded whether he did practice any Physic or Surgery: he
said that he does practice both, for the Tisicke and the Agues, and that he
has practiced this Physic by the space of these. v. years, since his
master sir Robert of Dreiton died.

Fourthly, being demanded of whom he learned his Physic and Surgery: he
answered that he learned it of his master sir Robert of Dreiton.

Fifthly, being demanded whether he does it by Art naturally, or else by any
other secret or privy means: He answered that he uses his Physic or
Surgerie by Art, naturallye practiced by him as he says, and not by any
other ill or secret means. And yet he being demanded whether he knew ye
natural operation of ye herbs, as whither they wet hot or cold and in what
degree they were hot or cold: he answered he could not tell

Sixtlye, he being demanded whether he had a Familiar or not: he answered and
denied utterly that he had none about him, neither in any other place of this
world, either above the ground, or under the ground, either in any place
secret or open.

Seventhly, he being demanded how he knows when any man is bewytched: He
says that he knew it partlye by the Feries, and says that there be. iii.
kinds of Feries, white, green, and black. Which when he is disposed to use,
he speaks with them upon hyls, where as there is great heaps of earth, as
namely in Dorsetshiere. And between the hours of. xii. and one at noone, or at
midnight he uses them. Whereof (he says) the black Feries be the woorst.
Also he says that he had a book of his said master, which had great circles
in it* wherein he would set two wax candels a cross of virgin wax, to raise
the familiar spirit. Of whom he would then ask for any thing stolen, who
did it, and where the thing stolen was left, and thereby did know, and also by
the Feries he knows who be bewitched.

Eighthly, he being demanded whether he had ever any Familiar or no: he says
that he had one of his said master. Which Familiar (after his book of
Circles was taken from him by one Robert Baber of Crokehorne, then being
Constable, in the year. 1565) he could never do any thing touching his
Familiar, nor the use thereof, but his Familiar did then depart from him, and
will never come to him again, as he says. And further he says upon his oath,
that his Familiar would sometime come unto him like a gray blackish Culuer, and
sometime like a brended Dog, and sometimes like a man in all proportions, saving
that he had cloven feet.

Ninthly, he being demanded how long he had the use of the Familiar: He said
one year by his said masters life, and. iiii. years after his death. And when
he would call him for a horse stolen, or for any other matter wherein he would
use him: he says he must give him some living thing, as a Chicken, a Cat, or
a Dog. And further he says he must give him two living things once a year.
And at the first time when he had the Spirit, his said master did cause him
to deliver him one drop of his blud, which blood the Sprite did take away upon
his paw.

Tenthly, he says that when the Familiar should do any thing at his
commandment, in going any arrant: he would not go, except first two wax
candels of Uirgin wax should first have been laid a cross upon the Circle,
with a little Frankensence, and saint John's woorte, and once lighted, and so
put out again: which Frankensence must be laid then at every end of the
candel, as he says a cross, and also a little Frankensence with saint John's
woort burned upon the ground, or ever the Familiar would go, and that would
force him to go the message, and return again at the hour appointed.

Eleuenthly, he being asked whether they yt do good to such as ar bewitched,
cannot also do hurt if they list. Whereto he answered, he that does hurt, can
never heal again any man, nor can at any time do good. Howbeit he says that
he which has but the gift of healyng, may do hurt if he list, but his gift of
healyng can never return again to any other persons use.

Twelftly, he being demanded whether that any of the three kinds of Feities,
when they did hurt, did it of their own malignity, or of the provocation of
any wicked man? He answered that they do hurt of their own malignitie, and
not provoked by any manne, and that they have power upon no man, but upon
such as only do want faith, which is ye cause why they have power more of
some persons, then of any others. Furthermore, he being demanded to what end
the Familiar did serve them? He answered that he serves for no purpose, but
to search out things theft stolle^, and for no other purpose at al. He being
further demanded to what end ye Spirits, in the likeness of Todes and the
pictures of man or woman made in wax or clay, do serve? He said, that
Pictures made in wax, will cause the party (for whom it is made) to continue
sick two whole years: because it will be two whole years ere the wax will
be consumed. And as for the Pictures of claye, their confection is after this
manner. They use to take the earth of a new made grave, the ryb bone of a man or
woman burned to ashes, if it be for a woman, they take the bone of a woman, if
for a man, the bone of a man, and a black Spider, with an inner pith of an
elder, tempered all in water, in the which water the said Todes must first be
washed. And after al ceremonies ended, they put a prick, that is, a pyn or a
thorn in any member where they would have the party grieved. And if the said
prick be put to the heart, the party dies within nine days. Which Image they
burn in the most moystest place they can find. And as touching the using of
the Todes, the which he says have several names: some they call great Browning,
or little Brownyng, or Bonne, great Tom Twite, or little To^ Twite, with other
like names: Which Todes being called, the Witches strike with. ii. withie
sperres on both sides of ye head, and says to the Spirit their Pater noster
backward, beginning at the end of the Pater noster, but they will never say
their Creed. And when he is stricken, they command the Tode to hurt such a
man or woman as he would have hurted. Whereto if he swell, he will goo where he
is appointed, either to the deiry, brewhouse, or to the dry kill of malt, or to
the Cattle in the field, to the stable, to the shepefold, or to any other like
places, and so return again to his place. The bodies of men or women be hurt
by the Images before named, and men's goods and Cattels be hurt by the Todes, in
commanding and using them, as aforesaid, as he says. And if the Tode called
forth, as before said, do not swell, then will the Witch that uses them call
forth an other to do the act, which if he do not, then will they spy an other
time when they may cause the party to be found lacking faith, or else to be
more void of grace, where he or they may be hurt. Furthermore he says, that
who so does once a day say the Lords prayer and his Creed in perfect
charity, the Witch shall have no power on his body or goods for that day.

Xiii. He being demanded whether that those which do heal men or women,
being hurted by Witches, can find out those Images under ground, where with they
were tormented? He affyrmeth they can

And. xiiii. he being demanded whether he him self either has or had at any
time any such Tode, or that ever he made any such Images to hurt man, woman,
or child? He affirms by the oath which he has taken, that he never had
such Todes, or ever made such Images.

And. xv. he being demanded, whether that ever he did any hurt to man, woman,
or child, or to their goods or Cattels? He says by the oath that he has
taken, that he never did any such hurt either in body or goods.

()


