THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH. Wherein the first institution of the weekly
Sabbath, with the time thereof, the nature of the Law binding man to keep it,
the true grounds, and necessity of the first institution, and of the
observation of it, on the several day in the Old Testament, and also of the
removing of it to the first day under the Gospel, are laid open and proved out
of the Holy Scriptures. ALSO Besides the special duties necessarily required
for the due sanctification thereof, these two profitable points are proved by
demonstrations out of Gods Word. First, that the Lord Christ God and Man, is
the Lord of the Sabbath, on whom the Sabbath was first founded, and by whom it
was changed from the last to the first day of the week; and is on that day
unchangeably to be kept by all true Christians, until they come to the
Eternal rest in Heaven, after the general resurrection. 2. That the faithful
under the Gospel are as necessarily bound to keep the weekly Sabbath of the
Lords day, by virtue of the fourth Commandment, as the Fathers under the Law
were bound to keep the seventh day. Delivered In diverse Sermons by GEORGE
WALKER B. of Divinity and Pastor of St. John Evangelists Church in LONDON.

LEVIT. 19.30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary: I am the
Lord. Printed at Amsterdam, in the year 1638.

To the Christian Reader.
THe Author of this Treatise being much importuned, to publish his Sermons
concerning the Sabbath (preached in his own Parish Church to his own Flock)
not only by diverse of his Ch^istian Hearers; but also by others both Preachers
and godly people, who had heard by report the manner of his large handling and
expounding of this Text, did yield at length to their Req^ests, and composed
this Treatise, which contains in it the whole sum and substance of the
matter more largely delivered. The Copy whereof written with his own hand, he
gave to be imparted from hand to hand, and transcribed by such as did desire to
make use of it, for their own satisfaction, and the inst^uction of their own
private Families and Christian friends. Which coming to my hands, I thought
fit to publ^sh and impart i^ to the English C^urches in those C^u^tries on
this other sid^ of the S^as; being credibly informed, that the Author ^s not
unwill^ng to submite his Doctrine to the judgment of the true Reformed
Church^s of Christ, acco^ding to that saying of the holy Apostle, 1 Cor.
14.3^. The spirits of the P^ophets are subject to the Prophets. Let those
things which be^ein seem most of all to savor of noveltie, be read without
prejudice and sinister affection, and weig^ed by the sh^kel of the Sanctuary,
and I doubt not but such as are judicious, will ^i^de them to be ancient
truths like pure old gold newly brought to light out of the old treasu^e of
the sacred Scriptu^es, in which many p^ofitable truths fit for these last
times remain, yet to be more clearly revealed. Which God w^ll undoubtedly
bring to light, by such as d^gge deeper in those mines then others formerly
have done, and labor to ^raw st^ll more Waters of comfort out of those Wells
of Salvation. To that God only immortal, and infinite in goodness and
wisdom, and to ^he wo^d of his grace I commend you, which is able to bui^d
you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH.
Genesis 2:2.3. And on the seventh God ended his work which he had made, and he
rested the seventh day from all his wo^ke which he had made. 3. And God blessed
the seventh day, and sanctified it, because in it he had rested from all his
work which God created and made.


CHAP. 1.
IN the unfolding of this Text, and handling of this maine and necessary point,
I will observe the Method and order which is most agreeable to the order of the
words.

First, from these words, (And on the seventh day)

Secondly, I will show the true ground and occasion of the institution God
ende^ his work which he had made, and he rested the seventh day from all his
work which he had made, and God bl^ssed the seventh day.

Thirdly, I will declare what is the blessing, and sanctifying of the seventh
day, where I shall have occasion to speak of the Law and Commandment by which
God separated it from other natural days to holy Heavenly and supernatural
use. And of the duties which that Law requires at the hands of all Gods people
in all ages to the end of the World on the most blessed day of all the seven in
every week, even the weekly Sabbath Day. Under these heads diverse subordinate
points will ^ffer themselves to be handled, and diverse necessary questions
will come to be answered and explaned.

First, concerning the time of the institution, there are several opi^ions
among learned Writers of former and later times.

First, some Heathen Writers, as Iustine and Tacitus, with others, have
grossly and absurdly erred, as in the time, so also in the Author and in the
occasion of the institution, though they had perhaps read the the writings of
Moses; yet it seems they believed him not concerning the first institution of
it by God; but finding the first express Law, concerning the keeping of the
Sabbath given by Moses at mount Sina, written in Tables of stone, and
afterward recorded in the the Books of Moses; they make Moses the first
Author of the Sabb^th, and that upon this occasion, because wandering with the
Israelites out of Egypt in the wilderness, and finding no sustenance, but
being forced to fast six days, at length coming to mount Sina with the
people, there found meat, and rested, and upon this occasion did appoint it to
be keept weekly for a Sabbath or day of rest.

But all true Christians, who believe the Scriptures to be the sacred
infallible Word of God, being thereby better instructed, do with one consent
hold, confess, and constantly teach, that God the Lord Jehovah, the only true
God, is the Author and Ordainer of the Sabbath, and that he first ordained it
upon the ground and occasion mentioned in this Text, and expressed in the words
of the Law. But yet in the time they much d^ff^r among themselves; Some in the
time of the first institution concur with the infidel Heathens before
mentioned; though they differ much concerning the Author and the occasion* For
they hold that the Sabbath was neither commanded by God, nor known to the
Fathers and Patriarchs, nor observed by any before the coming of Israel with
Moses to mount Sina, and that the first inst^tution of it was in the fourth
Commandment given by God among the ten from Mount Sina, both by word of
mouth, in the audience of all Israel, and also in Tables of stone written with
his own finger.

Iustine Martyr, Tertullian, Irenaeus, and others of the Ancient, seem to
have given the occasion of this opinion, Justin. Dialog. cu^ Triphone. Tertull.
adversus Judoeos Irenaeus lib. 4. c. 20
where they make it a question, whether Adam, Abel, Noah, Abraham,
Melchizedeck, or any of the holy Fathers kept the seventh day for an holy
Sabbath, and affirm that Abraham believed and was justified, and called the
friend of God without circumcision or observation of Sabbath; For from their
words, which are but doubtful, some late writers, both Tostatus Pererius
Gomarus.
Papists and Protestants, do go about to prove that the Sabbath was not
instituted by God until the giving of the Law by Moses on Mount Sina.

And although the words of this Text, written by Moses, do here plainly
affirm the contrary, and tell us that on the seventh day God ended his work,
rested and sanctified the seventh day; Yet thus they wrangle and wrest the Text
by a Childish forged sense and meaning; First, they grant the first words, that
on the seventh day God ended his work, and rested; But they deny that he
blessed and sanctified the Sabbath on the same day, they say that here by way
of Anticipation, Moses mentions the blessing and sanctifying of the Sabbath,
not as a thing at this time done; but as a thing which was first done in the
giving of the Law on Mount Sina, many ages after, and that upon this ground
which is here mentioned, to wit, his ending of his work, and resting on the
first seventh day of the World. And here Moses his purpose was, to show not the
time, but the equity of the institution; not the beginning but the ground of
that Sabbath. The paraphrase of the Text in their sense was thus: And on the
seventh day God ended his work, and rested; and upon this ground he many ages
after at Mount Sina instituted the seventh day to be kept by Jsrael for an holy
Sabbath of rest. But though some men of learning, and diverse out of effected
error and mal^ce stand for this opinion; yet indeed there is no ground for it
in the Scriptures, but many plain proofs to the contrary. First, this Text
(^f we take the words as they run) shows most manifestly, that on the
seventh day, even the next after the six days of the Crea^ion, God ended or
perfected his work, and on that day he rest^d, and also blessed and sanct^fied
it to be his Sabbath. Secondly, there is no c^l^ur of reason for any man to
think, that God should lay the ground and foundation of the Sabbath on the
first seventh day of the World, and suffer it t^ lie void, and of no use, and
never go about to build on it till so many ages after, God cannot endure to
do any thing in vain nor to suffer any thing to lie void, and to be of no
use, which of it self is very useful. Surely, as he loved and chos all the holy
Fathers from the beginning, Heb. 11.10.16.
and promisd to them the eternal rest of heaven, which they looked for, and
sought in the everlasting City, which has sure foundations, and in the
Country above in the World to come. So he kept not back from them the outward
sign^, seal^ and pledge thereof, his holy Sabbath, which was both a motive to make
them bend t^eir whole course toward that rest, and a means to further them in
their way and jorney to it also.

Thirdly, the Lords own words which he spoke from Mount Sina in the
commandment of the Sabbath, are most clear, and do show that God blessed
and sanctified the Sabbath in the beginning, on the first seventh day wherein
he ended his wo^k and rested. For he does not say, I the Lord rested on the
seventh day from works of creation, and therefore I now bless and sanctify
every seventh day of every week hereafter. But the Lord rested the seventh
day, wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath, and sanctified it, that is then of
old in the beginning when he rested, he blessed and sanctified it.

Fourthly, the Sabbath Day was kept and observed by the Israelites a month
before they came to Mount Sina, Exo. 16.25.26. And Moses and the people knew
that the seventh day after that God began to rain Manna from Heaven, for to be
their bread, was the Lords Sabbath, as his words do plainly show, and that
the Lord before that time has by his word appointed it to be the rest of the
holy Sabbath. Ve^s. 23. And the words of the Lord to Moses, when some of the
people went out on the seventh day to gather Manna, do plainly show, that God
had before that time given them Commandments and Laws concerning the rest of
the seventh day; For in the 28. Verse he says: How long will ye refuse to keep
my Commandments and Laws? Intimating that their going out on the seventh day
was a refusing to k^ep his Laws, which of old he had given, and before this
had revealed to them. For otherwise they could not be said to transgress:
Laws cannot be refused to be kept before they be given; Wherefore it is a
vain praetence and shift, which some use to decline this Argument, viz. that
the ceasing ^f the Manna on the seventh day, and Moses his admonishing of the
people to rest that day, was but a praeludium of the fourth Commandment, and a
preparation to Gods promulgation of it; For the words of the Text show most
plainly, that the intermission of Manna was an evidence of the Sabbath already
sanctified by the Commandment of God; the resting of the Jsraelites was
observing and obeying of the Law already given, and the going out of some to
gather Manna on the seventh day, was refusing to keep Gods Law given in the
first institution.

Now, for Justine Martyr, Tertullian, Jraeneus, their words do not prove any
thing for the maintaining of this opinion; Tertullian denies only the
perpetual morality of the Law, concerning the Jewish Sabbath, and calls into
question* not the institution of it in the beginning, but the observation of it
by the first Fathers and Patriarchs. Iustine Martyr and J^aeneus say, that
Abraham was justified without circumcision and observation of Sabbaths, that
is, of the Ceremonial Sabbaths commanded by God in the Ceremonial Laws
given by Moses, not without observation of the weekly Sabbath, as the word,
Zabbaton, Origin.
of the plural number which they use, does clearly declare: That the weekly
Sabba^h was instituted from the beginning, Hierom. trad. in 2 Genesis Austin in
Psalm. 80.
the best learned of the Fathers affirm, as Origin, Hi^rome, Austine, and
others. And although the Scriptures which briefly run over the lives and acts
of the Fathers, make no express mention of their observation of the weekly
Sabbath; Yet we have diverse places which minister very probable Arguments for
this purpose. In Genesis, cap. 4.3. It is said, that at the end of days, Caine
brought his offering to the Lord, that is on the Sabbath, which was the end of
the week and the last of the days. The Hebrew words are (...) and signify at
the end of days, and howsoever they are taken to signify in process of time,
by some Learned Translaters, yet in no other place of Scripture do I find,
that they signify any other end of days, but of a certain set number of
days, either of thirty or for^ie, or many days; Or of the days of a whole
year, as 2 Samuel 14.26. where it is said at the end of days, according to
days, that is of every year. Absalom polled his head. And 1 King. 17.7. at
the end of days, that is of a year (^s Tremellius translates the words) the
brook dried up. Now, I see no reason why we should unde^st^nd by the end of
days, the end of the year, that Caine and Abel did only at the end of the
year offer to God, or after a long time; but that on every seventh day of the
week, which is the weekly Sabbath, they sacrificed to God; undoubt^dly their
Father Adam, who taught them to sacrifice (which Worsh^pp God first instituted
on the seventh day) he also taught them the day of Gods holy worship even the
Sabbath which God had sanctified, and this was the end of the days of the
week.

Also in the same fourth of Genesis in the last verse, it is said, that when
Seths Children began to increase, that then men began to call on the name of
the Lord; that is as learned Iunius well expounds the words, they began to
assemble themselves together in public assemblies to pray unto God and
worship him, even all Seths seed who were Gods people. and were called by the
name of the Lord, that is the Children of God, as we see Genesis 6.2. Now, as they
had solemn and set meetings, so undoubtedly they had a set time, even every
Sabbath or seventh day, and set places or Churches; for without set time and
place there can be no solemn invocation or worshipp in solemn assemblies, as
common sense teaches.

And that Noah when he came out of the Arc began to observe the rest of the
Sabbath, and did offer a sacrifice of the rest that is of the holy Sabbath, and
that God was well pleased with it. Me thinks the Hebrew words in the original
Text teach very plainly; (...)
for it is said, that God smelled a savor of the rest; that is he accept^d it
as a pleasing Sabbath sacrifice, Genesis 8 21
the Hebrew emp^raticall and demonstrative particle here added to set forth a
special rest, implies so much. And the word which is in the Hebrew, (...)
rest, is of the same note and original with the word which Exodus 20.11. in
the fourth commandment is used to signify Gods resting on the seventh day.

Now, all these things well weighed and laid together do show that this
opinion, though held by some learned men, is but a mere dream and idle
fancy. And indeed the very first words in which God gave the fourth
commandment, to wit, remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, are of
themselves alone a sufficient argument to prove, that the Lord did not in
giving the Law from Mount Sina first institute the Sabbath day; but only did
renew the memory of it, and of the first institution thereof by renewing and
receiving his old commandment, by which he on the first seventh day of the
World did sanctify it.

There is another opinion which diverse both ancient and modern Christians do
hold upon a better ground; for they do gather and conclude with one general
consent from the plain words of this Text, that God in the beginning
immediately after the creation ended, did give the law of the Sabbath, and did
bless and sanctify the seventh day of the first week of the world, and every
seventh day of every week following, and commanded it to be kept an holy
Sabbath, in memory of his rest on the seventh day.

But howsoever, they all agree in the general; yet in diverse special and
particular things they do much differ.

1. Some hold, that the law of the Sabbath was given to man in the state of
innocence, before his fall on the sixth day, and that it was written in man's
heart, that he ought to keep the seventh day holy; and that if man had
continued in his integrity, he would have kept the seventh day of every week
an holy rest unto the Lord his God.

2. Others hold, that the Sabbath was instituted not in the state of innocence,
nor before man's fall, which happened toward the end of the sixth day; but that
on the seventh day when God rested from the work of Creation, he then did
bless and sanctify that and every seventh day and appointed it to be a weekly
Sabbath, and the law by which he instituted the Sabbath: was no other but such
as was written in man's heart in the creat^o^, and that man by the instinct of
nature would have obeyed that law and kept the Sabbath in the state of
innocnecy, if he h^d stood and continued therein.

3 A third sort are of opinion, that the Sabbath was instituted and the
Commandment for the keeping thereof given in the state of innocence, and yet
not till the seventh day: for they imagine that man stood more then one day,
and did in his innocence keep the Sabbath, and if he had continued would have
always kept it; not by any instinct of nature or light of natural reason
created in him and moveing him so to do, but by a possitiue law and Precept
given by God: of the same nature and kind with the Commandment of abstaining
from the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

In all and every of these opinions I find some failling, and noe consent and
perfect agreement with the word of God.

First they all go too far, and have not one word in scripture to warrant
their opinion: that Adam in the state of innocence should and would have kept
every seventh day for an holy rest, and that God would have required it at his
hands. For all Scriptures which mention the Sabbath do speak of it as of an
holy sign looking altogether toward Christ and toward the state of grace and
glory in him, and not toward the state of innocence. It is most certain that
man in that state was perfect with natural perfection, at all times equally
disposed to obey God and to serve him, and to remember his Creation and to
honor his Creator. He needed no observation of any day to put him in mind of
any thing which he had before known, and which god had revealed to him, his
memory was perfect, and he knew whatsoever was needful for him to know or do
in that present state. And his will was every m^ment ready to do wha^soever he
knew to be right, he needed no sign to ad^onish him of his duty, or to move
him to do it in due seas^n. He did not labor nor weary himself, every day was
to him a da^e of delight and pleasure of rest and recreation, and in every
creature which he did see or meddle with, he did behold and take notice of the
wisdom and goodness of God, In a word: his whole life was a constant and
obedient service of God, and there was no inequality nor less worship of God
in one then in another, for he fully served God at all times: W^osoever denies
this must needs deny therein man's perfection and constant conformity to God in
the state of innocence. For where one day is kept better then another, there is
inequality, and noe constant uniformity in himself nor conformity to Gods
will.

In the Second place, they who hold that the Sabbath was first instituted after
man's fall, and yet that it was written in man's heart in the state of innocence,
and he then was bound to keep it: they fall into many absurdities.

First that a man was bound to keep a Sabbath before ever it was instituted.

Secondly, that God did by his word and co^ma^dme^t teach ma in vain that which
he was fully taught already and had written in his heart.

Thirdly, that God gave to man a law in vain after his fall when he knew he
was become unable to keep it.

3. They who hold that the Law of the Sabbath was not written in man's heart,
but was a positive Law given in the state of innocence, of the same nature with
that Commandment of man's not eating of the tree of knowledge, They do make
this Commandment of the Sabbath utterly void by man's fall, even as that of not
eating is now void, and was not to be renewed after man's fall. But of the
unsoundness and vanity of these opinions I shall speak more fully, when I
come to show what kind of law that of the Sabbath is, and how that commandment
binds men.

Now because I cannot find any solidity, or satisfaction in any of these
opinions, J have left humane writings even of the best learned, and have
betaken my self wholly to the searching of the Holy Scriptures, Gods most pure
infallible W^rd, and what light J find therein for the manifestation of the
truth I will not hide nor cover, but set it before you openly. And for the time
when God first instituted the Sabbath, I conceive it to have been not in the
state of innocence, but after man's fall imediately, and yet upon the seventh day
wherein God rested from the work of the creation, as my text here says, and
although this may seem to cross the order of the History as is here laid down
by Moses, because man's fall related a while after his sanctification of the
Sabbath, even in the third Chapt. Yet let this move no man, for Moses does not
set down al things in order as they were done in this and the next Chapter,
but first he speaks of the finishing of Heaven and Earth, and all the host of
them, and then of Gods rest, and of the sanctifying of the seventh day, and
then returns to speak of things which were done before: as the planting of the
garden in Eden, which was a work of the third day, and the making of the woman
and forming her of a rib taken out of man's side, and man's naming of al living
creatures before the woman was made, which things were done on the sixth day.
Also in this chapter the forming of the man is related before the planting of
the garden and the watering of it with a river which was divided into four
Heads, though it is most evident that before there was a man to till the
ground, God made every plant and tree that was pleasant to the eye and good for
food, to grow out of the ground, that is all the trees of the garden amongst
the rest ver. 5, Wherefore we must not cleave strictly to the order in which
Moses sets things down in this Chapter, nor take all things to be first done
which are here first related, for then we should believe that plants, herbs,
trees, man and woman were all created after that the works of creation were
finished, and after Gods resting one the seventh day. But to pass by all
needless doubts, let us come to the proofs of this point which prove strongly
that Gods institution of the Sabbath was not in man's innocence but after his
fall*

First, the very words of my text affirm that the Sabbath was instituted on
the seventh day, for first it is said in express words, that on the seventh
day God rested and blessed and sanctified that day.

Secondly, the things which gave God occation to sanctify the seventh day; and
upon which the first institution of the Sabbath was grounded came not to pass,
neither were they in being until the seventh day, that is Gods perfecting of
the work and resting from al he work which he had made: the words of the text
are very plain On, or in the seven^h day God ended his work and rested, and
because of this resting he blessed and sanctified the seventh day, And
therefore the sanctifying of the seventh day which was the institution of the
Sabbath, cannot be before the seventh day; The building could not be before
their was ground to build on, neither could the work go before the cause and
occation of it.

Thirdly, it is against all reason to think that God actually blessed and
sanctified the seventh day, and made ^it his Holy Sabbath before it came into
being. Now this ground being very clear, that the Sabbath was instituted on
the seventh day from the beginning of the creation and not before. I proceed to
a second ground, to weet: that man did fall toward the end of the sixth day,
even on the same day in which he was created, which being fully proved, It well
necessarily follow That the first institution of the Sabbath was after man's
fall and not in the state of innocence.

First that man did fall upon the very day of his creation the sixth day, I
prove by plain Scriptures and by strong arguments grounded on them. The first
testemony is that speech of David, Psalm 49.12. Man being in honor lodged
not a night therein, but became like the Beasts that perish. So the words
run in the original text, and we cannot without wresting of the words from
their proper sense in the Hebrew, expound them of any other person but of the
first Adam, and of his fall, the word which is in our translation (man) is Adam
in the Hebrew, and the words which we read in our Engglish (abides not)
Bal-jalim, and in the Hebrew signify, lodged not a night therein: as appears
by other Scriptures, in which it is continually used to signify lodging or
tarrying for a night, viz. Exodus 23.18. and 34.25. Devt. 16. 4. where God
forbids the Israelites to let the fat of their Sacrifice, or any part of the
flesh of the Paschall lamb: lodge with them all night till the morning. and 2 Samuel 17.8. where Hushai says to Absalom of his Father David, that he was a man
of war, and would not lodge with the people. And 2 Samuel 19.8. where Joab
says to David, there will not one abide with thee one night. And Psalm. 30.5.
where it is said, that weeping may lodge for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. And so in all other Scriptures this word is used. And the learned
Hebrews who best know the propriety of the phrase: understand this place of
Adam and of his falling on the day of his Creation, and not continving one
night in the honorable state of innocency^ The Second testimony is that
speech of our Savior Ioh. 8. 44. where he says that the Devil was a
murderer of man and alier from the beg^nning and abode not in the truth. By
the beginning is meant the first day of man's Creation, and it is never
absolutely used in any other sense but for the time of the first Creation. Now
if the Devil did lie and deceive and murder man by drawing him to sin from
the first day, of ma^s being, it follows that man did fall the sixth day, on
which was the day of his creation. The third proof is grounded on the words
which passed between the woman and the serpent T;he serpents speech implies
that as yet they had not eaten of any tree, and that he set upon the woman
immediately after that God had given them commandment not to eat of the tree
of knowledge; the words which he uset^ (Y^a, or is it even so) they are a form
of speech used by one that standing aloof and over hearing what was forbidden,
does immediately step in and asks the party to whom the commandment was
given if it were even so as he conceived. And the woman's answ^r is in such a
word as is of ^he future tence in Hebrew, and signifies not an act past or
present, Genesis 31.2.
but a power and liberty to eat hereafter when they should have occation, and
the true translation of her words is: we may or will hereafter eat of the
fruit of the trees of the garden. Also it is very likely that if they had
eaten of the fruit of any tree of their own accord before their temptation
and fall, their reason will, and appetite would have led them to the tree of
life, which was near at hand even in the midest of the garden close by the
forbidden tree Ver. 9. The very name wher^of was amiable, and unto which the
natural desire of man did of it self chiefly carry him, as Gods words do
intimate Chapt. 3.2. But that they had not yet re^ched forth their hands to
take and eat of that tree, that speech of God shows Chap. 3.23. where he says
that he will cast Adam out of the garden. Least he put forth his h^nd and ^ake
and eat of the tree of life, which was the state of natural life; Now this
had been too late if they had already before eaten of it.

Fourthly, so soon as God had created the woman, and given her to the man, he
gave them the blessing of fruitfulness, and the desire of procreation of
children which is most natural to man, and he did bid them increase and
multiply, so we read Chapt. 1.28. and undoubtedly they would not have
neglected the blessing of multiplying and increasing mankind, but if they had
continued in their integrity one night, the woman by companying with the man
would have conceived a pure seed without sin, for there was no barrenness of
the womb in innocence, that came in as a curse after the fall. Chapt, 3.16.

F^ftly, the v^rity of God threatening, and the strictness^ ^f his justice
required that in the same day w^erein man sinned, in the same should the
sentence of death, be executed, the words of the law are very peremtory ver.
17. In the day that thou ea^st thou shall surely dye. Which sentence was fully
and truly execu^ed, though not on Adam himself, yet on Christ the second Adam
man's surety. The first Adam all his posterity are the same day made subject to
death, wherein they act or partake actually of this transgression, and Christ
the second Adam who undertook to satisfy the Law for this sin and to suffer
the punishment due to it and all sin which spring f^o^ this root, did certainly
die on the same day, and at the same hour of the day in which the first Adam
transgressed, so Irenaeus and diverse of the ancients and other acute writers do
hold, and they well observe, that on the sixth day of the week on which day
Adam was created and after the ninth hour of that day, that is in the
afternoon and to^ards the end of the day Christ suffered both a cursed bodily
death on the Cross, and also the agonies and pains of the second death, as he
shows by his crying out My God, My God, why have thou fo^saken me. And by
his word Consummatum est, that is the fullness and utmost extremity of torments
is come, or now is the utmost ex^remity of my paynfull suffering. And therefore
it is very probable and cannot without scornful wrangling be denied, that
Adams fall was about the same time of the sixth day, which does make good the
word of God and show the verity of his threatening law, and his admirable
wisdom and providence in thinking of man^ Redemption before he would suffer
man to fall.

Sixthly if Adam had stood any while, even one day or night or more until he
had eaten of the tree of life, which seems to be aseale of the first Covenant
of life by works of natural righteousness, it is likely that he could not have
fallen, nor the Devil been suffered to tempt him, or if after the taste of the
sweetness of the tree of life, and the sealing of the covenant of life by his
own works of obedience, he had fallen: surely his fall had been more
desperate, even total and final apostasy: for which God allows no Sacrifice
to be offered nor prayer to be made, Heb. 10.26. 1 Ioh. 5.16. Heb. 6^6.
and from which there is no recoverie nor renueing by repentance. The Devil
being created with the Angels amongst the supernatural host on the first day,
and having seen the glory of God and tasted of the Heavenly joys all the sixth
days of the creation until man was created and all the frame of the world
finished, and Lordship given to man over all inferior creatures, he then after
this taste falling away and not abiding in the truth but leaving his first
estate, did sin more disperately and rebelliously against the light, and his
sin is so hateful to God, that he will not accept of any satisfaction for
it, neither could the Son of God under take for him. But man's fall being at
the first before he had tasted of the tree of life and the full sweetness and
fruision of earthly fellicity, and springing not Originally from himself, but
from the Devil who deceived him, therefore there is mercy with God for him,
Gods giving of Christ, and Christ's undertaking for man, is an argument that
Adam did fall in the day of his creation before he had tasted of the tree of
life, and that he was made, ma^d, formed and deformed in one day, as the Greek
writers speak.

Lastly, it seems by diverse other Reasons very probable, that man did fall on
the sixth day before he had eaten of the tree of life, which if he had been
left to himself, and if he had not been prevented and seduced by the Devil
he would have done.

First because the Covenant of life by man's own works of obedience, being
sealed by his eating of that tree which was the seal of that Covenant: as
appears by Gods speech Genesis 3.23. Man had been confirmed in that natural
life and estate wherein God created him, and the Devil could have had no power
either to seduce him or to prevail by his temptations.

Secondly the things which Adam did after his creation and before his fall:
could not be done orderly and distinctly in less then a good part of a day.
First God brought all living creatures before him, and he took notice of them
and gave to every kind of creature fit names, before the woman was made, as
appears ver. 20. Then God cast him into a deep sleep and took one of his
ribs, and formed it into a woman and brought her to him. After that God gave
them the blessing of fruitfulness, and said be fruitful and multiply, he also
gave them rule and dominion over all creatures, and appointed them all Trees
bearing fruit, and Herbs bearing seed for their meat, and set man to keep and
dress the garden, and withal he gave them the commandment to abstain from
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, before they were tempted and drawn
into sin and transgression. Therefore their fall must needs be toward the
end of the day, after the ninth hour, at the same time of the day in which
Christ sufferd death and gave up the ghost: as the Gospel shows Math. 27.46.
and so the day and hour of man's first sin, was the day and hour of death
for sin according to Gods threatening ver. 17.

Thirdly after their fall and the sight of their nakedness, they sewed fig
leaves together and made them Aprones, and by this time we may suppose that the
sun did set and the cool of the day approached, even the breathing wind
which commonly blows after the setting of the sun and did blow in the night of
the seventh day, at which time they heard Gods voice walking in the garden,
which was tirrible unto them, partly by reason of the darkness of the night, and
partly through the conscience of their sin, and the shame of nakedness which
sin brought upon them, and hereupon they hid themselves from Gods presence
among the trees of the garden, which shelter was too vain and foolish no way
able to hide them from Gods pure eyes. Therefore certainly they did sin and
fall toward the end of the sixth day in which they were created. And justly
might Adam have cursed the day of his creation, if Christ had not immediately
betimes on the seventh day been promised, and had not actually and openly
undertaken to become the seed of the woman, and began to be an actual
mediator for man's redemption.

And thus I have by the help and light of Scriptures made it plain and
manifest, that man's first sin and fall was on the sixth day. And that the
first institution of the Sabbath being upon the seventh day, must needs be
after man's fall and not in the state of innocence.

CHAP. 2.
NOw this proving and demo^strating of the first point in my text, ^o weet: the
time of the first institution of the Sabbath, does lead us directly as it were
by the hand unto the second maine point, that is, the ground upon which the
Sabbath was founded, and the true outward moving cause and occation of the
first institution of it.

First we may hence collect that the ground of the Sabbath is not any thing
revealed or done on the six days of the creation, and therefore there was no
use of the Sabbath nor place for it in the state of innocence, neither is it a
commemoratio^ of any thing then brought into being, but rather of Gods resting
from creation and ceasing to proceed further in perfecting the world by way of
creation.

Secondly, that the true ground must be sought and found among the things
which came to pass on the seventh day, and after the state of innocence which
ended at man's transgration and fall, now this we will seek in the next words
of the text.

The ground of the Sabbath.

And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and on the
seventh day God rested from all his works which he had made, and God blessed
the seventh day.

In these words we may observe three distinct things concurring on the seventh
day.

First Gods ending or perfecting of the whole work or business of the creation.

Secondly Gods resting from that work and ceasing to proceed that way, and
^iving over to uphold the world and to repair man and other creatures (which
were ^rought under corruption and through his fall made subject to vanity) by
the mere work of creation.

Thirdly Gods blessing the seventh day by revealling therein agreat blessing,
far a boue all the good which he showed in the sixth days of ^he creation.

That these are the true grounds of the Sabbath, and that God because of these
concurring and coming together on the seventh day, did sanctify it and made
it an Holy Sabbath, to be kept by man for an Holy rest, the words following
immediately do show where it is said God did sanctify the seventh day, because
in it he rested from all his work of creation, and from dealing and doing that
way. These three points, I will therefore prove and explain out of the words
of the text in there order.

First for Gods ending or perfecting of his works which he had made, (...)
that is, expressed in the first words. [ God ended his works which he had
made.] the words in the Original Hebrew text are these; Vaiecal Elchim
melacht^ asher gnassah, which are diversely translated and expounded by the
learned translaters and expositers of this text.

The Uulger Latin runs thus: Cumpleuitque D^us opus suum quod fecerat. That
is, God finished his work which he had made, or God made his work complete on
the seventh day, The Greek Septuagints render the words thus. (...). That is,
God perfected his work on the sixth day.

The Caldee paraphraseth thus. On the seventh day God delighted in his work
which h^ had made. Trem^llious and Junious and many other learned expositers do
read the words thus: That before the seventh day God had ended his work, and
had finished it on the se^enth day that is, when the seventh day come he had
ended the creation.

The words thus diversely translated seems to have several meaning and may be
taken in diverse and several senses. The Uulger Latin which is all one with
our English translation seems, to make this the sense of the words. That on the
seventh day God made an end of his work, which till then was not fully
finished, and that in memory and for joy of the finishing of his work and
making it fully complete on the seventh day, he sanctified that day to be his
Holy Sabbath.

The Caldee paraphrase seems to make the joy and delight which God took in
viewing all the work of creation on the seventh day, to be a ground and cause
of Gods sanctifying that day for his Sabbath

Tremellius and the learned who agree with him, seem to hold that God had
before on the sixth day ended all the works of the creation. And all Being
finished when the seventh day came, that was the only day of the week in which
God had no work left to be finished, nor any thing to make, and therefore he
made this his Holy day and day of rest. This also seems to be the meaning of
the Greek Septuagints, who for this purpose have changed the Hebrew text, and
instead of the seventh day, put in the sixth day for the ending of the week,
and the seventh day they make the day only of Gods resting.

Now of all these translations taken in these Uulgar senses, there is not any
on which can give full satisfaction and remove all doubts and scruples: Yea if
we receive and grant them all, some difficulties will still remain; And
therefore, for the removing of all doubts and full manifestation of the truth,
I will endeavor to search and diue fur^her into the words of the Original
Hebrew text, and to find out a further sense and meaning; by comparing them
with other Scriptures which give more light unto them, and in so doing J will
make use of these several traslations and senses, to gather some light and
strength from them, and from the difference which is among them for the more
full manifestation of the truth which I shall commend unto you.

First for the Hebrew word (...) which is here translalated, Ended, Perfected,
Finished, it signifies in the first and most proper and full sense, to bring a
thing to the full end of it, so that now it has al which belongs to it in any
kind. Some times it is used in Scripture to signify the beginning of a thing
to the last end of it, either by consuming of it, and bringing it to an and of
being and well being which it had before Job. 4.9. By the Breath of Gods
Nostrills the wicked are said to be consumed, and Isa. 1.25. or by ceasing to
continue it if it be a trans^et action or speech: as Genesis 17.22. God ended his
speech or talk with Abraham, that is: ceased to continue it, and Exodus 34.33.
and 1 Samuel 10.13. and 2 Samuel 6.18. 1 King. 7 40. where mention is made of Moses
his ceasing to speak, of Saulls making an end of prophicieing, and D^vid of
offering Sacrifice, and Hiram of his working. This sense is in no case to be
admitted.

First because God consumed not the works which he had made before, neither
did God bring his working and making of creatures to an end by ceasing to
continue it, for that was the sixth day when he had made the woman the last
creature which h^ made, then he ceased from his working and brought it to an
end.

Secondly because consuming and destroying of creatures, can be noe good ground
of blessing and sanctifying the day and time in which it is done.

Some times this word is used to signify the bringing of a thing to the full
end of perfection, either by adding to the last and utmost thing which belongs
to the nature, kind and being of it, so that now it wants no perfection
which it ought to have in that kind, thus the word is used 2 Chro. 7.11. where
it is said that Solomon finished the House of the Lord, and Exodus 40.33. Moses
finished all the work of the Tabernacle. Or else by adding to it more then
naturally belongs to it: even some supernaturll and extraordinary perfection,
thus the word is used Ezech. 16.14. where it is said that God made Jerusalem
perfect by his beauty which he put upon his people whom he placed to dwell
therein: even David and other holy men whom he beautified with supernatural
and saving gifts and graces. In this last sense I conceive the word to be
especially here used. For it is most certain that God brought al things to the
full end and natural perfection on the sixth day when he created man and woman,
and gave them rule and dominion over all living creatures, and appointed all
things which he had made to serve for their use, and so much the last words of
the first Chap. show, where it is said: God saw every thing which he had made,
and behold it was very good, and this was before the end of the sixth day. And
therefore that giving of full natural being and perfection cannot be this
which is here said to be on the seventh day. If we should here understand that
perfecting and finishing of the work; we must either with the 70 Greek
Translatours corrupt the text, and for the seventh put the sixth day; or else
with Tremelius and others, strain the plain words of the text, and make this
the sense of them; In the seventh day (that is before the seventh day) God
ended, that is: God had ended his work and already finished it before, to weet:
on the sixth day; which being granted* It will hereupon follow, either that this
perfecting of Gods work is no ground of the Sabbath at all, or else that the
sixth should rather be the Sabbath, because it was the day and time in which God
brought the created work to perfection.

But here in the original text, the Hebrew words are Beiem hashebingi. In the
seventh day, that is within the compass of that day God perfected his work
which he had before made and created on the six days, and therefore I do
verily conceive and believe, and dare be bold to affirm for a certain truth,
that on the seventh day, God gave to the which he had before made very good and
perfect, with natural and mutable perfection, (and which the Devil by man's
fall had marred and defaced) now another second and greater, even supernatural
perfection by promising Christ the blessed seed of the woman for the
restoration of the work defaced, and by Christ his undertaking not only to
redeem us from all evils which entered in by man's sin, and from that
mutability of estate in which we were all created: but also to exalt us to a
far more excellent state and condition, even to the state of immutable grace
here; and of eternal life and glory in the sight and fruition of God in Heaven
hereafter in the world to come.

That Adam did sin and fall on the sixth day which we call Friday, and in all
liklihoode toward the evening about the same hour in which Christ dyed on the
Cross to redeem us from that sin and all sins which thereby entered into
the world, I have proved before. That after man's fall and discovery of his
nakedness, and sowing of fig leaves together for aprons, Gods voice was heard
walking in the garden in the cool of the day, that is, after the sun was
gone down and the seventh day begun, and that Adam hid himself the words of
the text affirm plainly in the third Chapter. Also that after the conventing
examining and arraigning of the man and the woman, and cursing of the serpent,
and also of the earth; and passing sentence of punishment on the persons of the
man and woman to weet: sorrows and labors in this life, and in the end
thereof bodily death and returning to durst, God for a comfo^table remedy of
all these evils, promised Christ to redeem man kind from them all and to
purchase for them eternal life and glory, the history as it in the same third
chapter laid down shows most clearly, and I do verily believe that all
reasonable men, especially all true Christians, will most freely confess and
willingly grant: That Christ in the day wherein he was first promised, and did
actually undertake to redeem the world, brought in a greater perfection unto
the work of creation, or the things created, then they had before given to them
on the six days in there creation, to weer: supernatural grace; and heavenly
and spiritual gifts of holiness, which exalt man to astate immutable and
eternal.

Now seeing it is a truth most manifest, that in the seventh day (God the
Father promising the blessed seed Christ to destroy the works, and to break
the head and power of the D^vill the Old serpent, and the Son of God actually
undertaking man's redemption, and beginning to mediate for man: And God the
Holy Ghost inspiring by the promise and through Christ grace and faith into
both the man and the woman to believe that out of her who was the instrument of
death to man; should Christ spring, who is the life and light of men, and so
she should become, Chavab, that is: the living one, or mother of all living)
there was a supernatural perfection brought into the world. And God brought
his work which he made to a better estate, and showed a further end of things
created. Surely it should be too much perverstnes in us, and too gross
resisting of our own reason, guided by the text it self. If we should d^ny
or refuse to believe, that this perfecting of Gods work is here meant in this
place, and is the true ground of blessing the seventh day to be the Lords holy
Sabbath.

And thus J hope I have fully discovered the true sense and meaning of the
first words, and showed how we are to understand this which is here said, to
weet: And on the seventh day God ended or perfected his w^rke,

J proceed to the next words, And on the seventh day God rested from all his
work which he had m^de, to which I ^dde the repetition of the same w^rds with
some addition in the later end of the third ver. namely that he rested from all
the work which he created, even from making any more, so the words in the
Hebrew do run. Now for the word rested, it is in the original (...) Shabath
of which the name of the Sabbath is derived, and it does not signify a resting
of God for to refresh himself: as being weary, nor resting from all working
absolutely and simply, but ceasing from making any more kinds of creatures: for
God does always as a provident Lord and Father work in the continual
generation of particular creatures; and in multiplying, preserving, ordering,
and disposing of them, as our Savior shows John 5.17. Here therefore we are
to understand, that on the first sixth days the Lord showed his good will and
pleasure in making every thing very good and perfect, with natural perfection.
So in the seventh day he rested wholly fro making any new kind of creature by
way of former creation: And man being fallen and having brought confusion into
the world, and corruption and vanity upon the creatures, Christ is promised and
actually undertakes and begins to enterceede for man, and to be his redeemer
and Savior, and by this means God may be said to rest diverse ways.

First whereas the rigor of justice required that man should dye and perish in
the same day wherein he sinned, and the creatures made for his use should
together with him be distroyd, and so should God have bin busied in execution
of justice and destroying his former work, and in making a new world of
creatures: the eternal word the Son of God undertook man's Redemtion, brings
rest to God by that means from destroying the former and making a new or
second work of creation, which is truly called resting from all the work
which he had made.

Secondly the natural estate and b^st being and perfection which man and other
creatures had by creation, showing it self mutable by man's fall so appearing,
If God should have proceeded and gone on in the same manner of working as he
had done in the sixth days of the creation, there should have been no rest nor
end of his work of making and remaking. But Christ undertook the work of
redemption and as an alsufficient Savior to perfect for ever them that are
sanctified by the communion of his spirit and spiritual and supernatural
grace, and to renew them after his heavenly Image of true and vncha^gable
holiness, does this way bring rest to God f^o^ the work or business of creation,
and sets on foot a new and more admirable work in which God rests, and on
which he takes much delight, and by which his creatures are reconciled, and
made pleasing and acceptable to him.

Thirdly Christ who was promised to become the seed of the woman for man's
redemption, b^ing the eternal wisdom and mighty word of God, and able to
bear up the palace of the earth, when it and all the whole tents thereof were
disolued, and the first foundations thereof were out of course, as the Psalmist
speaks Psalm. 5.3. and 82 5.8. God does justly settle his rest on him and
commits to him the ruling, governing, and judging of the world, as he is
medidiatour and the Son of man. So our Savior himself affirms John 5.22.27.

Now that on the seventh day God did not barely rest from his work of creating
and making creatures; but also that in and by Christ promised on that day, he
found rest and rested the sever^ll ways before named, the holy Scriptures and
also common reason do plainly show.

First a bare resting from creation and not working is not a matter of such
moment and benefit, that it should be the ground of blessing and sanctifying of
one day in seven every week to the solemn memory of it. Holy days and feasts
mentioned in the Scriptures have always been appointed by God, and set apart
for the commemoration of some great extraordinary works, and delivering
Jsraell out of Egypt, giving of the Law and such like.

Secondly, that Gods resting on the seventh day was more then this word (...)
Shabath which is here v^ed, and does properly signify in any other places of
Scripture where it is used to set forth other ceasing and resting from work.
The Holy Scriptures themselves do fully show. Also that God found rest in
Christ: even of refreshing, and se^led his delight in him the Redeemer, and in
his work of redemption, and committed the world to be Ruled, Judged, Ordered
and disposed by him as mediator, upon the seventh day and from that forward
until the eternal rest of heaven comes in, and the kingdom be delivered up
to God his Father, that God may be all in all. As for example Exodus 20.11.
where God in giving of the law, and mentioning the ground of his sanctifying of
the seventh day, to weet: his resting, does use the Hebrew word (...) Janach,
which signifies not a bare resting from work, but such a rest as is full of
sweetness and delight, and Exodus 31^17. where it is said that on the seventh
day God rested and was refreshed, that is: (...)
he did not only cease from creating and rest from works of creation, but he
found also great delight, that is in Christ undertaking to be the Savior and
redeemer of the world, he found great pleasure and delight in his kind: such
as men in their kind do find in things which delight and refresh their soul,
so much the words imply. And the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles
speaking to the same purpose: justify this sense and meaning, where they tell
us, that Christ the Mediator is Gods righteous Servant in whom his soul
delighteh. Isa 42.2. Math. 12.18. And that in him God setles his rest and is
well pleased Math. 2.17. And makes his elect acceptable in his beloved Ehe. 1.6.

Thirdly the keeping and observing of every seventh day for aholy Sabbath,
which God requires of us, consists not in bare resting from ordinary works and
laboring in worldly affairs which concern this life: but also in sanctifyng
of the day by holy and religious exercises, which concern the heavenly life,
and in making it our delight to honor the Lord; as appeates both in the words
of the law Exodus 20.8. Deuteronomy. 5.22. And also in the Prophets Isa. 56.4. And
58.13. Now such as the observation is, such must the ground thereof be on which
it is founded. And therefore undoubtedly Gods resting on the seventh day
includes his resting and delighting in Christ who was the promised redemption.

Thus much for the opening and expounding of the second clause, and the
discovery of the rest of God by which he rested on the seve^^h day, which is
the second ground of Gods blessing and sanctifying that day, and making it a
holy Sabbath of r^st.

The third ground remains, and that is: Gods blessing of the seventh day, laid
down in the next words. And God blessed the seventh day, ve^s. 3.

This blessing of the seventh day consists in two things

The first is: Gods blessing of it, by giving and revealing to man on that day
the greatest blessing which was made known to the Sons of men during the
time of the Old Testament, while the Sabbath of that seventh day was to be in
use and the law thereof enforce that was, the giving of Christ by promise to be
the Redeemer of the world; this belongs to the ground of the Sabbath.

The second is, Gods blessing of the seventh day by setting it apart to be kept
and observed of men as a day most blessed in memory of of that blessing, that
is of the promise of Chrst and his undertaking and beginning to mediate for man
kind, this belongs to the in sanctifying of the Sabbath which is the third
maine thing observed this text.

First I will speak of blessing as it is a ground of institution, and after in
the next place, J will handle it, as it is a part of the institution of the
Sabbath, and concurres with sanctifying of it.

Blessing (as it belongs to the ground of the Sabbath and signifie^ Gods giving
and revealing on the seventh day a blessing above the blessings of all the
other six days by which that day became more honorable) must needs be Gods
giving, either of some natural blessing tending to outward prosperity, and to
natural perfection and temporal felicity in this world; or of some gift and
blessing supernatural tending to heavenly happiness and eternal blessedness.

1. Gods blessing with natural and temporal blessings is declared in the
Scriptures to be two manner of ways.

F^rst by giving all sorts of temporal blessings and natural gifts in
general, thus God is said to bless Ishmaell Genesis 17.^0. and to bl^sse the
Jsralites in all their affaire^ and in all the wo^kes of their hands Devt.
14.29.

Secondly, by giving some special worldly blessing; success; and prosperity
either in respect of their Corn, Wine, M^ate, and Drink, Exodus 23.25. or in
respect of their cattle, or the fruit of their body or worldly goods,
p^ssessions and the like Devt. 28.3.

2 Gods blessing with spiritual and supernatural blessings and gifts is his
making of men to grow and prosper in grace and in all heavenly blessings as
Genesis 12.3, and 28, 4. where it is said that in the blessed seed of Abraham and
Jacob that is in Christ. All the nations and families of the earth shall be
blessed, and thus God is said to bless us with all spiritual blessings in
Heavenly things in Christ Ephess. 1.3. and of this blessing David ^peakes Psalm.
67.1. where he says, God b^ merciful unto us and bless us.

3. God is said to bless in a full and perfect sense with all blessings of
prosperity and happiness both temporal and spiritual, that is: by giving all
saving graces needful to salvation and good increase and growth in them, and
all outward prosperity and all things thereunto requisite, together with his
favor and a sanctified use of them, thus God promised to bless Abraham Genesis
12.2. and Jsaac Genesis 26.3. and Jacob Genesis 28.3. and Joseph Genesis 49.25. with
blessings of heaven a boue and deep beneath. And his people and inheritance
Psalm. 28.9. Now the thing here to be inquired after and sought out, is what
blessing is meant in this place: where God is said to Bless the Seventh day.
For it it most certain, that this blessing wherewith God blessed the seventh
day, did not consist only in Gods giving of any natural and temporal
blessings to that day, or to man and other creatures on that day, or in
ann^xing and tying any such unto it. For God had before ceased and now rested
from all works of creation, that is both from creating any kind of creature,
and also from adding more natural goodness or perfection to any thing created.
We never read that God made the seventh day blessed a boue the other six,
either in clearer light of the sun, or in more fair and seasonable weather, at
any time, or in any age from the beginning, or that he blessed it with any such
blessing which belongs to nature, or to the natural use of the creature.

Secondly for spiritual and supernatural blessings which tends to eternal
life and blessedness in heaven, we never read of any proceeding from God, but
only through the eternal son incarnate and made man: even Christ the
mediator. The Apostle affirms that God blesses us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ Ephe. 1.3. And that there is no other
name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved Act. 4.12, If any
man has ascended higher then Saint Paull was rapt, far a boue the third
heaven, and has t^^re heard of spiritual blessings which God intended to
bestow, or did bestow upon Adam in the creation before Christ was promised, or
did openly undertake to be man's mediator; he goes far beyond my line and
measure of faith, I dare not be wise a boue that which is written. It is enough
for me to know and believe that C^r^st is the only true way to heavenly and
supernatural happin^sse, and that he is the truth and the life Ioh. 14.6. And
that none can come to the Father but by him, and that in his name the Father
gives the spirit ver. 26. And through him sheds the Holy Ghost abundantly on
all that are sanctified and saved Tit. 3.6. And that as Christ only makes way
into the holy of holiest Heb. 10.20. so in him is all fulness, and from him
all grace proceeds by which God makes us accepted Ephe. 1.6. I know that God
created all things, and man in his own Image; perf^ct in his kind, but Yet
mutable. J confess and believe that man by his perfect obedience performed to
God in his own person, according to the first covenant of works, might have
continued in that natural life and earthly happiness wherein he was created:
But that he had any supernatural or spiritual power given before the promise
of Christ, whereby he was fitted for heavenly happinsse, ot that any such life
and happiness was promised in the first covenant, or any grace tending
thereunto, I cannot be persuaded.

First because the Scriptures are utterly silent in these pointes^

Secondly because it is against all reason to think, or conceive of God, who
is the fountain of all wisdom and does nothing in vain. That if there had
been a more near way then Christ, more ready for him to reveal and communicate
all his goodness and glory to mankind, even the way of man's own personal
obedience to the first covenant of works; Surely God would never have suffered
man to fall, nor have given his son to descend from heaven and to humble
himself to such base ignominous painful and cursed sufferings as he did, and
all to bring man so far a bout to the fruition of himself in heavenly glory.

Thirdly, whatsoever has or shall certainly come to pass concerning man's
happiness or misery, that God decreed, foresaw and purposed, and that only he
intended, and that from the beginning, even from all eternity; though God laid
upon man no impossibility of standing in innocence, nor any necessity of
falling, but man was able to do Gods will according to the first Covenant, and
if he had done it, he might and should have lived and enjoyed an earthly
felicity: Yet certainly God foreknew what man would do when he was tempted,
and did willingly permit him to break the first Covenant, intending to make a
more sure Covenant in Christ, and to establish it with better promises Heb.
8.6. and that none of all man kind should be saved but only they who are in
Christ and under this Covenant. Now these things being thus: If the blessing
wherewith God blessed the seventh day, be any spiritual blessing, it must
needs be in, and under Christ promised: Yea it must needs be either the
promise made to man one that day that Christ should be his Redeemer, and Christ
his undertaking openly to be man's surety and Mediator, or else some special
blessing which comes by Christ's mediation, as the gift of the spirit, and
spiritual grace given to man to believe in Christ, to rest on him, and in him,
to seek eternal rest, or Gods acceptance of Christ for man's surety, and God
resting on Christ's satisfaction and righteousness. In very deed, let others
think what they please, for my part J can see no reason either in this text or
any other text of Scripture to persuade me that this blessing was any, but the
supernatural and Heavenly blessing, even Gods gracious favor, kindness and
love then first showed to man in Christ, by promising him to become the seed of
the woman, accepting him for man's surety, and resting in his mediation, and
alsufficient satisfaction, which blessing brings with it, and includes in it
many, yea all natural blessings which are true blessings indeed, and end in
eternal happiness. For by Christ who then was first promised and revealed,
man has naturally life continued to him, and right and rule over the creatures
restored and given in an higher degree, and in a more excellent kind: He had
power given to him in the state of innocence to rule over Cattle and all
living creatures, and to order and command them for his delight and pleasure.
But in Christ he has power given to kill and sacrifise, and to eat them and
use them for his profitt. Jn the creation God gave to man as his steward rule
over all cteatures and right in them; but in Christ he gave man the right of a
son and heir, and made all creatures man's inheritance, which is a firm and
unchangeable right, and now all the blessings temporal which the elect and
faithful have and possess by faith in Christ and by a true right in him, are
blessed and sanctified to them, and are helps and furtherances to their
heavenly glory. And this I dare be bold to conclude: That the blessing
wherewith God blessed the seventh day, was a blessing a boue all blessings
natural which God gave to man in the sixth day and to other creatures on other
days of the creation. It was the blessing of his kindness and love to man,
revealed in Christ promised, which includes in it the restitution of man to all
natural blessings, all which all mankind have and enjoy by Christ and through
his mediation. So that here is a blessing worthy of an everlasting memorial
among all Adams posterity, which justly bound them all to observe that day of
the week to the honor and prais^ of God, until the coming in of the
fulness of that blessing on the day of Christ's resurrection, which is the
first day of the week and the eight from the beginning of the creation, which
all Christians by verue of the institution of the Sabbath here in my tex^, are
bound to k^ep holy and to solemnize with thankfulness for all blessings in
Christ on the seventh day, and on the first day fully exhibited a perfect
Redeemer in his resurrection. And thus I have discovered ou^ of this text the
whole ground upon which the Lords holy weekly Sabbath is founded, which is
briefly comprehended in these 3 particulars. 1. Gods perfecting of the wo^k
cr^ated. 2. Gods ^est on the seventh day. 3. Gods blessing of it. Out of which
particulars as I have laid them open: this Doctrine does arise.

CHAP. 3.
Doctrine.
THat the first institution of the Sabbath on the seventh day of the first week
of the world was grounded upon Christ, and occationed by the promise of him to
be man's mediator, and the worlds redeemer. And the true and proper grounds of
the sanctification of the weekly Sabbath, upon which it stands perpetually to
the worlds end, and to the eternal rest in heaven, are Gods perfecting of the
created world by bringing in redemption by Christ, Gods rest delight and
pleasure in Christ's mediation, and Gods blessing the seventh day with a
blessing far a boue the blessings all of other days even the giving of
Christ a perfect Savior for mankind. This point is most plain and manifest
by that whih I have before delivered. But yet for the better settling of our
Judgments and confirming of our hearts in the knowledge and belief of this
truth It will not be amiss to add further proofs and reasons grounded on the
sacred Scriptures.

First that which is the ground of Gods sanctifying the seventh day above all
the other six days of the week must needs be something which came to pass
one that day, 1 Reason
which far excelled the works created on the six days. For the holy
Scriptures and the common practice of all nations do concure in this, that all
holy days whether weekly monthly or yearly are observed and were first
instituted in memory of some notable and extraordinary thing which on those
days of the week, month, and year happened and came to pass, witness ^he
passover, Pentecost, the feast Purim; and dedication, the feast of Christ
nativity, resurrection, ascension, our fif^h of November and many others. But
there can be nothing imagined greater then the works of creation which were all
finished on the six days, but only the promise and relation of Christ the
redeemer and the work of Redemption by him the eternal Son of God, on that
day openly undertaken and begune as I have before proved.

First for Gods ceasing from his works of creation, and his bare rest from
them, it being a doing of nothing and not making of good things, cannot in any
case be esteemed better then the works of the six days wherein God created all
things good and perfect with natural perfection. For doing of good is better
in the judgment of all reasonable men, then doing of nothing.

Secondly, for Gods perfecting of the creation by bringing man and woman the
last and chiefest of his creatures into being that wa^ on the sixth day, and his
making of every creature complete and perfect in his kind, that was done on
the several days in which they were severally created, they cannot be any
ground of sanctifying the seventh day but rather of the six days of the week.
Wherefore it remains that Christ promised ^ perfect redemption on the seventh
day of the world begin^ing actually to mediate for man and to communicate his
spirit and supernatural grace and faith to our first parents is the ground of
the institution of the we^kly Sabbath on that day^

Secondly; a supernatural effect cannot proceed from a natural cause, 2 Reason
a spiritual building cannot be surely settled on a natural ground and
foundation. If the effect be supernatural the cause must be such, and if the
bu^lding be spiritual, the found^tion also must be spiritual on which it is
settled. Now the sanctification of the Sabbath as it is Gods work in the first
institution, it is a seperating of a day from natural, to heavenly,
spiritual, and supernatural use, and to works which tend to such an end as
cannot be obtained by creation, but only by the mediation of Christ, and
sanctification of the Sabbath as it is a work and duty which God requires of a
man, is wholly exercised about things which concern Christ, and which have
relation to him, and which none can rightly perform without the communion of
the spirit of Christ, and the saving gifts and graces of God in Christ. The
Hebrew word Kad^sh signifies only such works in all the Scriptures
wheresoever it is used, and never any thing is said to be holy or sanct^fying
but in, for, and by Christ, wherefore that ground of the Sabbath must needs be
something in Christ, or indeed Christ himself on the seventh day first
promised and revealed a perfect and alsufficient Redemer and mediator to
gather all things to God.

3 Reason
Thirdly that which has no proper or principal end or use, but such as
presupposes Christ and his mediation, and is subordinate to him promised and
to the revelation of redemption by him, must needs be grounded on Christ, and
receive the first institution and Original from the promise of him, or him
promised. This is a certain truth which with no culour of reason can be
denied, For God does nothing in vain, he makes althings for there proper end
and use, and brings nothing into being before he has a proper end and use
ready before hand, for which it may serve. Now the proper principal end and
use of the Sabbath for which the Lord is said in the Scriptures to institute
and give it to his people, is such as presupposes Christ and his actual
mediation, and is subordinate to the promise of redemtion by him.

First God himself testifies both in the Law Exodus 31, 13. also in the
Prophets Ezech. 20.12. that he gave his Sabbath to his people for this end and
use, Tha^ it might be a perpetual sign between him and them, to confirm
them in this knowledge and belief, That he is their God who does sanctify
them.

Secondly, another maine use for which God instituted the Sabbath is, that it
might be a sign and pledge to his people of the eternal rest or Sabbathisme
which remains for them in heaven, and until they come to that rest, they are
bound to keep a weekly holy Sabbath to put them in hope of that eternal rest,
so much may be gathered from the Apostles words, Heb. 4.3.9.

Thirdly, the Sabbath is for that end and use that by keeping it holy, and by
sanctifying our selves to the Lord, and delighting our selves in him, and in his
holy worship, we might grow up in holiness without which none can come to
see, and enjoy God, and so might draw still more near to God till we be fully
fitted to see and enjoy him in glory, and to come to his eternal rest in
Heaven. Now all these principal ends and uses of the Sabbath do presuppose
the promise of Christ and his mediation.

For first in him alone as he is our mediator, God becomes our God, who does
sanct^fie us, and without Gods shedding of the holy Ghost on us through Christ,
we can never be truly sanctified as appears Romans 8.9: Tit. 3.6. and 1 Cor.
1.30, And in Christ we are called to be Saints and sanctified, 1 Cor. 1.2.

Secondly, there is no thought or hope of eternal rest in heaven but in and by
Christ, he brings us into that, and by going before us makes way for us Heb.
6.20. and 9, 24. It is that which never entered into the heart of man, his
reason conceives it not till God does reveal it by his spirit given though
Christ 1 Cor. 2.9.10.

Thirdly, no man can have access unto God but in Christ, there is no approach
to the throne of grace but in him Heb. 4.16. It is Christ alone who for his
peoples sake sanctified himself, that they also might be sanct^fied Ioh.
17.19. And there is no growing up in grace and holiness but in him and by
union and communion in one body with him as our head Ephesians. 13^16. upon these
infalible premises it follows necessarily, that the proper end and use of the
Sabbath presupposing Christ, the first institution thereof must needs be
grounded on Christ also.

Fourthly, 4 Reason
if Christ as he is the Son of man united in one person unto God, and so our
mediator, be the Lord of the Sabbath, so that the alteration and change of it
from one of the seven days to another, is only in his power and depends wholly
on some change in him; then the institution of it is grounded one the promise
of him and upon his mediation. Now the Antecedent is manifest by our Saviors
own words, Mat. 12.9. where he calls himself Lord of the Sabbath day. And by
his resurrection and becoming the head stone of the corner, the Sabbath is
changed from the day of him promised unto the day of the full exhibition of
him aperfect actual redeemer in his resurrection, as David foretold Psalm. 118.
And the practice of the Apostles in all Churches of Christian Gentiles does
abundantly declare, Act. 20.7. and 1 Cor. 16.2. wherefore undoubtedly Christ
promised, was the first ground of the institution of the Sabbath, and as our
Savior in that place of the Gospel Mat. 12.9. affirms. it was made for man,
that is not only for men's use but also for him, the son of man: and upon the
promise and undertaking of him to become man and the seed of the women, for
man's redemption and for destroying the works of the Divill.

USE.
This Doctrine thus fully proved and confirmed, is a Doctrine of special use
to work in the hearts of all true Christians, who have all their hope and
confidence in Christ, an high and holy reverence and esteem of the Lords holy
weekly Sabbath, and to provoke and stir them up to a careful conscionable
and diligent observation thereof, in all their generations, for the promoting
and propagating of pietye, and for the increase of devotion and advauncement of
Religion, in all succeding ages. If the observation of the weekly Sabbath were
but a dictate of nature, written in man's heart in the creation; then were the
chief end and aim of it no more but an earthly felicitye, and the fruition of
a natural life in an earthly paradise. It should be no better then one of the
duties which belong to the old couvenant of life, and justification by man's
own works; which is abolished and made void by man's fall. And It is wholly
frustrated of the proper end and use of it, which was justification, and life
by works of a man's own doing. And so being not a part of the wisdom, which
is from above, it should be of less esteem and of common and ordinary account
with holy Christian Saints. Or if the Sabbath were a legal rite and
ceremonial ordinance only, such as were sacrifices, burnt offerings,
circumcision and legal purifications, which were shadows of things to come,
then should it be abolished by the full exhibition of Christ, and the
observation thereof among Chistians of the beleeveing Gentiles, were no better
then setting up of abominations which make desolate by cutting men of from
Christ.

But here we are taught better things concerning the Lords holy weekly
Sabbath, to weet: that it is an holy Heavenly, Evangelical ordinance, wholly
grounded upon Christ and depending only upon him* first instituted upon the
promised Christ, and limited to the seventh day of the week, in which he was
promised to be man's redeemer, did undertake, and in some measure begin actually
to mediate and to intercede for man with God, and commanded to be kept only
on that seventh day, during the time of the old Testament while Christ was
only promised, and the fathers sought salvation in him to come:

And now ever since the full exhibition of Christ a perfect redeemer in his
resurrection, necessarily imposed on all Christians, and limited by virtue of
the first institution and foundation of it upon Christ, to that day even the
first day of the week, which is the greatest day of Christ appearing in the
nature of man on earth, that is the day of his resurrection to glory and
immortality, and the day of his complete victory and triumph, in his own
person over sin, death, the Devil and all the powers of darkness.

So that though the particular days of the weekly Sabbath, that is the
seventh of the week in the old Testament, and the first in the new; and under
the Gospel may truly be called temporarye and caeremoniall, because they have
their set times and seasons; the one the time and season only under Christ
promised; the other the time and season under Christ fully exhibited, that is
the whole time of grace under the Gospel until we come both in souls and
bodies to the etternall Sabbath and rest in heaven, when (Christ Mediator
having destroyed all enimyes and delivered up the Kingdom to God his father)
God shall be all in all:

Yet they are such ceremonies as are holy in their seasons, not by
signification and consecration to holy and supernatural use only, as legal
shadows were: but also materially and in respect of the very duties, which are
performed in observation of them; yea and effectively because the due
observations of them properly tends to begitt and increase true holiness in
Gods people.

Besides if we consider the observation of a weekly Sabbath simply in it self
without limitation to a particular day, so it is a perpetual ordinance of God
which binds all mankind to the end of the world.

And there is none of all Adams posteritye, but by Gods first institution he is
bound to keep the holy weekly Sabbath, upon that very day of the week, which
by the word of God and the ground of the institution, appears to be most
seasonable in the age and the state of the Church under which thy live and have
their being on earth.

Now these things being, so, how it is possible that any true sincere
Christian (who as by one spirit and by a true lively faith, so also in his
whole heart and in all holy affections is united unto Christ; and has all his
h^pe and confidence in him as in his only Redeemer Lord and Saviou^) should not
have the we^kely Sabbath in most high esteem, which was first grounded upon
Christ, promised and came in upon the seventh day of the world, together with
the word of promise and the glad tidings of the worlds redemp^ion by Christ:
and with the perpe^u^ll commandments of repenting and believing in Christ,
which are the great commandments of the Gospel, which Holy and blessed
Sabbath has still continued and gone a long with Christ pr^mised on the
seventh day, during the time of the old Testament, and si^ce the full
exhibition of Christ in his resurrection; has advanced forward together with
Christ's unto the first day of the week, in which day he perfected man's
redemption, triumphed over death, rose up and was advanced to glory and
immortallity, Surely they who profess love to Christ, and profane the weekly
Sabbath, they are no better then painted Hipocrties, yea rather they are to be
numbered among those bold, audacious and scandalous sinners, who presume to pull
a sunder those whom God has inseperably joined together, that is, the sabbath
and Christ the Lord of the sabbath, who while they profess Christ in word, do
indeed deny the power of true Chr^stian godliness, and do what in them lies,
to turn the public worship of God into sacrilegious profanation, and so to
provoke the eyes of his glory. Thus much for the second maine thing her^
offered in this text, that is the ground of the holy weekly Sabbath.

CHAP. 4.
THE third maine thing which here offers it self and which I have propounded
to be handled more largly, as comprehending in it diverse special points of
great weight and moment, as the Sanctifying of the seve^th day, ^ as Gods
blessing of it, so far as blessing sign^fi^s Go^s setting of it apart to be
kept and observed for a bl^ssed memorial of the promise of Christ, and as it
is apart of the first institution of the sabbath.

F^r Gods blessing of a day or any other thing does signify. 1. His giving of
some notable benefit on that day, or to the thing blessed. 2. his setting of it
apart to a blessed end and use, in the former sense it belongs to the ground of
the Sabbath and so I have spoken of it before. Jn the later sense it belongs to
Gods act of Institution; and as in effect the same with sanctifying of the
seventh day, only this I conceive to be the difference that Gods sanctifying
of a thing is, his seperating of it by his word and commandment, to a
supernatural and extraordinary use either profittable, or unprofittable to it
self, as h^s seperating of things to be his instruments of just vengance for
the destruction of his enemies, and seperating men to some holy offce for a
time, as Saul to Prophecy, E^^e^ sons to be Priests, and Judas to be an
Apostle, by which office they received no true blessing; but it turned to their
greater curse at last. But Gods blessing of a day, or any other thing, is his
setting of it apart for a bl^ssed use, and his pronouncing and demanding it by
his holy p^werfull word, to be a blessed day or blessed thing, and to serve
for holy and blessed use, and so blessing is that special sanctifying which
is seperating of things to a blessed use, and come here to be handled under
Gods sanct^fyng of the ^eventh day: For Gods sanctifying i^ this place, is a
blessed sanctifying of the day to a blessed use, and the word blessed is put
before to make us clearlie see and understand so much. I will therefore insist
only upon sanctifying which comprehends blessing in it; and will first open and
exp^und the word and so proceed to points of Doctrine.

The Hebrew word, Kadash, is never used in any other sense in all the
Scriptures, but only to signify seperating of things from their ordinary
and natural use, to some use more then natural or above nature and the
fitting and preparing of them for that use, as for example compining of nations
in an holy league against Babell, or other wicked state to execute on them
Gods just revenge Jer. 6.4. and 12.3. and 22.7. and 51.27.18. and seperating
some cities for refuge Josh. 20.7. whenever this word is attributed to God in
all the Scripture, it signifies either Gods seperating things or times for holy
use, by his word and commandment, or by some h^linesse showed or some
extraordinary holy word done in them as Exodus 9.44. 2. Cron. 7.20. or else
Gods infusing of his holy spirit, and of spiritual and supernatural gr^ces
and gifts of hol^nesse into men by which they are separated from carnal men,
and prepared for Heavenly glory as Exodus 31.13. Levit. 20.8. Ezec. 2.12. Ier.
1.5. where God is said to sanctify his people, and to make t^em holy, that so
they may be fit to come nerer to him. And frequently in the new Testament, the
Greek word (...) is used in this sense as Ephesians. 5.26. Heb. 2.11.

Here the word signifies not sanctifieing by infusing holiness and making
holy, but Gods consecrateing, that is seperating the seventh day to an holy,
heavenly spiritual, and supernatural use, by h^^ word and commandment, or
by some holy work done first in it, or some holiness first revealed upon it.

For this was the day in which God by his gracious promise of Christ, and by
the new covenant of life made with mankind in him, did communicate his spirit
to our first parents, and wrought in them faith and all holy graces needful to
salvation, (...)
and so of, Ishah, a woman who brought woe to man made our first mother. Chavah.
that is the mother of life in Christ to all liueing.

This day, God here upon, commanded to be sanctified of men, and kept holy by
holy exercises which tend to the honor and praise, and to the solemn
commemoration and memorial of Christ promised, and of his own rest in Christ's
mediation, and this day he appointed to man to be a sign and pledge of the
aeternall Sabbath in heaven, after the end of the world which in six days he
created.

Here therefore we see wherein especially Gods sanctifieing of the seventh day
to be an holy Sabbath of rest, did consist. Which that it may yet appear more
fully and distinctly in all the particulars, J will reduce, the sum of all
into a few positions, some negative, and some affirmative; which being by
evident testimonies of Scripture, and by good arguments grounded on the word of
God, proved and confirmed; The truth will be so clear and manifest, that the
simple shall be able to understand the true sanctification, both of the seventh
day which was the old Sabbath of the old Testament, and also of the Lords day
the Christian Sabbath of the new Testament under the gospel.

CHAP. 5.
1. Position negative.
FIrst we must not in any case imagine. That Gods sanctifieing of the seventh
day was the creating or in^useing of any natural holiness in to it, by which
it was distinguished from other days of the week, and made more excellent
then any of them. My reasons are:

First because creating of natural holiness in any thing, is a work of
creation: But God rested from all works of creation on the seventh day, and
from making any thing which belonged to the natural being of any creature, or
to the natural frame and perfection of it, witness the words of my text, and
the words of the Lord him self. Exodus 20.13.

Secondly the Scriptures which are the only rule of faith, and so all
Doctrines of this kind do never mention any natural holiness in any creature
which God made in the whole created frame of heaven and earth; all though God
did create man perfect in his kind, even in his own image.

Yet I do not read, that this image comprehended any more in it, but natural
gifts and endowments only, as light of understanding, liberty of will, most
free to good only, and well ordered affections all upright; also a comely
frame and excellent temperatur of the body, fit to be the seat, subject and
instrument of a liveing reasonable natural soul and spirit, and to rule over
all other creatures. Solomon the wise preacher describeing the image and
excellent frame wherein God created man, makes no mention of any holiness, but
only of natural uprightness. God (says he) made man upright. We never read
of holiness natural to any but only to God.

Thirdly true holiness is a gift of supernatural grace given only in Christ,
and proceeding from the holy Ghost shed on men through Christ, and dwelling in
them as the immortal seed of God.

It belongs not to the natural image of God wherein the first earthly Adam was
created; but to the spiritual and heavenly image of the second Adam, Christ
who is a quickening spirit and the Lord from heaven heavenly, whose image no
man can bear but in the state of regeneration, when he is borne of the spirit,
and begotten of God to a lively hope, 1^ Pit. 1.3*
to the inheritance incorruptible and undefiled which fades not a way; as I
have largly here to fore proved by diverse Scriptures which appose the image of
true holiness, and undefyled righteousness, which men have in Christ; to the
image of the first Adam, but that upright image wherein he was first made, and
that corrupt image where in to he was transformed by his fall, as appears most
plainly. 1. Cor: 15.45.49. and Ephesians. 4.23.24.

The thing which deceives many learned men, and carries them to think that
holiness was apart of man's natural image in which he was created is this.
Objection.


First they take it for granted, that all uprightness and purity of man in
heart, soul, life, and conversation, by which he is conformable to the law of
nature and to Gods will revealed, and his commandments given to him, is true
holiness and is so called in Scripture.

Secondly, they read that Adam was made by God upright and had that purity and
uprightness which made him conformable to Gods law and revealed will, and this
was Gods image in him, and hereupon they conclude, that Adam was created in
true holiness.

Answer.
To this I have heretofore upon another textfully answered, by laying down a
plain distinction gathered from Gods word, and daily experience, and by
applying it to this purpose. For I have distingu^shed purity and uprightness
by which man is conformable to the revealed will and law of God into two sorts.
First there is a created natural purity and uprightness founded upon natural
principles, which God gave to man in his first creation, by he which was
conformable to Gods revealed will, to the law of his nature in the state of
innocence, but this uprightness having no other root, or foundation, but man's
mutable nature and frame, was also mutable and was quickly defaced and
corrupted by the subtilty of the tempter and man's fall. Secondly, there is a
renewed or new created uprightness and purity of man in his heart and soul,
life and conversation, which is found only in Gods elect and faithful
regenerat Children; by which they are here in some measure made conformable to
the law and will of God; this although it is much ecclipsed and obscured by the
remainders of natural corruption which still dwell in Gods Saints in this
frail life and mortal body, and does not shine forth in the true brightness
of it, yet it proceeds from an eternal fountain, the pure waters whereof
spring up unto life eternal, and cannot be defiled but remain pure, though
they pass through the dead sea of Sodom, the filthy lake of man's natural
corruptions, which dwell still in this body of death, this pure fountain is
the spirit of regeneration which God sheds through Christ on the elect, as our
Savior himself teaches, Joh. 14.4. and 8.38.39. And because this spirit even
the holy Ghost which daily renues them, being shed on them in there new birth
Tit. 3.5.6. does dwell in them as the mortal seed of God, and abides with them
for ever Joh. 14, 16. and is stronger then the spirit of malice the Devil,
which overthrew our first parents and ever since rules in all worldly men, 1
Job. 4.4. Therefore it is true purity and uprightness which cannot fail nor
deceive us as Adams did; and this is that which the Apostle calls the new man
and the righteousness and holiness of truth, Ephess. 4.24. in the same sense
that spiritual, supernatural, and heavenly graces are called the true riches,
that is the riches durable and incorruptible, which will neverly unto us: nor
by failing deceive us, Luke 16. As for the created purity and uprightness by
which the first Adam was conformable to the law, it is never in all the
Scriptures called by the name of holiness, neither is it, or any moral virtue
in any unregenerate man, any true holiness, because it proceeds not from the
holy Ghost who dwells in the regenerate and works all true holiness in in them.
I wish that all the learned would seriously weigh this truth and embrace it
with their hearts, and bear it continualy in their minds and memories: For
this will at one blow raze to the very foundation all pelagian, Popish, Armian
Hoeresies, concerning the power of man's fre^ will, the efficacy and merit of
man's natural works don before regeneration, and the falling away of men
regenerate and justified, from the grace of God and from justifying faith and
true holiness, also concerning universal grace given to all men, by which
they have it in their own power to be saved.

And if it would please the Lord to open the hearts of our people r^ghtlie
conceive this difference, between the image of the first and second Adam, and
between the created natural uprightness of Adam, and the spiritual
uprightness and infused holiness wherein the second Adam was conceived and
framed by the holy Ghost. This would ravish their hearts and fill them with
admiration of the singular love of God to his elect in Christ, and of the
singular excellency of the grace and holiness, and of those high prerogatives
which the regenerate and faithful receive and enjoy through him, which indeed
so far exceed all that belonged to man in the state of innocence, as Christ
the second Adam in his humanity exceeded the first Adam, and immutable grace
exceeds mutable nature, and as eternal fruition of God in heavenly grace,
excels the fruition of fading pleasures in an earthly paradise.

CHAP. 6
Secondly, Gods sanctifying of the seventh day was not the creation or infusing
of any spiritual or supernatural holiness into it; by which it did excel
all other days of the week. For first all spiritual and supernatural
holiness: is created and infused by the holy Ghost, only into reasonable
creatures Angels and men, and cannot be in any thing void of reason,
understanding, free will and affections. Although things without life, and
creatures void of reason, are called holy by way of relation, because they are
dedicated to an holy use: Yet nothing is called holy by holiness of
qualification, that is by holiness inherent and heavenly grace, quality and
perfection, but only man and the holy Angels who are partakers of the holy
Ghost; and have him dwelling and working in them. For this holiness is
unstained purity and unspotted uprightness, which possesses and informs
the understanding, will, desires, affections and inclinations of reasonable
creatures, and makes them conformable to Gods revealed will and the rule of his
law. S^e that to imagine holiness infused into any time, place or any other
thing, which has not reason and understanding and will, is a mere dream,
dotage and superstition. Times and places, as holy days, and holy temples,
are holy in Scripture not for any holiness inherent in them, which they
communicate to Gods people, but because these days and places are dedicated to
holy use, and in them God is pleased by his spirit working with his word and
ordinances, to beg it, increase and stir up holy affections in men, and to
come and enable them to perform holy actions, according to Gods will.

Secondly, all true infused inherent holiness, created and wrought by the
holy Ghost, springs from an eternal fountain, and is founded upon a sure
rock which can never be removed but stands firm for ever. Where Gods spirit
once informs or takes possession, and works true holiness there he abides
for ever, Ioh. 14.16.

The Devil and all the powers of darkness cannot prevail, nor dispossess
him, for he is greater then they all, 1. Ioh. 4.4. So that if God had
sanctified the seventh day; by infusing holiness, and conforming it with the
holy Ghost, it could never have been profaned, polluted and defiled by men,
neither could there have been any change, of it from the holy Sabbath to a
common and ordinary day of the week, as now we see, by Christ's resurrection:
It should have continued Gods holy weekly Sabbath for ever, even as men once
truly regenerate and sanctified by the holy Ghost; are by that spirit sealed
unto the day of full redemption, Ephess. 4.30.

CHAP. 7.
THE affirmative positions wherein J will show how God sanctified the seventh
day are three. 1. Position affirmative
First God did on that day reveal himself to man a most pure and holy God,
more then in all the six days of the creation. For in creating all things of
nothing, he showed his power: And omnipotency in making al things good and
perfect, in there kind. And in setting the heavens and the earth and all
creatures in such an excellent and comely order, he showed his wisdom and
goodness. And in making man upright in his own image, and giving him dominion
over all living creatures to order them according to his will, and to the law
written in man's heart, he declared his righteousness. But on the seventh day by
promising Christ a perfect redeemer and Savior, he manifested and revealed his
most perfect purity and holiness diverse ways. First by his suffering of man
to live in his sight, and to approach to his presence when he was corrupted by
his fall, and become filthy and abominable, and in the strictness and rigor of
justice worthy to be destroyed with eternal death. God did plainly show that
he is a God infinitely holy and cannot receive the least spot and stain of
man's corruption approaching to his presence, but appears most pure and
glorious, and shines forth bejond all measure, by making an holy use of man's
uncleanness, and ordering and disposing it to the more full manifestation and
communication of his glory and goodness to his elect in Christ: For as the
purity of gold does more appear by abiding most pure and perfect in the midst
of consuming fire and a furnace of fire full of unclean ashes, and after the
touching of things most unclean. So Gods perfect purity and holiness
appears most infinite and unspotted, in that he suffers unclean man, made
filthy and abominable by sin to live in his sight and presence, and does
order and dispose his uncleanness to an holy end, and does meddle with it, and
touch it, and yet is no whit diminished or obscured thereby but made more bright
and resplendent in the eyes of the world. Secondly God by his promising of
Christ to become man, and in man's nature to make a full and perfect satisfaction
to justice for man's sin, did show his infinite purity and holy hatred of sin,
more then by any work of creation, In that rather then ma^s sin and filthiness
should not be punished to the full, and his justice fully satitisfied, he would
give his own Son, a person of infinite value to bear the cur^e and sufferedthe
whole punishment of sin in man's nature and so to make full satisfaction for it.

Thirdly, the revealing of Christ and promising of him to be a second Adam, who
is the Lord from heaven heavenly, and a quickening spirit, through whom he does
richly shed his spirit on Adam, and all his elect seed in their generation;
which holy spirit does dwell in their frail earthly sinful bodies, as in a
Tabernacle and temple all the time of this frail life, and is not stained nor
defiled with their corruptions: but does abide most pure and holy, and does
overcome, mortify and kill by a long and lingering death the old man of sin
in them, and works in them that spiritual purity, and holiness, which though
it be not like a grain of mustard seed; yet cannot be destroyed or defiled,
but increases more and more, and prevails against all powers of darkness,
this does above all show the infinite purity and holiness of God and of his
spirit. And therefore J conclude that God by promising and revealing Christ, on
the seventh day, did then first show himself infinitely pure, and did manifest
unspotted holiness, more then in all the six days of the creation: and this
is the first point of his sanctifying of the day, to be an holy Sabbath of
rest, until the full exhibition of Christ, a perfect actual redeemer, on the
day of his resurrection.

CHAP. 8.
SEcondly, God on the seventh day, did though Christ promised ^^ed the holy
Ghost on our first parents, 2. position affi^mative.
begitte^th of his immortal the^ seed, sanctify them and work, faith and all
saving graces in them; so that they bele^ved the promise and found rest in
Christ. And so this was the day wherein God did first make man actual
partaker of his spirit, and did make in him true holiness, and conform him to
the Image of Christ, This appears by three things.

First, by Adams words, chapt. 3.20. where not withstanding Gods passing of the
sentence of bodily death against him, and of his returning to dust in the
grave, in the words next before: yet ^e by faith lays hold on one eternal
life in Christ the promised seed, and being strengthened with might by the
spirit in the inner man, does call his wife Chavah, which signifies life,
because by Christ promised to be come her seed, she should be the mother of
all living, and not only all his natural seed, should by Christ have natural
life for a time, and being on earth continued unto them: but also after death
his wife and al their elect seed should have life eternal in him. This is a
strong argument of a lively faith, and of the quickening spirit given to Adam
upon the very day of the promise which was the seventh day.

Secondly, that our first parents had the holy spirit given them on that day,
and by faith were instituted and made partakers of the righteousness of Christ,
the coats of skins do show which God fitted to them, and put upon them. For
undoubtedly these skins of clean beasts, which God taught and commanded them
to kill and offer in sacrifice as tipes, figures, and pledges of their
redemption, by the death and sacrifice, of of Christ: and these coats made of
the skins of beasts sacrificed, and put upon our first parents by God himself,
did plainly forshew the covering and clothing of all the faithful with the
Robes of Christ satisfaction and righ^iousnesse, and were a token and pledge to
them, that they were justified by faith in Christ to come, and clothed with
the garments of salvation. For all Gods works are perfect: he gives to no men
by his own hand immediately the outward pledge and seal without the inward grace.

Thirdly, Adams teaching of his sons, Caine and Abell to sacrifice, and to
bring offerings and first fruits to God, which were tipes of Christ, and of
Gods rest in his mediation and fulls satisfaction, and that, at the end of
days, that is the seventh which is the last of the week, and Gods holy weekly
Sabbath, these J say do testify Adams faith in the promise, Genesis 4.
his holy obedience to Gods commandment of keeping holy the seventh day, and
his holy care to teach his Children holy obedience also. Now this being
manifest, that of the seventh day God did first sanctify man by his holy
spirit, and did bring in holiness into the world among men. we must needs
acknowledge this a second point of Gods sanctifying that day, and making it fit
to be his holy weekly Sabbath and the day, of his holy worship,

CHAP. 9.
THirdly the Lord God for a memorial of these supernatural and heavenly
things first revealed, and done on the seventh day, 3 position affirmative
and for a pledge to man of the eternal rest in heaven, did also by his word
and commandment, appoint every seventh day to be unto man a day of rest from
his own works which concern this worldly life, and to be kept an holy
Sabbath, to the Lord his God, and this is the third point of Gods sanctifying
the seventh day, and setting it apart for holy and heavenly use, and for holy
worship, service, and religious duties which tend to begit and increase
holiness in men, and so to bring them to see and enjoy God in the eternal
rest of glory. This point because it is of greatest weight and moment, and
comprehends in it many of those things which are necessary to be laid open, and
made known for the distinct and profittable understanding of the Lords holy
weekly Sabbath, and the right observation thereof, together with the duties
which belong thereunto, and are therein required. Therefore I will do my best
endeavor to handle this point more fully, and to lay open distinctly the
special things therein contained, and that in this method and order.

First I will prove this maine point, to weet: That Gods blessing and
sanctifying of the seventh day, did include the giving of a law and
commandment for the keeping of an holy weekly Sabbath, and Gods giving of this
commandment was a maine and special part of his sanctifying of it.

Secondly I will enquire and search out the nature of that law and
commandment, and how far, and in what manner it binds Adam, and all his
posterity.

Thirdly, because every law which God gives to man, does impose a duty upon
man, and binds man to the performance of it, therefore the uerie words of the
text binds me to handlle at large, man's duty which this commandment of God,
and this word by which he did bless and sanctify the seventh day, does
impose upon Adam and all his posterity, even their sanctifying and keeping
holy the Sabbath day.

For the proof of the maine point, we have three notable arguments: First we
have the plain testimony of God himself Exodus 16.28. where he calls this his
blessing and sanctifying of the seventh day, by the maine of a commandment and
law. and tells the Isralites that they not keeping of an holy rest; but going
out togather Manna on the seventh day, did refuse to keep his commandments
and laws, that is his commandments and laws which he had given from the
beginning in his blessing and the sanctifying of the seventh day; For of other
special laws and commandments given before that time concerning the Sabbath
there is no mention at all in Scripture, neither did God give any besides that
from the beginning, until he spoke unto them afterward from mount Sinah, and
in the fourth Commandment called upon them to remember the Law of old, given
for keeping holy the Sabbath, and renewed it again to them.

Secondly, In all the Law of God and in all the Scriptures we never read of
any thing truly hallowed, sanctified and set apart for holy use but by special
Commandment of God, and by the direction of his word: the first thing which is
said to be sanctified after the seventh day, is the first borne of Israel
Exodus 13.2. and this was by Gods special commandment, and therefore he says
that he hallowed them On that day which he smote the first borne of Egypt, Number.
3.13. The next sanctified mentioned in Scripture is that of the people of
Israel when they were to come into the sight and presence of Gods Majesty at
mount Sina Exodus 19.10. and that was by Gods direction and commandment as is
there testified in express words.

The third sanctification mentioned in the Scriptures, is that of the
Sanctuary, and the Altar and all the holy Uessels and implements thereof. And
Aaron and his sons the Priests with all their robes and vestments, also the
sacrifices and all other holy things of the Tabernacle, and they all were
sanctified by the special commandment of God, and by direction of his word as
Moses in the law testifies in Exodus 40. and diverse other places.

So the temple in Jerusalem and all the Holy things which are consecrated and
dedicated to the service of God by Solomon, are said to be hallowed and
sanctified by God 1 King 9.3: and 2 Cron. 7.17. that is by Gods special
commandment and direction.

And Moses his dedication of all things in the law, is said to be by blood and
that by precepts spoken to the people according to Gods law Heb. 9. verse.
19.22. And every creature of God is said to be sanctified to the use of the
Saints by the word of God and by prayer 1 Timothy 4.5.

Now if in all Gods word every thing is said to be sanctified, by the word
and special Commandment of God: And wheresoever in all the Scriptures God is
said to sanctify any thing, and to separate it for holy Use: The word
(Sanctify) does necessarilye implie a Commandment, and special law of God
given for the seperating of it.

It were against all reason and common sense to deny here in this text the
words ( Bless and sanctify) do necessarily also implie that God gave a
special commandment and law for the keepeing of his holy weekelie Sabbath an
holy rest unto him the Lord our God.

Thirdly, whatsoever is sanctified by God and so dedicated to holy use, that it
is not in the power of any creature to alter and change and turn it to
another use, without sin and transgression against God, that is certainly
established by a spiritual law of God, for where there is no law there is no
transgression. Now after that God had sanctified the seventh day, and appointed
it to be the rest of the holy Sabbath. It was a sin and transgression not to
keep it, or to change and alter it to common use, yea it was transgression
against Gods commandments as appears in the place before mentioned Exodus
16.23.28. Therefore Gods sanctifying the Sabbath was undoubtedly by giving of a
commandment for the due keeping and observing of it.

Objection.
But from this point thus proved, there arises an objection, the answering and
removing whereof seems to a matter of some moment. For this being granted,
that God in sanctifying the seventh day immediately after the ending of the
creation, did give a special law for the observation of the seventh day of
every week as an holy Sabbath: And if once consecrared by Gods law to holy
use, may in no case be turned to common and profane use, and whosoever does
change it, sins most greeviousl^e, as appears Exodus 30.32. and Number. 16.38.
and also by the destruct^on of King Belsh^zz^r for turning the hallowed Vessels
of the Temple of Jerusalem to common and profane use, Dan. 5. It will here upon
follow, that Adams posterity in all ages are bound to keep the weekly Sabbath
on the seventh day, and no creature may change it to another day without
grievous sin. And the Christian Churches which have changed the Sabbath to
the first day of the week; and have made the seventh day a common day
wherein they do the works of their private calling and their worldly
business; have transgressed Gods law in so doing. Neither have they any
warrant or ground from this first institution, or the fourth commandment
(which the Sabbath of the Seventh day,) to keep their weekly Sabbath on the
Lords day which is the first of the week.

For the satisfying of this obj^ction, and clearing of this doubt, diverse
things may be answered. Answer.
First that in the most strict commandment of God by which he binds men to the
keeping of holy assemblies, and public solemnities for the performance of
religious duties, worship, and service, to his majesty's memorable of his
extraordinary blessings and benefits, though the solemn duties be limmited to
some certain and fit days and those particular duties be named in the law.
Yet if the substance of the Commandment be kept, that is; the holy solemnity
observed and the duties, worship, and service be performed, in all full and
ample manner as the law requires, though the particular days of the month,
year, and week be changed upon good reason and for weighty consideration;
The Lord does dispense with alteration of that circumstance to another day and
time, which appears by good reason, and for just causes to be more
convenient, and does allow and accept that for the right performance of his
law. This is manifest by a plain instance and example given by God himself.

For the law of the passover which God gave to Israel did command them to keep
that feast in their generations, upon the fourteen day of the first month, and
that under pain of being cut off. Exodus 12.14.18. and Levit. 23.5. And yet
upon just occasion, such as Gods law approves either of uncleanness of absence
from home upon a far jouney, it was lawful to change the particular time,
and to keep the passover, on another day more convenient, even on the
fourteenth day, of the second month, Number. 9.11. And so Hezekiah and all the
people of Israel and Judah kept it and changed the day 2 Cron. 30. And hereby
the Lord himself teaches us, that the Laws which command holy solemnities
and bind all his people in their generations to the due observation of them on
certain set days, such as the law of the weekly Sabbath, and the yearly
Passover, may stand in force and be duly observed, though the particular day
of the week be changed upon such grounds, as Gods law approves and for such
causes and reasons, as make that other day more fit, and excellent for the
solemnity, then that particular day of the week, or of the month which is
named in the law.

Secondly, If any object that the law of the passover was ceremonial, Object.
2.
and therefore might admit of some chaunges, but it cannot be so in the law of
the Sabbath if it be moral and perpetual, binding all man kind to the worlds
end.

To this I answer, Answer.
that for the time and season wherein ceremonial laws are in force they are
equal (in their obligation and binding of the persons commanded) to laws
moral and perpetual, and therefore the argument and answer is good and firm,
and cannot with any good reason be rejected and denied.

Thirdly, diverse positive laws which are moral and perpetual and bind Adam,
and all his posterity, in all their generations, though they be firm and
immutable in themselves and in their obligation: yet because the Duties of
obedience which they impose upon men, and the men up on whom the duties are
imposed, are in their state, and condition mutable and chaungable, And the
chaunges and alterations of the things commanded in times, places, and other
relations and respects, do not at all change the law, nor prove it
ceremonial, and chaungable. As for example, Gods commandment and law given to
Israel, was that they should love him the Lord their God, and serve him with
such worship as is agreeable to his word. This law binds them and all Gods
people in all generations unchaungable: It bound all such as lived in the old
Testament to serve God with sacrifices, and burnt offerings, and to worship him
with their first fruits, and sweet odoures and perfumes of incense, and that in
the place which he did choose out of all the tribes of Israel. And it binds us
still who live under the new Testament: to love God, and to serve him. But with
a spiritual woshippe and service, such as is most agreeable to the word of the
Gospel, as Saint Paul shows Romans 12.^. and our sacrifices are not of brute
beasts, but our own bodies devoted to the obedience of Christ, and sacrifices
of thanks and praise which are the calfes of our lips Heb. 13.15. for now men
are not by the law bound to worship God In Jerusalem, nor in the mountain of
Samaria. but in every place to lift up pu^e hands and hearts to God, and to
worship him in spirit and in truth, John 4.21. And to this worshipp the same
law does as strictly bind us, as it did the fathers to their bod^ly
sacrafices in Jerusalem, though the service in diverse particulars is changed,
yet the law is perpetual and st^nds firm and immutable, and binds all Gods
people in all their generations.

So likewise from the first promise of Christ, a redeemer to mankind, Adam
and all his posterity are bound to believe in Christ, and to seek, expect, and
hope for salvation, and life only in him the promised seed of the woman, that
is in him made man, and man's mediator And the law of believing in Christ is
perpetual firm, and vnch^ungable.

And yet the duty which he requires is changeable, and is changed, now under
the Gospel from that which is under the law, in circumstance, for the faithful
in the old Testament were bound to except and wait for Christ and to believe in
him to come, but we under the Gospel confess Christ and believe in that Christ
Jesus which is come in the flesh. and whosoever confesses not Christ which is
come, but believes Christ to come he is lead by the spirit of Antichrist, 1 John
4.3.

And even thus the case stands with the law of the Sabbath, which God gave in
the beginning when he sanctified the seventh day, for by that law he bound Adam
and all his posterity to observe and keep an holy weekly Sabbath, and that one
the particular day of the week which is the day most blessed with the greatest
blessing above all other days of the week, and wherein the created work of
the world comes to greatest perfection, and that is brought into actual being
where God especially rests, and wherewith he is chiefly satisfied and
delighted.

This is the sum and substance of the law which equally binds all Gods
people perpetually to the worlds end. This law, bound the fathers to keep holy
the seventh day, and last day of the week, in the old Testament, because that
was the day most blessed with the greatest blessing as yet revealed in the
world, that is the promise of Christ, and his actual undertaking and beginning
to be man's mediator, by which promise of the redeemer and bringing in of
supernatural grace, which is spiritual and immutable, the mutable work of
the creation was perfected, and in which mediato^ of Christ, God rested and
took such delight, that he would not go about to uphold the world by way of
creation, but committed the reparation of the world to Christ the mediator.
But now under the go^pel since the full exhibition of Christ, a perfect actual
redeemer, and the perfecting of the work of redemption on the first day of the
week, in Christ his resurrection, that first day of the seventh, which is the
seventh in the weekly revolution, if we count the days begin^ing with the day
next following, is now the day most blessed, and wherein the created world is
after a better manner, and in an higher degree perfected, and God finds that
actually performed wherein he rests and wherewith he is fully satisfied. And
therefore the same perpetual law of the Sabbath binds us to keep this day for
our weekly Sabbath, and that not with such service as was, holy under the law,
that double bodily sacrifices, nor with assemblies appointed for preaching,
reading and hearing of the law, and the promises of a redeemer to come, and for
seeking salvation and blessings in Messiah promised and yet not come. But with
spiritual worship and faithful prayer and invocation in the name of Christ
exhibited, and already exalted, and with reading, preaching, and hearing of the
gospel, which declares Christ Jesus already come in the flesh. And thus I hope
I have fully answered the objection, and made it manifest, the christian
churches in changing the day of their weekly Sabbath, and their form and
manner of worship, have not made void, but established the law of the Sabbath,
which God gave in the beginning.

and these chaunges do in no case prove the law to be ceremonial only and
mutable, neither does the morality and perpetuity of the law require that
every circumstance of the Sabbath, and every particular Sabbath duty, should at
all times remain the same perpetual and unchangable

CHAP. 10.
BUT that this truth may yet shine forth more clearlie, and may so m^nifestlie
show it self that no scruples may remain, nor any doubts concerning it or any
part of it. I will proced to the second special thing which is before
propounded. That is, to inquire, search out, and discover the nature and kind
of this law and commandment of God, concerning the weeklie Sabbath: And how
far and in what manner it binds Adam and all his posterity.

And her^ I have alarge field to pass through, wherein diverse points offer
themselves to our view, which J cannot pass by, nor lead you along without due
consideration of them. First here J meet with diverse and several opinions, of
the learned concerning the law of the sabbath which come first to be rehearsed
and examined.

Secondly, I find several kinds of laws which God has given to men;
mentioned in the Scripture, and diverse sorts of commandments, which we must
severally discribe, and distinctlie consider before we can determine that which
principally is here intended, that is, what kind of law and commandment this
of the Sabbath is, and how far and in what manner all man kind are obliged
by it, and bound to obey it.

The several opinions concerning the law of the Sabbath.
The first opinion is, that the law of the Sabbath is natural, moral, and
perpetual written in the heatt of the first man in his creation. And that as he
was bound to keep the seventh day holy to the Lord in the state of innocence.
So also are all his posterity bound in all all ages even to the last man to
keep the weeklie Sabbath. But they who conceive this law to be naturally
written in man's heart do much differ and are divided into two opinions. The one
sort holds the law to be wholly natural, and perpetually moral both in
respect of the rest, and sanctification, and also in respect of the particular
day of the week, even the Seventh from the beginnning of the creation.

Thus do Iuda^zing Christians hold, who profess Christian religion, but
reject the sanctification of the Lords day and embrace and cleave to the Jews
Sabbath.

The other sort do hold that there is a three fould use of the Sabbath day. 1.
Religious and holy, which is the exercise of holy and religious duties. 2.
Political or civil, which is rest from worldly weariesom labor of man and
beast. 3. Ceremonial or sacramental which is a signification and shadowing of
spiritual rest in Christ. That in the two first respects the Law is natural,
^mortall and perpetual, and that nature requires, that a seventh day of every
week should be for rest and refreshing, and for holy exercises of religion,
they all affirm: And because the seventh and last day of the week, was the
day wherein God rested, having in the sixth days before perfected all the
works of the creation, therf^^ they hold that for the signifying and sh^dowing
forth of spiritual rest in Christ; the seventh day was the fittest of all, and
Gods people were by Gods Law bound to observe it, for their Sabbath until
Christ had fully finished the work of redemption, and then rested from it as
God did from the work of creation. And that ever since the resurection the
sign and ceremony of Christ's rest being fulfilled. The Sabbath is to be kept
by the same law of nature, and commandment of God on the Lords day the first
day of the week, which is one in seventh until the eternal Sabbath and rest
in heaven, unto which Christ will bring all his elect at last. This is the
Doctrine of many of the best learned heretofore in our Church, and diverse godly
divines do rest in this opinion which for the maine matter and substance of it,
is pious and godly and approved by Aquinas the great Scooleman.

The second opinion is, that the law of the Sabbath was not natural wr^tten in
man's heart, neither did bind man to observe an holy rest the seventh day of
every week, and only on the seventh day in which God rested, but that it was
a possitiue law given by God, commanding more then the light of nature did
clearly and distinctly show to man, or bare natural instinct move him unto,
and that it was like the law by which God forbad man to eat of the tree of
knowledge, which his own natural appetite did lead him to eat of, being good
for food and to the eye and appetite pleasant and desirable. But God restrained
him from it, not but instinct of nature or law written in his heart, but by his
own voluntary commandment, to show his authority over man, to teach man
obedience, and to make man know, that he might as justly have restrained him
from all, or the most part of either fruits, and that the use of the
creatures, and the power which he gave to man over them was his free gift, and
therefore man ought to love and serve him his creator, as for his whole being,
so also for the use and benifit of all other crea^urs. And so like wise they
hold, that by nature all days are alike in themselves, and man by the light of
nature can disc^rne no difference in the^, b^t yet God to make man mindful of
his creation, and of God his creator, did by his word and everlasting
commandment given to man, seperat one day fot the uses before named. 1. For
holy use even performance of religious duties only. 2. For civil use, to weet:
rest from hard labor. 3. For ceremonial, to signify the rest of Christ after
the work of redemption finished, to admonish man of rest from sinful works,
and to be a token of eternal rest in heaven. and though any one day in the
week is of it self naturally as fit as another, and that it is no matter what
day be kept, so that one in seve^ be for these uses set apart: yet because God
rested on the seventh day from his work of creation, therefore in the old
Testament he would have that last day of seven to be the Sabbath until the
coming of Christ: inte^ding that when the greater work of man's redemption was
perfected by Christ; then the day of his resurrection in which he rested from
that work even the Lords day, should be the Sabbath of Gods people to the end
of the world; And so this law and commandment though it be not natural, yet
it is moral, and a perpe^uall, and unchangeable rule of Gods canstant will, and
of man's duty in this particular: which is the main substance of it, viz, that
man do keep one day in seven of every week for a Sabbath of rest 'though^ut all
ages of the world, and that it is chaungable only in the circumstance of the
day, and that only thus far. 1. That while the work of creation was, that work
which had the pre-eminence in the eyes of the world, the Sabbath was to be
kept necessarily one the last of the seven, in which God did rest from that
work, and so this law did bind men. 2. That after Christ had finished his
work of redemption, ^ested the seventh day in the grave, and on the first day
was risen and entered into his rest, and the work which now has the
pre-eminence under the Gospel, is redemption perfected by Christ's resurrection,
the day of his resurr^ction and rest, should be the holy Sabbath to all
christian people, whereby they should be admonished of the eternal rest in
heaven, and wherein they should be holy devoted to such duties, as tend to bring
the^ on, to the fruition of rest with Christ in glory. The third opinion is,
that the law of the Sabbath is not natural nor perpetually moral at all, but
only civil and ceremonial, and some who are of this opinion do hold, that it
was given of God in the beginning to be observed only until the coming of
Christ, partly in memory of the creation, until the greater work of redemtion
should come in, and partly to signify things to come by Christ, and of true
rest to be found in him, and that now it is utterly abolish^d, together with
all the festival Sabbaths, of the Jews. Others of them hold, that because
there was great equity in this law, and also seting apart of one day in the
week for religious exercises, is a thing uery profittable and useful for the
propogation of religion, and for the upholding of order in Gods Church: therefore
the law in respect of the particular day is abolish^d, for that was
ceremonial, but the equity of the observation of on in seven still rem^ines.
And therefore all Christians in imitation of the Ap^stles, ought to keep one in
seven, especially the Lords day which is the last in the week, rather then
any other, if the Church so determine it, and if it be observed without any
superstitious conceit of more holiness in that day, or annexed to it, rather
then any other.

The fourth opinion is, that the first law for observation of the weekly
Sabbath was the fourth commandment, given from mount Sina, and that is did
bind only the Isralits to keep the seve^^h day of the week for an holy Sabbath
until the coming of Christ: but now under the gospel it is abolish^d in
respect both of the particular day, and also the strictnes of the observation,
and only the equity of it remains in the Lords day, the observation vvherof is
commended to us by the example of the Apostles, and ^ovv the law of keeping it
holy is only ecclesiastical and an holy ordinance of the Church^ Thus you see
while men build upon unsure and unstable grounds, and not upon the certain
words of holy Scripture compared together and made to run in a svveet
harmony, how various and different they are, and how contrary some of them,
in their opinions.

For the removing of all doub^s, and settling of men's judgments in a sure way
so far as God shall enable me. I will endeavor to select and single out
whatsoever I find in these several opinions, to be agreeable to the truth,
and to the sacred word of God: and reject the rest: and will ad more over
what is wanting to make up a perfect Doctrine, not out of mine own
conjections, but out of canonical Scriptures, for that is the sure rule of all
necessary saving and sanctified knowledge, and that must be the sure guide when
Fathers, Councels, and Churches do lead us into several and doubtful ways.
First for them who hold that the law of the Sabbath was written in man's heart
in the Creation, I hold it true insome part, to weet: thus far. That God
creating man in his own Image did print this in man's heart That as he had his.
whole being from God, especially his reasonable soul, by which he was made
able to understand the will of God, revealed to him by his word, so he was
bound to obey God and to serve him all his days, with his whole heart, and
with all his might. And if God did require of him any part of his time, and
commanded him to obsteine from some good and lawful works tending to his
natural good and well being, and to do some special works for his Lords
pleasure, in one day or more selected days of the week, or of every month or
year, he ought to do it out of duty and obedience to his Lord and Creator.
Thus far J consent that the law is natural written in man's heart, to weet:
in general and in respect of the common foundation:

J grant also that the law and commandment of God, injoyning the rest of men,
their servants, and cattle from hard labor the seventh day, or one day in
every week, is a thing so naturally helpful and needful for the health and
wellbeing of men ever since man's fall, and the curse of barennesse laid upon
the earth, and the punishment of toil some labor and faint sweating imposed
on man kind, that man's own natural reason, will and affection must needs
approve it, and move and incline his heart to the obedience of it, and his
inward thoughts cannot but accuse him of wrong done to his own body, and to
the life of his laboring cattle, and servants, if he disobey it, and in this
respect it may be called a law of nature:

Yea I add moreover that if we take the law of nature in a large sense, as
some times it is taken, that is for every law which commands such duties and
such obedience, as in there own nature are very useful and profittable to the
parties commanded, and which is grounded on such just causes and weighty
grounds, as by the judgment of natural reason, are in their own nature well
worthy of such observance, then the law and commandment of keeping an holy
Sabbath (on the seventh day in the old Testament in thankfulness for Christ
promised and for a continual memorial of that great blessing: and one the
first day of Christ's resurr^ction now under the Gospel, in thankfulness for
Christ fully exhibited, and the work of redemption by him perfected, which so
much excels the promise made on the seventh day, as perfecting of a work
excels the beginning and undertaking of it) may both in respect of the
particular day and the sanctification of it be called a law of nature that is a
law requiring such moral and perpetual obedience, as is in the nature of it
most just, and worthy to be performed.

But that the law and Commandment, which bound the fathers to keep an holy
rest one the seventh day of every week, and us under the Gospel to keep it on
the first day especially and no other, was in in the creation written and
imprinted in the heart of man so distinctlie, and expressly, that man had an
inbred notion of it, and a natural instinct of himself to observe this law,
and to keep a weekly Sabbath on those uerie days which God has prescribed
both to the fathers and us. This I must needs deny for these reasons following.

First Gods sanctifying of the Seventh day by his word and commandment, and
his institution of the Sabbath by a positive law given, as my text here shows;
had been vain and needless, if the law and the Sabbath of holy rest had
been expressly, and particularly written in man's heart already. For what man
by the instinct of nature, and by his own natural reason, will and affection,
is lead and moved to do, that he is vainly and needlessly urged unto by any law
or commandment, being of himself without any monitor ready to perform it.

Secondly, the very word ( Sanctify) signifies the setting apart of this day
to a supernatural and heavenly use, even for the performance of such duties as
are above the naturalll imaginations and thoughts of man, and which his
natural reason would never have revealed to him, not his will lead him to do.
If God by his word, and divine and superturall revealation had not directed and
moved him. Therefore this law by which God sanctified and instituted the
Sabbath is not a natural law, but a divine and supernatural precept.

Thirdly, in the creation and state of innocence, man was bound to serve God as
his creator and the author of all his being, and to be content with that
estate wherein God had placed him, and saw to be very good, and to look no
higher. It was the inordinat desire of more knowledge and of an higher estate
then God had revealed and promised, which made our first parents so yielding to
the devils temptations, and undoubtedly it was an occasion of their sin in
eating of the forbidden fruit. Now the serving of God as his Lord and Creator
was the duty of man every day alike, for the heavens above* and the earth
beneath, and all creatures in them serving daily for man's natural good and
welbeing, even every day equally did put man continually in mind of his duty.
to weet: that he was to love and serve the Lord with all his heart, soul, and
strength at all times, for this is the righteousness of a man's own works and
of his own person, which God required of man in the first covenant in the
state of innocence, even his constant obedience to the whole and law and
revealed will of God all his days without one days intermission. Therefore
the Sabbath which requires service of God and worship, and love of him as
merciful a Redeemer, and that upon one day of the week more then all the
rest, was not known nor commanded nor observed by nature in the state of
innocence.

Fourthly, the law of nature written in man's heart requires no particular
duty, but such as his own natural reason and will did direct and lead him
unto in the creation, and which belonged to him in the state of innocence. But
the law of the Sabbath from the first institution commands and requires such
things, and such works, and duties as did not concern man in the state of
innocence. As 1: Rest of man and beast from their vvearisome labor for their
refreshing upon one day in seven. This man had no need of, neither was their
any need of such rest, because the toil and labor of man and beast came in
after the fall, when God cursed the earth for man's sin.

Secondly, it requires in general sanctification of the seventh day, by holy
and religious exercises, and in particular by sacrificing to God, by prayer and
supplication, and by meditating on heavenly things, and on eternal rest, and
by studying all holy duties which might fit men for the sight and fruition of
God in heavenly glory. All which and what soever other holy Sabbath duties and
works, are mentioned in the word of God, do belong to man, only since the
promise of Christ the blessed seed. And in the state of innocence, man had no
occasion of any such duties he had no need of sacrificing until Christ, his
ransom and sacrifice for sin was promised, he neither could have any
thought ar meditations of glory in Heaven, or studies to fit and sanctify
himself for the fruition thereof until Christ the only way to eternal
rest, and glory was promised: what use had he of prayers and supplcations to
God for any good thing needful, when he lacked nothing, or for deliverance
from evil when as yet noe evil was known in the world? What occcasion
could he have to praise God either for Christ, before he did so much as dream
of Christ or had any thought of him at all. As for natural gifts and
blessings he was by them admonished and provoked every day alike to love,
serve, honor and praise God, wherefore seeing the works and duties of the
Sabbath are holy, and tend only or chiefly to the supernatural and heavenl^
life, and to the eternal rest which Christ has purchased in heaven for man,
undoubtedly the law of the Sabbath which expressly commands such works and
duties every seventh day, is a positive supernatural and divine law, not any
dictate of nature imprinted in man's heart in the creation.

Fifthly, every law of nature is common to all man kind, and is written as well
in the hearts of heathen as of Christians, so that the conscience of men who
never heard of God or of his word, is a monitor, to admonish them of the duty
which that law requires, and an accuser if they transgress that law, and men
have no more need to be put in mind of those duties, then of any other which
the law of nature requires: But the law of the Sabbath has no footsteppe of
impression in the hearts of barbarous heathen nations. It is quite forgoten
among them, and only Gods people who have his written law, and word
continually read and preached, do keep the Sabbath: And God in giving it to
Israel in written tables, and in repeating it often afterward, still calls
upon them to remember it, thereby showing that it is not as the law of nature
printed in man's heart, but is a law given by word and writing, and from thence
learned, and therefore easily and quickly forgotten.

Sixthly, If it were a natural law founded upon the creation, and binding man
to keep a weekelie holy day in thankfulness for his creation, and for the
creatures made for his use, then it should in all reason bind man to keep
Holy the six days in which God Created all things, and especially the sixth
day wherein God made man himself and gave him rule and dominion over all
creatures. For holy celebrations are kept weekly or yearly one the days in
which the blessing and benefits solemnized and celebrated were first bestovved
one men.

Therefore it is not a natural law grounded on the creation.

Lastly Christ came not to change the law of nature, nor to take away any part
of the obedience thereof, but to establish and fulfill it in every jot and title
as he himself testifies Mat. 5.17.18.

And yet the law of the Sabbath so far as it requires keeping holy the
seventh day, as the fathers were bound in the old Testament is changed by
Christ and by his resurrection, in which he finished the work of redemption,
and was exhibited a perfect redeemer. And the observation of the seventh and
last day of the week is abolished.

And the first day of the week even the day of Christ's resurrection, is
sanct^fied and substituted in the place of it, and so was observed by the
Apostles, and after them by all true Christian Churches for the Lords day, and
for the Queen and ch^efe Princess of all days, as the blessed Martyr
Ignatius calls it. Epist. ad magnesi^s page 31. Therefore it is not a law of
nature printed and e^grauen in man's heart.

J could allege more reasons, but J hold this perfect number of seven
sufficient for this present purpose. J will therefore proceed to the next thing
which is the discovery of the several kinds of laws, which God has given to
men, and the brief description of every kind particularly, by which J shall
come to demonstrate what kind this of the Sabbath is.

CHAP. 11.
The distinction of Gods laws
THE Laws of God which he has given to men, are of two sorts, either laws
printed in man's heart which we call laws of nature: Or else Positive laws,
which God has commanded in his word over, and above, or besides the laws of
nature.

The Law of nature is that will of God which he as Lord and creator has
imprinted in man's heart in the creation, even that natural disposition which
God gave to man, when he made him in his own Image, by which he does inform
man in the knowledge, and move him to the practice of all duties which belong
to him, and which he requirs of him, for natural wellbeing and continuance in
that life, and good estate wherein he was created.

The law of nature may be distiguished into two sorts. The one is General and
indefinit, which binds man definitly in a general bond. The other is special
and particular, which does define and prescribe special and particular duties
and works to men.

The general and indefinit law is this. That man being Gods creature and
having his whole being, life, motion and all things from God, of free gift, is
in duty bound to obey God to the utmost of his power in all things whatsoever
God either by natural light, or by his word either has revealed, or shall at
any time reveal and make known unto him, to be his will that he should do
them. The bond and obligation of this law is very large, and reaches through
all laws, and binds men to do whatsoever God commands by any law whatsoever.

The special definit and particular law of nature, is that commanding will of
God engraven in man's heart* and in his upright natural disposition, which
directs man to know and moves him to perform such special kinds of duties and
such particular works, as he ought to do and God reveals to him and declar^s
to be his will that he should do them.

Of these special laws some are primary. And some are secondarie laws of
nature.

A special primary law of nature is the will of God, concerning such special
duties and particular works, as man's own pure created nature and natural
disposition did direct, lead and move him unto, which his natural reason in
the state of integrity did show unto him, and his pure natural will and
affections did move and stir him to perform. As for example, to know and
acknowledge God for his sole Lord and Creator, and one only God, to serve and
worship him with such worship and reverence, as his pure reason taught him to
be meet for God, to think and speak of God accordingly: to bear himself
toward the creatures, and to rule them according to the wisdom which God,
had given him, to increase and multiply and to replenish and subdue the earth
and such like.

A Secondary special law of nature, is a rule or precept concerning such
special and particular duties and works, as man's own right reason, or Gods
word discouers unto him, to be in there own nature good, and just, and
profittable either for his own natural being, and wellbeing, as the cause now
stands with him since his fall, and for any other good end and use agreeable to
Gods revealed will. As for example, that men should not live idle, but labor
painfully to provide for themselves and families, this is a duty which was
known to man before his fall, but ever since the curse vvherevvith God cursed
the earth for man's sin, Gods word requires it, and man's own natural
reason well informed, and his will and affections well ordered do naturally
move him to the performance of it for his natural vvelbeing.

So diverse negative precepts which forbid such evils and sinful deeds, as
man never knevv nor had any thought of them in the state of innocence, but now
true natural reason, affection and conscience; teaches and moves man to hate
and abhor them; they are laws of this kind.

And if we should extend the law of nature to the utmost, as many do, and
bring under it every law which commands duties which are in their own nature
just and honest and very useful and profittable to the doers and to others;
and serve directly and naturally for Gods glory. We might reduce to this kind
of natural laws, every positive moral and perpetual precept commanding any
just or holy work and duty which is just in it self, though there were no
express commandment given for the doing of it. A Positive law of God is that
which God in his wisdom and by his word gives to man, by which he binds man
to some obedience which he of himself by his own natural wit and reason would
not have found out and discerned to be good and just, neither would have done
or performed by the instinct of nature, and the motion of his will and
affection, for such an end as God has appointed them unto.

There are diverse laws and precepts of this kind, all which as they require
that which God justly and wisely wills man to do, and do command things which
are in respect of the present state and condition good for man, so they al are
after a general manner included in the general law of nature, and binds men
to obey them all.

Of these positive laws there are diverse sorts. Some are Positive commanding
things which tend to preserve and maintain good order, society and peace, not
only between God the creator and man his creature, but also between man and
other creatures, and among men themselves. Such was the law which God gave to
man, when he commanded him under the pain of death to obsteine from the fruit
of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and that for a wise and just end,
even to put man in mind that he was not absolute Lord of all the visible
creatures, to use them at his pleasure, but that he was a subordinate Lord and
ruler under God, and that all other trees berbes and fruits which God allowed
him to eat of, were Gods free gift, and also to teach him, that he was
chiefly and above all to look to the service of God and obedience of his will,
and to omit the serving of his own turn, and the doing of that which his own
will might move him to do, when God at any time should call him another way.
And of this kind are all the judicial laws, which God gave to Israel by
Moses for the well ordering of their common wealth, and all precepts of
obedience, which inferiors owe to superiors in things lavvfull and that for
peace sake. Some positive laws are Evangellicall and religious which command
works and duties tending to an holy heavenly and supernatural end and use,
such are all laws and co^ma^dments which God has given upon occasion of
Christ revealed to man, and in and through Christ which require duties, and
service due to God as he is ma^s redeemer, and bind man as he expects benefit
by Christ the mediator and redeemer, to such works and such obedience, as
come to be of use in respect of Christ. These Evangellicall laws are of two
sorts. 1. Some are universal and perpetual requiring necessary works and
duties of all such as are to be saved by Christ. 2. Some are special and
temporary, which require some special service and works of obedience, and
them of some only, and for some times, and in some condition of the Church.
Perpetual and universal Evangellicall laws, which bind all Gods redeemed
ones, and require things necessary to salvation by Christ, are the
commandments of God, by which he binds all men to repentance and reformation
of life, to godly sorrow, and humiliation for sin, to believe in Christ under
penalty of loosing salvation, and of perishing for ever, and condemned and cast
into hell for their sins. Special or temporary laws are they which bind men,
or all men of some ages and in some times to some special service and worship,
fit for the present state and condition of the Church, or to so some duties and
works which for the time are profittable to guide and lead men to Christ, and
therefore are sanctified of God and set apart for that purpose: ^uch are the
laws and commandments of sacrificing and bringing offerings and first fruits
to God, of oxen and sheep and other clean beasts and birds, and of the
increase of the earth, some of which laws did bind all Gods people from the
first promise of Christ even all the fathers from Adam until Moses, and all
Israel until the coming of Christ, such laws were that of Circumcision
given to Abraham, as a seal of the covenant which God made with him and his
seed, and that of the passover, and of the first borne, and all Leviticall
ceremonial laws, given to Israel by the hand of Moses, and such are the
commandments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, which bind all Christians
under the Gospel.

There are also besides these several kinds of laws, some mixed laws, and of
these some are partly and in some respects natural, because they bind men to
some duties unto which nature binds them; and in some respects civil, for they
require things which tend to civil order and government; and partly in some
respects also evangellicall commanding things which tend to salvation in
Christ. Some are partly moral and perpetual in that they require moral
duties which are necessary and useful at all times to the end of the world;
and partly ceremonial and temporary in that they require obedience in things
which are useful only in some cases and at some times. As for example the law
which God gave from mount Sina, and wrote it in tables of stone it does bind
men not only to all moral duties which engraven in the creation, to weet: all
duties which man did owe to God as to his only creator, and to men as fellow
creatures; but also to such further duties and degrees of obedience as man does
owe to God his only Savior and Redeemer in Christ, and to men and Angels as
his fellow sevants brethren and members of one and the same spiritual body
under the same head Christ.

And therefore God presses and urges obedience to that law, at the giving
thereof upon this consideration, and for this reason, because he is the Lord
God the Redeemer and deliverer, who as he delivered the natural Israel from
Egyptian bondage, so by that typical deliverance did foreshew and prefigure
the spiritual redemption of all the spiritual bondage under sin, the world
and the Devil.

To love God above all, and a man's neighbor as himself, to honor Parents,
and to speak truth of every one, to give leave to every one freely to enjoy
his own, and many such duties requited in the ten commandments are natural,
and nature bound man to them in innocence, and in respect of them that law is
nature.

But to believe in God as a Redeemer, to visit and comfort the sick, and
distressed, to honor parents, pastors, superiors, as fathers in Christ, and
diverse duties of neglatiue precepts, as not to make images of God; not to
pollute Gods name by vain swearing and such like, the knowledge and thoughts
of which man had not in his heart by nature in the creation, which come into
the world by natural corruptions, and man was not subject to them, until he
was seduced and fallen and brought into bondage by Satan, they are posituallie
moral, and as the law commands them, it is a positive moral law, yea in
respect of some of them Evangelicall. And as reverence and respect to civil
Magistrates and men of higher place, as they are superiors and men of greater
power and authority (which difference and equality came in by man's fall, and
flows from Gods distribution of his common gifts in a different manner and
measure) as I say this honor given to them as civil rulers, ruling for our
Good and the good of the common weath, is commanded in this law so it is
civil. And lastly as all ceremonial and religious ordinances, and outward
significatiue, and worship sanctified by God, and appointed as most fit for the
time and season, receive their original authority and first strength from that
law given from mount Sina, especially from the commandment which binds man to
obey God, as his creator and Redeemer in all ordinances, so far as he
requires, so and in this respect this law is Ceremonial and binds to
obedience temporary, fit for the season, and opportunity.

Jn like manner the commandment which the Lord Christ has given in the
Gospel, for Baptizing of Christians and for the administration and receiving
of the Sacrament, of his body and blood, as they command an outward
sacramental washing with water, and abodily eating of bread and drinking of
wine which have been of use only since the coming of Christ, and not from
the beginning, so they are ceremonial and temporary. For whatsoever ordinances
are in use in the Church of God for a season only, that is during the time of
the true and proper signification of the world Ceremonia: which is compounded
of the Gr: words (...), which signifies a set time or season, and (...), whice
signifies only, or rather (...) which signifies to abide or remain. But
because the time of the Gospel is perpetual unto the end of the world, and
they are commanded to be observed of all Christians at the time of the Gospel,
in this respect these Commandments may be called universal and pepetuall. And
as in these and all other Ceremonies, ordained by God, there are required
besides the outward bodily rites and actions, many spiritual duties, as inward
reverence and holy affections of the heart faith in Christ and the blessed
Trinity believing of the covenant, commemoration of Christ and his benefits,
confession of three persons in one God, and the eye of faith looking chiefly to
the spiritual things signified, so the commandment and law enjoining them may
justly be esteemed positiuely and Evangellically moral. Thus much for the
diverse and several kinds of Gods laws which he has given to men.

J proceed to that which is the maine thing here intended, that is to show what
kind of law the commandment of the Sabbath is, and under which of these
several kinds it is comprehended. And in a word J hold it to be of the last
kind, to weet: a mixed law that is partly natural, and partly positive, both
civil and Evangellicall, and not only universal and perpetual but also
special and ceremonial, and so indeed it takes part of all kinds of laws
which God has given men, and which are mentioned in the Scriptures, which
thing because the learned have not heretofore observed nor well considered, but
some have cast their eyes upon the common ground of this law printed in man's
heart in the creation, and finding it among the ten commandments which are
generally held to be the sum and substance of the law of nature, do call it
a law of nature.

Others have considered it as a special commandment given by God immediately
after the creation by word of mouth and not written in man's heart, and do call
it a positive moral law. Others have considered it as it commands rest one the
seventh day, now altered by Christ, which rest was a sign of Christ's rest from
the work of redemption and is a token and pledge of eternal rest in heaven,
and there upon hold it to be a ceremonial law: and hence arises the diversity
among Christians, and almost civil war between the Pastors of several
Churches, yea and among learned preachers of one and the same Church: Whereas
indeed they all hold the truth in part but not wholly: They all err in this,
that they limit it every one, to that special kind of law, which he has has
chiefly in his eye and upon which he has set his conceit: Now make it a mixed
law and prove it manifestly, and there needs no more contention, except some
men will contend without cause and against reason out of a spirit of contention
and contradiction.

First, this law as all other laws is indefinitly comprehended in the general
law of nature, for the general law written in man's heart in the creation,
binds him to attend the will of God, and to be ready to obey God, his Creator
in all things whatsoever he either had already declared, or should at any time
to come reveal to be his will, and to be a duty which he required of man.
And therefore the observing and keeping of a weekly holy Sabbath, and devoting
of a seventh part of every week to religious exercises and to rest from bodily
labor and common worldly business, being expressly commanded by God, and
declared at several times and upon several occasions to be his will, man is
by the general of nature bound to perform it, and in this respect we may
truly say that the law of the Sabbath is a law of nature, included indefinitly
in that general law and dictate of nature written in man's heart in the
creation.

Secondly, though J cannot conceive that the keeping of an holy Sabbath weekly,
was a thing so disti^ct written in man's heart in the creation, that man of
himself by the instinct of his nature, or by the light of his reason and
motion of his will, would have set either the seventh day or any other of the
seven days of the week apart for rest, or other duties of the Sabbath, which
God in the first institution required, and commanded also in his law given from
mount Sina: Yet because the keeping holy of a weekly Sabbath upon such grounds
as are mentioned in this text, and for such ends and uses as God has ordained,
to weet: commemoration of Gods mercy and bounty in promising Christ, preserving
the knowledge and memory of the covenant of eternal life, and rest in Christ,
training up of people in religion, the fear and worship of God, and in
holiness, by which they are made fit to see and enjoy God in glory, because J
say, the keeping holy of a weekly Sabbath is in these respects a thing very
good and profittable, yea and necessary for the help of man and for the
reparing of his nature corrupted.

Thirdly, if we consider the law of the weekly Sabbath as it was given by God
in the first institution, and in his blessing and sanctifying of the seventh
day, and again renewed and inserted among the ten commandments given from
mount Sina: and at other times upon diverse occasions repeated by Moses and by
the Prophets from Gods mouth, If we also consider that never the Sabbath it
self nor the ground; reason, and ocasion of it, (to weer: Gods perfecting the
creation by promising and revealing redemption in Christ, and the rest which J
have before proved and demonstrated) were written ^n man's heart in innocence,
but were after man's fall revealed by God, and thereupon the holy rest commanded
to be kept on that day which God above other days has blessed and
sanctified. We may truly affirm that the commandment of the Sabbath in these
respects is a positive law of God, and not a law of nature requiring such
particular duties as man of himself without Gods positive commandment would
have observed. Yea the word (Memento Remember) so often added to the precept
of the Sabbath as appears Exodus 20.8. does plainly show that the keeping holy
of a weekly Sabbath, was not a thing printed in man's heart, for then it had
been vain and needless for God so often to use this word Remember and to
put them in mind of this duty by Moses and the Prophets, man's own conscience
would have been his daily and continual Monitor and Remembrancer, and his own
thoughts would have been ready to accuse him for every omision and neglect of
it. As the Apostle testifies of the work of the law written in man's heart,
Romans 2.15.

Fourthly, if we consider the law of the Sabbath as it commands man together
with his children, servants and laboring cattle to rest from their wearisome
labors and bodily pain; which came in by sin, and by man's fall, together
with servile subjection and difference of the Master and servant, which weekly
rest and intermission from toil and labor granted to servants and cattle by
their Masters: as well as to themselves, makes very much for good order in
every state and common wealth, and for peace and society among me^, and in
every family, and serves for an excellent civil and political use, so it is
in the judgment of many learned and godly Divines, not without good reason hold
to be a civil and political law.

Fifthly, if we consider. First the time of Gods first institution of the
Sabbath, as it falls under Chist, even upon the seventh day of the world, in
which Christ was, promised to redeem man who was fallen in the latter end of
the sixth day as is before showed. Secondly, if we consider the ground and
reason of Gods institution of the Sabbath and sanctifying the seventh day, even
Christ promised the seed of the woman, and to break the serpents head, by
whose actually undertaking and beginning to mediate for man, God did perfect
the mutable work of creation, and settled the world in an higher estate of the
perfection supernatural, and did rest in Christ's mediation, being that which
was able to give full satisfaction to his justice.

Thirdly, if we consider that in the first institution, the Sabbath day was
sanctified and blessed above the other six days: that is, was set apart to
heavenly and supernatural use; which cannot be imagined but in and under
Christ in whom all things are sanctified. We must needs know and confess
that the commandment of the Sabbath even in and from the first original and
institution, is a law Divine and Evangellicall, commanding such an observation
and service, as is of use only in and under Christ, and mainly tends to lead
men to salvation in him.

Sixthly, if we consider the necessity of resting, one whole day in every week,
from all our worldly affairs. First that with one consent the Church and
congregation of Gods people may all generally meet together in their set places
of holy assemblies, to hear and learn the Doctrine of salvation and word of
life, and to honor God with public holy worship and service, and with joint
prayers to call upon him in the name and mediation of Christ for all blessings.
Secondly, that every man may instruct his family in private also at home, and
by constant exercising of them a whole day together in religious duties every
week, may make them to grow and increase in grace and religion and in
knowledge and skill to order and direct all their week days labors, to Gods
glory, their own salvation, and the comfort and profit of their Christian
Brethren. Without which religious observation once every week at the least,
especially upon the particular day of the week, which God has blessed with the
most memorable work belonging to man's redemption, it is not possible for people
to be well ordered in a Christian Church, nor Gods holy worship to be either
generally known or publicly practiced, nor the vulgar sorts of Christians to
be brought to the knowledge and profession and practice of true religion
neceessary to salvation. These things I say considered, we must necessarily
grant that the law of the Sabbath is an Evangellicall universal and perpetual
law* such as the commandments of believing in Christ, repenting from dead
works, reforming of our lives, worshipping and invocating of God in the name
and mediation of Christ, and by the motion and direction of his holy spirit,
all which Commandments bind all Gods people of all churches and ages from the
first day wherein Christ was promised in one measure or other. So that without
obedience in some degree unto these Evangellicall laws, it is not possible for
any man to be and to continue a true child of God, and to attain salvation in
and by Christ.

And this law thus far and in these respects considered, can no more be
abrogated and abolished, then Gods covenant of Redemption of salvation made
with mankind in Christ. But all mankind even every one who seeks salvation
in Christ, is at all times and in all ages bound to observe this law of
sanctifying a seventh day in every week, and of resting from all worldly
affairs, that they may serve and worship and seek God in Christ.

Lastly, if we consider the Lords Sabbath, as it is a significatiue even a
sign to us of the eternal Sabbath in Heaven, and as it is in respect of the
particular day of the week and some ceremonial worship used in it, chaungable
and mutable according to the chaunges and motions of Christ the foundation and
Lord of it, and according to the several estates of Gods Church, and Gods
several dispensations of the mysteries of salvation, and several ways of
revealing Christ in the old Testament, and before and after the coming of
Christ in the flesh. We must of necessity confess, that the law of the Sabbath
is in these respects a Ceremonial law, commanding things which are temporary
and mutable and fitted for some times and seasons only.

First as it commanded the seventh day of the week to be kept holy, as the most
holy day because therein Christ was promised to be the redeemer of the world,
and God rested in his creation, and perfected the creation by bringing in
redemption, which was the greatest blessing of the old Testament. And as it
required hallowing of the day by sacrifices and other outward service and
worship which were tipes and figures of Christ to come, and by preaching and
rehearsing the promises of Christ out of the law and Prophets, believing in
the Savior in heaven. So it was a ceremonial and temporary law, and did
stand in force and bind all Gods people to the observation of the last day of
the week, all the time of the old Testament until Christ was fully exhibited
a perfect Redeemer in his resurrection. And it was not in the power of the
Church to change the Sabbath to any other day of the week that power rested
in Christ the foundation and Lord of the sabbath. It also bound the faithful
of these times, to the ceremonial ^^nctification, and to that tipicall service
vnhich looked toward Christ to come, as well as to the seventh day only and
no other, during that nonnage of of the Church.

Secondly, as the law of the Sabbath (which requires that day to be kept for
an Holy rest in which God has revealed the greatest blessing and so has
blessed it above all other days of the week) does now ever since the
perfecting of the work of redemption in Christ's resurrrection, bind all Gods
people to keep for their Sabbath the first day of the week which by Christ's
victory over death obtained fully in that very day, became the most blessed day
above the seventh day and all other days of the week. And as under the name
of hallowing and keeping holy the Lords Sabbath, it enioines such worship as
God requires of his Church in her full age and more perfect estate, to weet:
spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, preaching and teaching faith
in Christ crucified and fully exhibited, aperfect redeemer, praying unto God in
the name and mediation of Christ, and seeking access unto the father in him by
one spirit. And as this law imposes this holy weekly Sabbath, to be a pledge to
the faithful, of that Sabbathisme of eternal rest in heaven which remains
for the people of Gods as the Apostle testifies. Heb. 4.9.

So this law is like the commandments of Baptism, and the Lords supper. It is
ceremonial commanding such duties to be performed, and such a day to be
observed as are fitted to the time and season of the Gospel, and yet it is so
ceremonial, as that it is also perpetual, binding all Christians during the
season and time of the Church during the time in the new Testament and under
the Gospel that is perpetually to the end of the world, until we come to the
eternal rest in heaven. And as there shall be no chaunges in Christ, nor of the
state of the Church until Christ shall come in glory to receive us into that
eternal rest. So there shall be no change of the Sabbath to any other day of
the week, neither has the Church or any other whatsoever any power to alter
either the day or the sanctification and observation of it, no more then to
bring in such an other Change in Christ, and such an alteration of the estate
of the Church, as that was from Christ promised and obscurely revealed in the
old testament, to Christ fully exhibited.

CHAP. 12.
NOW having discovered the several kinds of laws, and commandments which
God has given to men, and having showed what kind of law this is which God
has given for the observation of the weekly Sabbath, and how and in what
manner it binds the sons of Adam in all ages, some in one kind, and some in
another, and Adam and all his posterity in some respects. There remains yet
for all that has been said before, one special point to be more fully
proved. That is concerning the Change of the Sabbath from the seventh to the
first day, what ground and warrant we have for it, and how the law of God (by
which God set apart the seventh day in the first institution, and still in the
fourth Commandment and other repetitions of that law by Moses mentions on the
seventh day for the weekly Sabbath) can bind us Christ ans to keep holy the
Lords day, or warrant us to make it our Sabbath.

For the more full manifestation and proof of this point, and satisfiing of
all doubts: I will by the light of Gods sacred word, and by the helps which I
shall find in the writings and sayings of the best learned both ancient and
modern Christian divines, do my best endeavor to show and prove that the
Lords day, which is the first of the week, and the day of Christ's
resurrection, the fittest day of all the seven to be the holy weekly Sabbath of
Christians. That God before and in the first giving of the law of the Sabbath,
did intend and foresee the change and the grounds of the change of it to the
first day, that God by Christ has changed it. And that the law of the Sabbath
in the maine duties which it requires is more fully and in a better and more
excellent manner obeyed by Christians in there observation of the Lords day;
and keeping it for the holy rest; then it was by the fathers of the Old
Testament; in their keeping of the seventh and last day of the week; for
their holy rest and weekly Sabbath,

First to prove the conveniencie and fitness of the Lords day to be the
Sabbath under the Gospel, above all other days, we have diverse arguments.

The first I frame thus. That day which is the first of days, and the first
fruits of time especially of the time of grace, is the fittest to be the Lords
holy day above all other days of the week in and under the time of grace. The
Lord himself teaches this for a plain truth requiring the fruits of all
things for an holy offering to himself under the law, and from the beginning
when he taught Adam, and Adam did teach his sons Caine, and Abell, to bring
sacrifices of firstlings and first fruits for offerings to him. Genesis 4. Now the
Lords day which is the first day of the week is the first of all days in the
world. In it God began the creation, the highest heavens which is the place of
blessedness and the heavenly host, also the common mass and matter of the whole
visible and inferior world, and the chiefest and most gracious element, the
light, that is the fiery heavens with the first beginning of the creation, this
day began, and so it is the first fruits of all times created, and although in
the creation and during the state of innocence the first fruits were no more
holy the^ the rest of the lump, or mass, and sanctifying of things to holy
use, came in by Christ and with the first promise of him* and the first time of
Christ revealed being the seventh day was to be the holy Sabbath all the time
in which Christ was only promised and not given.

Yet now seeing by the resurrection of Christ, in which Christ wa^ exhibited a
perfect redeemer, and became the first fruits of them that sleep. The first
day of the week and of the world which was only the first fruits of time
before, is by Gods providence become the first day and firist frvites of the
time of grace under Christ a perfect redeemer. Therefore the first day which is
now the first fruits of time both in the crea^ion and under pefect redemption,
which does perfect and sanctify the creation, is now the fittest of all the
days of the week to be the Lords holy Sabbath. And it is against all reason
for any to think any other day so fit to be offered up for the first fruits
of every week, and of our times to God, as this day which is the day of the
Lord Christ, who is the true first fruits of all creatures, and does sanctify
the whole mass and lump of mankind and all other creatures which are
gathered unto God in him. In which day Christ arose from death and became the
first fruits of them that sleep: that by the virtue of his resurrection he
might sanctify the very grave to them that sleep in him, and might raise them
up as to grace in this life, so also to glory at the last day in the general
resurrection.

Secondly that day wherein the place of eternal rest and of the everlasting
Sabbath which after this world ended, remains for the people of God, was
created and brought into being, and wherein eternal rest was purchased, and
the way opened into that rest, must needs in the judgment of reasonable men be
the fittest day for the weekly Sabbath, which is to all gods people a sure
sign and pledge of eternal rest and of their everlasting Sabbath in heaven,
which weekly Sabbath is to be kept holy and sanctified by mediations on Heaven
and Heavenly rest, and by such Holy exercises of religion, as do fit and
prepare us for the life of glory in Heaven. Now the first day of the week is
the day wherein God created the place of eternal rest, even the highest
Heavens, which are from eternity decreed and ordained to be the place in
which his elect shall keep rheir eternal Sabbath after this life.

In this day also Christ arose from death perfected redemption, and rested from
that work by which he procured eternal life and Heavenly glory for God
people, upon this day he opened the way to the Holy of Holies, and made his
first entrance both in his own flesh, and also for all his members into that
life eternal and that rest which they with him shall enjoy in the Heavenly
mansions. Therefore undoubtedly: this day of all the days of the week most
fit and and worthy to be kept an holy Sabbath of rest and to be sanctified with
mediations on heaven and heavenly glory, and with other exercises of religion
which fit men for eternal rest in heaven.

Thirdly, that day wherein God first created the light of this inferior visible
world, and wherein the light of the visible heavens did shine forth, when it is
once blessed with the rising up of a greater and more glorious light, even the
Sun of righteousness: It is of all days become the fittest and most worthy
to be the Lords holy weekly Sabbath, which is to be hallowed by meditating upon
the inheritance of the Saints in light, and by such holy exercises as tend to
make men meet to be partakers thereof. Now the first day of the week, the
Lords day is the day wherein God first created the light of the visible world,
even the fiery heavens which shine forth ever since, and give light to the
inferior world, so it is testified Genesis 1.3. And on this day Christ the Lord,
the sun of righteousness did rise up, and did bring to light immortallity and
eternal life, and became the great and glorious light of the world.

Therefore this day is the fittest and most worthy to be the holy weeklie
Sabbath, and to be spent in meditation upon, and seeking for the inheritance of
the Saints in light.

Fourthly, that day which has not only the same grounds and reasons in it,
upon which God first founded the Sabbath, and sanctified the seventh day, but
also diverse additions of the same kind which make the grounds and reasons more
forcible and excellent. This is most fit and worhy to be the holy weekly
Sabbath, and such is the first day of the week and has been, ever since it
became the Lords day, by the Lord Christ his resurrection. For proof whereof
consider the grounds and reasons upon which God sanctified the seventh day. 1.
Gods ending or perfecting his created work. 2. Gods resting from that work.
3. Gods blessing of the seventh day by revealing on it the greatest blessing,
far above any given in the creation. These are the grounds here laid down
in my text, which are rehearsed again by God in the fourth commandment of the
law. And another reason drawn from the end and use of the Sabbath is also
added Exodus 31.13. Ezech 20.12. to weet: that the Sabbath might be a sign and
token from God that he is their God who does sanctify them, that is: by
giving his Holy spirit with all saving graces in this life unto them in Christ,
does fit them for the fruition and sight of his glory in the eternal rest in
Heaven, and so makes the weekly Sabbath a pledge of the eternal Sabbath in the
world to come also. Now the godly learned heretofore who had no thought of
founding the Sabbath on Christ promised on the seventh day of the world, they
do understand Gods ending of his work, to be either the finishing of the
creation on the seventh day by adding some perfection or natural blessing to
the creatures more then he had given, on the sixth days. Or else that God had
already ended and perfected his work before the seventh day, and for this
cause blessed and sanctified the seventh day for a memorial of the creation of
the world, and all things therein made perfect and complete and so appearing on
that day. And by Gods resting on the seventh day from all his work which he
created and made, they understand nothing else but Gods rest of mere cessation,
and because this was the day wherein God having finished his work, and made
all things good, had no occasion to work any more by way of creation, but
rested from making more kinds of creatures. Therefore God commanded man to
rest after his example every seventh day, and to keep it for a weekly Sabbath.
And by Gods blessing of the seventh day, they do understand Gods sanctifying
of it to be a sign and pledge of the eternal rest.

These being the grounds and reasons (in the opinion of the learned) upon which
God sanctified the seventh day, are in a more excellent measure to be found in
the first day of the week, on which day the Lord Christ rose from death^ For
first the Lord Christ on that day, who is the Lord of the sabbath. ended a
greater work then the creation, even the great work of redemption which on
that day he did perfect and finish, by the last and highest act of it, even
his resurrection in which he got the victory and triumphed over death the last
enemy, and over him who had the power of death that is, the Devil, and did
show to the world that he had fully paid the ransom and price of man's
redemption, satisfied justice, and wrought and fulfilled all righteousness,
sufficient to justify all that believe in him and to settle them in Gods
favor for ever. So that here is a better ending and finishing of a better
work, then that of the creation was, which did perfect the mutable work of
creation, and so here is a b^tter ground of sanctifying the day in which it
came to pass, as dive^s learned writers have rightly observed.

Secondly, on this day the Lord Christ entered into a better rest, then any
from the creation can be: he rested from all his labors, pains, and
sufferings, and all works which Gods infinite justice required for man's
redemption by way of satisfaction, Heb. 4.10.

And he took possession of eternal rest for himself as the head, and for his
body the whole Church and for every elect member thereof.

So that this resting is a more far excellent ground and reason of the
sanctifying of this day to be the weekly Sabbath. Yea though I do by Gods
perfecting of his work, understand his perfecting of the work which was
marred and defaced by man's fall, even the work of creation, and his making of
it more perfect and complete, by his promising of Christ, and by Christ's
undertaking and beginning his actual Mediation, and first bringing in of
supernatural perfection. And by Gods resting I understand his resting so fully
and wholly in Christ's mediation, and in his satisfaction undertaken for the
repairing and perfecting of the world, which man by his fall had brought under
vanity and corruption, that he put from him all thoughts and purposes of going
about any new work of creation for the repairing thereof, and so is said to
rest, as I have before fully proved: Yet I must confess that on the Lords day,
which is the first of the week, in which Christ did rise from death. God did
more fully and excellently perfect all his work and brought in a rest, which
does so far excel that perfecting of his work and resting from creation on
the first seventh day, as the actual performance of a promise, and giving and
fulfilling of a good thing promised, undertaken, and begun, does excel the
promise and the undertaking and beginning of it. And therefore J will be bold
upon these grounds and premises to conclude with the best learned both of the
Ancient fathers and modern Divines. That there is more convenience and
fitness in the Lords day, the first day of the week to be the Lords holy
weekly Sabbath now under the Gospel. And there are more excellent grounds and
sure reasons for the sanctifying of it, then any which are named or can be
found in the seventh day which was the Sabbath of the old Testament: yea this
day by means of Christ's resurrection to glory in it, is the surest pledge and
token which outwardly can be given to Gods Church and people, that God who
raised him up, is by him fully appeased, satisfied and reconciled to his
people, and is the Lord who does sanctify them and will bring them to glory.

And thus I pass from the convenience and fitnes of the Lords day, which is
the first of the week, to show the change of the Sabbath unto that day both
in Gods intention and purpose from the beginning, and also actually in the
fullness of time by the glorious resurrection of the Lord Christ up on that day.

Where by Gods assistance J shall make it appear. That this change of the
Sabbath to the Lords day is no humane invention, or Eccesiasticall tradition,
but a thing which God the lawgiuer did purpose and intend from all eternity,
and foretold by the Prophets, and by diverse signs foreshewed of old, and in
fullness of time did by his Son Christ the Lord of the Sabbath, command and
actually bring to pass.

sermon. 251. de tempore.
First Saint Augustine and diverse other learned men have heretofore observed.
That God by some notable things which he in his wisdom made to concur in the
first day of the ceration, did plainly foreshew in the beginning before the
seventh day was sanctified, or the law of the Sabbath given, that it was his
purpose and will, and he in his eternal counsel had determined to advance in
fullness of time, that day above all other days of the week to the honor of
the holy weekly sabbath, to a day of meditation on the eternal rest in heaven,
and a pledge to his people of the everlasting sabbathisme, which there remains
for them, and the first fruits of their time offered unto God in Christ and
sanctified in him.

Those notable things are the three things before named. 1. That God made that
day the first fruits of all time. 2. Created in it the place of eternal rest
the highest Heaven, in which the blessed saints shall enjoy their blessed
Sabbath whereof the weekly Sabbath is a sign and pledge to them in this life.
3. In it he created the light of this visible world, which things concurring in
one and the same day: (God in his wisdom so ordering it, who does nothing in
vain but every thing for some wise purpose) and being good reasons to prove
and grounds to make that day the fittest to be sanctified in Christ, and made
the Ch^istian Sabbath, as J have before noted, the learned from thence do
gather, and not without good reason: That from the beginning God intended for
this day the Honor of his weeklie Sabbath, in the time of the glorious Gospel.

Secondly, diverse of the Ancients have observed. That God raineing Manna first
from Heaven to Israel on the first day of the week in the wilderness: as we
read Exodus 16. did therefore foreshew that this was the day which he had
appointed to be the day of the Lord Christ, even the day wherein he who is the
Heavenly Manna and bread of life should be given from Heaven in his
incarnation, and the day in which he should come out of the furnace of fiery
afflictions, and made a strong bread and nourishment by his resurrection able
to feed our souls spiritually to life eternal. And from hence they infer,
with the approbation of diverse grave Divines and schoolmen of later times,
that God did of old intend and purpose to make this day, in the times of the
Gospel after Christ fully exhibited and given unto us, to be the bread of life,
and heavenly Mann^, his Holy weekly Sabbath and day of spiritual provision,
wherein Christians should make their weekly provision of spiritual food, and
heavenly Manna to feed their souls.

Thirdly, diverse of the Ancient fathers have observed, and diverse both
Schoolmen and godly learned writers of the reformed Church therein consent
with them. That the Lord did of old by his spirit-speaking in the Prophets,
fortell the change of the Holy Sabbath from the seventh to the first day of
the week, the Lords day, and day of Christ's resurrection. The blessed M^rtyr
Jgnatius who lived and was grown in the knowledge of Christianity in the time
of the Apostles, and before the death of St. John the Evangelilist as he
himself testifies, does in his Epistle to the M^gnesians not only affirm
that the Lords day is the Queen and supreme Lady of all days, but also
endeavors to prove, that God from the days of old had ordained it to be the
true Christian Sabbath, and did foreshew so much by the words of the Prophet
David in the title of the sixth Psalm, wherein it is called a Psalm unto the
eighth day, that is in honor of the Lords day, which as it is the first of the
week counting from the creation every week severallie by it self, and the
seventh if we begin our account with the next day after the Lords day, as the
Jews did with the next after their Sabbath.

So if we reckon forward from the beginning of the creation into an other week
it is the eight day. And also learned Augustine and others of the fathers, as
also diverse late writers do in this point concur with him, and affirm that
God moving David to make such Honorable mention of the eighth day, did
foreshew his purpose and will, to change that day by Christ's resurrection in
to his Holy Sabbath. Some also from Gods institution of circumcision one the
eighth day after the birth of the child which was to be circumcised, do gather
that the eight day, after the birth of the world, to weet: the Lords day was
before ordained of God to be not only the day of Christ's resurrection and
victory over sin and death by which sin should be cut of and destroyed, but
also the Christian sabbath and so both a special day of Circumcising their
hearts to the Lord in the state of grace, and also a pledge of the fullness of
mortification and sanctification in the day of the last resurrection and of
entrance into the eternal Sabbath in heaven. For this purpose also Saint
Austen and many other learned men in all ages since even to this day, sermon. de
tempore. 136.
do allege the plain words of David, Psalm. 118.24, where having
Prophetically fortold the glorious resurrection of Christ. Thou after that the
Jews had crucified and put him to death, he should rise up to be the head
corner stone even the rock and foundation of the Church, (for so our Savior
Mat. 21.42. and the Apostle Act. 4.11. do expound David's words) he immediately
affirms, that this is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice, and
be glad in it. That this is the day of the Lord Christ as St. John calls it
Revel. 1.10. which the Lord has made. That is, in his degree has already
appointed to be his holy day, we (that is in the time of the Gospel when this
stone is become the head of the corner) will rejoice and be glad in it: that
is, rejoice before the Lord with all joy and serve him, be glad in him with
Sabbatical and holy solemnity, and if we consider well the matter and substance
of the 92. Psalm, which is entitled a Psalm for the Sabbath, we shall see
that it is most fit for the day of Christ's resurrection, setting forth the
fruits thereof plainly and after a lively manner, to weet: the soled joy of
Gods people, and the flourishing state of the righteous in Gods Church, and
exalting of the horn of Christ the true M^ssiah and King of the Church.

Fourthly, if we consider the diversity and difference of things which are
commanded in the law of the Sabbath, and are to be observed in the weekly
Sabbath as it was instituted by God at the first, and again reviued in the
fourth commandment, if we call to mind that the law is a mixed law commanding
some things which concern the uery substance and being of the Holy Sabbath,
unto which it binds men perpetually, such as are a fit proportion of time one
day in every week, rest and cessation, from common works of this life, and
sanctification of it by religious exercises and devoting it to public
assemblies and holy worship. And other things it commanded which were typical,
and ceremonial, and were to have there full accomplishment in Christ, and to
be in force only until the full exhibitio^ and revelation of Christ, a pefect
Redeemer, all which I have largely showed before, and the best learned have
ever held. It will upon these grounds necessarily follow, that there must be a
change of the Sabbath from the seventh day, and in respect of the tipicall and
ceremonial worship, at the full exhibition of Christ, into aday and a
worship more fit for Christ given and revealed, and for the times of the
gospel.

First it is generally held by the best learned. That God by sanctifying the
seventh day and commanding his Holy Sabbath to be kept every week on the
seventh day, did thereby show, that in his wisdom he saw it fit and necessary
for man to observe this proportion of time, and to devote one day in every
week, both to bodily rest and a total cessation from his own worldly
labors, pleasures, and delights, and also to Holy and Heavenly meditations,
and to religious exercises, and Holy assemblies. And in these respects they
call the law of the Sabbath natural, moral, and perpetual, and they prove it
thus.

First because nature it self and common reason and experience do teach, that
ever since man's fall it is naturally necessary for man's health and welbeing,
and for the preserving and upholding of the life and strength of his laboring
and ^oyling cattle, that he, his servants and cattle should have one days
rest in seven. And that without this proportion of time dedicated to Holy
assemblies, and exercises of piety, the saving knowledge of God, and true
religion and piety cannot well be upheld, frail men would by little forget
God, become ignorant of heavenly things, and so of the way to eternal rest; if
it were left in man's power to choose his own time; some would choose none at
all, the rest for the most part would differ that time which some thought fit.
Others would refuse as inconvenient, and so there would be no set ordinary
assemblies, Gods worship would grow out of use.

Secondly, true piety teaches us; that we ought to think our selves bound in
conscience to give and devote so much of our time at the least to pious
exercises, as God, in whose hand we and our times are, did require of his
people in the obscurer times of the Old Testament, for the keeping of religion
and his worship on foot, for preserving of the knowledge and memory of his
goodness, and benefits, and for the sanctifying of their weekly labors of
his creatures to their use and of themselves to him, that they might be fitted
to see him in glory, for the abundance of grace shed on us by the Gospel; is a
bond and obligation to us of much more service and obedience which we owe to
God. Now God required of them every seventh day to be kept holy, and that was
the least which any of them in any age were bound to dedicate to his worship.
And therefore true piety binds us much more to keep an holy weekly Sabbath.

These are arguments and proofs, sufficient to satisfy any man who does not
peruersly resist, and rebel against the law of nature. But let me here give a
cave at by the way: That when the learned call the sabbath and the law of it
natural, we are not to conceive that by natural, they mean a thing written in
man's heart in the creation, which man was made to perform and obey simply as a
reasonable creature and natural man ( For man was made for the Sabbath Mark
2.27.) Neither did he toil and sweat or need a set weekly rest: Neither did he
need a weekly solemnity, to help his memory, or to stir up his affections, as
I have before proved. But that they understand by natural, that which the
uerie light of natural reason shows to be most convenient and necessary for
men now corrupt, and which so soon as it is commanded and revealed by Gods
word appears so necessary in the very nature of it, both for men souls and
bodies, that without it they cannot have ordinarily any well being on earth, nor
escape hell and come to Heaven after death. This exposition learned Zanchyus,
gives of his own and other learned men's speeches, Zanch. lib de De Calog.
these, 1.
when they call the law of the Sabbath natural. Jf, says he, it were so
natural as things written in man's heart in the creation, then the Heathen
Gentiles would have felt themselves bound by it, and would have showed it in
their practice in some measure more or less. Nevertheless the conclusion of
Zanchyus, and other learned Divines is firm and sure, upon the former
premises, to weet: That Gods first commandment of the Sabbath does perpetually
bind al Gods people to the worlds end, to keep a weeklie Sabbath even a seventh
day in every week Holy to the Lord.

Secondly, it is a thing universally held by all true Christian writers, that
the Sabbath as it was limited to the seventh day of the week, and was to be
observed by bodily sacrifices morning and evening, and by worship which
consisted in outward rites which were tipes and figures of things which have
their accomplishment in Christ, so it was ceremonial temporary and chaungable.
The common ground of the sanctifying of the seventh day and tying the Sabbath
to it, is held commonly to be Gods rest on the seventh day from the work of
creation. And this is such a ground as in the fullness of the time was to give
place and did give place to a better rest arising, and brought in by the
finishing of a more excellent and glorious work of Gods goodness and bounty
even the work of man's Redemption. The worship of God on the Sabbath of the
seventh day in the old Testament, by double sacrifices and such ryts were but
vanishing shadows the substance of the^ was Christ, and therefore they were to
cease when the body and substance came in. And the particular day it self and
the rest tied to it was a tipe and figure of the death of Christ, and of his
rest in the grave, and of the rest and ease which Christ by his death should
bring to all Gods people from the burden of legal rites, and from the guilt of
sin and horror of conscience, which as an heavy load did press them down,
and from the mass of corruption like a weight hanging fast one them, all which
Christ abolished by his death and redemption, and so put an end to the Sabbath
as it was tied to the last day of the week.

This being commonly held for a certain truth by the learned Fathers and
writers of all ages after them until this day, proves so far as their
authority and reason will reach: that though the keeping holy of a weekly
Sabbath is a perpetual day, to which all Gods people are bound in all ages:
yet the particular day was mutable, and another special day was to be
appointed and consecrated by him who is the Lord of the sabbath, wherein an holy
rest fitter for the time and state of the new Church must be kept, with better
service and solemnity. Instead of bodily sacrifices, there must be offering up
of spiritual sacrifices of praises, prayers, alms, and works of piety, and
charity: for-slaughtering of beasts, there must mortifying of corruption by holy
contrition, and killing of all brutish lusts and carnal pleasures and
delights, by seperating our selves and sequestring our minds from them.
Instead of dark shadows of the law, and obscure promises of Christ to come;
there must be the light of the Gospel shining in the Church and preaching of
Christ crucified, and raised up and set at Gods right hand, and there must be
seeking of Gods face in his name and mediation, and of access unto God in him
by one spirit.

Now what day can any man conceive in any reason so fit as the Lords day, the
first of the week: wherein we christians keep our weekly sabbath? This
undoubtedly is the most fit and convenient of all days as I have largely
before proved. Yea that this undoubtedly is the only particular day which Gods
law binds us to keep holy all the time of the Gospel, even until we come to
the eternal rest in heaven. I will as briefly as I can prove and demonstrate,
in the last place, and so conclude this point of sanctifycation of the Sabbath,
as it is the work of God the lawgiver, and is distinguished from man's duty and
work of sanctification.

CHAP. 13.
THE First which is the maine foundamentall argument, is drawn from the
foundation upon which God has from the beginning builded and surely settled the
weekly Sabbath. 1 Argument.
It is a thing most certain and undeniable, that whatsoever things are
inseperably joined and cleave fast together, they stand and move together, the
one cannot move to any place, but the other of necessity must move with it.

Whatsoever is firmly s^tled on a rock and inseperably fastened to it, and
founded on it, must needs move with the rock and cannot move to any place but
where the rock is moved, upon which ground I argue thus: That which is from the
beginning founded upon Christ, and so surely settled and firmly builded vp^n him
by God, the founder of al things, that cannot be separated, it must needs move
and change the place with Christ, and cannot be moved, nor change and remove
to any place but only to that which Christ is removed. The weekly Sabbath from
the first institution is founded by God, firmly builded and sure settled upon
Christ the redeemer, and is in seperably joined to him. Therefor it cannot
move nor change the place, nor be removed from the seventh day to any other
day of the week, unless Christ the Redeemer change his day and move together
with it, and if he does change his solemn day, it must needs be changed and
removed with him to the same day. The proposition is undeniable: the assumption
also J have fully proved before, in the laying open the grounds of the Sabbath:
and therefore the conclusion is a most manifest truth. That whenever Christ
changes his day and chooses another, the Sabbath must needs be changed to
the same day. Which conclusion fully proved I lay it down for a good ground and
argue thus upon it.

That day which Christ leaves and passes from it unto another, which he
chooses for his special and particular day. From that day the Sabbath also is
changed and moved, and the other day which Christ has chosen becoms also
immediately the particular day of the holy weekly Sabbath. Now the seventh day
which was the special day of Christ in the old Testament, because on it Christ
was promised a Redeemer of the world, and did first undertake openly and
actually to mediate for man, is now ceased to be Christ's peculier day, he has
left it, and has chosen the first day, and made that his special and peculiar
day above all other days of the week, when in it he got the victory over
death, and by his resurrection entered into his glory and eternal rest; and of
a redeemer in promise, became a redeemer indeed and fully perfected man's
redemption. Therefore ever since has the weekly Sabbath been removed to the
first day, and that is the peculiar day of the weekly Sabbath.

Secondly, that God did from the beginning purpose in himself, 2 Argument.
and by many evidences did declare his intent, to change the Sabbath from the
seventh to the first day, and also in the first institution of the Sabbath, and
in the giving of his law for the keeping of it, did intend to bind us under the
Gospel to the keeping of our weekly Sabbath on the first day of the week, as
he bound the fathers to the seventh day in the Old Testament. J prove from the
determinate counsel and forknowledge of God concerning the chaunges which he
foreknew and determined to bring to pass, in the foundation, grounds, and
prerogatives of the Sabbath from the seventh to the first day of the week: It
is a thing which all men who have any true knowledge of God must needs know
and acknowledge for an undoubted truth: that God whose wisdom is infinite, and
his wife providence orders and disposes all things, does never any thing in
vain, he never lays the foundation in any place but there also he intends the
building, he never brings in the proper causes any where, or in any time, but
then and there he intends to bring in and to produce the proper effects of
them, and whatsoever commandment God gives to men to perform some special
duty upon some special grounds, and for some singular causes, occasions and
reasons, by that commandment he binds them to perform the duty whenever and
whersoever he shows the grounds and reasons to them, and gives and offers the
causes and occasions.

So that if it be made to appear unto us, that now under the Gospel, God had
according to his own determinat counsel and forknowledge changed the
foundation of the weekly Sabbath, and removed it and all the grounds, reasons,
accasions, and praerogatiues of it, from the seventh day to the first which is
the Lords day, we must needs see and acknowledge, that it was the Purpose,
mind, and will of God to make the Lords day our weekly Sabbath, and in his
giving of the first law of the Sabbath, which in the maine substance of it is
perpetual, to bind all his people after the full exhibition of Christ to the
last resurrection to keep the Holy weekly Sabbath on that day only.

Now these things may sufficiently appear by the opening and proving of diverse
things before, which I have observed out of this text, and by urging and
pressing them home to this present purpose a little more fully here again I
shall put them out of all doubt and question, and make them manifest and clear
to al who do not wilfully shut their ears against the truth. First, that the
foundation of the Sabbath is Christ the Redeemer, and that all the true and
proper grounds, reasons and occasions, of keeping one day in every week Holy to
the Lord, are only to be found in Christ and came in with him, as I have before
fully proved. And as God first promised Christ to come the seed of the woman,
for the Redemption of mankind, and Christ did undertake for man to mediate for
him on the first seventh day of the world, and thereupon that day was
sanctified to be the weekly sabbath: So God had in his immutable counsel
determined to exhibit Christ a perfect Redeemer, and by him to perfect man's
redemption on the first day of the week, and so to remove Christ the
foundation from the seventh day of the week, to the first day, together with
all other grounds, reasons, occasions and prerogatives of the Holy Sabbath.
What greater change could be or ever was hard of in Christ the maine
foundation both of the Sabbath and of the universal Church, then when of a
redeemer promised on the seventh day, and so continuing all the time of the old
Testament while the fathers believed only in him promised and not yet come. He
became a Redeemer fully exhibited in his resurrection on the first day of the
week and changed the state of the Church: and bringing her from the Nonnage and
childish estate of bondage under the rudiments of the world, and legal rites,
and carnal ceremonies, to the fullness of her time which God had appointed,
and to her full age in the new testament. And hereby that first day of the
week became the chiefest day of the Lord Christ, even his special and
particular day, and came to have all the subordinat grounds and high
prerogatives of the Sabbath. For in it God perfected his work which he had
made in the creation by the work of redemption, not promised and undertaken
only, as in the seventh day, but by a better kind of perfecting and ending,
even by redemption fully finished, on that day Christ rested from that
greater work of redemption, and declared by his resurrection, that he had made
full satisfaction for mankind to the justice of God, and that God rested in his
satisfaction, now actually made and performed, by a more excellent manner of
resting then that wherewith he rested on the seventh, in that satisfaction only
undertaken and promised, on that day Christ got the victory over death, hell,
sin, the world and the Devil, and becoming immortal not subject to die, or
suffer any more, entered into the glorious state of exaltation and into his
eternal rest, and made way for men to that eternal rest whereof the Sabbath is
both a lively pledge, and also a powerful means to fit men for it. And in all
these respects God blessed the first day of the week, with a blessing far
above his blessing of the seventh day, for that was the promise and undertaking
only, this was the performance and perfecting of redemption: and therefore so
far excels that, as the giving of a great gift and perfecting of a work
exceeds the promise of that gift and undertaking of that work. Now that that
this removing of the maine foundation of the weekly Sabbath, together with the
subordinat grounds, occasions and prerogatives of it, from the seventh day to
the Lords day; the first of the week, came to pass by the determinate
counsel, foreknowledge and providence of God, and that from the beginning and
in the first giving of the law of the weekly Sabbath, God did purpose and
intend this change, it appears most plainly by diverse reasons. First because
God is no idle spectator, but the provident Lord and disposer of all things,
which come to pass in the world, and nothing can come to pass but so as he
has appointed, and in the time and season which he has determined.

The flood and general deluge by which the old world was destroyed, came to
pass in the very year and day which God had prefixed, and did for tell to
Noah one hundred and twenty years before. The end of Jsraell peregrination and
servitude in Egypt, came to pass just at the end of four hundred and ^hirty
years, in the same day which God had determined, and foretold to Abraham.
Exodus 12.41. and so the deliverance of the Isralites out of captivity, and the
decree for their return came out at Gods appointed time, which he had foretold
by Jeremiah the Prophet. Dan, 9.2 23. And the particular time of Christ's
satisfaction and atonement for sin, and bringing in of eternal
righteousness, was determined by God, and came to pass at the end of the
seventy sevens of years, as it was revealed to Daniell in the same Chap. 24.
ver. And in a word the very time of Christ's resurrection, by the virtue whereof
we are fully redeemed and shall in our very bodies be raised up to life
eternal, and rest in glory, as the Apostl^ testifies. Romans 6.5. 1 Cor.
15.13.21 Philip. 3.10. and 1 Pet. 1.3. It was determined by God before the
foundation of the world, as the words of St Peter do show. 1 Pet. 1.2.
Secondly; God in the very creation and from the first beginning of the world,
did foreshew that he had a purpose to honor the first day of the week above
all the other days, and to make it the Lords day and Christian sabbath by the
resurrection of Christ. In that he made it the first fruits of time, and in it
created the highest heaven, the place of the eternal Sabbath, and brought
forth the light of this inferior world, by which natural prerogatives he made
this day the fittest of all days of the week, to be the day of Christ's
resurrection, wherein he the sun of righteousness and light of the world, rose
up with healing in his wings, and became the first fruits of them that sleep,
and by virtue whereof he will bring the faithful into the eternal rest,
whereof the weekly Sabbath is a pledge and will make them partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, as the Scriptures testify 1 Cor. 15.20.
and Coloss. 1.12.

Upon these premises before proved at large, and here again pressed home to
the purpose. The conclusion follows necessarily: That it was the purpose,
intent and will of God to make the first day of the week, the Lords day and
the Christian Sabbath, and in the first institution of the Sabbath. and by his
first law of the Sabbath (which in the maine substance of it is perpetual) to
bind all his people in the time of his glorious Gospel, to observe that day
only for their holy weekly Sabbath; until they come to that whereof the
Sabbath is a lively pledge, even the eternal rest of glory in Heaven.

3 Argument.
Thirdly whatsoever tends most to the perfect fullfilling of any special law
and commandment of God given to men, and is manifestly made known to man to
be most agreeable to Gods will revealed in that law, and to the ends and uses
which God openly pretends therein, that man is chiefly bound to do by that
law and commandment. This is a most certain and undoubted truth. For Gods
general commandment is, that we love him with all our heart, and worship and
serve him with all our soul and all our strength. Deuteronomy. 6; 5. and Mat. 22.37.

Now the will of God revealed in this first institution, and sanctifying of the
sabbath, and in the fourth Commandment of the law, is often repeated and urged
by Moses and the Prophets, is more perfectly fulfilled in the right
sanctification of the Lords day under the Gospel, then it was in the
observatio^ of the seve^th the sabbath of the old Testament, and whatsoever
necessary duty God in the law of the sabbath requires of man from the
beginning, Or whatsoever end and use he openly pretends, his law of the
keeping of the holy sabbath that is more fully obtained, effected, and brought
to pass by an holy sanctification of the Lords day, and by keeping it an holy
Sabbath to the Lord now under the Gospel. Therefore by the law of the sabbath
given at the first, and by the fourth commandment, it is repeated and
explaned, Christians are bound to to keep the Lords day which is the first of
the week for their weekly S^bbath.

If any man does make doubt of the assumption in this Syllogism. It is easily
proved by a particular enumeration, both of the particular substanciall and
necessary duties which Gods word requires in the Sabbath: and also of the ends
and uses for which God requires an holy sabbath to be kept every seventh day.

The First maine duty from which the seventh day requirs the name of Sabbath,
is rest and cessation from all worldly labors, pleasures and delight, wherein
man is to withdraw his mind from worldly cares and secular affairs, which
concern this frail earthly life, and is to give rest and refreshing to his
own body, and to the bodies of his children, servants strangers, and toyling
cattle as appears. Exodus 20.10. Isa 58.13.

And the proper end and use of this rest is. First to admonish man that he must
not place nor seek felicity in this world, nor since his fall and breaking of
the Covenant of works by his disobedience, hope for any happiness or felicity
either here or else where to be purchased by his own works of righteousness,
which he either is, or was able in the first creation to perform in his own
person. Secondly to show that Gods just wrath appeased by Christ, and the sting
of death and the curse and bitterness of man's sorrows, and toilsome labors
which God imposed on him for his transgression, is taken away, and God will not
have his people to torment their bodies which continual toil, and painful
labor, but to ease and refresh themselves with a weekly rest. Thirdly to make
men take notice that God has a provident and fatherly care of his creatures
both men and beasts, hates all merciless cruelty, and oppression of their very
bodies, and will have them so refreshed and eased that they may last the
longer, and go cheerfully through their weeklie labors.

Fourthly, to show that in Christ upon whom the Sabbath is founded, there is
spiritual rest and ease and refreshing of the soul, from the heavy burden of
sin, and the miser^es of sin, to be found of all them who being heavy laden
do flee to him, and in him place their hope and confidence.

Fif^ly, to put in mind of Gods resting in Christ's mediation from the work of
creation, and that he has wholly given over all purposes and thoughts of
repairing the world, and restoring man fallen and corrupted by any work of
creation, and has set his mind on another kind of work, even the work of
redemption by Christ, and the new creation of heavenly spiritual and
supernatural graces and perfections in men by his holy spirit.

Sixthly, to be a sign and memorial of Christ his full perfecting of the
work of man's redemption, and of his perfect satisfaction made to the justice
of God for frail sinful men.

Lastly to be a token and pledge of the eternal rest in heaven, and of the
Sabbathisme which after the labors and troubles of this life, the elect and
faithful people of God shall enjoy for ever in the world to come.

Now there is no day in all the week, in which this first maine duty of the
Sabbath can be well be performed, for the ends and uses, as on the Lords day
which is the Christian Sabbath. The seventh day never yielded half so much
light and helps to Gods people in the old Testament for these purposes, as the
Lords day does to us under the Gospel. For the Lords day in which Christ arose
from death, and entered into his glory, and perfected the work of Redemption,
It discovers Christ the maine foundation of all rest, and even of the Sabbath
it self more plainly unto us, and in it being bewtified and adorned with so
many blessings and prerogatives which Gods word gives to it, we may as in a
clear glass see and behold Christ with open face, we see in his resurrection
Gods justice fully satisfied, his wrath appeased, redemption fully perfected,
Gods resting in Christ mediation, eternal rest purchased by Christ for us, and
gained to himself, and heaven opened unto us, and sin, death and hell already
overcome and conquered. And therefore there is no day by many degrees, so fit
as this day of Christ's resurrection to make us rest comfortably in our bodies
and minds from worldly cares, and bodily l^boures, and in our souls and
consciences from the burden of sin and the guilt thereof. No day or time can
so plainly show unto us, that our fellicity is not in this world, nor to be
obtained and purchased by the righteousness of our own works. This sets
before us Christ raised for our justification. This shows Gods abundant mercy
and compassion ^o us, and that he hates all cruelties and oppressions. And
this is a special means to bring us to the assurance of the blessed hope and
eternal rest reserved in Heaven for us. And therefore the first maine duty with
all the parts thereof, and the special ends and uses of it, are more fully
performed and obtained in the observation of the Lords day for the Holy weekly
Sabbath, then they possibly can be now by us, or could be of old on the sabbath
of the seventh day, by the fathers in the old Testament.

The second maine duty of the Sabbath is sanctifying and keeping of it holy to
the Lord, which comprehends in it many special and particular duties. 1.
Setting of their affections even their joy and delight wholly upon God and
heavenly things. 2. Honoring and worshipping of God, in their hearts with holy
thoughts and meditations, by their lips with holy prayers, praises, and
thanksgiving, in their outward actions by preaching, hearing, reading, and
repeating of Gods word, and solemn commemoration of his promises, mercies and
blessings in the word and sacraments. 3. Teaching and learning all holy duties
which tend to bring us nearer to God in Christ. 4. Offering spiritual
sacrifices to God of sweet savor, such as are almesdeedes and works of mercy
and charity, whereby others may be made to taste of Gods goodness and stirred up
to laud and praise his name.

All these are comprehended under the maine duty of sanctifying the holy
Sabbath which the Lord commands expressly in the law, and they are commended to
us by the Prophet. Isa. 56.4. and 58.13. And the proper end and use of this
duty and all the parts thereof, is. First to make us set our affections on
things which are above and not on things below, and to stir us up to seek
eternal life and heavenly happiness in Christ only, and in him crucified and
raised up.

Secondly, to continue and increase in frail men the knowledge and memory of
Christ, and of the way to eternal life and blessedness in him, which without
keeping holy of a weekly Sabbath, would fail and cease among the sons of men.

Thirdly, to begit and increase true grace and holiness in men by exercising
holy duties of religion; and so to bring them by justification and adoption to
the right of inheritance in Heaven, and by sanctification to fit them for the
possession of it. Now the observation of the Lords day, in which Christ arose
is such as may far more powerfully and effectually move men to the performance
of these duties, and lead men more directly to the proper end and use of them,
then the old Sabbath of the the seventh day, either now can, or of old could do
when it was most in force. For it had no other light or life in it, but only
from obscure promises, and dark shadows through which Christ was seen as
things far off are seen, and in the star light nights. But the Lords day
the first day of the week, has light and life from the sun of righteousness
Christ who in it rose up, and to be the light of life to all nations, and has
brought life and immortallity to light by the Gospel, and discovered to us the
kindness and love of God and the riches of his goodness, in giving grace and
shedding his spirit on us abundantly here, and so fit us for glory hereafter.
And therefore this day must needs be of great force and power, far ab^ve the
seventh day, to make men set their affections on God and heavenly things,
especially upon the inheritance incorruptible and undefiled which fades not
away: reserved in heaven for us, unto which God has begotten us by the
resurrection of Christ from the dead. 1. Pet. 1.3. It is also powerful and
excellent to incite and stir us up to honor God in our hearts, by the due
consideration of his goodness and mercy. Also it much furthereth us to
proclaim the high praises of our God, and king, and to make prayers and
supplications to him. Besides to make us helpful unto others, in seeking after
their salvation. And thus we may see what are Sabbath duties, even the works
of piety, mercy, charity, etc. pleasing to God, and by which others may be
brought to join with us, in lauding and praising God, and we our selves fitted
for glory.

Upon ^hese points so fully proved. The conclusion follows necessarily: that
the law by which God first instituted the Sabbath on the first s^venth day of
the world, does bind us under the Gospel to keep the Lords day for our
weeklie Sabbath.

Argum.
Fourthly, that day which God has made, most Honorable, and has given it a
most Honorable name and title above all the days of the week, to that he has
given the prerogative to be the weekly Sabbath and has made it his day of
Holy rest. For it is a property of the sabbath, to be the Lords Holy and
Honorable day, as the Evangellicall Prophet Isaiah shows. Jsa 58.13. and
making of it Hono^able, is making of it the Sabbath. Now the first day of the
week is the day which God has Honored above all days, by the glorious
victory of Christ, over death and over all enemies, and powers of darkness,
and to it he has given the most Honorable, name and title: For the holy
evangelist and divine Apostle S. John, who was the intimate, beloved, and
bosom Disciple of the Lord, and did best know his mind calls it the Lords day.
Revel. 1.10. that is, the day which the Lord has made the day of great joy and
gladness to his people, as David foretold. Psa. 118. which day the Lord Christ
has appropriated to himself, and his honor, and Honored with his own name,
as he is the Lord God, one Jehovah with the father. For the Greek word ((...))
Lord, is in respect of the root from whence it is derived the same in
signification, with Gods proper name Jehovah, and most commonly in the new
Testament, is used to express that sacred name. Therefore it is now under the
Gospel made by God himself the weekly Sabbath.

The Fifth argument is grounded upon the words of our Savior. Math. 12.8. and
Mark. 2.27^28. Where he says, that the Sabbath was made for man, and not man,
for the Sabbath. Therefore he, even as he is the son of man, or God made man,
is the Lord of the sabbath.

The first clause, to weet: ( the sabbath was made for man,) notes out unto us
two things. 1. That the Sabbath was first instituted for man, even by reason of
the son of God promised to become man, and so he is the foundation of it. 2.
That it was made for man, that is, for the man Christ, and for the benefit of
all mankind in him, for his honor and the advancement of his kingdom among
men, and for the good of men, both natural and civil, in respect of weekly
rest, and refreshing, and also spiritual, as knowledge, instruction, growth in
grace and holiness.

The second clause ( not man for the Sabbath) shows that the Sabbath is not one
of those things which man was made to observe in the creatione, neither is the
law of it written in man's heart in the the creation: it was the fall of man and
his corruption, which caused his to stand in need of a weekly rest, and of holy
Sabbath exercises, to work good in him, and to bring him nearer to God. And
being made for man's use, he may in case of necessity dispense with outward
observations of the Sabbath: and the same must give place to works of necessity
which cannot be omitted either without loss of life or some certain loss or
mischief

The third clause (Therefore is the son of man Lord also of the sabbath) does
give us to understand that the use of the Sabbath was founded on Christ
promised to be Lord of the sabbath, and was in, and under him made man, and
necessary for the profit of man corrupted, not for man in innocence. Therefore
Christ the son of man is Lord of the Sabbath that is, he has the true proper
right and propriety, in it for to make it serve for his use being the Lord
possessor of it, and he has authority and power over it, so that it is at his
command, either to be or not to be in use, either the seventh day or upon some
other day of the week. Now we never read, that Christ exercised any Lordship
over the Sabbath, as he is the son of man, either to command it or to change
it, but only in these two respects. First that he brought it first into the
world by undertaking to be the seed of the woman, and the son of man, and so
it was settled on the seventh day, in which he was promised during the time of
the old Testament, while he was a redeemer pr^mised.

Secondly, that he by his resurrection in which he perfected redemption, did
consecrate the first day and made it the most honorable day, fit to be the
Sabbath of the new Testament, and also gave commandment to his Apostles so to
ordain in all Churches. Besides this Lordship and power of Christ as son of
man over the Sabbath, we cannot conceive or imagine any other. Therefore
undoubtedly he has changed it to the first day of the week, and as Lord of
it has given commandment for this change and alteration.

6 Argument.
The sixth Arg. is drawn from Gods sanctifying of the Lords day by his son
Christ more fully and excellently, then he did the seventh day in the first
institution of the Sabbath. For seeing the making of the seventh day to be the
Holy Sabbath, is the sanctifying of it as the words of my text show, and also
the words of the law. Exodus 20.13. It must needs hereupon be granted. that
what day God by his Son Christ, has in all respects more fully and
excellently sanctified, then the seventh day was sanctified when God made it
the Sabbath. That day God by Christ has made his Holy Sabbath, and so it is
worthy to be esteemed, and so is to be observed in the new Testament. But
now it is most certain and manifest: That the Lord God by his son Christ has
in all respects more fully and excellently sanctified the first day of the
week, in which Christ arose from death (as appears by diverse things which I
have formerlie touched.) First he in that day more abundantly revealed his
holiness to the world in that he declared Christ our Redeemer and the head of
the whole body the Church, To be the Son of God with power, according to the
spirit of Holiness by the resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.3.

Secondly, he then opened as it were the floodgates of Heaven, that Holiness
might be more abundantly with his spirit powered out upon all flesh, when Christ
was raised up and exalted by Gods right hand, that he might shed his spirit on
all sorts of people of all nations, as we read. Act. 2.33. Yea in that, in the
feast of Pentecost which was the first day of the week, and the 49. day after
Christ's resurrection, the Holy Ghost was sent down upon the Apostles to
sanctify them, and to lead them into all truth, and to give them the gifts of
tongues, to preach the Gospel unto all nations which they presently did, and
the same day converted 3000. souls, herein he both showed his Holiness more
abundantly then before.

Thirdly; It is piously held by many Divines, that among other things which
after his resurrection Christ spoke to his Disciples, concerning the Kingdom
of God, that is the Church under the Gospel: this was one, namely, of the
keeping of the Holy Sabbath, and holy assemblies, or gathering of the saints
together upon the first day of the week: For immediately after, the Apostles
observed that day, and all churches in all ages since have followed their
example. Therefore it is God who by his Son Christ has made this first day,
that is the Lords day the weekly Sabbath of Christians.

J might here add for further proof of this truth, an observation of diverse
godly and learned writers, to weet: that our Savior sanctified the first day
of the week more then any other day by his promise and example, in that he did
most commonly appear to the Disciples after his resurrection, and came amongst
them when they were assembled together on that day, and taught and instructed
them and breathed on them, so we read. Luke 24.13.36. and Ioh. 20.19.26.

Seventhly That which the Apostle taught by word and writing and ordained in
all Churches of Christian Gentiles, 7 Argument.
and confirmed by their constant practice, is undoubtedly a Commandment which
they received from the Lord Christ, so it appears. Act. 15.28. where they
profess that what they prescribed to the Chirstia^ Churches, was the dictate
and sentence first of the holy Ghost, and then of them joyntlie. And our
Savior tells us that the Holy Ghost leads men into all truth by speaking his
word only to them and calling it to their remembrance, Ioh. 16.13.14.
therefore it was Christ his word and ordinance, St. Paul also professes that
he delivered unto them, such traditions as be received from the Lord 1 Cor.
11.23. And again he says 1 Cor. 14.37. Jf any man think himself to be a
Prophet, or spiritual, let him know, that the things which J write unto you
are the Commandments of the Lord. Now it is manifest in the Gospel, and in the
writings of the new Testament: that it was a constant practice of the Apostles
to keep their assemblies with one accord on the first day of the week, so we
read: Ioh. 20.19.29. Act. 2.1.2. and in those their assemblies the Lord Christ
presented himself to them bodily, and by the visible appearance and powerful
operation of his spirit. Also Act. 20.8. St Paul on that day kept an holy
assembly at Troas, and there he preached and administered the sacrament of the
Lords supper and performed Holy exercises of the Christian Sabbath. And the
same Apostle gave a precept and commandment to the Corinthians, even the same
which he there says he had ordained in the Churches of Galatia. 1 Cor.
16.1.2: to weet: that they should observe the first day of the week, and in
their Holy assemblies on that day offer up pleasing Sabbath sacrifices, that is
do good and distribute to the necessities of the saints, with which sacrifices
God is well pleased. Heb. 13.16.

Therefore undoubtedly it is the ordinance and commandment of Christ, which
the Apostle received from him. That the first day of the week should be the
Holy Sabbath, and the day of weekly Holy assemblies to all Christians. 8. Argu.
The 8. argument is drawn from the blessing of stability wherewith God has
blessed the Sabbath of the first day, the joy and comfort and great benefit
which most godly and religious christians find in it, and the tediousnes of it
to carnal people, and the loathsomeness of it to all such as are opposites to
Christ, and from his grace. This is most true which grave and learned Gamaliell
gave in the counsel of the high priests and elders of the Jews. That which is
of men and not an ordinance of God, if it concern religion, it will come to
naught, it cannot continue in force, nor prosper any long time. Act. 5.38. And
surely if the Christian Sabbath, and keeping holy of the first day of the week
were an invention of men, and not the ordinance of the the Lord Christ, it
could not prevail and stand in force in all Christian Churches, and in all
ages by an uniforme consent without interruption. The most godly zealous, and
religious Christians, would find no solid joy and comfort in it, nor any
blessing from God in their religious observation of it. And the world of
carnal men who hate Christ, and his ordinances, would not be so opposite to
it, as to hate and loath it. For the world loves her own. But all carnal
worldlings, and profane persons, do so hate it, as they hate Christ, and it is
loathsome and tedious to them, and notwithstanding many and great oppositions
of profane persons. Yet we see it stands firm in all ages since the Apostles,
and in all Christian Churches. None but Heretics have rejected it, and all
godly Christians find solid joy and abudance of blessings in the strictest
observation of it. Therefore it is most certainly no humane invention, but
Christ's ordinance, It is he who has made the first day of the week his own
Holy day and our weekly Sabbath. The Ninth Arg. is drawn from the manifestatio^
of Gods wrath against the open profaners of the Lords day, 9. Argu.
and from the great and fearful judgments, which God has in former ages, and
does still execute on the dispicers and polluters of the christian Sabbath. It
is certain that the Lord does not cut of or consum me^ in wrath, but for some
notable scandalous sins and transgressions against some express law and
commandment, he makes no men examples of vengance by sudden and fearful
d^struction, and notable plagues, but for some notable sin, and all notable
sins, are transgressions of Gods law, committed against his revealed will and
word. Now as the Histories of all ages do afford many examples of fearful
judgments suddenly executed and inflicted on wilful profaners of the Lords day
in former times. So I could rehearse and relate above 30. examples of Gods
vengance, which he has showed openly in this land within the space of two
years, upon such as have showed open contempt of this Christian sabbath, some
of whith he has sticken with sudden death by his mediate hand, others he has
devoured with waters, and some he has cut of by surfets which they got in
dancing and drinking on the Lords day, and so^e he has fired out of their
houses in the midst of their drinking and jollity, and consumed al their
substance. And these judgments have suddenly and unexpectedly befallen them in
the very act of their transgression, while they were in the midst of their
actions, very busy about their own works, sports and pleasure. And these
things are as clear as the light, and manifest to our eyes and outward senses,
that God is most severe against the profanation of this day, and that it is
apparent that his son Christ made this day his Holy Sabbath, and commands all
men to keep it. Lastly we have clear testimonies both from the Apostles them
selves, that the day wherein Christians keep their Sabbath, even the first day
of the week is the Lords peculiar day. Revel. 1.10. And also from all the most
ancient fathers and learned Christian writers which succeeded the Apostles in
the next ensuing ages, that the Lord Christ changed the Holy Sabbath to this
day, consecrated it by his resurrection, and that all Christian Churches from
the time of the Apostles kept their holy rest in it, and devoted it to public
exercises of religion, and of Gods worship and counted it the Queen of days,
the supreme Lady and princess, and worthy to be observed and sanctified with
Sababaticall solemnities Ignatius calls it. (...). Epist ad magnesios Justin
Martyr 2. Apol. page 77. discribes the observation of it in his times, and tells
us, that Christians spent it in reading, preaching, prayer administration of
the Sacraments, offering of alms, and other public worship of God in their
public assemblies, besides private exercises of religion. Tertullian also
acknowledges this first days sabbath, and none other lib. adversus Gent. p.
41. and 155.

Eusebius lib. 4. Eccles. Histor. cap. 22. brings in the profession of
Dionysius Corinthius, who says thus. This day we kept holy the Lords day. St.
Austen in his 119. Epistle and in the 22. book. De Civit Dei. Cap. 30 and
sermon. de verbis Apostoli. 15. And many other which it would be a tedious thing
here to rehearse, especially seeing. J have before mentioned diverse of their
testimonies, which tend to this purpose, and shall produce some also hereafter.
Now upon all these arguments laid together, J hope we may boldly and
confidently conclude against all both Jewish Sabbatarians, who retain the old
abolished Sabbath of the seventh day, and also unchristian Antisabbatarians who
deny the Lords day to be the Sabbath under the Gospel, which Gods people by
Gods law and Christ's appointment are enjoined to keep Holy to the Lord.

And that this Sabbath of the Lords day, cannot be changed but must stand
firm, and be still in force among all Gods people until the end of the world
and the last resurrection, I will briefly demonstrate and show by two plain
reasons which I hope none will deny, and thus I frame them. The first is
grounded on Christ's words. Mark. 2. verse. 28. thus I frame it.

That which has Christ, as he is become the Son of man, Lord of it, must
needs exist and have a being under him as he is the son of man, that is in
the time of the Gospel. The Sabbath has Christ the son of man Lord of it.
Mark 2.28. Therefore it continues in being under Christ.

Whatsoever ordinance of God is given to his People to be unto them a token
and pledge of some great blessing, and future good promised, that God will have
them to keep saf^ and to hold fast, until they receive the blessing and come
to the full possession of it. This is manifest by the tipes and sacraments of
the law, which could not be a bolished, nor without sin purposely neglected
until Christ was fully exhibited, of whom they were signs and pledges and he
was the body and substance. And we find by daily experience, that the loosing
or casting away of the pledge, is the forfetting or forgoing of a man's right
whereof it is a pledge: If we will receive the blessing we must do the
condition of it. Now the observing of a weekly Sabbath is not only a sign of
eternal rest in heaven, but also a token and pledge if it, given in the
beginning, together with the first promise of Christ, and conveyed over from
the fathers to us, and settled on the day wherein Christ arose from death, and
perfected man's redemption. That it is a pledge of the Sabbathisme which remains
for the people of God, the Apostles words imply. Heb. 4.9. And the best learned
have ever held it to be our pledge of eternal rest in Heaven. As Aust^n. Tom.
4. Quaest. 162. and lib. contra Adimantum. cap. 13. and diverse others. Therefore
the holy weekly Sabbath upon the Lords day must be observed by all Gods people,
and the law of the Sabbath binds them thereunto perpetually to the end of the
world; and to the day of resurrection to glory. And thus I have finished the
Doctrine of the sanctification of the Sabbath, as it is the proper act of God,
even his seperaing of the seventh day to be an holy rest, by his word and
commandment.

CHAP. 14
THE thing which now follows, next in order, Of man's sanctification of the
Sabbath.
is man's sanctifying the weekly Sabbath and keeping of a seventh day holy to
the Lord, which God has imposed on him for a necessary holy duty, when by his
word and co^ma^dement he blessed and sanctified it, as here we read in the
words of my text. For Gods sanctifying of days, times, and places is not any
infusing of his holy spirit into them, as he does into his saints, even holy
Angels and men, but this giving of a law and commandment to me^ to observe and
keep them after an holy manner, and to use and employ them to holy heavenly and
supernatural use, even to divine worship and exercises of piety and religion,
as I have before proved plainly. And in that Gods sanctified the seventh day,
that is: gave a law in the beginning to man to keep and observe it for an holy
Sabbath, as my text shows. Therefore it is a necessary duty imposed by God upon
man so to observe and keep an holy sabbath every seventh day, or a seve^th day
in every week, and that duty of man's sanctification and keeping holy the Lords
sabbath, comes now in order to be handled, which is here necessarily implied
and included in the word of my text. In the opening and handling whereof, I
purpose to proceed in this method and order. First I will show that this duty
of sanctifiing an holy Sabbath to the Lord, is imposed by this act of God, on
all mankind, and the children of men are bound unto it from the seventh day of
the world, after the first beginning of the creation, until that last day of
the general resurrection and judgment, in which they shall be called to an
account and reckoning of all things which they have done in this life.
Secondly, I will show how far, and upon what terms and conditions men are
bound to this duty by Gods law, given for that purpose in his act of
sanct^fying the Sabbath. Thirdly I will show more special, the special works
wherein the sanctification and observation of the weekly Sabbath consists.

The duties are of three sorts. 1. Some are common to all Gods people in all
ages from the beginning, and all states and conditions of the Church, both in
the old and new Testament.

Some are proper to the fathers of the old Testament, while the Sabbath was
limited to the last day of the week, and grounded upon Christ promised only.
3. Some are proper to the Church and people of God under the Gospel in the new
Testament, when the Sabbath is ch^unged to the first day of the week, even the
Lords day, and builded upon the finishing of man's redemption, and Christ fully
exhibited, and Gods resting in Christ's satisfaction consummated, which is a
more excellent ground. Of all these in order.

The ^^rst point (concern^ng the obligation of all mankind to the keeping of
an holy weekly S^bbath from the first seventh day of the world, unto the last
resurrection, when the elect and faithful shall both in their souls and
bodies, enter into the eternal rest in Heaven) may be proved by diverse
Arguments.

1 Argument.
My first Argument is drawn from the law by which God here in my text did first
bind man to this duty: and thus J briefly frame it. That duty which God has
enjoined by a commandment given to our first parents, without limitation,
exception, or exemptio^ of any, that he has imposed by his commandment upon
Adam and all his seed and posterity in his loins, and they are all bound unto
it to the worlds end.

The sanctifying of a seventh in every week, and keeping it an Holy Sabbath,
is a duty enjoined by a Commandment which God gave to Adam without limitation,
or exemption of any of his seed and posterity. Therefore it is a duty imposed
by God upon all mankind, and they are bound unto it in all ages until the end
of the world.

The first proposition cannot with any color of reason be denied: if any shall
object that God gave to Adam upon the promise of Christ a law of sacrificing
clean beasts, and offering first fruits which bound him and his seed in his
loins: and yet they are not bound by it in all ages but only until the
coming of Christ: and his offering of himself a sacrifice which is the
substance of all sacrifices, and after that men are bound no longer to that
duty. I answer, that though the last of sacrifices, and of other service and
worship, which were types and shaddows, was given to Adam upon the first
promise without express limitation, and reached to his seed in his loins, and
as Caine, and Abell, so Noah, Abraham and all the patriarchs, and people of
God were bound to that duty until Christ, yet there was a limitation in the
things commanded, which being types and shadows only of Christ promised,
were of no use, but only while Christ was yet expected, and not actually
offered up a sacrifice of perfect atonement, and Gods people had need of such
types and figures to lead them to Christ. Therefore this Objection does not
touch, nor infring this proposition which speaks of a law, and of a duty which
is of use to all mankind in all their generations.

The assumption also is manifest. For here we have a law given to Adam, when
all mankind were in his loins, commanding a duty even the sanctifying of a
weekly Sabbath, which has been and is, of as great use after Christ as
before. For as the Isralites were bound unto this duty by God Exodus 16.23.28.
and 20.8. even in all their generations, as appears. Jer. 17.21. so also Gods
people are bound to it under the Gospel, whether they be strangers which join
themselves to the Lord, and lay hold on his Covenant. Isa. 56.6.7. that is,
Churches of the believing Gentiles, or natural Isralites after their long
hardness, in the last days, converted to Christ the repairer of the breach
and builder up of the old wast places after many generations. Isa. 58.12.13.14.
And J do not think there is any man professing Christianity dare be so
impudent as to affirm, that any of Gods people in any age are exempted from
the Holy duties by which the Sabbath is sanctified, and a seventh day in every
week kept Holy to the Lord, or that we in these evil and perilous times,
have not as much need of them, for the upholding of true religion, and for the
increasing of grace and godliness in our hearts. Therefore undoubtedly all
mankind in all generations and ages are bound to keep a weekly Sabbath.

My second argument is drawn from the duty it self, of keeping Holy a seventh
day weekly to the Lord, and thus I frame it. 2 Argument.
Every duty imposed on Adam and his posterity by Gods commandment, which is
in it self perpetually Holy and just, and of as great use to all men in all
ages, and as necessarily in all respects as it was in Adam when God first
enjoined it by his law. That belongs to all mankind, and all the posterity of
Adam are bound thereunto in all ages to the end of the world. The keeping of an
Holy weekly Sabbath, and sanctifying of a seventh day in every week, is such a
duty. Therefore it belongs to all mankind, and all Adams posterity are bound
to it in all ages to the end of the world.

The proposition is so manifestly true, that there can be no acception against
it, to deny it is, to deny that greatest of Gods commandments, which says
that Gods people ought to fear the Lord, and walk in his ways, and to love
and serve them with all their heart, and with all their soul, and with all
their might. Deuteronomy. 6.5. and 10.12. For whosoever exempts himself, or others
from a duty which is perpetually holy and just, and useful, and necessary for
all men, he in so doing, refuses to serve God with all his heart, soul, and
might, and teaches others to transgress that great commandment. The
assumption also is an undoubted truth. For first there can be no time nor age
named since man's fall and corruption, which brought all mankind under the
bondage of hand and toylsome labor, and eating his bred with the sweat of his
face, wherein the rest of one day in every week is not useful profi^table, and
needful for men's bodies, and most just and equal to be granted to their
laboring servants, and toyling cattle, the very light of natural reason
reqiures it for the common good, and welbeing of all men. He who denies this to
himself, and to his children, servants, and cattle, he is an unjust and
unmercifull man, not to be numbered among the righteous who are good and
merciful to the life of their beasts. Prove. 12.10.

Secondly, justice and equity require, that seeing the life of man is a
pilgrimage on earth, and here on earth there is no abiding place for him, nor
any felicity, true rest, or perfection to be found but in heaven, man should
not spend all his time, and all his thoughts and studies in, and about the
things of this world, but that he should have a set time at lest one day in
every week, wherein he resting and ceasing from worldly cares; labors, and
delights, should wholly devote himself to heavenly meditations, and to holy
exercises, which may fit him and prepare him for the place of rest, teach and
direct him in the right and ready way thereunto, and enable him to walk wisely
therein. Who thinks it to much to consecrate one whole day in seven unto
religious exercises which may fit him for eternal life, he is undoubtedly most
unequal in his judgment and a judge of unjust things. Thirdly, it is a thing
not only good and holy in it self, that man of his own accord, and much more
being commanded by God, should devote one whole day in every week to the
mediate worship of God, in thankfulness for his creation and redemption, and the
use of Gods creatures restored to him in Christ; with some advantage: But also
very useful and necessary for the seasoning of man's weekly labors with
justice and piety, for the continuance and increase of holiness, and religion in
his heart and for the enlightening of his mind, rectifying of his will,
sanctifying, of his affections, and fitting him to undertake and begin all his
weekly labors in the fear of God, to direct them to the right end, and to
perfect and finish them happily by Gods favor and blessing. Jf any man shall
dare to deny this, we may justly fear that he is rude and ignorant of those
heavenly and spiritual things, whereof all Gods people have continually
experience in themselves. And the constant practice of Gods people who in all
ages have observed and kept a weekly Sabbath holy to the Lord, and thereby have
profitted in all piety and holiness, will convince them of gross blindness
stupidity. Adam no doubt did every seventh day devote himself to Gods worship,
and taught his first sons, Caine and Abell to bring their offerings to God,
at the end of days that is: every last day of the week, for that is the most
proper sense of the words in the Hebrew text. Genesis 4.3.4. And so soon as the
posterity of Seth began to multiply and increase they gathered themselves into
a Church and were called the children of God, or Gods people, and hereby they
were distinguished from the carnal and profane progeny of Caine, and then they
began to invocate and call upon the name of the Lord, that is to worship God in
public assemblies. Gen 4.26. Whereas Adam, Abell and Seth, had invocated and
worshipped God in their own private families only, now the faithful being
multiplied did frequent public assemblies, which could not be, but in set
places, and at set times surely every week on the seventh day which God had
blessed and sanctified.

Also after that general Apostasy which came in by unequal marriages of the
sons of the faithful with the daughters of the profane, and the destruction
of the the old world with the flood. Righteous Noah who was saved in the Arc
with his family, immediately after began to observe the holy rest of the
seventh day, for it is said, that the Burnt offering which he offered on the
Altar, of every clean beasts and clean foul unto the Lord was a sweet
smelling sacrifice of rest, that is sacrifices, of the sabbath. The Hebrew word
in the text there used, with the emphaticall particle (...) signifies the most
notable rest, even the rest of the holy sabbath, wherein man rests in memory
of Gods rest, in the satisfaction of his people the Isralites before the giving
of the law from mount Sinah, by Gods own voice, they did observe the Sabbath
and were admonished by Moses so to do. Exodus 16.23.

And they who rested not, but went forth to gather Manna are reproved by God,
as transgressors of his laws and commandments ver. 28. And although we do
not read of any Sabbath, kept by Abraham and the Patriarchs before Moses,
because the Church of the faithful was but small, comprised only in their
families, which could not keep any great and public Sabbath assemblies,
worthy of record in the sacred History: Yet undoubtedly they had their set time
as well as set place of Gods worshipp, even a weekly Sabbath according to the
law which God gave to Adam when he blessed and sanctified the seventh day. But
I shall more fully speak of these things hereafter. And here upon these
grounds I conclude, that the assumption of this present argu: is manifest: And
the conlusion which thence flows is certain, to weet: that the posterity of
Adam in all ages are bound to this duty of keeping a weekly Sabbath Holy to the
Lord.

3 Argument.
A third argument is drawn from the ground upon which God founded the Sabbath,
and commanded the duty of keeping it Holy to himself. For if the ground of the
duty stand firm, throughout all generations, and do belong to all men of all
ages, as well as to Adam who had the commandment given to him, and the duty
imposed on him by God. Then the duty also belongs to all men of all ages unto
the end of the world. And whosoever do claim any interest in the ground of the
duty, and expect profit by it, ought to acknowledge that the duty belongs to
them also, except they can show some special dispensation from God Himself.
Now the ground upon which God founded the Sabbath and imposed the duty of
keeping it Holy, is such as does equally belong to all men. For if we cleave
to the bare letter of the text (as diverse commonly do) and take the ground of
the Sabbath to be no more but this, that God finished the work of creation on
the seventh day, or having finished it and made every creature good and perfect
before on the sixth days, rested on the seventh from creating any things in the
world. Then we must withal confess, that this ground belongs equally to all
mankind, for all men of all ages have interest in the benifit of Gods creating
the world, and making all things so perfect, that he had no more to do but
rested on the seventh day. But if that be the true and proper grounds which I
have before laid down and proved, to weet: Gods perfecting of the creation,
which left all things good but mutable: by bringing in redemption which Christ
promised, did on the seve^th day, take upon him to perform in man's nature: And
God resting in the al sufficient satisfaction which Christ undertook, to make
for man, and which saved God the labor of a new creation, and making new
creatures, and of repairing by a mediation the breach which man's fall had made
in the word; and so made for man's use. This ground does belong to all mankind
in all ages. we now under the gospel have as great, or rather greater interest
in it, then Adam or the fathers in the old Testament. And by virtue of this
promise of Christ, and by means of his undertaking to be man's Mediator, and
of Gods resting in his mediation, all living men, and all creatures made for
the use of man do consist, and have them in being in this world. Coloss. 1.17.
and God by him (the word of his power being made man and fully exhibited
aperfect Redeemer) does substaine and uphold all things. Heb. 1.3. And although
the circumstances of this ground, are with the times and ages of this world
mutable, and there is a great change from Christ only promised and undertaking
man's redemption, to Christ fully exhibited aperfect Redemer in his
resurrection: Yet the ground it self, even Redemption by Christ, is still the
same: the promise of Redemption which was made to our first parents on the
seventh day being the greatest blessing, which was revealed to mankind in the
old testament, procured to that day the honor of the weekly Sabbath in all
ages before the coming of Christ.

And the full exhibition of Christ, and the perfecting of Redemption in the
resurrection of Christ, on the first day of the week, did merit, and procure
to that day the honor of the Christian Sabbath in all ages under the Gospel:
For God did not rest so much in the undertaking of Redemption on the seventh
day, as in the actual performance and full perfecting of it, on the first day
of the week, the foresight of the full performance made the promise a ground
both of Gods rest, and of the Sabbath in ^he old Testament. And if Christ had
suffered, dyed, and been swallowed up of death and corruption in the grave, and
had not gotten the victory over death, and all the powers of darkness in his
resurrection, then had we remained in our sins, and all our preaching of
Christ, and all our faith in him had been vain. 1 Cor. 15.17. It was Christ's
resurrection which consumated the great work of man's redemtion, and on the day
wherein he a rose from death, did he rest from that great work, as God on the
seventh day did from the work of creation, and consecrated that day to be the
Christian Sabbath. But yet all this while Redemption both promised and
undertaken and also actually performed is the same common ground of the holy
weeklie Sabbath: And Christ is the same Redeemer to all mankind, and the only
mediator and Savior. Yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Heb. 13.8.
And the duty of keeping an holy weeklie Sabbath is grounded on him throughout
all ages, who is the common Savior, and Redeemer of all mankind. Therefore
all men of all ages are bound to this duty, and none exempted from it, in any
nation age or generation.

Fourthlie, that which God has given to all mankind in Adam, for a perpetual
law to them of future benefit, 4. Argu.
which he has promised and has in store for them, that they are bound
carefully to keep until they fully obtain the blessing and benefit
promised, for if he that has given a pledge, does take it away from them to
whom he has given it, this is an evident sign that he has altered his mind
and purpose of giving the benefit to them. And if they do at any time loose
this which is the pledge, or wilfully cast it from them, they have no evidence
or token any more to assure them of the benefit, nor any witness of the
covenant, or sign whereby to challenge the blessing.

Now the holy weeklie Sabbath is ordained of God, and given in Adam to all
mankind to be a sign and pledge to them of spiritual and eternal rest in
Christ, which they shall never fully obtain until the last resurection in
the end of the world: For the full rest and Sabbatisme whereof the Sabbath is a
pledge, does till then, still remain for them. Heb. 4.9. and they shall not
enter into the full possession of it until the last resurrection. And Gods
giving of himself unto his people to be their God, which does sanctify them
whereof the Sabbath is a sign, token, and pledge unto them as he himself
testifies. Exodus 31. 13. is not fully manifested, nor perfected until they
be fully sanctified both in souls and bodies at the last day, and made fit to
see and enjoy God to rest with him in glory for ever. It is true which the
ancient fathers have observed and taught, that the old Sabbath as it was
limited to the the seventh day of the week, was a sign of the spiritual rest
of the faithful from their own sinful works, and of their steadfast rest upon
Christ by faith, when they are regenerate and renewed by the holy Ghost, which
is shed on them abundantly through Jesus Christ under the Gospel. Tit. 3.5.6.
and therefore that old Sabbath of the seventh day of the week, is so far
fulfilled in Christ, and has the accomplishment in him: But because the
fullness of eternal rest whereof the weeklie Sabbath absolutely considered is
the sign and pledge shall not be obtained until the last resurrection of the
just, when by virtue of Christ's resurrection, their bodies shall be raised out of
the dust and be made like the glorious body of Christ, which they still exspect
in hope. Therefore the keeping of a weeklie Sabbath as a pledge of that perfect
eternal rest, still belongs to all Gods people, and they are bound to keep it
on that day of the week in which Christ arose, which day by his resurrection is
made a sure pledge that they shall be raised up in the perfect image and
similitude of his resurrection.

Fifthly, that which is ordained by him and given to men, to fit them for
eternal rest in heaven, 5 Argument.
and to be a special means to conduct and lead them in the right way thereunto,
and which of it self is very good, profittable, and excellent for that
purpose. That Gods word and will, and every man's reason guided by the word,
binds him to observe and keep, and to hold himself constantly and
perpetually unto it, until he comes to the end of his race, even the eternal
rest in Heaven. This is a truth vndoubt^dly. For the Scriptures command us to
run our race unto the end, and to omit no means which may help to eternal
life: and experience teaches us, that the neglect of the ready way and means
of gaining the pledge is the way to loose it. Now the keeping of an holy
weeklie Sabbath after the best and strictest manner, by resting from all
worldly business, so far as our weakness and necessity will suffer, and
devoting our selves to Gods holy mediate worship, as prayer, reading, and
hearing of Gods word both in private and public assemblies, and to serious
meditations of heavenly things, is in it self one of the most powerful
means, to beg it and increase faith, and all holy saving graces in us, and God
has ordained it, for to conduct and lead men on, in the right and ready way
to etenall rest in heaven. Therefore Gods word, and will revealed, and every
man's own reason guided by the word: binds all men to it in all ages, until
they come to eternal rest in heaven.

CHAP. 15.
THE First point being thus proved. The second thing before propounded
follows: that is, to show how far, and upon what terms and conditions the
sons of Adam are bound to the duty of keeping a weekly Sabbath by Gods
commandment, given in the sanctifying of the seventh day here recorded in my
text, where God is said to sanctify the seventh day, that is: by giving man a
law to keep it holy. First for such sons of Adam as are borne and live in the
Church of God, and have the means to know Gods word, and to obey his law: There
is no question to be made, it is clear that they are bound to know and to keep
this commandment of God, and to separate one day in every week, even that
which God has blessed above all the rest, and to devote it to holy and
heavenly exercises, ceasing from all worldly cares, labors, and delights, and
so to keep it an holy Sabath. First, as they are Gods creatures, and God has
thus far declared his mind and will, that men in immitation of him their God,
who rested on the seventh day, and also for the refreshing of themselves, their
children, servants, and cattle in their bodies, should rest from worldly
labors: and for the comfort of our souls should spend it in holy and
spiritual exercises, and in the worship of him their maker, and preserver:
even the general law of nature binds them to this duty.

Secondly, as God has revealed himself a Redeemer and Savior of mankind by
promising and giving Christ: So they are much more bound to keep all his
commandments to the utmost of their power, especially this of the Sabbath,
which God ordained to be a memorial of redemption and eternal rest, to be
found only in Christ promised on the seve^th day, and in fullness of time given
and exhibited. Jf they believe that Christ is their redeemer, and that they are
bought with the price of his blood, and are no more their own, but his, who
has bought them, this binds them to glorify God with their souls, and bodies
also which are Gods. 1 Cor. 6.20. And this they cannot do, except some time be
set apart, at least one day in every week, to celebrate in holy assemblies,
the gracious goodness, bounty and love of God to them in Christ, and to
sanctify and fit themselves, for him in all their weekly works, and for the
intending and seeking of him in all the labors of their hands, Thus much the
Lord shows in his law given and expounded by Moses. Deuteronomy. 5.15. Where he tells
Israel, that he gave his commandment to them of keeping holy his Sabbath, for
this end, that they might remember their slavery in Egypt, and their
deliverance by his mighty hand, and stretched out arm. Upon which words we
must necessarily infer, that if God bound them by his commandment urging
them and pressing often to keep the Sabbath day, for a memorial of their
deliverance from temporal and tipical bondage, and thankfulness to him for it,
then much more were they and all Gods people still are bound, to keep holy the
Sabbath day in thankfulness and for a memorial of spiritual deliverance from
sin, death, and Hell, and that on the day of the Lord Christ, wherein he is
promised or fully exhibited.

Thirdly, because there is none of all the Sons of men who live in the
Church, and know the word and law of God, and discern their own frailty but
know how hard it is for them to continue in grace, and in the knowledge of
Christ, and in the understanding of the mysteries of godliness, without often
exercises of religious duties, as well in public as in private, and without
much hearing and public instruction in the word and law of God. Therefore every
rational man must needs know and acknowledge himself bound by the light of
reason, and his natural appetite of his own happiness, to use all means for
continuance and increase of grace and of heavenly knowledge in himself needful
to salvation, especially this keeping of an weekly Sabbath which he finds by
experience to be ameans to hold him fast to Christ. But if any who live and are
borne in the Church, in such times and places wherein they have sufficient means
to know Gods revealed will and law for the keeping of an holy Sabbath weekly,
do through negligence, and idleness, malice, or perverseness remain wilfully
ignorant of this law and will of God, as well as diverse alients. This shall in
no case excuse them, neither does it from the bond of this duty, no more then
it does from the bond of any other laws of which they are wilful ignorant, but
God will punish them, both for their failing in this duty, and for their
wilful shutting of their eyes and ears and refusing to know his will and law.
Now because a great part of mankind even of Adams posterity do live out for the
Church, and many nations for many ages even all pagans and Heathen infidels
never heard of the Sabbath, nor of Gods word which requires the weekly
observation of it. We are in the second place to consider, whether this law of
God, and this his blessing and sanctifying, of the seventh day, does in any
respect bind them to this duty. And first that ignorance of the law does not
exempt them from the duty, it is manifest by plain reasons.

First because they had means from Adam and their first progenitors to know
this law, for when the earth was divided into several nations and countries,
the fathers and first founders of every nation did know, that God had, in
sanctifying the seventh day given this commandment to our first parents and
their seed in their loins: But they by wilful neglect of this duty brought
the law into oblivion, and their children rejoicing to follow their licentious
ways, and to put far from all thoughts of this duty, and all regard of this
law, became wilfully ignorant of Gods will, yea they skorne to hearken to Gods
word if it be brought unto them.

Secondly, no ignorance which is not invincible, but might be avoided by due
care and diligence, can exempt a man from any duty which God has commanded
all mankind to perform: Our Savior tells us, that he which fails of his duty
out of simple ignorance, and does not his Lords will, because he knew it not,
shall be punished and beaten though with fewer stripes. Because God is the Lord
of all, every man ought to enquire after and learn his will: And therefore
Heathen people though they know not this law, shall be beaten for neglect of this
duty, because they ought to know God, and to learn his will, who gives them
life, breath, and all things. And if they who fail though simple ignorance,
must be punished though in a less measure, then wilful profaners. It must
needs follow, that they are bound to the duty though not so strict lie, nor in
that manner and measure as they who live in the Church, and in such times and
places, where they know, or may know the law and word of God.

Thirdly, all mankind even the most barbarous and savage nations, as they
have their being, and all guif^s of nature, from Gods creating hand and power.
So they have all these things continued unto them by the mediation of Christ,
and by a common and universal virtue of him the Redeemer, they are vpheld in
life and health and strength in this world: And Christ as Mediator procures
all these things to them, after a secondarie manner for his elects sake, which
are either to spring after many ages out of their loins, or to receive benifit
of their labors in subduing the earth, making it habitable and fit for his
people to dwell in, and so preparing a place for his Church, or the like. In
this respect God is called the Savior of all men, but especially of them that
do believe. Of all, in as much as he preserues them innaturall life, but of the
faithful, fully and perfectly in that he saues them from eternal death, and
hell, and brings them to life eternal. And hereupon it is, that all things are
said to be and to consist in, and by, and for Christ. Coloss. 1.17. and he is
said to be a ransom for all men, that is reaching to all in some measure,
manner, and degree, even to infidels to obtain common gifts for them, and to
the elect perfectly to redeem them. Now they who partake the benefit of the
Christ the blessed seed promised to Adam, they are bound to the duty which God
requires in thankfulness for it, and for a continual commemoration thereof.
Therefore all mankind even the most barbarous are bound to the duty of keeping
an holy sabbath weeklie, though they do not know that which binds them to
it, and leads them to the performance thereof.

Fourthlie, Gods blessing of a seventh day, and sanctifying it by his
commandment given to our first parents, is as easily to be learned, and
known, and kept in memory as many other things of less moment, which Heathen
Jnfidels do learn and know, and keep in memory for worldly respects. As for
example, to measure the times of the world by Years, and Years by months, and
months by weeks, and weeks, by seven days, this because the Heathen find to
be very commodious for worldly and civil respects, therefore they are
careful to learn and remember it, and all such things. And it is as easily
and as possible to to learn and know Gods law, concerning a weeklie Sabbath,
and they would and might learn it, if they were as careful for their souls,
and to serve God, as they are for their life, and to serve their own lusts,
and this world. And if they would travel, and send abr^ad into far countries
to learn heavenly knowledge and holy bevaviour, as diligently as they do to
learn humane knowledge and worldly wisdom, art and skill, they could not be
ignorant of Gods law, concerning the weekelie Sabbath: But they refuse to
learn this, as they do to learn true religion, and shut their eyes against
it, as they do against the knowledge of Christ. Therefore as Turks and other
infidels, who have Gods word professed in their Countries, cities and among
them: though they cannot rightly call upon God, nor believe in Christ without
preaching of the word, which they will not look after but skorne it: Yet they
are bound to repent and believe, and shall perish for rejecting and not vseing
the means to git faith. So it is with other infidels further of, they shall
perish for not using such means as are in their power, whereby they might come
to know this and other duties which they are bound to perform in thankfulness
for Gods gracious promise of Christ the redeemer, and for the common benifits
which they receive through him.

CHAP. 16.
THE Third thing which I propounded concerning man's sanctification so the
Sabbath, is the consideration of the duties wherein it does consist, which are
of three sorts. First some are such are common to all Gods people in all ages
of the world, and they be duties which are necessary to the being of the
Sabbath.

Secondly, some are proper to the Sabbath of the seventh day, while the
fathers under the Old Testament did expect Christ promised, and were to keep
their Sabbath in memory of the promise of Christ made to our first parents on
the last day of the week. Thirdly some are proper to us who live under the
Gospel since Christ fully exhibited a perfect Redeemer: and after the burial
of Moses, that is the utter abolition of all legal shaddows together with the
material temple of the Jews.

The duties common to all such as are necessary to the being of an holy Sabbath
at all times, and they are three especially. The first is a rest and cessation
from all seculiar affairs and worldly pleasures, except only such as are
necessary for man's welbeing, and cannot be omitted or deferred without great
hurt and danger of man's health, and life, and of the life and safety of the
creatures which God has made for man's use. The second is sanctification of the
Sabbath, with such holy exercises of religion and of Gods worship as God
requires in that age, and state of the Church in which they live. The third is
sanctifying of that day of the week which God has blessed and honored with
greatest blessings, above all other days, and wherein he has more fully
revealed his holiness, and opened the fountain of holiness for the sanctifying
of his people. Concerning the first, to weet: rest and cessation from all
worldly affairs and bodily delights, there is a doubt made by some, whether
it does equally concern all Gods people, as well christians under the Gospel,
as the fathers of the old testament. Diverse are of opinion that Christians have
more liberty and are not so strictly bound to rest from all worldly affairs
and bodily delights, as the fathers were before Christ. But for the clearing of
this point we are to note three specially things. First that rest and cessation
from all seculiar business, and worldly pastimes is a duty of the Sabbath
which generally belongs to all men in all ages who are bound to keep a weekly
Sabbath or holy day by virtue of Gods sanctification of the Seventh day. For
first the very name ( Sabbath) which God gave to the day, signifies rest and
cessation, and puts us continually in mind of this duty. And whosoever calls it
by the name Sabbath, does thereby acknowledge it to be a day of rest. Secondly,
a maine ground of Gods first institution of the Sabbath, the rest from all
works of creation wherewith God rested in Christ the seventh day, who on that
day was promised and took upon him to be man's mediator (as has been proved
before out of the words of this text. For Chtist the son of God undertaking to
repair the works of creation, which were defaced by man's fall, and to restore
al his by another kind of work then creation, even by incarnation, obedience;
suffering and satisfaction for sin in man's nature, and for the redemption of
the world) did bring unto God the Creator, rest and cessation from any more
creation of new kinds of creatures. And upon this ground, even this perfecting
of his work of creation, by bringing in redemption, and in memory and for a
sign of Gods resting in Christ promised, God sanctified the seventh day to be
an holy weeklie Sabbath, and bound man to this duty of rest on the Sabbath day
from all secular business.

Thirdly, in all ages whenever God repeated the law of the Sabbath, or urged
the observation of it, either by Moses or the Prophets we shall observe that
rest and cessation is enjoined, as Exodus 20.10. The seventh day is the Sabbath,
in it thou shall do no manner of work. and Exodus 31.14. thou shall do no manner
of work therein. and Exodus 33.2. Devt. 5.14. whosoever does any work on the
sabbath shall surely be put to death. They might not gather man^a on the
sabbath day. Exo. 16.28. they who went out to seek Manna are called
trasgressours. And all the Prophets which in after times made mention of the
Sabbath, urged rest, and blamed all servile works which concern this life: as
Isa. 58.13. Jer. 17.27. Neh. 13.17.

Fourthly we in these later days, have as much need of rest and more then men
in former ages, and the greater hopes and more clear evidences of rest and
glory in heaven which we have, do more bind us to rest from worldly cares, and
to set our minds on heaven where our hopes are. These are strong arguments to
prove that rest upon the Sabbath day, is a duty which generally belongs to all
men in all ages, which the first thing serving to satisfy the former doubt and
to prove the first general duty.

Secondly, Gods sanctifying of the Sabbath, and his first commandment given to
Adam for the keeping holy of the seventh day: binds all men, in all ages, to
keep a weekly Sabbath to the end of the world, as I have before proved, and
therefore the duty of rest belongs to all.

Thirdly, they who hold the law of the weekly Sabbath to be but for a time,
and that it is now abolished, they can show no Scriptures to vvarrant their
opinion. That place which they object, Coloss. 2.16. speaks not in the
singular number of the weekly Sabbath, instituted here in my text. For though
the day be changed upon weighty reasons and good ground.

Yet the Sabbathisme still remains to the people of God, not only the
eternal, and heavenly, but also the temporal Sabbath on earth which leads to
the heavenly. The words of the Apostle speak of those Sabbaths or holy days
of the Jews, which were tipicall, and shaddows of things to be exhibited in
Christ, such as were the first and last days of the Passover, Pentecost, and
other great yearly feasts. The word Sabbaton, being of the plural number,
implies so much, and the nameing of feasts, days, and new moons which were
shadows of the law, give us just cause to conceive that the Apostle intends
only the festival and not the weekly Sabbaths. Or if we should grant that the
weekly Sabbath is meant, among the rest, which the fathers observed on the
seventh day: Yet the Apostle calls it a shadow, only in respect of the
particular day of the promise of Christ, which day is a bolished, and gives
place to the first day, in which the promise was fully performed, and Christ
became a perfect Redeemer actuallie in his resurrection.

The Anti-Sabbatarians have only two objections which have some show and
color of reason at the first hearing.

Objection
The first is, that if it had been the mind and will of Christ, that the
weekly Sabbath should be continued and removed to the Lords day, under the
Gospel, then would he either by himself, or by his Apostles, have given some
express commandment to that purpose, which they say, he did not.

Answer.
To this I answer. First that our Savior spoke fully to this point, when he
said, that he came not to destroy, but to fulfill the law. It remains
therefore on their part to show, that the Commandment of the Sabbath is no
part of the moral law, or else they do but beat the air and labor in vain.

Secondly, the Apostles themselves kept their holy assembles, and ordained in
all Churches of the believing Gentiles that public assemblies should be kept
and exercises of the holy Sabbath perfomed ordinarily on the first day of the
week, as I have before proved, from. Act 20. and 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. And
whatsoever they ordained was the commandment of che Lord 1 Cor. 14. verse. 27.
Thirdly, while the first temple was yet standing in the days of the Apostles,
and Moses was not yet buried and quite taken out of the way: It was not
convenient that the Apostles should change the day of the Sabbath among the
believing Jews. Yea they themselves in Judea and all places among the Jews,
kept the seventh day: among the Gentiles the Lords day.

We never read that the Lords day was called a Sabbath in the Primitive times
next after the Apostles, nor since, Object.
by any but only by Jewish Sabbatarians.

Howsoever these adversaries, put on a bold impudent face, Answer.
to color and countenance this objection: Yet herein publish a manifest
untruth. For Igna^ius immediately after the Apostles says. That the Christians
must keep their holy sabbath: not after the man^er of the profane Jews of those
times, with excessive feasting, dancing, and such carnal sports and
pleasures, nor on their seventh day: But on the Lords day, the day of Christ's
resurrection, which he calls the Queen and supeeme Lady of days, as I have
formerlie showed.

Saint Hilary says, Prolog. in Psalm.
Nos in prima die perfecti Sabbathi festiuitate latae mur. i.e. We Christians
rejoice in the festiuity of our perfect Sabbath on the first day of the week.
St. Augustine in the 25. sermon de tempore. Having rehearsed diverse notable
blessings and prero^atiues which God of old honored the first day of the week
the Lords day, does there affirm, that upon those grounds the holy Doctors of
the Church, to weet: the Apostles. Who were taught by Christ, and inspired by
the holy Ghost in all things which they decreed and ordained, have by their
decree removed or rather transferred all the glory of the Jewish sabbathisme,
unto the Lords day. And immediately he adds this exhortation. Let us Christians
therefore observe the Lord day, and let us sanctify it so as of old the Law
giver commanded the fathers concerning the Sabbath saying. From evening to
evening shall ye celebrate the Sabbath. And further he says, that if we from
the evening of the Jews sabbath the satturday, to the evening of the Lords day
sequester our selves from all Rural works; and all seculiar business and
devote our selves only to Gods worship, then we rightly sanctify the Lords
sabbath according ^he words of the law: (Ye shall not do any work in it.

Also Psalm. 32. He affirms that keeping of the Sabbath is one of the things
which belong to the love of God, and thus he exhorts every true Christian.
Observa diem sabbati non Carnaliter, non Judaicis delicijs, etc. that is
observe the day of the sabbath not carnally with Judicial delicacies, for they
abuse their rest, and rest to naughtiness for indeed it is better that men
should dig all the day then dance as they do: But do thou meditate on the
rest in God and doing all things for obtaining that rest, abstain from servile
work.

And in his 3. Tract at upon John. He says, We are more strictly commanded to
keep the Sabbath then the Jews: For we are enjoined to keep it spiritually.
Jews keep it carnally in luxury and drunkenness, and it were far better that
their women should be busied in working all the day in woll, then dance. The
true Christian keeps the Sabbath spiritually, by refraining from servile
work. These and diverse other testimonies of the Ancients show ^ufficiently
the falshode and vanity of this Objection. And that in the judgment of the most
godly and learned fathers, the law of God binds us to keep the Sabbath holy
on the Lords day weekly. It is true that some part of the seve^th day was by
reason of great multitudes of Jews abounding in all countries, so frequent
and so commonly known and called by the name of the Sabbath, and that name was
so proper to the Saturday in those times, that if any had called the Lords day
by that name, his words would be understood by the hearers of the Jews
Sabbath, except ^e had expounded his meaning as those fathers before named do
in their speeches b^f^re mentioned. And again the Jews were so superstitious
in observing their Sabbath, ^o contrary to the Christian sanctifying of the
Lords day, even with feasting, dancing, and profane pomp, that the name of
Sabbath through their abuse of it grew distasteful to godly Christians, even as
in our time the old name Catholic; by reason of the Antichristian Papists,
falsely usurping and approbria^ing it to their Apostaticall Church and false
religion, is grown to have an ill sound in the ears of reformed Christians.
And therefore the Ancients were very sparing in calling the name of the
Sabbath, and seldom did they call the holy weeklie rest of Christians by that
name, except only in case when they opposed it to the Jewish sabbath, and
preferred it far before their carnal observation.

But whereas in this Objection the aspersion and reproachful name of Jewish
Sabbatarians is laid on all them who call the Lords day the Cbristian Sabbath,
and urge the sanctification of it, by the law of God. This is a point of such
notable impudency and intemperancie, that it deserves the scourge and whip of
Ecclesiastical censure and punishment, to chastise and correct, rather then
any arguments of reason or divinity to convince such Raylors. For in the
Homilies which are comprehended and commanded in the Articles of our Religion,
by law established: the Lords day is frequently styled by the name of Sabbath,
even no less then eight times in one Homily, which treats of the time and
place of prayer.

And both there, and in the writings of the most godly divines, and builders of
our Church, Gods people are urged by the law of God, even the fourth
Commandment to keep holy the Lords day, for the Christian weekly Sabbath, and
in our divine service after the public rehearsing of that commandment in the
congregation, are enjoined to pray in these words. Lo^d have mercy upon us, and
incline our hea^tes to keep thy law And this you see the first general duty
of the Sabbath, to weet: Resting from worldly affairs clearly proved, and that
while their is a Sabbath or weekly day of holy assemblies, either under the
Gospel, all men are bound to observe this rest.

The second general duty necessa^ily to be performed in the keeping of the
Sabbath is sanctification, which is by men's devoting of themselves wholly to
divine worship, and such religious actions, as God requirs in the times of the
Church in which they live, such as are public assemblies for praising God,
praying to him, preaching, reading, expounding, and hearing of his word,
commemoration of his great works, and rehearsing of his promises for common
edification. Also private praier^, and meditations on heavenly things,
domestical instructions and the like. All these are necessary Sabbath duties
to be observed of al men, in all ages, both under the old and new testament.
First the words wherein Moses here in my text, discribes Gods first institution
of the Sabbath, prove this fully. For here it is said that God sanctified it,
that is, set it apart for holy exercises in the performance whereof men do
sanctify it. For sanctifying is either by infusion of holiness into the thing
sanctified, or setting it apart to holy use and exercise, but it had no
holiness infused into it, as I have else where proved. Therefore it was
sanctified, by consecration, that is, setting apart to holy use.

Secondly, it is called the holy Sabbath, that is: such a day of rest as is to
be kept Exodus 16.23. before the giving of the fourth commandment as Moses
shows, saying. To morrow is the rest of our holy sabbath to the Lord, that is:
this is a rest not of idleness, but from common affairs, that men may be
exercised in holy duties only.

Thirdly, in the giving of the law from mount Sina, God commands expressly, that
all his people do remember to sanctify and keep holy the sabbath, which
cannot be but by exercise of holy duties, and performance of holy service and
worship unto God. Exodus 2^.9.

L^stly, in all the scriptures of the law, which speak of the sabbath in the
old Testament, it is called the Lords holy sabbath. And sanctification of it,
is required as appears, Exodus 31.15 and, 5.2. Deuteronomy. 5.12. And in the
Evangellicall Prophets, which speak of the sabbath both of old, and also in
the last days of the Gospel, it is called the Lords Holy day. Isa. 58:13: and
66:23: and it is said, that all flesh, that is true Christians of all nations
Shall from one Sabbath to another come to worship before the Lord and Ezech.
44.24. They shall hallow the Sabbath.

But here some perhaps will object. That none can truly sanctify the Sabbath,
Objection
nor perform a^y holy duty, who are wholly carnal, and unregenerate and have
not the spirit of God dwelling in them, and sanctifying them, and such are many
even in the bosom of the true Church. And therefore sanctification of the
Sabbath, cannot be a general duty performed by all men, nor requi^ed of all,
but is a special duty pr^per to the elect Saints, who are truly sanctified,
others were never able to sanctify the sabbath and therefore it is not a duty
which God can justly require of all in general.

Answer.
It is true indeed, that as a bitter fountain and corrupt, can send forth no
sweet and pure water, so no natural man can perform a true and holy duty.
Holiness is a supernatural gift of the holy Ghost, and he it is who enables
men to perform all works which are eternally holy: But as there is a two fold
sanctification the one internal, which is the wo^k of the holy Ghost in men;
the other external, which is the consecrating and setting apart of things
natural and artificial to be employed to an holy use, and to supernatural
end, so also there are two sorts of holy exercise. Some which are eternally
holy, as holy prayers and praises and all works of true piety, which only
holy men perform, by the power of the holy Ghost working in them and moving
them. Others are only externally holy, by outward consecration and separation,
because the are appointed to be done for holy use, and to be used in the
worship of God, such are all outward religious duties, as sacrificing and such
like performed by Hipocrites and carnal professors in the old Testament, such
as Caine, Saul, and Elis wicked sons were. And reading, preaching, set forms
of prayer, and gestures of worship performed by Hipocrites both before and
under the Gospel. These later are in the power of Hipocrites and unregenerate
men, who by a common gift and general grace are enabled to perform far
more in this kind then they do, or are willing to do. Now though all men
cannot perform the first, yet so far as they are able they are bound to
perform the later sort of dut^es, among which are the external
sanctifications of the Sabbath, as frequenting holy and public ass^mblies,
singing of Psalms, joining with the Church in public prayers and the like:
which as they are able to do, so they are bound to do, and if they refuse in
such things to conform themselves, they are punis^ed both by God for
disobedience to his law, and also by the Censures of the Church. The third
general duty necessarily required of all in the observation of the Sabbath is:
That they keep for their holy Sabbath that very day of the week, whether it be
the first or seventh, which God has blessed above all other days with the
greatest blessing, and which he has sanctified above all other days by more
full relation of his own holiness to the world, and opening of a more wide door
of holiness for the san^tifying of all his people. Thus I prove. First most
plainly from the words of my text, which describe Gods first institution of the
Sabbath. First by blessing it above other days with that greatest of blessings
even the promise of Christ a perfect Savior and Redeemer of mankind.
Secondly, by sanctifying it in revealing his holiness to man, and sanctifying
man by his spirit and the promise and thereupon appointing it to be kept holy.
As I have fully before proved.

Secondly, the Lord God himself, both in giving the law from mount Sina, and
often repeating of the fourth Commandment by Moses, still urges the
observation of the weekly Sabbath upon this ground: because he has on that day
Redeemed them out of the house of bondage with a mighty hand and streached out
arm. Deuteronomy. 5.15. and in other places: for indeed on the Sabbath he redeemed
them and sanctified the first borne to himself. Exodus 13. From whence we
conclude, that Gods blessing of a day above other days with greatest
blessings, is a good ground for the keeping of it for his holy Sabbath, and so
also is Gods sa^ctifying of it by more special holiness. Thirdly it is
manifest, that all extraordinary and yearlie Sabbaths which God commanded
Israel to keep holy such as the first and seventh dai^s of the feasts of the
Passover, Pentecost, and of Tabernacles were al enjoined to be k^pt and
observed in memory of greater blessings given on those days, and of Gods
sanctifying them by more full revelation of his holiness. And therefore much
more is the observation of the continual weekly Sabbath grounded upon greater
blessings given, and holiness fully revealed on that day of the week which is to
be observed for the Sabbath: and in whatsoever age, time, or state, of the
Church men do live, they are bound by the first institution of the Sabbath, and
by the first law which God then gave for the keeping of it, as to observe an
holy weekly sabbath, so to observe on that very day of the week, which God
has at that time and in that age revealed, and declared to be the day which he
has blessed and sanctified above all others days of the week. As for
example, while Christ was promised a redeemer of the world, and was not yet
given, the day of the promise wherein he was first promised, and did undertake
and begin to mediate for man, was the most blessed day which God had sanctified
and blessed with the promise, which was the greatest blessing revealed and made
known in the Old Testament. But when an other day of the week comes to be
blessed with a greater blessing, even the giving of Christ, and the full
exhibition of him a perfect redeemer, then is that the day which God has
sanctified above all days, and then the law and the words of the first
institutio^s bind me^ to keep that for the holy Sabbath. And thus you see the
general duties which God requires of all men in general which are necessary
to the being of the Sabbath, and with out which there can be no right
observation of a weekly sabbath holy to the Lord.

CHAP. 17.
THE second sort of duties now follow, to weet: those which were proper to the
people of God in the old Testament, unto which the Fathers were specially bound
before the coming of Christ while he was yet only promised and not given a
perfect Redeemer. They also though they consist in many particulars: Yet may be
reduced to three chief heads. First to rest and cessation. Secondly to
sanctification. Thirdly to observation of the seventh and last day of the week
for their holy weekly Sabbath.

First concerning rest from all worldly affairs, and cessation from bodily
exercises such as delight and refresh the outward man only, and are directed
to no other end, there are different opinions among the learned. Some hold that
the fathers under the law, were bound more strictly to rest from bodily
exercises and worldly affairs on their Sabbath, then Christians are on the
Lords day under the Gospel, Jnsomuch that the strict bond of rest unto which
the law tied them, was an heavy yoke, and apart of the bondage under which they
groaned.

Others are of opinion, that their rest being no more but from worldly affairs
and bodily exercises: serving only for bodily delight and worldly profit, was
the very same unto which all Gods people were bound in all ages, and are still
under the Gospel. There are reasons brought on both sides: but all Scriptures
and reasons being well weighed: I doubt not but they may be brought to agree
in one truth: If only one thing wherein both sides agree, and which both mistake,
be removed, namely a conceit which both have of a more strict and religious
exaction of rest and cessation, then indeed was required in the Sabbath of the
Old Testament.

They who hold the first opinion, bring many testimonies of Scripture, which
seem to impose such a strict rest and cessation on the fathers, and the
Isralites under the law, as is by common experience found to be an heavy
burden, hard to be borne, and even intolerable. As for example. Exodus 9.16.23,
Where Moses speaks thus unto Israel. This is that which the Lord has said.
To Morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the Lord, bake that which ye
will bake to day, and sees that ye will sees, and that which remains over,
lay up for you to be kept until the morning. Hence they conclude that the
fathers were restrained from baking or seething any meat on the Sabbath day.
Also verse 29. Where Moses says Let no man go forth of his place, but every man
abide in his place on the seventh day. Hence they infer. That the fathers
might not walk abroad on their Sabbath. Likewise from the words of the law.
Exodus 20.10. Jn it thou shall not do any work, they gather that the Isralites
might upon no worldly occasion do any work on the Sabbath day, not so much as
make a plaster or medicine for a sick and wounded man. And so the learned
Doctors of the Jews vnderstodd the law, and observed it, as they showed by
their reproving of Christ for healing a diseased person by a word only and no
other labor. Also Exodus 31.14.15. and 35.23. all kind of work is forbideen
under pain of death. Whosoever does any work therein shall be put to death,
says the Lord. Yea he forbids to kindle a fire through their habitations on
the sabbath day, and Number. 15.35. The man that was found gathering sticks in
the wilderness on the sabbath day, was by Gods appointment stoned to death by
the Congregation. and Neh: 13:17. It was called profaning of the Sabbath, when
men sold any wares or vitails, and when strangers of other nations brought in
wares and fish on the Sabbath day to be sold. Also Amos 8.5. They whose minds
were so set on the worldly affairs, that they longed, till the sabbath was
past, and had their mind on selling corn and wheat. The Lord swears by the
excellency of Jacob, that he will not forgit to reveng their doings: From
these scriptures diverse both of the Ancients, and later divines have concluded
that the law of the Sabbath in respect of rest and cessation, which is exacted
in the old Testament, with such rigor and upon such grievous penalties. was an
heavy and intolerable burden, and therefore is abolished by Christ, in respect
of that total cessation and strict rest.

Others on the contrary do hold, that as Christians have more clear evidence
and hope of eternal rest in heaven, and the spirit which makes the more
spiritual, shed on them more abundantly through Christ, so they ought to be
more restrained from love of the world, and from care of earthly things. And
therefore by the law of the Sabbath are bound rather more strictly then the
fathers in the old Testament, to rest and cease from all worldly cares, and all
labors, and affairs of this life, on the Lords day, which is consecrated by
the resurrection of Christ, to be the weekly Sabbath of all Christians.

But if these Scriptures be diligently searched, and all circumstances well
weighed. It will appear upon good reason, that both sides are mistaken, and
that the forenamed Scriptures do not import any such rigorous rest or burden
some cessation. For first of all, though the Pharisees, and other strict sects,
and Rabbinicall Doctors, and expounders of the law, did of later times alittle
before, and at the appearance of our Savior in the flesh, expound the law so
strictly in respect of the carnal and literal sense, that thereby they laid
heavy burdens upon men, as our Savior does charge them. Matthew. 23.4. Yet it
was not so from the beginning, but even the Isralites themselves who lived
under the law, as under a Scoole master, and under the rudiments of the world,
they had liberty to go out of them places, and dwellings a Sabbath days
journey, which was, as their Rabbinnes writes two thousand cubits, that is as
some take it an Italian mile, and in the opinion of others two miles. And 2
King. 11.6.7. It is recorded the Priests and people went in and out, to and
from the house of the Lord on every Sabbath day.

They did also kindle fire for sacrifices and burnt offerings, which they did
offer unto God double, morning and evening every Sabbath day, after they had
killed and dressed the beasts, and this according to the strict sense and
strained exposition of the Law, which the Scribes and Pharisees gave of it, was
a breach of the law, and profanation of the Sabbath as our Savior shows.
Matthew. 12.5.

Secondly, the scribes and Pharisees did not expound the law, as forbidding all
bodily works. For they do circumcise Children, and apply medicines to heal
the sores of the Circumcised on the Sabbath, when it happened upon the eight
day after the birth of Children, as our Savior also shows. Joh. 7.23. They
led their oxen and asses to the water, and if a sheep, or ox, or ass did
fall into a pit they did pull it out on the Sabbath, because these were works
of necessity. Luke 13.15. and 14.5. And the chiefest and strictest of the
Pharisees did make great feasts and invited many guests, and our Savior
himself amongst the rest, who did not refuse to take part with them. Luke
14.1. and did observe how the invited guists did choose out the chiefest rooms
ver. 7. Which shows plainly that dressing of necessary and convenient meat was
not forbidden by the law on the Sabbath day, neither did the Pharisees so
expound the law.

Thirdly for the places of Scrpture before alleged, let us take a particular
view of them in order, and we shall see, that they are much mistaken. First
that place Exodus 16.29. does not enjoyne every man to keep his place, and not
to go out of their camp to gather Manna on the seventh day, the reason
prefixed shows this plainly, to weet: because God gave them on the sixth day
Manna sufficient for that day and the seventh. The exposition which some make
of the 23. ver. is very idle and ridiculous, namly that the Isralites were
commanded to bake and sees on the sixth day, that which they were to eat on
the seventh. And therefore it was not lawful to bake and sees on the Sabbath.
For Moses does not bid them bake for the Sabbath which was the morrow after,
but only that which they were to eat on the present day, and to reserve the
overplus, which they did not bake and sees until the seventh day; and though
they did so, and did not bake and sees it: yet it did not putrify neither
were any worms therein, which had it bee^ sodde or baked, for baking and
seething do naturally and as an ordinary means preserve things from stinking
and putrefaction.

In the next place the words of the fourth commandment ( in it thou shall not
do any work) they do not forbid religious works which tend either to inward
or outward sanctification of the Sabbath day, nor works of mercy, charity, or
necessity which are necessary, for the safety and preservation of the life of
man or beast. Though the perverse Scribes and Pharisees out of their Hypocrisy
did ^oo strictly expound and interpret the law of the Sabbath against our
Savious doeings, and held it unlawful to Heal the sick on the Sabbath day,
though it were but by speaking a word: yet their practice which they received
from the fathers of killing and offering sacrifices, circumcising their
children, leading their oxen to the water to drink, and drawing their sheep,
asses and other profittable cattle out of a ditch: did show that they were
taught from the beginning a contrary lesson, of more liberty, which our Savior
approves, and thereby convinces them of gross error and Hypocrisy.

Thirdly, that place of Exodus 3 35. where they are forbidden to kindle a fire
in all their habitations on the Sabbath day, is not a general commandment
binding all simply at al times. but a particular precept binding in some
cases, for they kindled fires and burned sacrifices twice every Sabbath, they
also kindled fires to dress necessary and comfortable meat Exodus 12:16. Where
God forbidding all manner of works on the Sabbath of the Passover, which were
commanded to be kept as strictly, and to be sanctified with holy assemblies and
solemnities, as much as the weekly Sabbath, yet exceps that which is to be done
in dressing necessary meat. Wherefore the kindling of a fire here forbidden,
is expounded by some Rabbines to be only making of fires to burn malefactors.
But indeed if we look to that which follows, it will appear that Moses
being about to summon the people to bring all materials, gold, silver, brass,
jron, and other materials, and also silk, purple, and other stuff for the
building of the altar, the tabernacle and all things thereunto belonging, does
first call to their remembrance the law of the Sabbath, and does give them a
charge from God that in building of the tabernacle, the place of his worship,
they abstain from all work on the Sabbath day under pain of death, and that
they do not kindle a fire to melt gold, or silver, or brass, for the Altar or
the arc, or any holy thing in the tabernacle. For God abhorres the breaking
of his law, or profaning his Sabbath under the pretense of building an House,
or tabernacle, or altars to him. And this is no more then our builders of the
famous Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, in this city, are on our Lords day the
Christian Sabbath, at this time bound to observe, and do abserue very strictly.

Fourthly the forbidding of all work under pain of death, Exodus: 31.14.35.2.
And the commanding of him to be stoned who gathered sticks on the sabbath day.
Number. 15.35. are not thus to be understood, that every breach of the sabbath by
any bodily labor, was to be punished with death in all persons under the law
(though inded before God every b^each of every commandment deserves death.)

But that the open wilful and presumptious profaning of the sabbath by any
scandalous act, or by a common practice was to be punished wi^h death. This is
plain by the words next before going. Number. 15.^0.31. where the Lord commands
that he who sins presump^iously with an high hand, and so reproacheth the
Lord. and dispiseth his word, be cut of from among his people, against which
word and express commandment the man which was found gathering sticks on the
sabbath day, did presently sin, and committed wilful transgression
presumptuously, not through ignorance nor compelled by necessity, and therefore
he was stoned for an example of terror to all presumptious transgre^sours. But
as for others who did bear burdens, and sell vitailes not presumptuously, but
either through ignorance or forgetfulness, or drawn by custom and ill example
of the multitude in the days of Jeremiah, and Nehemiah, they were not by the
law put to death, but compelled by authority and rebukes, and by threatenings of
wrath and judgments of God, to desist from profanat^o^ of the holy sabbath, as
the plac^s before named show. Neh. 13. Ier. 17.27.

As for them whole minds are altogether carried away after buying, s^lling,
and worldly games on the sabbath day, Amos. 8. they are threatened with no other
woe, then that which belongs to all such as after the same manner; unhallow the
Lords day now under the Gospel. Wherefore it is manifest that the fathers in
the old Testament, had no heavy burden of strict rest laid on them by the law,
but the same cessation from worldly affairs which they are bound unto, is
still required of us, and of all Gods people in all ages of the world. They
were not restrained in time of war from works of necessity, as fig^t^ng against
enemies, taking and destroying their cities, as we see in the compassing of
Jericho seven days together, one of which must needs be the Sabbath day.
Josh. 6. They might flee for their lives, and pull cattle out of pits, and do
any other work which could not be deferred until the next day, but present
necessity requ^red it for their own safety, and for the saftie of their
cattle and of other good creatures which otherwise were in danger to perish.

But suppose the opinion of diverse both ancient and late writers were true, to
weet. That the Isralites were bound to observe a more strict and burdensome
rest, and under greater penalties, then either the fathers before the law, or
we who live in the light and liberty of the Gospel: Yet this proves no more
but only that this rigor was apart of the bondage and paedagogie of the law;
wherewith they are hardly pressed, for this end to drive them to seek ease in
Christ, and to long for his coming in the flesh. And this burden and rigor
only is abolished by Christ, together with the change of the particular day:
But the substance of the Law still remains and binds all men to keep the
Sabbath, resting and ceasing from all worldly business, except that which is of
necessity and charity, even as the fathers were bound from the first
institution. The second principal head of which the second sort ^f special and
proper duties which God r^quired the fathers under the old testament, may be
reduced, as sanctification. For over and above their resting from secular
affairs, they were by Gods first institution of the Sababath bound to
sanctify the seventh day, with holy and religious duties, such as God in that
state and condition of the Church required, as an holy service and for
heavenly and spiritual use, even for begitting and increasing of grace and
faith in them, and for the fitting of them for the fruition of eternal rest.
The sanctification of the Sabbath in general belongs to all mankind in all
ages, and that all are bound to it by a perpetual law. As I have proved
sufficiently before. I am now only to show the special and particular duties
of sanctification, which God required of his people in the Old Testament.

The first special duty of sanctification was the solemn commemoration of
Christ the blessed seed, and of the promise of redemption by him. Unto this all
the fa^hers fro Adam until Moses, and so to Christ, were bound by Gods first
institution of the Sabbath and sanctifying the seventh day, upon promise made
of the blessed seed: For full proof of of this: I argue thus both from
Scripture and common experience.

Whenever a day is set a part either by God or holy men, to be kept with
solemnity because of some great blessing or deliverance given or promised, the
chief thing to be observed in that solemnity, is a public and solemn
commemoration and rehearsal of the blessing and deliverance with joy and
praise. Experience of all ages does prove this. In the solemn feast of the
Passover, the chief duty of sanctification was the co^memoration of Gods
deliverance of Jsraell from bondage in Egypt, by his mighty hand streched out
to smite Egypt, and his destroying Angel passing over all the houses of the
Isralites, and slaying all the first borne of ^he Egyptians, and this
deliverance was the blessing, because of which God instituted this feast. Exd.
13.5. The solemnity of the feast of tabernacles for seven days together was
instituted by God, because of his preservatio^ of Israel in the wilderness
forty years together without houses or cities, in boothes and tents, and the
chief thing which they were bound to observe in this holy solemnity, was the
commemoration of that preservation in the wilderness, by dwelling in boothes all
the time of that feast, whereby occasion was given to the^ to rehearse unto
their children, and their child. were moved to enquir, learn, and bear in mind
that blessing of Gods preservatio^ Lev. 23.43. and so in all ages we find by
experience, that the commemoration of the blessing upon which every feast was
first ordained, is the chief duty in all the solemnity, as the co^memoration
and rehearsal of Christ's resurrection in the feast of Easter, of the coming
down of the holy Ghost in the feast of Pentecost, of Christ's incarnation in the
feast of the nativity. And in our late yearly f^stivall for our deliverance
from the powder treason, the chief duty is the co^memoration of that
deliverance. So that this proposition is most certain and undeniable.

Now what the blessing of the seventh day was, because of which God sanctified,
it to be the weekly Sabbath of the old testament, and also after by Moses
commanded it to be kept holy. As I have largely before proved: even the promise
of Christ the Redeemer. And therefore it follows necessarily, that the first
and chiefest duty of sanctification of the Sabbath, which the fathers were
bound unto, was the commem^ration of the promise of Christ and of redemption by
him, which was the blessing wherewith God blessed the seventh day, and thereupon
sanctified it: And because from Adam until Noah, Christ was promised to be the
seed of the woman: And then he was promised to come of the seed of Shem, and
afterward Abraham was singled out of Shems family, and Christ the blessed seed
was promised more specially to come of his seed, even of Isaak the son of
promise, and of Jacob Isaaks younger son. And of all the tribes of Jsraell
Judah was nominated. And of all the families of Judah David's house was chosen,
and David received the promise that he should be the progenitor of Christ. And
all the Prophets in all ages in their Prophesies of Christ foretold: that he
should be made of the seed of David according to the flesh.

Therefore the fathers from Adam until Noah, and after him until Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacob, their seed and posterity in their several families, still
made a commemoration of Christ promised to come of them, in all their weekly
Sabbaths. And when God had enlarged his Church in all the Tribes of Israel: and
had by Moses recorded the promise of Christ, that he should be the seed of
Abraham etc. and after the Prophets had foretold that the Messiah was to come
of David's royal seed: then they were all bound to preach Christ. and to
commemorate the promise of him after a most solemn manner, to their public
^ssemblies on every Sabbath day. And this was a prime duty, and special work
of their sanctification of that day. As we read Luke 16.29. and Act. 15.21,

The second special duty was offering of Sabbath sacrifices, which were types
and shadows of Christ, and of red^mption and reconcilia^ion of men unto God
in him. For as they did more solemnly rehearse the promises of Christ, so also
they did offer more solemn sacrifices, and in a double measure both morning
and evening every Sabbath day, this God commanded by Moses to Israel. Number.
28.9. And undoubtedly Caine and Abell being instructed by Adam, did bring their
^fferings on the seventh day which ended the week, Genesis 4.3. And Noah his
pleasing sacrifice was a sweet savor of rest, that is a Sabbath sac^ifice.
Genesis 8.21. As J have largely before proved.

The third special duty, was an holy assembly or holy convoca^ion, which
they were commanded to keep on all other yearly festival Sabbaths, so every
weekly Sabbath day as we read. L^vit. ^3.38. For although while the Church and
people of God, were but a small number, and despersed in several places and
families, as in the family of Melchisedek, and Abraham, and Lot, and
afterward in the family of I^b, and of the sons of Abraham, and Jacob before
that Israel grew up to be a nation, there were few public holy assemblies
kept either on the Sabbath, or upon any other occasion. The Godly fathers did
only call together their household and families by themselves, and did
command and teach them to keep the way of the Lord, and to remember this
Covenant. as is testified particularly of Abraham. Genesis 18.19. and in another
place. Where he is said to build altars and there to worship God. As Genesis
12.7. and 13.4. as also it is said of Job. c. 1.5. That he rose up early and
sanctified his seven sons, and offered up burnt offerings according to the
number of them.

Yet it is manifest that whenever in any age, there was a great increase of
Gods people, and an enlargment of his Church over a whole nation and country,
the Sabbath was by Gods appointment sanctified with holy assemblies. After the
birth of Enosh when the family of Seth began to increase and multiply, it is
said, that men began then to call upon the name of the Lord. Or as some not
unfittly do translate the words, then they began to call men by the name of
the Lord, that is: Adam and his sons especially Seth and his Children began
to separate themselves from the wicked and profane people of Caines race, and
being gathered into a Church, were called the children of God, and Gods people,
and did assemble themselves together in set places, and at set times every
Sabbath day to worship God, and to call upon his name, as appears in the
Four^h Chapter of Genesis ver. 26. Thus Luther and Iunius expound that place, and
as the words will uery well bear this exposition, so also both Scripture and
reason confirm it. For Genesis 6.2. The people of God who were gathered into the
Church, and professed pure Religion in their assemblies, are called by the name
of God, even the sons of God and by this title are distinguished from the
wicked and profane, who are called the sons of Adam, that is carnal earthly
corrupt men.

Secondly, it is manifest that Abell long before Seth and Enosh did worship
God and call upon his name, and so undoubtedly did Adam and Seth before this
time in their private families, and therefore here cannot be meant the first
beginning of men's calling upon Gods name, and worshipping him. but certainly the
first beginning of Gods worship in public assemblies of the Church in set
places, and at set times even every Sabbath day. As for them who translate
this place, that when Enosh was born men began to profane the name of the Lord,
they make way for diverse absurdities. First that calling upon Gods name is
profanation of it. Secondly, that profanation began in the family of Seth, or
at the least by the increase of his posterity.

Thirdly, that there was no profanation of Gods name committed by Caine and
bloody Lamech before this time, contrary to that which is recorded before in
this Chapter ver. 8. and 24. Where Lamech is brought in skorning of Gods
threatenings. And as we have some monuments of antiquity which show that holy
assemblies were observed as religious duties of the holy Sabbath from the
beginning. So after that Israel became a nation, and God set up his Church and
tabernacle among them, we have most clear and express commandments of God
given by Moses to them and all their posterity, that they should do no servile
work, as appears Levit: 23.3.7.8. Number. 28:18 and 29.1. Deuteronomy. 16.8. And that
the Priests and Levites together with the people assemble together in the
Temple on the Sabbath day, it is recorded 2 King. 11.5. 2 Cron. 23.8.

But I need not insist upon further proof of this point. For every man of
reason must needs confess, that no public holy Sabbath duties can be
performed but in public assemblies.

The Fourth special duty of the Sabbath (unto which Gods people under the law
were bound; after the time of the law written by Moses, and the publishing of
the promises in the Scriptures of the Prophe^s) was the public reading, and
expounding of the law and the Prophets, by the Priests and public teachers,
and reverent hearing of them by the people. This is manifest by the places
before named, to prove asolemne rehearsal of the promise, to weet: Luke 16.29.
and Ast: 15:21. And that on the Sabbath day. For as those Scriptures do show
that the promises of Christ were solemnly rehearsed. And out of Moses and the
Prophets every Sabbath day. So also they show that Moses and the Prophets were
publicly read, and heard in their weekly holy assemblies, and by this means
the people were taught, not only in the promises and prophecies of Christ to
believe in him a redeemer to come: but also in all the righteousness and duties
of the law moral, and all the judgments; ordinances, and ceremonies of the law
ceremonial, which was their Scoole-maister to lead them to Christ.

We have also to this purpose another plain testimony Luke 4.16. Where it is
said, that our Savior as his custom was, went into the Sinagogue on the
Sabbath day and stood up to read, and the book of Isaiah the Prophet was
delivered unto him. And he read a place which was written concerning himself,
and expounded it unto them with the general aprobation of the assembly. Also
Ast, 13.15 and 27 verses. It is testified, that the Jews in their Sinagogues
on every Sabbath day, had Moses and the Prophets read unto them publickely:
both in foreign countries where they were disperced, and also at Jerusalem and
in their own country. And that this was an ancient practice even from Moses,
and in the time of the Judges, and the Kings of Jsraell and Judah, to read the
law in the holy assemblies, and to hear it read by the Priests we may gather
from Exodus 24.7. Where it is said, that Moses read the Covenant in the audience
of the people, and Deuteronomy. 31^11.12. Where the Isralites are commanded to read
the law in their assemblies, in the hearing of all men, women and children. I^
may also be collected from I^sh. 8.34.35. Judge. 18.3. and 2 Cron. 17.7.8.9. and
30.22. and 35.3.

That it was in use after the Captivity, the History of Nehemiah testifies
Nehem. 8.4, and 9.3.

The ancient division of the five books of Moses into 54 lectures, that they
might be read over once in every year, by reading one lecture every Sabbath,
is a thing so ancient, that we find no mention of the author of it, and
therefore it may be supposed to be from Moses the writer of those books. And the
reading of a lecture also out of the Prophets every Sabbath, is recorded to be
a custom long before Christ's birth begun, by occasion of the Tirant Antiochus
who prohibited the Jews to read the law of Moses in their Sabbath assemblies
under the pain of death. As we read in the Apocripall History of the
Macchabees lib. 1. c. 1.59. Lexic^ cold.
Whereupon they were forced instead of the Law of Moses to read lectures, out
of the Prophets as Elias Leuita says, and ever since that custom is retained
and was in use in our Saviors days Luke 4.16.

The fifth special duty of sanctification, was the worshipping of the Lord,
which as it is required of Gods people in private and upon particular occasion
at all times: So public upon the Sabbath day, and in all holy yearlie
Sabbaths. The duty of worship consists in confession of sins, prayers,
supplications, lauding and praising God, singing of Psalms, and offering of
free will offering, and the like as we read, Neh. 9.33. Levit. 26.3. Deuteronomy.
5.5. Where confession and acknowledging Gods favors is called worship, and set
down for apart of it. and Genesis 4.26. and 12.8 and 13.4. and Psa. 79.6. Where
the name of invocation and calling upon God by prayer is used by Synechdoche
for all worship in in general and Exodus 15.1. Iud. 5. Lauding and praising God
with singing of Psalms, and holy Songs are rehearsed as a special part of
Gods worship.

Now this worship of God by public confession, prayers, and singing of
praises, cannot be but in public assemblies, and holy convocations which are
especially kept on the Sabbaths, and therefore this worship must needs be a
special duty of the Sabbath and one part of the sanctification of it. David
also shows this Psalm. 42:3. Where he says that he was wont to go up to the
House of God, among the multitude which kept holy day, with the voice of joy
and singing. And the 92. Psalm which is intitul^d a Psalm for the Sabbath
day, does proclaim it to be a good and necessary duty on that day, To give
thanks and to sing praises to the name of the Lord, to show forth his loving
kindness and truth from morning to night, to Triumph in his works, to speak
of them with admiration. and to declare his mercies and judgments and what a
rock he is to rest on. These are the most notable duties which Gods people were
bound unto, in their sanctifying of the seventh day in the old Testament.

The third and last principal head comprehen^ing the rest of the duties. which
did belong to the observation of the Sabbath in the old Testament is the day it
self which they were bound to keep for their weekly Sabbath, that is the last
day of the week even the seventh from the beginning of the creation. That this
and no other was to be kept for their weeklie Sabbath in the old Testament
appears most plainly by three things. First because it was the day which God
blessed with the greatest blessing of al which were given and reveal^d before
the resurrection of Christ, to weet: the promise of Christ and of the
redemption of the world by him, and Gods entering into the Covenant of grae
with man, and Christ's open actual undertaking to be man's mediator and Savior
in whom the mutable work of creation is perfected, and God is well pleased and
rests satisfied: as J have before proved.

Secondly, because as the fathers and Isralites observed it according to Gods
commandment in the first institution Exodus 16. before the giving of the law
from Mount Sina: So in giving of the law to Jsraell and in the renewing of the
Commandment by Moses upon diverse occasions the Lord does expressly require the
keeping of the seventh day for his holy Sabbath: as we see Exodus 20. and 31.35.
and Deuteronomy. 5. Thirdly, because not only as the Prophets and holy men of God
urged and taught all men to observe that day until the coming of Christ. But
also our Savior himself all his life time on earth, and after his death kept
this Sabbath by resting in the ground. And the Apostles also while they lived
among the Jews and the tabernacle was yet standing, and Moses was not yet
buried, did observe and keep for orders sake the old Sabbath of the seventh day
as appears Luke 4.16. Ast: 13.13. and diverse other places.

CHAP. 18.
I Am come now to the last place, to the special Sabbath duties, unto which
all Christians are bound under the Gospel. In the right observation of the
Lords day which is their holy Sabbath: And these special duties may be reduced
to the common and general heads before named. The first which come here to be
handled in the first place, as the ground upon which the rest are builded, is
the consideration of the particular day of the week which they are bound to
keep for their weekly Sabbath. This is that which is most controverted and
called in question among the learned in this age, and therefore comes to be
first proved and clearly demonstrated by testimonies and proofs out of the
holy Scriptures, which being performed I proceed in the next place to the duty
of rest, and will show how far Christians are bound unto it on their weekly
Sabbath the Lords day. And in the last place, I will come to the special
duties of sanctification by which that day is to be kept holy to the Lord now
under the Gospel.

First for the day it self. Some are of opinion that it is the same which was
from the beginning, that is: the seventh and last day of the week This opinion
is grounded upon the bare letter of the law, as it was given both in the
institution, and sanctifying of the seventh day, and renewed again in the
fourth Commandment, and understood by the fathers in the old Testament. J
confess that the words of the law, if we take them as they were limited to the
fathers, not considering wi^hall how and upon what grounds and conditions God
made the seventh day the weekly Sabbath, they seem to favor their opinion.
For if we conceive no mo^e but a mere cessation and rest of God from his works
on the six days created, to be the ground of the law, then we may also
conceive that the law of the weekly Sabbath binds all mankind to that
particular day in all ages, because the ground is the same to all men and
equally belongs to all men, in all times to the worlds end.

Others are of opinion that the law of the Sabbath, being but a mere
ceremonial law is a bolished by the coming of Christ, and binds not us under
the Gospel to any particular day. And that it is free for the Church of God,
to appoint any day for their holy assemblies, and that Christians have no
Sabbath, neither are bound to keep any such rest as the law required in the
old Testament.

Others hold that the law of the Sabbath is naturally simply moral, in the
general nature of it as it requires a weekly Sabbath to be sanctified and kept
holy, and that the particular determination of the day is an honor and
prerogative which belongs to Christ the Redemer who is the Lord of the Sabbath.
And that it was the purpose of God from all eternity and in the first giving of
the law, as to consecrate the seventh day in memory of God perfecting all the
works of creation, and resting from them on that day, so also to consecrate by
the resurrection of Christ; the first day of the week to be ever after the
weekly Sabbath in honor and memory of the work of redemption, which on that
day was fully perfected by Christ's rising from the dead, and entering into that
state of glory, in which he rests for ever, having no more to do for the
ransoming and redeming of mankind. Gods justice being full satisfied.

The first of these opinions being grounded upon a carnal understanding, and
imperfect sense of the words of the law, has but a weak and sandy found^tion,
and because as the first authors of it were blasphemous heretics which erred
in diverse fundamental points of christian faith and Religion: So also the
reviuers of it, are either cursed Anabaptists, or men who do not rightly
understand the law nor the grounds and conditions upon which it requires an
holy weekly Sabbath. Therefore it is justly hated and rejected as a Jewish
error, and the maintainers thereof have in all true Christian Churches of all
ages been branded with the name of heretical and Judicial Sabbatarians. And
I need not spend any precious time in confuting it, and the frivolous fallacies
by which it is maintained.

The second opinion being too rashly conceived, and vnadvisedlie professed and
held by some godly Divines of the reformed Churches, who in this point do much
contradict themselves, also being an unsound opinion and therefore well
relished by Popish Schoolmen, malicious Jesuits, licentious Liber^ines and
men of profane hearts, has no ground in the Scriptures, nor any sound Orthodox
writings of any ancient fathers: Yea bringing great confusion into the
Decalouge which is the sum of the moral law, and laying a foul stain upon
our Church which has appointed the commandment of the Sabbath, to be read
among the ten Commandments, and enjoynes the people to pray that God would
incline their hearts to keep that law, as well as all and every one of the
rest. Therefore I shall not spend any time in the confutation of it: The
arguments which are brought for the confutation of the contrary truth, will
sufficiently raze and utterly abolish it, out of the hearts of all true
Christians.

The third opinion is most agreeable to the holy Scripture, and the common
Doctrine of the Orthodox writers both of ancient and later times, especially
of the most godly and learned in the Church of England, who have heretofore
written learned treatises of the Sabbath, and expositions of the ten
Commandments of the Decalogue. And therefore I wilbee bold here again to
commend it to you for an undoubted truth* which I have abundantly proved and
confirmed by many demonstratiue convincing arguments already, partly in that
large search which J have made before into the nature of the law of the
sabbath; and that description which I have made of it, but most fully in that
passage where I proved the change of the day by the resurrection of Christ from
the seventh to the first day of the week now under the Gospel, and brought
diverse argumen^s to show that the law which God gave for the keeping holy of a
seventh day in every week (at the first institution of the Sabbath here in my
text; and renewed again on mount Sina, and give ^f^en in charge by Moses to
Israel) does now as strictly bind us to keep an holy Sabbath on the Lords
day in every week, as it bound the ancient people of God in the old
Testament to keep the Sabbath of the seventh day.

But for the confirming of your hearts in the belief of this truth, and in the
knowledge of this duty. I will not multiply any new arguments, only that you
may more firmly retain it in your memories and still bear it in mind, that
you are in conscience bound to keep only the Lords day and none other for
your weekly Sabbath in these times of the Gospel: J will bri^fly touch and
explain some principal heads which have been before laid down at large and
in ample manner. The sum whereof is this; Namely: That although the law of
the Sabbath is not a law of nature in that rigid sense in which some do
conceive it, that is a law written in man's heart expressly and distinctly in the
creation which by the mere instinct of nature, and direction of natural reason
did lead man to keep every seventh day of the week an holy Sabbath to the
Lord. But that indeed it came in after man's fall together with the promise of
Christ, and therefore is more fitly called a law of grace, and a Positive
Evangellicall law requiring duties of obedience to God which chiefly and
especially tend to begit grace and and increase holiness in men. Yet it is
not simply Positive. nor so Evangellicallie moral, but that it may in some
sense and respect be called natural also. For first it requires some duties
of obedience which in their own nature are Good and profittable, though the
law giver had not by express commandment revealed his will that they should
be done, such is the giving, no wof rest and int^rmission of bodily labor and
toil, to our bodies and to the bodies of our servants and laboring cattle
one whole day in every week over and besides that which they have in the time
of sleep in the darkness and dead of the night. This is according to natural
reason and common equity.

Secondly, it commands some duties of Gods Worship and service which man by the
law of nature was bound to perform in his innocence and which are naturally
moral, as lauding and praising God, and giving to him all honor and reverence
in the most solemn and pu^lick manner.

Thirdly, it commands such holy spiritual works of grace, and such duties of
sanctification, as in their own nature work to the sanctifying of men more and
more, and to make them capable of eternal rest in heaven, and of the full
fruition of God. As for example: Meeting upon a set day in every week in holy
assemblies, for to hear and read Gods word, public instructions,
exhortations, and mutual provocations to piety, sanctity and Christian
charity. Fourthly, the patticular day of the week which the law commands to be
kept for an holy Sabbath, is separated upon such a just ground and reason in
the first institution of the Sabbath, and blessed by God with such a blessing
above other days of the week, that whosoever knows the law and true intent and
meaning of it, and rightly unde^stands the ground of the Sabbath mentioned in
the law, he must by the light both of nature and grace, he forced to confess
and acknowledge the particular day which the law commands to be kept an holy
Sabbath both in the old and new testament. For the law does not command one day
in seven to be an holy rest simply and merely for the pleasure of the lawgiuer,
because he would have it so, and for no other reason: but for very good reason
and upon a ground because he dignified the day of the Sabbath and blessed it
above all other days with a singular blessing: and our own reason does tell
us, that the particular day of the week, which has in it the true reasons and
the honor and blessing of the sabbath, it ought by the law to be observed for
the holy sabbath and none other, while it retains that honor and blessing,
and has the true reasons properly annexed to it. Now it it most manifest to
all who read the Scriptures, and are well exercised in Gods word and law: That
as the seventh and last day of the week was blessed, honored and adorned by
God with the greatest blessing which God gave to the world in the old
Testament, to weet: the promise of Christ the Redeemer of the world, and Gods
entering into the Covenant of grace and of eternal life and salvavation with
man, also Gods perfecting of the whole work of creation, by revealing and
giving in promise the work of Redemption, and his resting in Christ's mediation
on that day undertaken and begun. And therefore every reasonable man must by his
own reason be induced, and lead to acknowledge that day the fittest and most
worthy of all days in the week to be the holy Sabbath, and to be spent in
thankful commemoration of Gods free love and bounty to mankind. During the
whole time of the old Testament before the coming of Christ. So likewise God
having now under the Gospel transferred this honor to the first day of the
week, that is become a blessed day above all other days, being blessed of God
with a blessing far more excellent then that of the seventh day, to weet: the
actual performance of the promise by giving and exhibiting Christ a perfect
actual redeemer in his resurrection without which resurrection all our
preaching of Christ, and all our faith in Gods promises would prove vain as
the Apostle proves. 1 Cor. 15. Therefore every man must out of common reason
and equity conclude, that together with the ground and reason of the Sabbath
which God has now removed from the seventh to the first day, he has also
removed the honor and festival solemnity of the Sabbath. Also his first law
which enjoyneth man to keep that day for the holy Sabbath which God has
blessed with the grea^est blessing, does bind all Christians to observe the
Lords day for their weekly Sabb^th under the Gospel: And in a word that it were
a thing most unequal and unjust, if a man or any Church should go about to
set up for the weekly Sabbath any other day which God has not dignified and
honored with so great a blessing. Now upon these pr^missed reasons, I hope it
appears manifestly. First that though the Commandment of the weekly Sabbath
is no dict^te of nature: but a positive Evangellicall law: yet it does by
common natural reason as well as by the light of grace direct every reasonable
man to the partilar day of the weekly Sabbath as to the seventh day in the old
Testament, so to the first in the new Testament. And no reasonable man can deny
it to be the most equal which this law binds men unto, but upon the true
grounds of the Sab: well weighed and considered must be forced to confess,
that as the seventh day was most worthy of the honor of the Sabbath, and had
it before Christ's full exhibition in his resurrection, so ever since the Lords
day the first of the week is become the true Sab: of Christians, and none has
power to give that honor to any other day. Secondly, it is here manifest: that
though Christ the son of God made also the son of man, and man's redeemer is
the Lord of the Sab: and the determination of the particular day of the week
depends on him, and none other have the honor and pror^g^tiue to appoint the
particular day, but he only. Yet we must not conceive that Christ by his bare
will sets down the particular day, and that the day is to be observed only
because of his bare will and commandment, and that any other is as fit and
worthy as the seventh, and the first if he would be pleased at any time to
comm^nd the same. But we are to hold th^^ Christ is the Lord* of the Sabbath,
and has the determination of the particular day depends on him the Redeemer,
only because the ho^y Sabbath is founded and builded upon him, and in him
alone are to be found all the mean and essential grounds and reasons both of
the Sabbath and also ^f the particular day wherein he requires that it should
be observed. If he had not undertaken man's redemption from death and hell, and
man's exaltation to eternal rest and glory, there had been neither any place
for man's keeping of a Sabbath nor any use of it to fit him for heaven or to be
a pledge of eternal rest in heaven. Jf God had not on the seventh day promised
Christ the blessed seed to redeem man from death, to purchase life for him,
and to continue to him the benefit of the creatures, and to perfect his
creation. Surely it had not been the most blessed day of the week, neither
would God have instituted it to be a weekly Sabbath at the first, and so to
continue until the coming of Christ. And if God had not raised up Christ on
the first day of the week, and so exhibited him aperfect redeemer; and fully
performed his promise.

Then the first day had not been made a more blessed day then the seventh and
all other days of the week. And the Lord Christ would never have made that
day of the week his Sabbath always after, neither would his holy Apostles by
inspiration of his spirit being moved to call it the Lords day, and to observe
it, and teach others to observe it for their day of holy assemblies for the
performing of all holy Sabbath duties. And thus we see Christ is the Lord of
the Sabbath, and so determines the particular day of the week, not by his bare
will and word, but by bringing in such blessings on the seve^th or first day of
the week, as made the one of them most worthy under the new testament to be
the holy Sabbath, to be kept and observed of all Gods people, unto the
observation whereof they are justly lead by the light both of grace and nature:
And it is not either in the power of man or any other creature or in the just
will of God, or agreeable to the will of the Lord Christ and the wisdom of
his spirit to appoint any other day for the weekly Sabbath, but only the day
of the Lord Christ, that is the day of him promised in the old, and the day of
him fully exhibited in the new Testament. The first of which and no other the
fathers were bound to keep for their holy rest of old. And the later and no
other is our weekly Sabbath and the due observation of that particular, is the
first special Sabbath duty of all Christians under the time of the Gospel
until the last resurrection.

The second sort of special duties unto which all true Christians are bound
unto, in their observation of the Lords day, which is the christian Sabbath,
are the duties of rest and cessation from all worldly affairs which now follow
to be handled in the n^x^ place. Concerning which J find much diversity both
of opinion and practice, not only between true Christians of the reformed
Churches, and Antichristian Papists and other heretics, but also in the
reformed Churches among themselves. First for the Church of Rome, and all that
are of her faction devoted to her superstition and Idolatry, and marked with
the mark of the beast which bears up the Romish Babylon, though diverse of
their learned Scoole-men have heretofore maintained a very strict observation
of rest on the Lords day. Yet now in later times both in Doctrine and practice
they are grown uery desolate, especially the Romish Catholics which live
among us, turning the Lords day into a day of liberty, and spending a great
part of it in sports, plays, revelling other bodily exercises which are
carnal, fleshly, profane and impious.

As if so be their irreligious profaneness were at strife with their
Idolatrous religion. and at great emulation contending which should out go and
over run the other in carrying them with greater speed to hell. Yea to show
and make it manifest to the world, that the Romish man of sin is that great
Antichrist, which exalts himself above all that is called God, even above the
true God, and the Lord Jesus Christ whose vicar he in hypocrisy makes himself.
The Church of Rome does teach and urge her Uassals to ke^p yearly holy days
most strictly, which are of her own devising, which the pope has commanded to
be observed in honor of his Cananized Saints: and in the mean time opposes
with many great profanations the Lords day, which the Lord has consecrated by
his resurrection. Which day being blessed by God with the greatest blessing
above all other days of the week, is by the law which God gave from the
beginning, commanded to be kept for the Lords holy Sabbath vveeklie.

Secondly, there are of the heretical faction of the Anabaptists, Antimonians,
families and other such profane Sectaries, which make little so^ any law of
God or man, saving only the dictate of their faniticall spirit. And left the
commandment of the weekly Sab: least they should seem to be subject to Gods
law and to be be his (servants which they account slavery) and not absolute
Libertines and sons of Beliall which have cast of the Lords yoke. These
esteem and observe no day at all, but according to their own fancy, and make
the Lords day so far as they dare for fear of men a market day of buying and
selling wa^es, and a day of labor, and of bearing and carrying our burdens as
they well know who have been at Amsterdam where such heretics and sectaries
are tolerated.

Thirdly, among Christians of the reformed Churches there is a difference both
in Doctrine and practice. Some of the reformed Churches, who out of their
extreme hatred to Popish superstition, and to all Popish rites and Ceremonies,
being unwilling to retain any thing which was used in popery, except there
be some express Commandment or example for it in the Scriptures, especially
of the new Testament, and laboring to overthrow the whole Hierachie and
government of the Church by Bishops, and all bodily rites: they do in the heat
of their zeal so violently set themselves against Popish superstious holy
days, that they go about to take away all observations of days, and they
have proceeded so far, as to deny that any either weekly Sabbath, or
yearly set feast, ought to be kept holy by any special law or commandment
of God. They teach that the Sabbath as it was commanded to be kept of old, was
a mere ceremonial and shadow of things which are accomplished in Christ, and
that is now a bolished. But because it is a thing necessary for the having of
holy assemblies, and for good order in the Churches, that there should be a set
day either a seseventh or sixth day of eight days: And because the law of
nature requires that Christian people should have some days of rest from hard
labor for the refreshing of themselves, and their servants and cattle:
therefore the Church of God may appoint any day of the week. And in honor of
the resurrection of Christ on that day, has from the time of the Apostles
agreed to keep that day for the Lords day, not out of any opinion that God
has blessed and sanctified it above all other days of the week, but only
for good orders sake, and that it is lawful for Gods people, after public
exercises of religion and some needful rest and refreshing, to use necessary
labors and bodily recreations; which in themselves are not sinful and
unlawful, neither do hinder public duties of religion and of Gods worship.

But on the contrary it is the common doctrine of the most godly and learned
in the Church of England, ever since the reform^^ion of religion held,
maintained and taught, that although Christians are by Christ freed from the
observation of the seventh day, which was the Sabbath of the old Testament, and
from that servile bondage and rigorous rest which the law literally and
carnally understood did impose on them, or rather they by their carnal
exposition and wresting of the law did impose on themselves, as not kindling of
a fire, nor liberty to heal the sick, nor to do any work of charity and
necessity on the S^bbath day, which could not without danger be deferred. Yet
they are bound by the law which was first given here in my text, and after by
Moses and the Prophets, to keep in every week an holy rest, and that on the
first day which is the Lords day, because God has blessed it with a blessing
above all other days, even by exhibiting Christ a perfect redeemer in his
resurrection, and has thereby consecrated that day to be his holy sabbath.
And that all bodily labors, sports and recreations, and all worldly
negotiation, are by Gods law strictly prohibited now under the Gospel, as they
were in the days of the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and under the law, Because
indeed and in truth they cross the holy purpose of God which he has
manifested in his law, and are impediments of those holy exercises, which are
required in the sanctification of his holy day.

This doctrine and practice I hold to be the best, and this we are all bound to
receive and embrace and to cleave unto it, not only because it is the Doctrine
of our Mother Church, commended to us in the book of homilies, established by
divets laws statutes and constitutions still in force: but also because it is
most consonant to the sacred Scriptures, the precepts and practice of the
Apostles, and to the common Doctrine of the purest and most holy Orthoxe of the
ancient fathers in the Primitive times, and ages next succeeding after the
Apostles, as by Gods assistance as J shall make clear and manifest.

In the justifying and proving of this Doctrine, and in laying open the
special duties of Christians which concern rest and cessation from all
worldly negotiation, and bodily labors, on the Lords day which is the
Christian Sabbath: I will show: First of all. That rest and c^ssation from all
bodily labors about the worldly business, and from all servile and and
earthly works which concern this frail life, is a necessary duty which
God requires by his law of all Christians on the Lords day, which is their
Holy weeklie Sabbath under the Gospel.

2. That Gods law rightly understood does in respect of rest from worldly
cares, and all bodily works and pleasures, as strictly bind us under the
Gospel on the Lords day as it bound the fathers upon their seventh day in the
old Testament. 3. I will show how far Gods word and law does allow of bodily
exercises which concern this life, and how far in such exercises we may go
with good warrant upon the Lords holy Sabbath, and what exercises are condemned
in the word of God.

CHAP. 19.
FOR the full proof of the first point, there are many strong and invincible
arguments grounded upon the word and law of God, upon the general consent of
Orthodox divines both ancient and modern, even upon the confession of them
who in this point much differ, and seem to deny that the Lords day either is,
or ought to be called a Sab.

1. Argument.
The first Argument is drawn from the words of the law, which forbids all works
to be done on the Sabbath day either by man himself, or his children,
servants, or cattle, as Exodus 20:10. Deuteronomy. 5.14: where it is said. In it thou
sh^lt not do any work thou nor thy son nor thy servant nor thy cattle: and
Exodus 35.2 Leuit. 23.7. Ye shall do no servile work^ therein, whosoeve^ does
any work therein shall be put to death. The reasons why the Lord requires rest
from all servile work on the Sabbath day are two.

First because he who is the Lord our God and our Redeemer, has on that day
rested from his work, and him we ought to imitate if we will enter into his
rest. Secondly, because he has blessed the day which is his Sabbath above all
days of the week, and wheresoever the causes and reasons stand firm, there
the law is still in force. Now this law of the Sabbath does reach to the Lords
day: (As J have proved before) and the reason upon which it requirs rest from
se^vile works are much more to be found in the Lords day which is the Christian
Sab: then in the Old Sabbath of the seventh day. For in it Christ who is God
over all blessed for ever, and who is our Redeemer from a greater then Egyptian
bondage, even the slavery of sin, death and hell, and the Devil, has rested
from the great work of redemption as God the Creator did one the seventh day
from the work of creation. And this day is now by Christ's resurrection in
which Christ perfected man's redemption, blessed with a blessing far more
excellent then any wherewith God blessed the seventh day. Therefore this is the
Sabbath now under the Gospel, and in it God requirs of us by his law a rest
and total cessatio^ from al servile works. Secondly whatsoever day is the Lords
holy day, and a day of holy convocations and assemblies that is a Sab: of rest
from al servile works and worldly business, 2 Argument.
this is manifest Exodus 12.16. and 31.15. and 35.2: and Leuit. 32.3:7: which
places do plainly show, that every day which is holy to the Lord and a day of
holy assemblies, is a Sab: of rest, and no work may be done therein. And so
likewise in all the law and the Prophets every day which is a day of holy
convocation, and an holy day is called a Sab: and day of rest from our own
works and pleasures and every Sab: is called the Lords holy day, for these two
are termini convertibiles, terms which may be naturally affi^med one of
another, as apeares Neh. 9:14: and Isa: 58:13: Now the Lords day in the time of
the Gospel is the chief of all holy days among Christians: It was sanctified
and observed by the Apostles for their day of holy assemblies from the first
publishing of the Gospel among the Gentiles, on that they did meet together to
hear the word and to receive the sacrament of the Lords supper Act: 20:7: And
on that day St Paul ordained that the collections and offerings should be made
for the Saints 1 Cor: 16:12: which were things proper for holy and public
assemblies: So St: John calls it by the name of the Lords day: Revel: 1:10: that
is, the day which is universal, sacred, and holy to the Lord in an high
degree. For whatsoever things have the Lords name named on them, are such, as
all confess and many examples of Scripture prove abundantly: All the ancient
fathers and doctors of the Church who immediately and in the ^ext ages succeed
the Apostles, do proclaim it to be the chief holy day of Christians; even the
Queen and supreme Lady of days: So Ignatius calls it as J have often before
noted: also the day of their holy assemblies wherein they did come together to
preach, read, expound, and hear Gods word, to worshipp God, to pray and to
praise God with their one voice, to receive the Sacramentt and offer up alms.
So Justin Martyr affirms: The rest of the most learned fathers, as Basil,
Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Hyerome, and Austen, do all extol it for the Lords
high royal holy day, the chief^, primate, and first fruits of days, as the
learned of all sides know and confess, even Calvin, and his followers, who
made a doubt and scruple of calling it the Sab: or observing it for a Sab: of
holy rest by any warrant from Gods law. Therefore none can with any good reason
deny, that one maine duty of this day is rest from all earthly works. Thirdly,
3. Argument.
wheresoever there is as much use of holy rest and cessation from all worldly
affairs, as there was of old when God first gave, and afterward repeated and
urged the law of the weekly Sab: there a Sab: of rest ought to be kept weeklie
even by the Com: of God. This is truth and undeniable. For no laws of God
comm^nding things which are but tipes and figures, are at any time abrogated,
until the things commanded cease to be of use as the Apostle shows in the 8
9: and 10 cap: of Heb:

Now Christ who is the body and substance of all types and shadows, has not
by his coming so fulfilled the rest of the weekly Sabbath, but there is as
great, as holy and as necessary use of it to us Christians, as there was to the
people of God in the Old Testament.

First, we have as much and more need of refreshing our weak bodies, and the
bodies of our servants and laboring cattle then they had, by keeping a weekly
Sabbath, for we are grown far more weak and feeble, and of shorter life then
they were.

Secondly, we have as great need of seperating, sequestring, and recalling our
minds and affections from all worldly cares negociations, and pleasures, that
we may have pleasure and freedom to worship and serve God, and devote one day
in every week to public assemblies for our edification in grace faith and
holin^sse. For we are more full of infirmities, and do decay and grow corrupt
more and more, as all the world does, and have need of all outward helps more
then they.

Thirdly, as rest from all works and labors which concern this life was
necessary and of great use to Adam, and all the fathers, to withdraw their
hearts and mind^s from placing their felicity and seeking happiness in this
world, and to put them in remembrance, that (being fallen from that integrity
in which they were created, and the first covenant of life by man's own works,
being broken and made void by the first fall and disobedience) there is no hope
of life or of any true blessedness. So it is of no less use, but of much
more necessity for us, who are far more eagre after the world, more ready
to place our felicity in earthly things, and more proud and arrogant, ready
to glory in our own merits, and to boast of our own righteousness, ^s we see
by common course of the world, which now a days so madlie doateth after
Popish and Pelagian merits.

F^ur^hlie, as Gods commanding of a weeklie rest to be given to man and beast;
and the resting of the fathers on the Sabbath day, from servile works and
labor which came in as a curse for sin, were of great use to teach them, and
to be a pledge, and token unto them, that God did rest in Christ's mediation,
and his justice was fully satisfied, and his wrath appeased toward them, by
that satisfaction which Christ had undertaken to make, and that the sting of
sin and death, and the bitterness of the curse was taken away by him. So
likewise it is of the same use still to us, and we have as much need of the
same weekly holy r^st, to make us feel more sensible, and relish more sweetly
the virtue of Christ's satisfaction, the sweetness whereof we through our
dullness can hardly taste and relish, and many amongst us make a doubt whether
there be any such satisfaction of Gods justice needful at all, or any
appeasing of his wrath by Christ.

Fifthly, as Gods injoyning of rest was of use to the fathers to testify to
them his provident care over his creatures, both men and beasts, and his hatred
and detestation of merciless cruelty and unjust oppression: So it is much
more useful to us for the same purpose in these last days and perilous
times, wherein men are become fierce, cruel, implacable, without natural
affection, as experience teaches, and the Apostle foretold. 2 Timothy 3.2.3.

Lastly, as the weekly rest of the old Sabbath grounded upon the obscure
promise of Christ, was commanded by God, that it might be a means to stir
up the fathers to look for true comfort, ease and refreshing in Christ, if
they did by faith flee to him, whenever they did travel under the burden of
their sins, and Satan's temptations, as we read that Job did cap. 16.21. and
19.25. So now it is much more useful to stir us up to seek to Christ, when
we are heavy laden, and groan under the burden of sin, and of the miseries
which come by sin, and of Satan's dangerous temptations. Seeing as Satan does
now ^ore rage like a Roaring Lion, 1 Pet 5.8. And is full of wrath because his
time grows shorter Revel. 12. So we have Christ actuallie given and revealed,
and in the Gospel calling and inviting us and promising rest and refreshing
for our souls in such causes of distress, if we come to him. Jn a word, to us
the rest of the Lord Christ's day is a more lively pledge of eternal rest by
him prepared in heaven for us:

These things being clear and manifest, the conclusion following upon these
praemises it this. That we are as much or more bound by Gods law to keep the
Lords day as a Sabbath of weekly rest, by ceasing from all affairs of this
life, laying aside all worldly cares, and resting from all our own ordinary
and common works and labors.

Fourthlie, 4. Argum.
they who are more spiritual and have have lively hope of Heaven, and have the
spirit shed on them more abundantly, they are more bound by Gods law to
sequester themselves and withdraw their minds from worldly cares, and more to
mind heavenly things as at all other times, so on the Lords holy day, which
is consecrated to heavenly, spiritual and religious worship and service of
God, and is a pledge to them of eternal rest with Christ in heaven.

For to whom God has given, more of them shall more be required.

Now it is most plainly testified in the Scriptures. That Christians under the
Gospel are more spiritual, and have the spirit more abundantly shed on them
through Christ, then the Fathers had Act. 2.17. and Tit. 3.6. The Ministry of
the new Testament is the ministry of the spirit not of the letter 2 Cor. 3.6.
And we have now more evidence and more assurance of the blessed hope reserved
in heaven for us. Colos. 1.5. There is Christ our life and Treasure Colos. 3,
1.2. And there our hearts ought to be, and not on earthly things. We must now
be ready if Christ call us to sell all and to give to the poor, that we may
have treasure in heaven.

Therefore we are bound by the law especially on the Lords day our weekly holy
day, to be more sequestered from the world, and to rest wholly from all cares
and labors about earthly things, that we may be wholly devoted to heavenly
things and to divine meditations.

5. Argu:
Lastly, though Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church did much condemn in
their writings, the observation of the Sabbath after the manner of the later
Jews, Chrisostom in Cor. 16. Augst ser. 25 1. de temp: Gregor. Magn Epist:
lib: 11.3:
to weet: in idleness, and from resting from all worldly affairs, that they
might spend the day in vain sports and delights, and in wanton leaping and
dancing, which in the grave judgment of these learned Fathers: Was worse and
more profane then plowing and digging and working in woll. Yet notwithstanding
they do generally commend the Lords day as a day of rest to all Gods people
from all rural works and worldly affairs, that they may be at leisure to
exercise themselves in holy duties, and be wholly devoted to the worshipp of
God. And hereupon it is, that the learned of these later times; especially the
builders of Gods Church in this land, do most frequently in respect of this
rest and cessarion from al seculiar affairs call the Lords day the Sabbath of
Christians, as appears in the first part of the Homily of the time and place
of prayer, and do affirm that as the Fathers in the old Testament were bound
to rest one the seventh day from all manner of work: So also are Christians
bound on the Lords day to rest and that by the law of God.

CHAP. 20
THE second position which I have propounded before, which now Comes to be
proved is: That Gods law rightly understood, does in respect of this duty of
rest from all worldly affairs, as strictly bind us under the Gospel on the
Lords day, as it bound the fathers on the Sabbath of the seventh day in the old
Testament. Here some will perhaps imagine, that I go about to lay an heavy
yoke of Jewish legal bondage upon Christians, contrary to Christian liberty,
by which Christ has made us free. But if they remember, and bear in mind
what I have before proved, to weet: That the fathers from the beginning had no
such burden imposed on them as is commonly conceived, and that the Scrip^ures
are alleged to prove that they might not kindle a fire nor dress meat, nor
go out of their place on the Sabbath day, and that it was death to gather
sticks on that day in case of necessity, are much mistaken. They shall be
forced to confess that I take away the heavy yoke which many lay upon the
Fathers in the old Testament, ra^hen then lay any yoke upon Christians in the
observation of the Sabbath. Yea that I require and urge no more, then that
which all the learned of best note in all ages have ever since the time of the
Apostles, and by tradition from them commended to the Churches of Christ, which
also the laws, Canons; and Doctrine of the Church of England generally
received and established, do impose on us the light burden and easy yoke of
Christ.

It is true that the Scribes and Pharisees those great corrupters of the law,
and blind Hypocrites as our Savior calls them, did lay an heavy yoke on the
people of their time, by their false glosses and corrupt traditions, as in
diverse other points, so in the observation of the Sabbath. They held it
unlawful in case of necessity to pull an ear of corn, or any fruit from a
tree on the Sabbath day, and blamed Christ's Disciples for doing so when they
were hungry and had no other means to keep themselves from fainting. They
accused our Savior Christ for working a glorious miracle, and doing a work of
great charity on the Sabbath, when by his word he healed some that were sick of
great infirmities, and sent them away bearing their beds on their backs in
open sight of all, which tended much to the honor of God, and made the people
glorify Christ and his Gospel. But our Savior reproues them for this
strictness, and convinces them of error by diverse argument^.

First, by Scripture which says, that God will have mercy rather then
sacrifice, that is: God is served more acceptably with works of mercy which
are moral duties, then sacrifices which are but a service ceremonial, and he
delights more in works of mercy and charity then in them, as at all times, so
when they are done to his glory on the Sab: day. So that if it was a breach and
profanation of the Sab: to do any work of mercy in it, then it must needs be
much more a profanation to labor and work about sacrifices in killing
beasts, dressing and washing their flesh, and making fires to burn them on the
Altar, which were not so pleasing to God as works of mercy. But the Pharisees
allowed and approved such works of sacrificing and durst not condemn the^. And
th^^for our Savior concludes that they ought not to condemn his merciful
works of healing the sick on the Sab: day, and shows that by censuring his
doings for profanation, they did much more censure the forenamed actions of
their Priests even the dressing and burning sacrifices mat. 12.5.6.7. Secondly,
our Savior proves, that by Gods own law they were allowed to circumcise
children on the Sab: day, whenever it happened to fall out on the eight day
after the birth of children, and to the Child circumcised they applied healing
medicin^s, and therefore they groslie erred in accusing him for healing on the
Sabbath which was a thing pleasing to God and was a less labor then
Circumcision, John, 7.22.

Thirdly, he convinces them of gross hypocrisy and blindness in that they
imposed heavy burdens upon others which they themselves would not bear, they
did restrain men from pulling an ear of corn, rubbing and eating it on the
Sabbath day in the case of hunger and great necessity. And yet they led their
oxen to the water, and did pull a sheep or a ass out of a pit on the Sabbath
day. Mat. 12.11. Luke 13.15. and 14.5. By these arguments which our Savior
used against the Scribes and Pharisees in the Gospel it is most clear and
manifest, that it was not the law of God given from the beginning, nor the will
of God the lawgiuer, but only the Hipocriticall Scribes and Pharisees who by
their traditions and devices of their own brains, imposed on the Jews that
strict and rigorous rest and cessation from all works whatsoever on the Sabbath
day, which the learned fathers and Christian writers do call an heavy burden
hard to be borne

Object. But it may be some will object that the fathers in the old Testament
were bound to offer double sacrifices on Sabbath day, Number. 28.9. even two
lambs of the first year without spott, and two tenth deals of flower For a
meat offering mingled with oil, and the drink^ offering thereof. Which was
more costly and required more bodily labor and care, then any which is imposed
on us Chri^^ian^ by Gods law upon our Christian Sabbat^, and therefore their
observation of the Sabbath was an heavy yoke and burden harder to be borne,
then any which is imposed on us.

Answ. I answer, that this objection does strongly prove the point in hand. For
if more bodily labor and care was required of the Fathers in their worship
(which was more carnal and bodily then ours) on their Sabbath, and we are
therefore eased of that yoke, and have a more spiritual worship taught us,
and imposed on us by Christ and his Apostles as the Prophets foretold. Then
were the Fathers less restrained from bodily labors then we are, neither
was there so strict and rigorous a Rest and Cessation imposed on them, which
serves much for the justifying of our position, to weet: That Gods law rightly
understood, and expounded according to the will and intent of God the lawgiuer,
does as strictly bind us under the Gospel to Rest from all worldly business
on the Lords day, as it bound the fathers one the seventh day in the old
Testament.

But to proceed in the further manifestation of this truth: Although I could
bring many arguments and proofs both out of Scripture, also out of the
writings of the learned, and clear testimonies which show the consent of all
Godly Orthodox vvrititers of all ages: Yet because I will leave no occasion
or color to such sons of Beliall as do intrude into our assemblies, to
catch calumniate and report my words safely and to accuse my Doctrine, except
they will h^rden their despeand malicious hearts, and put on brazen faces
with vvhorish foreheads to accuse the holy Scriptures, and the Doctrine
published in the book of Homilyes, and by law established in this Church of
England vvherof we are members: therefore I will only commend to your
consideration the public Doctrine of our Church in the very words of the
Homilies, which both by statut^ law, and Royal perogatiue are established in
this land and Kingdom, and will show how parfectlie they agree with holy
scripture in this point.

First in the first part of the Homily. Concerning the time and place of
prayer, We are taught: that God in the f^urth Commandment has appointed the
time for his people to assemble themselves together solemnly, when he said.
Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath. Secondly, in the same place it is
affirmed, that the praecise keeping of the seventh day, and the external
ceremonial worship of the sabbath which the law required, as it wa^ given to
the Jew^s being b^t C^remoniall are ceased to us, and we are not bound by the
law so strictly to forbear work and labor in the case of necessity after the
manner of the Jews. That is as they were taught by the Scribes and Pharisees.
But we keep now the first day of the week which is our sunday; and make that
our Sabbath, that is our day of rest, in the honor of our Lord Christ, who as
upon that day rose from death, conquering the same most triumphantly. These are
the words of the Homily. And that the keeping of a set time, to weet: one day
in week, wherein we ought to rest from lawful and needful works, Js found
in the fourth Command^ment, among the things which appertain to the law of
nature, and is a thing most godly most just, and needful for the setting forth
of Gods Glory, and ough^ to (...) retained and kept of all good Christian
people. So is it there expressly affirmed.

Thirdly, we are there ^aught. That as by the fourth commandment no man on the
six days ought to be slothful, or idle, but diligently to labor in their
estate wherein God has set him. Even so God has given express charge to all
men, that on the Sabbath day which is now our Sunday, they should (...) from
all worldly and work day labor, and that Gods obedient people should use the
Sabbath holily, and so rest from their common and daily business, that they
may give themselves wholly to Heavenly exercises of Gods true religion and
service.

Fourthly, in the same Homily all Gods people are urged and pressed to keep
the Sunday for their holy Sabath. by three A^guments. The first is the
commandment of God in the law. The second is, Gods examample who rested on the
Seventh day, and did no work of creation at all, but blessed and sanctified
it, and consecrated it to quietness, and rest from labor. The third is an
example of the Apostles, who immediately after the ascension of our Lord Christ
began to keep this day of the week, and commended it the first Churches of the
Gentiles 1 Cor. 16* and called it the Lords day. Revel. 1.10. Since which
time Gods people has always with out any gainsaying observed it.

Fifthly, and lastly the Homilies shows that the rest and cessation which God
requires by his law one the Lords day, at the hands of us Christians, is the
same which the law did bind the fathers unto from the beginning upon this
Sabbath in the old testament.

First, whereas the law commanded the Fathers to rest from all such works, as
they are allowed to do on the other common days of the week, that is wordly
labors as the express words of the law show.

In it thou sh^lt not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daugther, nor
thy servant, etc. Exodus 20.10. And again thou shall do no servile work therein
Levit. 23.7. thou shall do no manner of servile work. Number. 28.18. So the
Homily blames all those people for wicked boldness and careless profanation
of the Lords day, who make no conscience of doing their worldly business one
that day, though there be no extreme need and necessity.

Secondly, as the law forbids journeying from home about worldly affairs on
the sabbath: Exodus 16.29. bringing in and carrying out loads and burdens Ier.
17.27. exercising themeselves in the works of their ordinary calling and
trade, as buying, selling, keeping market and faires on that day. So also the
Homily condemns them as transgressors and profaners of the Lords sabbath, who
on the sunday which is the Lords day and Christian sabbath, do not spare to
ride, and journey, bring and carry, row, and ferry, buy, and sell keep markets
and faires; and so use the Lords holy days and work days both a like.

Thirdly, as the law and the Prophets commanded Gods people in the old
testament to rest in holiness, Exodus 31.14. and 35.2. and not pollute the
sabbath, by doing their own pleasure, but to honor the Lord, not doing their
own ways, nor finding their own pleasure, nor speaking their own words Isa.
58.13. So also the Homily requires of all Gods people, the same Holy rest on
the Lords day, in that it condemns them who follow vain and carnal sportes,
and fleshly pleasures, and all such exercises as cause brawling and railing and
tending to wantonness, as a worse sort of people then they that break the
sabbath by working and doing all their business in it. For these are the words
of the Homily. The other sort is yet worse, for though they will not travel
and labor on the sunday, as on the week day, Yet they will not rest in
holiness, as God commands, but they rest in ungodliness and filthynesse
praunsing in their pride, pranking, and pricking, pointing, and painting
themselves to be Gorgeous, and Gay, they rest in excess and superfluity, in
Gluttony and drunkenness, like Rats and swine, they rest in brawling and
railing, in quarrelling and fighting. They rest in wantonness, ^oyish ^alking,
and filthy fleshlynesse. So that it does evidently appear, that God is more
dishonored, and the Devil better served upon Sunday, then all other days of
the week besides. And I assure you the beasts which are commanded to rest one
the sunday, honor God better then this kind of people.

Now by these express words of the Homily we se most clearly, that both this
and the former position are not any new Doctrines, or factious opinions of my
own devising; as some malicious catchers and false traducers have
slanderously reported both of them and me: But the true Orthodox Doctrine of
the Scriptures in the law, the Prophets and new Testament, and the divine
doctrine pubklickly received in the Church of England, and by law established.
For the further confirmation whereof, J could say much besides the strong
Arguments which I have brought to prove the former position, which do over and
above most strongly prove this also. For 1. Jf the Lords day be a more blessed
day then the seventh day was in the old Testament. 2. Jf it be a more holy
day, and a day of more holy convocations and assemblies. 3. Jf we have as
much, and as manifold use of rest and cessation as they had and more. 4. Jf we
be bound by Gods law, and by the Gospel to be more spiritual and more
sequestered from the world, because we have more abundant gifts of the spirit,
more clear sight and knowledge of heavenly and eternal rest, and more hope of
eternal life and glory. Then it must needs follow, that we by Gods law are as
strictly bound to rest and cease from all worldly cares, and bodily works,
sports, and pleasures, as the Fathers were in the old testament. But because
slanderous traducers shall have nothing here to object against me in this
point, except they can desperately harden their hear^s, and faces to accuse,
blaspheme, and wound thr^ugh my sides the holy Scriptures, and the public
doctrine of the Church of England by the law established and royal authority
maintained: I will content my self and desire you my hearers to be satisfied
with this which I have said and you have heard already. And so I pass to the
third point before propounded concerning the duty of rest, even the manner and
measur^ of it, and in what cases Gods law permits bodily exercises on the L:
day.

CHAP. 21.
HOwsoeu^r all worldly works and labors are forbidden, and rest From them
all is commanded in the law, yet the equity of the law permits some labors
and exercises, and in some cases allows such bodily works, as are
ordinarily unlawful to be done on the Lords holy Sabbath day. First of all
it is lawful for Ministers and preachers of Gods word to do some painful and
laborious works upon the Lords day, even all such as are necessary for the
better sanctification of the day, and for the edification of the people and
flock in public.

Though they are not allowed to neglect their studies on the six days, but are
bound to read, study, meditate, and for help of their memories to write down
the heads, points, and proofs of their Doctrine; before the day of assembly?
Yet because few or none are so perfect, as to preach public with good order,
Method and readiness of speech and memory, that which they have studied,
without searching, and reading over the testimonies of Scripture which they
have collected and studied, and noting down and writing some which come new and
fresh to their mind, and serious meditating upon that which they are to speak,
for better imprinting of it in their mem^ries. Therefore their is a necessity
laid on them to labor in this kind on the Lords Sabbath. And though it be a
great labor of the body to stand up and preach in the congregation, with
intention of the voice and earnestnes of affection, and does more spend the
spirits, and strength of the body, and makes drops of sweat run down the face
more abundantly then the tilling of the ground: Yet the matter in which they
deal is holy and all their work is religious, and their labor tends to an
holy and supernatural end, and is necessary for a full sanctification of the
day: therf^re it is not only allowed, but also required and commandment by the
law of God. If any does make a doubt or question of this truth we have very
strong proof thereof in the holy Scriptures.

The first Argument is drawn from the hard bodily labors and artificial
practices of the Priests which they vver^ by the law bound to perform in their
double sacrifices and offerings on the Sab: day in the old Testament, they were
bound to flealambs and to dress and wash the flesh and the intrals, and to
offer them up in sacrifices on the Altar, thy were bound to lay them upon wood
on the Altar, to kindle the fire and burn the fat, and some part of the flesh
also they were to take a tenth deal of flower to mingle it with oil, and to
make the drink offering thereof also, and to offer all to God as we read, Number.
28.9. Now if God by his law allowed and commanded such bodily works on the Sab:
day, because they were needful for sacrifices, and Circumcision which were but
a ceremonial and tipicall service of the Lord, which he in his temple required
by a ceremonial law for the sanctification of the Sab. Then much more does
Gods law allow and command his public ministers, to labor and sweat and spend
their bodily strength and spirits in preaching his word in the holy Christian
assemblies, where Christ who is greater then the temple is present by his
spirit in many of his members who are so many temples of the Holy Ghost and of
God.

The second argument is drawn from the practice and example of Christ and his
Apostles. For as the Priests and learned scribes did of old read and expound
the law and the Prophets in all their sinagogues every sabbath day. And our
Savior approved this by joining with them in some practice, preaching and
teaching in their sinagogues in great throngs and assemblies of people, which
thronged after him and undoubtedly made him sweat as appears. Mat. 4.13. and
John. 5.10. So also the holy Apostles did on the first day of the week the
Lords day, labor in the word as we see by the example of St. Paul, who at
Troas continued his Preaching till midnight, because he was to depart the next
day. Act. 20.7. Now what they did perform as a duty taught by the law and
moved by the spirit of God. Jn that all their faithful successoures are bound
to immitate them. Therefore the labors and pains of Ministers and preachers
are allowed on the Lords day, being holy and religious works, and fittest of
all for the holy day and holy place.

A second sort of works allowed to be done on the Lords day: are bodily works
and labors which are so necessary for the fitting and enabling of Christians
to sanctify that day, and for bringing them unto holy and public assemblies
and places of prayer and of Gods worship and holy service, that wit^out such
working and laboring even on that day they neither can be so fit and able to
serve God joyfully, and to worship him with cheerful hearts, neither can
they as the present case stands, come unto holy Sabbath assemblies, to hear
the word, to pray and to worship in public. As for example, in places of
restreant, and of trouble and persecution where public Sabbath assemblies of
true Christians are not tolerated, but in Churches which are remote diverse
miles, and in barren countries where the Churches are four or five miles
distant from some houses and vilages in the parrish, men may lawfully ^rauell
on foot and ride one horses, or make their horses labor in drawing them to
the Church in Coaches. And because men cannot be so Cheerful in the service
of God, nor so heartily rejoice before him, not with strength and delight spend
the whole day in Sabbath duties, wit^out warm and wholesome food, and
plentiful refreshing of their weak bodies. therefore the dressing boiling
baking and rosting of meat is lawful on the Lords day, so far as it more
helps then hinders holy duties and the service of God. This is manifest by the
words of the law, Exodus 12.16. where the Lord forbidding all manner of work on
his holy Sabbaths, excepts labor and work about that which people were to
eat, and which was necessary for the upholding of an holy moderate feasting on
those days. This was practiced by the Ph^rises and by our Savior and his
Apostles who on the Sabbath day came to a feast to the house of a chief
Pharise, Luke 14.1.2. Also the speech of the Shanamite to his wife 2 King.
4.23: does import, that for the solemn observation of the Sabbath they were
wont to ride and travel to the Prophets and to places where they might worship
God; and be instructed in the knowledge of his will and worship.

For when she desi^d an ass to ride on, and a young man to attend her unto
Carmell where Elisha ^he man of God was. Wherefore will thou (says he) got to
him to day seeing it is neither New Moon nor sabbath? But here let me give a
caution. That Christian people be not too heedlesse setting their
inhabitations in places Remote from the Church for some worldly commodities,
when they may with a little less convenience dwell near. And that they do not
by unnecessary feasting and superstitious dressing of meat, hinder, or wholly
disable some of their fam^ly from keeping holy the Lords day a fault to common
in our days.

Thirdly, all works and actions of bodily labor which are works of mercy and
of Charity which cannot without convenience or danger be deferred, or which may
be done without hindering of our souls in Gods public worship, and to the
great comfort of our brethren are lawful and may be done on the Lords day. As
for example, visiting of the si^k, and of them that are in prison, or in any
great distress, and applying and ministering comfort, and healing medicines to
them: offering and gathering of collections for the Relief of poor Saints,
laboring to set men at ^nity, and to Reconcile jarring neighbors. These are
holy pious works as our Savior shows, and he accounts such deeds when they
come from a sincere heart as if they were don to himself, Mat 25.40: Yea he
himself did commonly on the Sabbath day practice such deeds so often as he
found occasion as we read, Mat. 12. Luke 6: Paul by inspiration of the spirit
and by Commandment from the Lord Christ does ordain, and appoint such works
to be done on the Lords day: 2 Cor. 16.1:2. And from the days of the Apostles,
all true Churches of Christ did practice such works of mercy, piety, and
Charity as Justine Martyr witnesses, and diverse others in alter ages. And
such works the Ecclesiastical constitutions of our English Church, commanded
and commend on the Sundays and holy days of the Lord.

Fourthly, all bodily works of great, and extreme necessity which concern
the life and safety of men, and of their cattle, the preservation of necessary
creatures, and other good things of good use, value and moment, serving for
man's being and welbeing, may lawfully be done on the Lords day. As for example.
1. Fighting for our lives and for the safety of our country or city against
enemies which invade us, and set upon us, and taking advantage if God does
offer it to us on the Lords day, as Joshua did at Jerico in compassing the City
by Gods appointm^nt, and (by circumstances it is probable) taking it on the
seventh day and offering a bloody sacrifice in fire to God, as a Cherem, or
Anathema, devoted and separated to God, for the first fruits of the land of
Canaan after they came to Jordan from which no man might without sacrilege
detract any thing as Achan did and was cut off for it, Josh. 6. If Joshua did
compass the City seven days together, (as the text says) then one of the
seventh must needs be the Sabbath, and most likely the last of the seventh,
wherein the City was taken and offered up in fire as a devote thing to God.
God offering the occasion and giving the advantage by the ruin of all the
walls about the City, did impose a necessity upon them to take and destroy
the City on that day, and this work was dispensed with and approved by God,
and so are all of the like kind: ( For necessity has no law).

Secondly, by the same rule other works of necessity, as labor in que^ching
fire, when men's houses are on fire, or the town in danger, or in stopping of a
breach when the sea, or some overflowing river breaks through the banks, and
is ready to draw some part of the country; and to destroy men and beasts, and
there is a necessity of Removing men and beasts, corn and other good creaturs
that they be not be drowned and swallowed up. And in a word wheresoever God
brings men into that necessity, that they cannot be kept in welbeing without
present help by some work done on the Sabbath day, such works are not
forbidden on that day. Neither killing of sheep and oxen, nor dressing of them
nor grinding corn nor baking bread to refresh an army returned from battle
and ready to faint without present sustenance, by dressing and preparing some
part of the praey which they have taken: Our Savior in the Gospel proves this
clearlie Mat. 12. Where by David's example, who did take and eat the show bread
in his necessity he defends his Disciples and their act of plucking ^ares of
corn, rubbing and eating them on the Sab: and also allows leading of cattle
to drink, and the drawing the^ out of pits, and such like.

But because occasion is here offered to speak of all kinds of actions which
are allowed to be don, and from which men are not bound to r^st wholly on the
Lords day: It will be expected of some, that I should speak of actions and
exercises of sport and recreation, whether men be altogether restrained from
them, or whether any of them be lawful to be used on the Lords day: Now
because I will not provoke nor exasperate any who seem of contrary judgment,
especially men of great place and authority: I will propound my judgment which
I conceive to be agreeable to Gods word, only ingenerall rules gathered out of
the holy Scriptures, which all understanding Christians may easily apply to the
particulars. 1. It is acknowledged by all godly learned divines: That nor
creations or sports which feed and cherish men's corrupt and carnal affections
are at any time lawful, as Idle and Uaine jefting, wanton gestures, and
daliance which increase lust and occasion wantonness, and therefore least of
all to be tolerated on the Lords day: For this is seeking of our own pleasures
and polluting the Lords holy day, which the Prophet Jsaiah condemns Isa, 58.
2. Honest and lawful sports and recreations, such as shoo^ing, wrestling and
other games of actiuity, hunting, hawking, angling, and the like, though they
be lawful at other times: yet they are not to be tolerated on the Lords day
in any measure if they be found to hinder men from public worship and service
of God, and public set duties of piety fit for the day, or to withdraw them
from private duties requisite in Christian families, as prayer, reading,
meditation, repetition, and examining of Doctrines by the Scripture which have
been publicly preached and heard, private instructions, exhortations, and
mutual provocations to piety and to praising of God by singing Psalms and the
like: Whatsoever sports and recreations do hinder these, and withdraw people
from them, they are on the Lords day impious and profane how lawful soever on
other days: In this point all Godly grave and learned Divines do agree. And
how sinful profane and hateful to God such sports are on the Lords day.

The Lord himself does continually show and declare by the many examples of
dreadful judgments and tokens of his wrath which he has showed and does
still show in this and in all ages for such doings, dorwning some in their
swimming, breaking the backs, arms, legs and necks of other in their
wrestling, stricking with horrible lamenesse and with dreadly surfers, and
sudden death, leapers, dauncers, hunters, hawkers, riders, bowlers, and such
like.

And let every man take heed that his own heart do not deceive him, and that he
do not flatter himself in his folly, when it is manifest that such sports
are a man's own pleasures condemned by the Prophet, Isa. 58. And are seen and
known daily to steal away men's hearts from holy duties, and to turn their
affections from heavenly and spiritual things, wherein they ought chiefly to
delight.

Thirdly, as men may not do the lawful works of their calling, neither in
providing meat, drink, clothes, or other necessaries on the Lords day, with a
bare respect of natural good and worldly profitt, because this is doing of his
own ways and works, and not the work of God. Unto which Gods holy day is
wholly consecrated and set apart: Except only in case of necessity, when men
and beasts cannot otherwise be preserved in life, health and being, or when
Gods people without such works cannot be made fit, and able to serve God
cheerfully as they ought on that day: So also no bodily sports, Recreations and
pleasures are to be tolerated or used, merely to cherish the flesh, to refresh
the body, and to procure bodily strength, but only such as are in very deed
needful in themselves, and used and intended by Gods people with this purpose,
and ^o this end, that they may with more ability, alacrity, and cheerfulness
do the holy works, and perform the holy duties of Gods worship and service
which are proper to the Lords holy day. First, this is manifest by the words of
the Lord: Isa. 58.13. Where he requires of his people, that they turn away
their feet from doing their own pleasure on his holy day, and call the
sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, Honorable, and honor him, not doing
their own ways, nor finding their own pleasure. By their own ways and
pleasures, we are to understand, not only their corrupt sinful works, filthy
words, and vain carnal pleasures which proceed from nature corrupted and
naturally tend to increase transgression, (for they are to be abhorred every
day and at all times,) but here by their own ways, words, and pleasure we
are to understand such as proceed from nature created good, and are only
intended to that end, and have none other effect: For such, though at other
times lawful and honest, Yet on Gods holy day are profane, common and
inordinate, as these words imply.

Secondly, as it is not lawful to use Gods holy word in jeasting, nor with it
to mingle our own vain talk, nor to play with holy things, because this is
taking of Gods name in vain. So undoubtedly to use worldly delights, and to
sport our selves with uanishing, earthly natural and civil pleasures, which
are neither useful to help and further us in holy devotion, nor intended by
us to that end, is a profanation of Gods holy day, and an intermingling of our
own prophannesse with the spiritual, and heavenly observation of the Lords
holy day, in which God requires serious sanctification, and grave and sober
conversations as our own Ecclesiastical Constitutions do affirm: the reason
is the same in both.

Thirdly, in all other things consecrated by God himself, and by his word and
commandment to holy and heavenly use, it has always been counted a
greevious offense to ad our own natural inventions and diuises to them, or to
turn them to common civil and mere natural use, either in whole or part,
except in case of necessity. So undoutedly it is by the same reason a greevious
offense willingly and purposly to employ the Lords holy day, or any part
thereof to common natural and civil sports and delights. Now the first is
manifest by the word and law of God. Nahab, and Abihu, the sons of Aron, were
consumed by fire from the Lord when they offered sacrifices with common fire
Lev. 10. Because they added to the holy offering that which was common.

Also the sons of Ely did sin greeviously in turning any part of the
consecrated flesh to feed their own bellies 1 Samuel 2. Saul in turning Gods
sacrifice to a profane use, and forcing himself to do it in ordinately, that
he might make the people to stand to him, and keep them from scattering, sinned
and lost his Kingdom. 1 Samuel 13. And when the Jews profaned Gods house of
prayer; which was the holy place, by buying, selling: and money changing, it
was so vile in our Saviors eyes, and so wicked, that he who in other things
was a meek Lamb, being moved with zeal, did like a Lion Roar against them,
fell violently upon them and whipped them out with disgrace, John. 2. Now the
Lords Sabbath is an holy day sanctified by God immediately after the Creation,
and commanded in the fourth Commandment to be kept holy. And our Savior by
his Resurrection has consecrated and blessed the Lords day above all other
days of the week and made it the Lords Sabbath, more holy then the first as
have been before abundantly proved. And as all true Christian Churches, so our
Church more especially both by Doctrine and practice has openly approved
this for the Lords Sabbath. Therefore no part of this day ought to be turned to
nautrall, civil or carnal sports and delights.

Lastly, though our Churches the places of our holy assemblies, and our
communion tables have no particular express commandment for them from God,
but only are consonant and agreeable to the houses of God in Israel, and we
have no other warrant for them but the example of Gods people in the Old
Testament, and our own experience, and reason teaching that they are very
necessary for public assemblies, and holy service: the plot of ground is
chosen by men, and the materials and framing of them and the form of them are
all the works of men. God has neither appointed the place as in the temple of
Jerusalem, nor the materials and the form, as in the Tabernacle, the Arc and
Altars which were built by Moses: Yet we would count a great offense, to turn
any part of the Church to be a place for common sports, and plays, or a
dancing School, and to play at dice, or Cards, or other profane games, upon
the Communion Table. Now then seeing we count it unlawful to profane the
places consecrated to holy use by men inimitation of God, and not by express
commandment given for the separation of the ground or the place: We ought more
to count it unlawful to spend any part of Gods holy day in carnal sports,
being a time sanctified by his express word, and blessed with the greatest
blessing.

Fourthly, and in the last place, whatsoever recreations and exercises of body
and mind, are necessary required for the bettering of our sanctification of the
Lords day, and the enabling of us to perform with more cheerfulness strength
and courage the holy worship of God, and the work and service of his holy
Sabbath, and which are also intended by us only to that end and use them we
may use. And so far as they serve to further, and in no wise to hinder Gods
holy worship and the immediate works and duties thereof. This is manifest by
Gods allowing to his people in the law, dressing of meat, and Cheerful
feasting on his Sab: and holy days: Which are needful to cheer up men, and
to provoke them to worship him with all thankfulness of heart, also to put on
our best apparel; that we may come decently to Gods house.

As these are lawful being directed to holy use, so undoubtedly honest
refreshing with recreations which cheer up the heart, and refresh the spirits,
are lawful when they are helpful to holy exercises and are directed to that
end, as stirring of the body; walking in to gardens or fields, to take fresh
air being found very helpefull to Preachers, to reviue their spirits*
s^rengthen their loins, clear their voices, sharpen and quicken their wits,
and memories, and being done only to that end are lawful.

So also walking into the corn feilds in ^ommer o^ harvest, or into meddowes
or Pastures in the spring, both to refresh our Bodies and spirits, and to give
us occasion to admire Gods bounty in clothing the bodies, and his Fatherlye
providence in making the ear^h so fruitful, and to laud and praise him, is
lawful for us. And if after public and private exercise we do so walk
about, diverse together conferring of heavenly things, and taking occasion by
sight of earthly blessings to provoke one another to thankfulness, and
acknowledgment of Gods love, this no doubt is a recreation fit for the Lords
day, and helps much our devotion, and this seems to have been practiced by
our Savior who went through the corn feilds on the Sabbath day Mat. 12.1. and
his Disciples with them.

CHAP. 22.
IN the last place J come to the special Duties of holiness by which The
Lords Sabbath is especially said to be sanctified, which I will run through as
briefly as I can, so far as brevity may stand with plainness and perspecuity.
And first of all you shall see, that the most strict sanctification of the
Lords day, which is taught and urged by the godly learned both ancient and
modern Christian Divines, Is no Judaisme. I would have you to take special
notice, that whatsoever things the Jews and natural Isralites were bound by
the law ^o perfo^me in the sanctification of the old Sabbath, which were
merely tipicall and ceremonial, and were ordained and practiced only to
signify some things, which are fully accomplished in Christ; that we hold to
be so abolished and made void, that Christians ought in no case to obser^e or
practice them, on their new Sabbath the Lords day.

For they are all removed with the change of the day, and we ought to a void
them as much as we avoid the old Sab: which was the seventh day from the
beginning of days in the creation. As for example offering the sacrifices of
slain beasts, and mear, and drink offerings of fine flower mingled with oil
and such like, and incense and gummes and spices, they where but tipes and
shadows of Christ his substanciall sacrifice, and in that respect holy by
Consecration. And though diverse of them were indifferent and tolerable while
the bodily Temple was yet standing. Yet when God has cast them out by the
destruction of the material temple, and the change of the weekly Sabbath,
they are grown unlawful to be practiced, and the reviuing of the practice of
them is called abomination, Dan. 12. And apostasy from Christ, Gala. 4 5. and
turning again to weak and beggarly elements and rudiments, and becoming slaves
to them, Gal. 4.9.

Wherefore we are now only to observe in our sanctification of our holy weekly
Sabbath such holy duties, and exercises as are holy at al^ times and in all
ages, both before and under the law, and now also under the Gospel, which in
their own nature are either truly holy or t^nde to beg it, increase, and
cherish holy graces in men. And because God has by the Gospel shined into
our hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge of his glory the face of
Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4.6. And has shed his spirit on us abundantly through
him. Tit. 3.6. And so made us more spiritual, because also our Savior
himself has taught us in the Gospel, that God is a spirit and they are true
worshippers who worship him in spirit, John, 4.23.24. Therefore the chiefest
duties by which the Sabbath is sanctifi^d, are the most special duties of Gods
worship, and the more spiritual, the more pleasing to God and more beseeming
Christ^ans.

So that the first rule which is here to be given, and to be observed is this.
That all Gods people do chiefly labor to stir up, and quicken the grace of
God in their hearts, and holy, heavenly and supernatural affections in their
souls, that with pure mind^ and spirits they may perform all duties and
actions of Gods worship and service both public and private. It is true that
all times and on all days we ought to keep our whole spirit and soul, as
well as our body pure and blameles, to serve God as well with inward affection
of heart and purity of spirit, as ou^ward, visible, sencible actions and
gestures of body. But because the Lords day is the most blessed day of the
w^eke, sanct^fied and set apart for the holy worship, and immediate service
of God, and for public and private service. devotion and Religious duties
only, therefore we all ought to have as great care to furnish our souls with
spiritual beauties of holiness more abundan^ly and in greater measure, as we
have to make clean and neat our houses, and to deck and adorn our bodies
with our best and cleanest holy day apparel, on the Lords day. For though
outward and bodily actions, and gestures are required as r^quisit and necessary
in the public worship of God, and without them it is as impossible to do that
public duty and service to God, which belongs to mutual edification of
Christians in this life, and to the solemn lauding and praising of him in
public assemblies, as it is to perform visible and senceable actions of this
life by the soul only without the body. Yet bodily service and worship of God,
as coming duly and diligently to the house of God to public assemblies,
hearing the word withal attentions, and speaking it with great vehemence,
Praying worshipping and giving thanks in the best form of words, which can
be devised, and with most humble and reverent gestures of devotion, as bowing
down the body to the ground, knocking of the breasts, sighing, groaning,
lifting up the hands, and eyes to heaven, and the like, they all without
spiritual affection and devotion of the heart, are no better then a dead
karcast without a soul, yea they are filthy hyp^crisie, and mockery of God,
and loathsome abomination in his sight as the Lord by the Prophet testifies
Isa. 1 c: 10: to the 16: verse: and 29:13: And therefore let our first and
chiefest care be about the fitting and preparing of our hearts, and filling
and, replenishing our souls with spiriruall affections, and quickening and
stirring up inward and spiritual grace within us; for these are the life and
soul of all religious duties. and of all holy worship of God, and without them
we cannot in the least measure sanctify Gods holy day, nor perform any least
duty of sanctification acceptable to God: Now the special means which serve
for the quickening of spiritual grace, and kindling of spiritual devotion in
our hearts, are diverse: The First is that which J have spoken of before in the
duties which concern Rest, to weet: a total sequestring of our selves from
all worldly business, and putting away all earthly thoughts, cares, and
delights, that our whole heart and soul, and all our affections being purged
from all such dross, may have room for holiness only, and for spiritual
devotion and motions of the spirit: For no man can serve two Masters at once,
God and the world: Cast out earthly carnal thoughts, and spiritual and
heavenly affections will easily enter, and bear sway:

And because this sequestring of our selves from cares of the world: must go
before true sanctification in order and time, therefore undoubtedlie the beginning
of the Lords Sab: day, is there where the old Jewish Sab: ended, that is in
the evening of the Saturdaie: And certainly when men taking their Rest from
labor the whole night before the Lords day for sequestring themselves from
worldly business, fitting of their souls with spiritual devotion, and
stirring up of grace in their hearts, then do they most profittablie begin
their Sabbath, for by the means the time of preparation and quitting of the
mind from worldly troublesome thoughts, shall go before the time of practice
and public assemblies Wherein they are to appear before God, and to perform
the maine duties of Sanctification and of his holy worship. And her^ J cannot
pass by without some reproof that evil carnal custom, most worthy to be
condemned which is to common among our Citizens, who defer their reckoni^g
with their worke-men until the evening and night which beginns the Lords day.
Let me here admonish you all to forsake this practice, if you love the Lord,
and will honor his holy Sab.

The second means is to meditate on those things which may stir up our dull
spirits, and quicken grace in our hearts, as first upon the greatness,
holiness, and gl^rie ^f the Lord, and more specially to present our selves
when the light of the day comes, and both to speak to him in prayer and
praises, to hear him speak to us in his word read and preached. This must
needs move and stir up spiritual devotion and affection: as we see by
experience in worldly things, how careful we are to trim and fit our selves
when we are to go before an earthly King or some great Nobles. Secondly, to
consider what holiness and purity, especially of heart and soul is required
in using the public holy ordinances of God, and in approaching near to him,
to worship him in his holy place his owns house. As we read Leviticus, 20.7.
1 Peter 1.15.16.

The holiness that becomes Gods house is not vanishing shows, and shadows
which pass away in the doing and using of them, as bowing, cringing, and such
gestures, but a spiritual and eternal holiness which lasts for ever, and can
never be defaced nor perish, as David shows Psalm. 93.5. It is better then
thousands of Rams Mich. 6.6.7.8, It is putting on of Humility, Mercy,
meekness, and all other affections, and departing from all iniquity, 2 Timothy
2.19. It is the Jmage of Christ in the new creature which is created after God
in righteousness and holiness, that is; which cannot lie nor deceive by
faiding, but lasts for ever. Ephesians. 4.24. Thirdly, to call to mind those
Scripturs which require holy preparation as Eccle. 5.1. which shows Gods anger
against such as come to his house without due furniture and a wedding garment,
as Mat. 22.12. Fourthly, to meditate on that whereof the Sabbath is a sign and
pledge unto us, even our Resurrection to eternal life, and to the eternal
Rest of glory in heaven in the sight and fruition of God, whom none can see
without holiness. Thi^ is most powerful to stir up spiritual affection and
to quicken grace in our hearts.

The third means is earnest prayer to God for his spirit and increase of his
spiritual grace in our hearts, that is of great force if it be importunate
Luke 11.13. and 18.1. and fervent, Iam. 5.16. And therefore when the Lords day
begineth in the evening or day going of the Satturday, we must make special
prayers for this purpose, as also in the morning when we awake and see the
light of the Lords holy day.

Jn the next place after we are thus prepared, we must set our selves wholly to
the performance of the duties of holiness, which are required for the
sanctification of an holy Sabbath to the Lord, which are either public or
private. The first public duty is diligent assembling of our selves with the
congregation of Gods people in the house of God the place of public
assemblies. This is so necessary that without it there can be no solemn
service, nor public worship of God performed by us. This the Lord requires in
the law, where he joins these two together, as in seperable companions, even
holy convocations and keeping of a Sabbath. Ex. 12.16. These our Savior Christ
did frequent though Lord of the Sabbath, as well as the fathers did under the
law, as appears Mark. 1.27. And so did his Apostles on the new Sabbath the
Lords day. 1 Cor, 16.1.2.

The second public duty in the public worship of God, is Prayer, lauding and
Praising him, and offering up sacrifices of thankfulness and the first fruits
and calves of our lips, in a solemn orderly and decent manner and order.
This the holy men of God carefully performed in the House of God on their
Sabbath in the old Testament: as David shows. Psalm. 5.7. and 42.4. And this
our Savior commandes to us for an holy duty in Gods house, where he calls the
house of God the house of prayer Mat. 21.13. that not only to the Jews, but
also to al believing nations as the Prophets words by him cited do show Isa.
56:7. This the godly at Philippi, where they had no Synagogue nor Church,
performed in a public assembly by a Rivers side, Act. 16.13. This was
practiced by the first Christians at Iudaea Act. 2.46.47. and this the Apostle
injoynes, Heb, 13.15. This David foretold Psalm. 118.24. In a word all
Scriptures which teach us, to call upon God, to pray to confess our sins, to
humble our selves before God, to worship him and to give thanks, and do
commend these for holy duties, they do much more teach us to perform them on
the Lords day, in our holy assemblies.

The third sort of public duties are the holy ordinances of God, which tend
properly to beget and increase holiness, and to teach Christians Gods holy
worship and fear, to weet: the public reading and and expounded of the word
of God, and preaching and Catechizing on the Mininisters part, and on the
peoples part, reverent attention and hearing of the word of God. This was a
constant practice from the days of old which the Fathers observed so long as
the Church of the Jews, and first temple was standing. As appears. Ast. 13.15
and cap. 15.21.27.

Also by our Saviors practice. preaching in the Sinagogues every sabbath day
Luke 4.16. Mar. 1.31. And this the Apostles practiced in holy assemblies which
they appointed to be kept on the Lords day, and this they commanded to be
performed by all the Christian Churches, as appears Act. 11.25. and 20, 7. and
1 Cor. 16.1: and 14.23.26. Colos. 4.14 1 These. 5.27.

Fourthly, besides preaching, reading, and expounding, of the holy Scripturs,
there is also the administration of the Sacraments, as of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, the later of which especially is an holy sab: days ordinance of
Christ, first instituted in the assembly of his Apostles, and not to be
administered and received ordinarily but in Sab: asse^blies, and public meeting
of the Church coming together on the Lords day as we gather from. Act. 20.7.
and 1 Cor. 11.20.33. And that public Baptism is most fit to be administered
on the Lords day in the public assembly, these reasons show. 1. Because it is
joined with preaching, Matthew, 28.16: Secondly, because it is the receiving of
the Baptized into the true Visible Church. Thirdly, in public it may be
better perfomed by the joint prayers of the whole Congregation^ Fourthly, it
may much profit the whole public congregation of Gods people by putting them
in mind of the covenant made in Baptism.

The fifth sort of public Sabbath duties, are works of mercy and charity
which are fruits of faith working by love. Unto which duties the public
Ministers so often occasion is offered, are to excite up the people, and they
ought to offer freely and to make collections for the poor Saints. This St.
Paul taught 1 Cor. 16. 1:2: and this was in times and ages next after the
Apostles practiced, and performed. as Justin Martyr testifies Apolog. 2: page
77.

Sixthly, public censures of the Church, and actions of correction are most
fitly performed in public assemblies of the whole Church on the Lords day,
such as open rebuke of scandalous, sinners, before all the people, that others
may fear Excommunication and casting out, and excluding from outward
communion, obstinate and refractary offenders, as heretics, adulterers,
incestuous persons, and such like. Receiving into the Church of God such as
were cast out, upon their humble confession, and public repentance openly
before the whole Church. These are not to be done in corners but in the face of
the Church, as St. Paul ordained by commandment from the Lord, and by
direction from the spirit of God. 1 Timothy 5, 20* 1 Cor. 5.4. and 2 Cor: 2:6:7:
and as diverse of the ancients have held and showed in their practice.

Seventhly, ordaining and calling of Bishops, Pastors, and Elders, being of old
performed in the face of the whole Church, with public prayers, and laying on
of hands, Act. 1.15. and 14.23. 2 Cor. 8.19. As it was of old, so at this day
is a very fit duty of the Lord holy weekly Sabbath.

Besides these public duties, there are diverse private duties which are
necessary both to make the public duties effectual, and fruitful, and to
testify to the Praise and glory of God the power of his holy ordinances and
the work of the spirit by them upon our hearts and souls.

The first of these is private prayer, either by our selves alone or in our
families with our Children, servants, and others of the household, for if we
must pray continually when just occasion, and oppertunity is offered as the
Apostle teaches, 1 These. 5. then most especially before we go unto, and after
we return from the public assemblies, for a blessing upon Gods Public
ordinances both to our selves and others: Our Savior bids us pray in secret,
and David exhorts us to commune with God on our beds, and to pray after his
example, morning, evening and at noone day:

The second is meditation of such as are alone, on things heard in the Church,
and repetition in the family for the printing of the the word in their minds
and memories, and mutual instruction and exhortation, one of another, without
which the word will take small effect afterward and quickly beforgotten:
Saint Paul does intimate the necessary use of this duty; where he commands
women to ask and learn of their husbands at home, and not to speak in the
Church 1 Cor: 14:35: and 1 timothy: 2:11.

This is the holy duty which God commended in Abraham: Gen: 18: That he did
command and teach his household and Children which few men can do conveniently
on the week days, when every one is about their work, some in one place and
some in another, only the Lords day is the fittest. The third is rejoicing,
singing of Psalms, and Praising God in our families, this David commends for a
duty of the Sabbath. Psalm. 92.1. And this Paul and Silas taught us by their
example Act. 16.35. Where they two being in prison and in the stocks, are said
on the Lords day at midnight, to pray and sing Psalms with so loud a voice,
that the Prisoners heard them. And yet I hope none dare call them Puritants,
and Hipocrites, as the profane miscreaunts of our time call all the familes in
which they hear singing of Psalms on the Lords day.

The Fourth is visiting of the sick, and of prisoners, releiving the poor and
needy, persuading of disagreeing Neighbors to peace, and reconciliation: These
are works of mercy and of Christian love and charity, and have no proper end
but to bring honor to God, and to make him to be praised, of his people and
his people to be edified in love. And being an holy private service of God,
they may be done on the Lords day, and our Church Doctrine does teach them,
and Ecclesiastical constitutions allow them.

The last duty is meditating on Gods works, magnifying them and speaking of
them with admiration one to another, if upon any just occasion, or for
necessary refreshing we walk diverse together into the feilds. This David
mentions in the Psalm for the Sabbath day Psalm. 92, 45. Where he says: thou
Lord have made me glad through thy works, and I will triumph in the works of
thy hands. O Lord how great are thy works? Thus much for the special duties
both public and private, which Christians are bound to perform on the Lords
day, which is the Christian Sabbath.

Now the consideration of these several duties, being some public, some
private, some more proper for the Sabbath, and some for all days, offer to us
somethings more to be observed. First the public duties of the whole Church,
together must first be regarded and preferred before private duties at home,
and mumbling of private prays with our selves in the Church, because they make
more for Gods glory and mutual edification, and do show and declare our
Christian unity.

Secondly, public duties must take up the best, and greatest part of the day,
because they are proper to the day, and to public assemblies, which are to be
kept weekly on the Sabbath day: Private duties are common to all days of the
week.

Thirdly, the duties of mercy and charity to men, must give place to the
mediate worship of God, when there is no urgent necessity, and they may be
deferred to another day, without any inconvenience. Men having oppertunity
before must not put them off, until the Lords day, and then by them shoulder
out holy duties of piety and Gods solemn worship. Lastly, by the many and
several duties required on the Lords Sabbath, we see that to him who has a
care and respect of them all, there will be no time left for for idle words,
and toyish talking, praunsing in pride and vanity, nor for any carnal sports,
pastimes, and pleasures. But Gods day will be found little enough for holy duties
which are to be performed. And therefore I dare not allow any liberty for any
sports how honest and lawful so ever at other times, except they be holy, and
Gods worship be furthered, and no better duties by them be hindered: Which no
man can in reason conceive or imagine. If God be to be loved above all, and
honored and served with all the heart and mind, soul and strength as the law
commands. J do not see but all Gods people ought so to do, especially on the
Lords day, and to be discontent and grieved that they cannot do it so fully as
they ought, and not to allow to themselves in these things any liberty which
may hinder Gods holy worship. The greatest opposites of the weekly Christians
Sabbath, when they have most vehemently disputed, and spent al their arguments,
against the observation of the Lords day for an holy Sab: and day of holy rest,
are by the clear evidence of the truth so convinced, that will they, nill
they, their conscience forces them to confess: That the spe^ding of the whole
day even the space of four and twenty hours of the Lords day, an holy rest and
cessation from all worldly thoughts and cares and from all seculiar affairs,
and in holy duties, of Gods worship and service, both public and private, is a
thing Commendable and praise worthy in them, and pleasing and acceptable in the
sight of God. To that one only wise omnipotent, immortal, and eternal God,
who in all things and over all enemies makes his truth to triumph, be all
honor, glory, and praise now and for ever.

FINIS.

