The Poore-mans Preacher.

A SERMON Preached at S. Mary's Spittle in LONDON, on Tuesday in Easter week,
being April. 7. 1607.

By TO. WAKEMAN Bachelar of Divinity, and fellow of Ballioll College in Oxford.

Prou. 28.27. He that gives unto the poor shall never lack. Matt. 10.42.
Whosoever gives to one of these little ones to drink a cup of cold water
only, shall not lose his reward. LONDON, Printed by A. Hatfield for John Bill,
Ann. Dom. 1607.

THE POOR MAN'S Preacher.
ECCLES. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for after many days thou shall
find it.
WHen Solomon the mirror of Wisdom and Knowledge (right honorable etc.) had
taken a full view of all earthly things, he found by his own experience, that
there was nothing under the Sun either worthy of man's impetuous pursuit, or
able to effect man's true felicity. He made himself many great works, he
built many goodly houses, he planted many pleasant vineyards, orchards, and
gardens, and trees therein of all fruit: he had servants and maidens, beeues
and sheep, silver and gold above all that were before him in Jerusalem. He
provided him his men-singers and his women-singers, and all the delights of the
sons of men. Whatsoever his eyes desired he withheld it not from them,
neither did he withdraw his heart from any joy, and yet see his censure at the
last of all these things, Vanitas vanitatum vanitas vanitatum, and omnia
vanitas. Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, and al is vanity: which
lesson, whenas a good Preacher, he had abundantly taught the faithful in the
precedent chapters of this book, in this verse now read unto you, he sets up
another mark whereat they are to aim, he shows them another path that they
must tread, he chalkes out another race for them to run, and he gives them
another precept for them to practice. Cast, says he, thy bread upon the
waters, for after many days thou shall find it.

As if he had thus said unto them. O ye sons of Adam, why do you beat your
brains and busy your heads in seeking after the vain and transitory things
of this world? why do you place your chiefest happiness and delight in
strength or beauty, or pleasure, or wisdom, or knowledge, or honor, or
pomp, or wealth? Where is the strength that sickness has not weakened? where
is the beauty that age has not withered? where is the pleasure that pain has
not pursued? where is the wisdom that folly has not tainted? where is the
knowledge that ignorance has not blemished? where is the honor that care has
not accompanied? where is the pomp that time has not ruinated? where is all
the wealth and glory of this world, that troubles have not followed? what is
the fruit of all these things? Possessa onerant, amata inquinant, amissa
cruciant. In possessing them they burden you, in loving them they defile you,
in loosing them they torment you: this is not a course to come to happiness,
this is not the way to attain heaven. Cast away these trifles O man, lest they
cast thee away from thy God: rather be merciful to thy poor brother, that God
may be merciful unto thee. Give him cheerfully of thy goods that God may
liberally reward thee of his grace. Let thine own bread feed him, thine own
house harbor him, thine own apparel cloth him, and thine own wealth
minister to his want. Do this to him that cannot do it to thee again, make
choice of such as cannot return the like, cast thine alms unto such poor, as
like water pass away, and will never bring again what thou give, yea loose
thy money for thy neighbors sake. This is a means to purchase Gods favor,
this is a course to make thee blessed: for howsoever, thou do not presently
taste the fruit of this charitable devotion, yet a time shall come when thou
shall find this reward, if not of temporal things in this life, yet of an
everlasting inheritance in the resurrection of the just. Cast thy bread upon
the waters, for after many days thou shall find it.

Few words I confess, beloved, yet the subject of much matter. For as those
waters in Ezechiel were first to the anckles, next to the knees, after to the
loins, lastly such a river as could not be passed over, Ezech. 47. so the
divine rivers that flow from this heavenly fountain to make glad the city of
God howsoever at the first view they may seem but shallow to the shallow
conceit of flesh and blood, yet upon further search they are found to be most
profound and plentiful in the streams of wholesome doctrine to satisfy the
thirst of our sinful souls: and as he said of that famous Historian,
Verborum numero sententiarum numerum comprehendit, he spoke as many sentences
as he did words, or as Hierome said to Paulinus concerning the catholic
examples of Peter, James, John, and Jude, breues esse pariter and longas,
breues in verbis, longas in sententijs: that they were short, and yet they were
long, short in respect of the number of the words, long in regard of the
variety of much matter in them contained: So I may as truly say the same of
this text, that it is short, and yet it is long, short in the paucitie of
words, long in the plenty of matter, every word carrying his perfect weight,
and every syllable his substantial sense, and almost every letter his several
lesson. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for after many days thou shall find
it.

For art thou rich and blessed with much wealth, the first word is for thy
instruction, thou must not gather unto thee, but cast from thee. Cast. Will thou know what to cast? thou must cast bread, that is, any thing necessary for
the relief and help of the distressed. Cast bread. Will thou hear whose
bread, thou must cast, not an others, for that is injustice, but thine own,
for that is true charity: cast thy bread: will thou understand upon whom to
cast thy bread, upon thy poor brethren, upon whom whatsoever thou bestowest,
thou must no more expect from them again, then thou look for that which
thou castest away into the sea. Cast thy bread upon the waters: Will thou see a
reason of all this? the reason brings with it a reward, the time when this
reward shall be received post dies multos, after many days for after many
days, the reward it self implied in the last words, thou shall find it: for
after many days thou shall find it.

So that you see here are many parts and circumstances to be considered:
whereon if I should particularly insist, each of them might require a longer
time then is allotted me for the handling of the whole: but for brevity sake,
the sum and effect of all may be drawn into these two heads, and divided
into these two branches. Whereof the first is a precept of a duty to be
performed, in these words: cast thy bread upon the waters: The second is a
reason grounded upon the promise of a reward to be received, in the next
words, for after many days thou shall find it: the precept is given by way of
exhortation to Christian charity: cast thy bread upon the waters: the promise
is made by way of remuneration of Christian piety, for after many days thou
shall find it. Cast thy bread upon the waters, therein man's duty is
expressed: for after many days thou shall find it: therein Gods mercy is
declared. Cast thy bread upon the waters: behold our distribution to men of
things temporal commanded, for after many days thou shall find it: behold
our retribution from God in things temporal and eternal promised: the one is
the exercise of our good works here on earth, cast thy bread upon the waters:
the other is the crown of our good works there in heaven, for after many days
thou shall find it. The first we must practice for the time: cast thy bread
upon the waters: the latter we must expect in time to come, for after many
days thou shall find it.

These are the bounds and limits of my intended meditations upon these words.
God grant I may speak of them, directed by the same spirit they were
indighted, and that all this great and honorable assembly may hear and receive
them to their own instruction and consolation in Christ Jesus. And so by your
Christian patience I now come to the handling of the parts as they lie in order.

Prima pars.
CAst thy bread upon the waters. By the first word mitte, or proijce, cast:
Solomon implies that our charity must not only be extended to such as are
near at hand, but also to those that are far of, as Hugo Cardinalis does
expound it, and that we must give our alms libenter and liberaliter non per
extorsionem and quasi coacti: willingly and liberally, not constrained thereunto
by extorsion and compulsion, as Bonauenture will have it: both of them aiming
at David's admonition, If riches increase set not your hearts upon them, Psalm.
62.10. we must not set our hearts upon our wealth, but as readily cast them
upon others, as we have greedily gathered them unto our selves, knowing that a
righteous man by the Psalmist, and out of him by S. Paul, is described to be
not a griping and greedy gatherer unto himself, but a most cheerful and
friendly caster unto others: dispersit, dedit pauperibus, he dispersed and
scattered abroad, that is, he gave his alms unto the poor, Psalm. 112.9. 2.
Cor. 9.9. cast thy bread.

Thy bread: I am not here of Melancthons and others opinion, who diuing after
too spiritual a meaning, do by bread understand Panem vitae, the bread of
life, the word of God, which they would have the Preacher thereof to distribute
unto the people: for howsoever this interpretation may be sound, and agreeable
to the analogy of faith, yet certain I am (and it is the judgment of our
best writers, ancient and modern) that it is not for natural and suitable to
the circumstances of this text, I rather by bread understand with Carthusian
Corporalem refectionem, corporal refection; with Lauater, eleemosynam, alms;
with Olympiodorus, omnem eleemosynam, every alms; with Hugo Cardinalis, omne
beneficium, every good turn; with Pelican, omnem eleemosynam, and omne
beneficium, both together; with Vatablus and Illyricus, quicquid ad vitam est
necessarium, whatsoever is necessary to man's life: for so bread in many places
of holy Scripture and (one for all) in the Lords prayer by a synecdoche does
signify all things necessary for the preservation and sustentation of the
life of man. Cast thy bread.

Panem tuum, thy bread: tuum non alienum, thine own, and not another: for God
will not have us rob one, thereby to relieve another, nor to take away from
this man to give unto that, he likes not such alms deeds, Siquidem and hoc
rapina est, for this is no better then rapine says S. Chrysostom. conc. 2. de
Lazaro, satius est non dare quam alterum spoliare: and better it were not to
give at all then to maintain our charity by unjust means, says that good
father, de verbis Apostoli, sermon: 21. but he that will be truly charitable,
must remember S. Paul's rule, not to give away an other man's goods, but to
labor and work with his own hands, that he may have to give (of his own)
to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28. and as Marie wiped the feet of Jesus with her
own hair: so must every faithful Christian cover the feet of Jesus, I mean
relieve his poor members, at the least with the superfluities of his own
wealth: honora dominum de tua substantia, honor the Lord of thine own riches,
says the wise man, Prou. 3.9. and the bountiful man is pronounced blessed,
and why? because he gives of his own bread unto the poor, Prou. 22.9. Cast
thy bread. Cast thy bread upon the waters.

Upon the waters. By waters are here meant the poor and needy. But this may
seem to some a strange thing, that Solomon will have us cast our bread upon
the waters: for whatsoever is cast therein, is utterly lost, as the common
proverb (...), and (...), in Aristophanes do sufficiently declare, and will
Solomon have us there to bestow our alms where there will no benefit come
either to them or us by the same? Surely beloved in our Lord and Savior,
Solomon would have us give not looking for any thing again, and I confess
there are many masterlesse rogues and sturdie beggars in the world, to whom
whatsoever is given, it is but indeed cast into the waters: for being
themselves evil beasts and slow bellies, they wastfully and wantonly and
wickedly spend the charitable devotion of the well disposed, and are nothing
bettered in their estates: but those are not the only waters whereon Solomon
would have us cast our bread, although I grant even those also as they are men
and Christians, (their manners being corrected, and their persons respected) are
not altogether to be excluded from our benevolence. But who then are these
waters whereon we must cast our bread? I answer still, the poor and needy,
who may be called waters in diverse respects.

1. Respectu multitudinis, in respect of multitude: for as the Angel in the
Revelation told S. John, that the waters which he saw were people, and
multitudes, and nations, and toongs, Revel. 17.19. so Solomon would us know,
that the waters which he here describes, are multitudes of nations and
people, in number many, in condition poor, on whom we must cast the eyes of
compassion. Liberalitas hinc in multos commendatur, says Illyricus,
liberality to many is hence commended unto us: Cast thy bread upon these many
waters.

2. Respectu agitationis, the poor are called waters in respect of continual
agitation and tossing: for as the waters are seldom at rest, but tossed hither
and thither with wind and weather: so the poor and distressed are never at
quiet, but always vexed with the adverse storms of afflictions and
tribulation, eleemosyna pauperibus afflictis est facienda, says Bonauenture,
the poor afflicted are to be relieved with our alms: Cast thy bread upon
these troubled waters.

3. Respectu humectationis, the poor are called waters in respect of
moistening: for as the waters do not only moisten the adioining shores, but
sometimes also ouerflow the bordering fields: so they that are pinched with
poverty, are forced many times not only with David to water their couch with
their tears, but even the bosom of their friends also, weeping and wailing in
remembrance of those many calamities which have fallen upon them: O all ye
that pass by have pity on these waters, I mean on such as are even turned
into watrie fountains, quique propter casus aduersos vbertim lachrymantur, as
Munster expounds it, and by reason of their miserable estate do power down a
sea of tears. Cast thy bread upon those falt and brinish waters.

4. Respectu transitionis, the poor are called waters, in respect of their
passing away from one place unto another: for as it is true of all men, in
regard of their daily passage in this course of mortality, which the woman of
Tekoah told the king, we are all as waters spilt upon the ground, which cannot
be gathered up again, 2. Sam. 14.14. so is it specially true of the poor,
they are, shall I say, tanquam aquae diffluentes, as waters spilt on the
ground, that cannot be gathered; certainly they are aquae transeuntes, waters
current upon the ground that return not again what is cast into them: and to
this sense many read the words of my text, mitte panem tuum super transeuntes
aquas, and they be these aquae transeuntes, these waters transient, upon whom
we must cast our bread: call them if you will Gods pilgrims, qui de loco ad
locum, de villa ad villam, de gente ad gentem transeunt, as Bonauenture and
Hugo describe them, that pass from place to place, from town to town, from
country to country, to crave our charitable alms. Cast thy bread upon these
running waters.

So then you see, my brethren, how wise Solomon under this metaphorical
speech, Cast thy bread upon the waters, does necessarily enforce this moral
precept, distribute thy wealth unto the needy, give thine alms unto the
poor: cast and cast bread, cast and cast thy bread, cast and cast thy bread
upon the waters, cast and cast it cheerfully, give what thy hand is able says
the son of Syrach, with a cheerful eye, Eccles. 35.10. and as every man
wishes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for
God loves a cheerful giver, 2. Cor. 9.7. alacri animo facias eleemosynam, ne
dum panem tristis dedisti, respondeat tibi Deus, panem and meritum perdidisti,
says S. Augustine upon Psalm. 42. Cast and cast speedily, delays in giving
are dangerous, a quick and a ready hand brings with it a double gift, quantum
morae addidisti tantum gratiae subtraxisti, says sententious Seneca, the more
delays thou have used in giving, the less thanks thou art to expect for thy
gift. The Graecians say, (...), the swiftest graces are the sweetest: defer not
then the gift of the needy, Eccles. 4.3. and say not to thy neighbor, go and
come again, and to morrow I will give thee, if thou now have it, Prou. 3.28.
cast, and cast abundantly, deliberanti consilium, tristi consolationem,
erranti viam, captiuo redemptionem, nonsano medelam, peregrinanti hospitiu^,
nudo vestimentum, esurienti cibum, sitienti potum, and quod cuique est
necessarium indigenti, says that good father, cap. 82. Enchirid. ad
Laurentium: if thy brother be simple and destitute of understanding, afford
him thy counsel, if he be friendlesse, give him thy comfort, if he be faulty,
spare not thy brotherly correction, if he be ignorant, lend him thy
instruction, if he be in prison, cast him thy silver to redeem him, if he be
sick, cast him thy salve to cure him, if he be harbourlesse, grant him thy
house to cover him, if he be naked, cast him thy garment to cloth him, if he be
hungry, cast him thy meat to feed him, if he be thirsty, cast him thy
drink to refrsh him, if he be in any want and necessity, cast him this bread
in my text, that is, whatsoever shall be requisite to preserve him: in a word,
cast it sincerely without boasting, continually without fainting, cheerfully
without repining, speedily without delaying, wisely without misspending: cast
it to the needy, not to the wealthy, for there is no necessity: cast it
freely, not looking for any thing again, for that is no charity, cast
according to thy estate, not more then thou art able, for that is prodigality,
cast of thine own, and not of others, for that is wrong and robbery, cast in
secret, and as on the waters, not to be seen and praised of men, for that is
mere hypocrisy. Thus must we minister to the necessity of our brethren,
thus must we supply our neighbors wants, thus must we relieve the poor and
distressed, thus must we cast our bread upon the waters. Cast thy bread upon
the waters.

They were the words of our Lord Jesus, that spoke as never man spoke, It is a
blessed thing to give rather than to receive, Act. 20.35. and they were the
words of an other Jesus, even the son of Syrach in his book, Let not thine
hand be stretched out to receive, and shut when thou should give, Eccl.
4.31. for as the schoolmen tell us, bonum est sui diffusinum, and amor
communicatinus eius quod habet, true goodness is of diffusiue and spreading
nature, and unfeigned love is not for it self alone, but apt to participate and
communicate what it has unto others: and the Philosopher through the windows
of natural speculation, could see as much, that virtues chiefest praise was
rather, (...), in the action of distributing to others, than in the passion of
receiving from others. Shall I say with the Poet, res est ingeniosa dare, nay
nather with a good father I may pronounce, (...), to give is a thing most
divine, seeing the liberal giver comes nearer in imitation unto God, who
receaueth nothing from any, but gives plentifully unto all life and breath,
and all things, Act. 17.25. Give therefore O man to others, if thou will be
truly happy, distribute unto others, if thou will be rightly virtuous,
minister unto others, if thou will be like thy self, cast unto others, that
thou may be like unto thy God.

A duty, beloved, commanded unto us in the Law, commended in the Gospel,
approved by nature it self, and practiced by the faithful in all succeeding
ages. In the book of Exodus the people were commanded to till the land, to
dress their vines and olive trees for the space of six years, but in the
seventh year the Lord appointed them to let it rest and lie still, that the
poor of the people might eat, Exodus 23.11. and it was the express will of
almighty God, that in the time of harvest, they should leave the gleanings of
their corn, and after their Vintage the remainder of their grapes for the
poor, Leuit. 19.9.10. Nay the precept of the Lord was general, Si fuerit apud
te egens quispiam, de fratribus tuis: If any of thy brethren be poor within
the land, thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from him: but
thou shall open thy hand unto him, and lend him that which is sufficient for
his need; thou shall give him, and let it not grieve thine heart to give him,
Deuteronomy. 15.7.8 10. And for this purpose in the same chapter, the Lord said, there
should ever be some poor in the land, because they might ever have occasion to
exercise their charity and benevolence. This was that doctrine which Esaias laid
down unto the Jews,, frange esurienti panem tuum, deal thy bread unto the
hungry, bring the poor that wander into thy house, when thou see the naked
cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh, Es. 58. O what a
forcible argument is this to every Christian, to stretch out his hands unto
the needy, considering that he who asks our alms, be he never so base, is
not a stranger unto us, but flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, a poor
member with us, of that mystical body whereof Christ Jesus is the head: hide not
then thy face from thine own flesh. This was the duty which Ezechiel taught
his hearers, for describing a just man, he speaks not of his strength and
power, his dignity and honor, his wealth and riches, but of giving his bread
unto the hungry, and covering the naked with his garment, Ezekiel. 18.7. and he
taxes it as a capital sin in Sodom, in that she did not strengthen the
hands of the poor and needy, Ezech. 16.49. This was that which John Baptist
preached unto the people, (...), he that has two coats, let him part to him
that has none, and he that has meat let him do likewise, Luc. 3.11. This
was that which our Savior so often pressed: Give alms of those things which
are within, Luc. 11.41. and, Sell that you have and give to the poor, Matthew.
19.21. all which places are parallel to this of Solomon in my text, Cast thy
bread upon the waters.

What shall I say more, but as Job speaks, Ask the beasts and they shall
tell thee, ask the fowls and they shall teach thee, speak to the earth and
it shall show thee, and to the fishes of the sea, and they shall declare this
unto thee: Naie look O man upon the heavens above, and on thy self below, and
tell me whether all the creatures of God do not after a sort preach this
doctrine of casting and distributing unto thee: the heavens cast thee their
sweet influence, the Sun his light, the Moon her light, and the stars
their light, the clouds cast thee their fatness, the air her sweetness, and
the fire his warmness, the sea casts thee his water to wash thee, his fish to
feed thee, and many rare things to delight thee, the earth casts thee her
herbs, the herbs cast thee their flowers, the flowers cast thee their seeds,
and the seeds cast thee their increase: every thing casts something unto
man, to teach one man to cast somewhat unto an other: and if all this does not
move thee, then look O man into thy self, the little world: does not thy
hand cast meat into thy mouth, does not thy mouth convey it unto thy stomach,
and is it not from thy stomach distributed indifferently to the other parts,
and all for the preservation of the whole? have not all the members in the body
need one of another? can the mouth say unto the eye, I have no need of thee? or
the eye to the hand, I have no need of thee? or the hand to the ears, I have
no need of thee? or the ears to the feet, I have no need of thee? or the
whole body to the heart, I have no need of thee? nay, do not each of these
members afford their best help and furtherance unto the rest? to teach us who
are all members of the same body, by giving our charitable alms to supply
the several wants and necessities one of an other: and whereas (as one
observes) omnia animantia manus habentia illis terram attingunt praeter
hominem, nature, or rather the God of nature, has so framed and fashioned all
other creatures, that with their hands, or forelegs which are instead of hands,
they touch the ground: man only carries his hands lifted from the earth, to
show that he should not imploie them in earthly affairs, but rather in
distributing of his goods, and dividing of his substance, and giving of his
riches unto the poor, and casting of his bread upon the waters. Such a caster
was holy Job: If I have restrained (says he) the poor of their desire, or
caused the eyes of the widow to fail; if I have eaten my morsels alone, and
the fatherless have not eaten thereof; if I have seen any perish for want of
clothing, or any poor without covering: then let mine arm fall from my
shoulder, and mine arm be broken from the bone, Job. 31. Such a caster was
good Zacheus, he was no doubt a very rich man, and yet he gave no less then
the one half of his goods unto the poor, Luc. 19.8. Such a caster was
faithful Cornelius, who is registered by the spirit of God to all posterity,
for a devout man, and one that gave much alms unto the people, Act. 10.2. such
casters were those two renowned women, the one in the old Testament, the other
in the new: the one was the widow of Sarepta, who relieved the prophet of the
Lord with all the substance she had, even a little meal in a barrel, and a
little oil in a cruse, 1. Reg. 17.12. the other was that charitable Dorcas in
the Acts of the Apostles,, who was rich in good works and alms which she did,
Act. 9.36. Finally, such casters were those worthy instruments of Gods
glory, men and women of famous memory, whom the Lord has raised up in this
city as especial founders and benefactors in many worthy works. (Here
report was made according to the custom of the place, of the number of poor
children, and soldiers, and other impotent people, that this last year were
maintained, cured, and by some means relieved within the Honorable city of
London, in the Hospitals of Christ, S. Bartholmew, S. Thomas, and Bridewell,
which amounted in all to 4258.)

These are excellent things beloved brethren: so that as S. Paul said of Rome,
in the time of her ancient purity, that her faith was published through the
whole world, Romans 1.8. so we may pronounce of London, for these her singular
deeds of charity, that her faith, and the fruit of her faith, her many good
works, are famous through the whole world: neither do I think that any one
city has given more worthy testimonies of a true and lively faith: but among
all these, I find one good work yet wanting, and I wish it may be hereafter
registered in this bedroule, it is that which heretofore many have much desired,
and I cannot at this time conceal it from you: that whereas this Honorable
city is above all the cities in this land, so well furnished with the choicest
men for learning, sent hither weekly to stand before the most solemn
congregation, there is not some place provided at the charges of this city,
and the well affected therein, for their better entertainment, but that they
are constrained to take their diet and lodging in troublesome Innes, whereby
their expenses are increased, their minds disturbed, their meditations
distracted. I speak not this, beloved, in mine own behalf, for blessed be
God, I need it not, and I have no cause to complain herein, my self
receiving so kind entertainment of a private friend: but I speak it out of a
compassionate affection toward many of my poor brethren and fellow laborers
in the ministry, who having but small means and maintenance, are by
authority sent for from the Universities, to supply, if not sometimes this,
yet many times, that other solemn place. The course of their study is hereby
interrupted, their pains increased, their bodies wearied, their purse emptied,
and yet their person, nay, their calling by many is little respected: for as
that Leuite sometime said, I go now to the house of the Lord, and yet no man
receaueth me to house, Iud. 19.18. so many of our Leuits may as truly profess
of themselves, that coming hither, they go unto Gods house to perform that
part of service due unto him, and yet there is no man receaueth them to
lodging, no man entertaineth them in his house. Gaius was but a private man,
and yet he was the host not of S. Paul only, but of the whole Church, Romans
16.23. Simon was but a poor Tanner, and yet he lodged S. Peter many days,
Act. 9.43. Lydia was but a purple-seller, and yet she requested, nay, even
constrained the Apostles to come into her house, and to abide there, Act.
16.15. and will not London, so rich, and so religious through her many
inhabitants, be as forward herein as one man? Will not such a public city
perform as much as a private person? will not they whose zeal in other
matters (as S. Paul speaks of the Corinthians) has provoked many, be
provoked by others to this good work? That good Shunamite shall ever be
remembered while the world stands, for her love to the Lords Prophets. Mark I
beseeh you her speech unto her husband, 2. Kings 4. I know this is a holy man
of God that passes by us continually, let us make him I pray thee a little
chamber with walls, and let us set him there a bed, and a table, and a stool,
and a candlestick, that he may turn in thither when he comes unto us. O
that wise men would not scorn to imitate a weak woman, and that you (right
Honorable my L. Mayor, and the right worshipful Aldermen of this city) would
vouchsafe in your meetings, among other your serious affairs, to entertain
this consultation, that as this holy woman of God moved her husband, out of
his private estate, so you would be as ready to move one another, that at the
last out of the public charge, there may be provided for the Lords Prophets, a
little chamber and a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick; I
mean a place sequestered from tumult, and fit for meditation, whereunto they
may betake themselves when they come unto you. Know you not that he which is
taught in the Word, should make him that has taught him, partaker of all his
goods, Gal. 6.6? know you not that they which minister about the holy things,
eat of the things of the temple? and they that wait at the altar, are
partakers with the altar? who goes a warfar at any time of his own cost? who
planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
flock and eats not of the milk thereof? 1. Cor. 9. They come to sow unto
you spiritual things, and think you much they should reap your carnal
things? they come to bring you heavenly Manna, and will you not afford them
your earthly mammon? they come to save your souls, and will not you provide
for their corporal necessities? they come to feed you with the bread of life?
and will not you bestow on them material food? they come to comfort you with
the waters of life, and will not you give a cup of cold water to refresh them?
they come to bring you to the kingdom of heaven, and will not you prepare for
them a pilgrims lodging in an earthly mansion? wherefore as S. Paul told the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 8.7. so give me leave to use the like exhortation: as ye
abound in every good work, in faith and word and knowledge, and in all
diligence, and in your love toward us, even so see that ye abound in this
grace also. Blessed shall he be that furthereth such a business: blessed, and
thrice blessed he, that thus casts his bread upon these waters: such a good
work will be acceptable to Almighty God, comfortable to his Ministers, and
honorable to this renowned city. Consider my dear brethren what I have
herein spoken, and the Lord God give you a right understanding in all things.

I might here take occasion further to incite you to this and the like holy
duties, by the example of many of your forefathers in this city not yet named,
who have excelled in the works of mercy, and with a liberal hand have cast
their bread upon the waters. But I will not press this point any further:
only of them thus much I say, their remembrance will be, as the composition of
a perfume that is made by the art of the Apothecarie, sweet as honey in all
mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine. They were the great Amners of the
king of heaven, plentiful in the deeds of piety, abundant in the fruits of
charity, and full of the bowels of compassion toward the needy. They are now
dead and rest from their labors, and their works follow them; though I see
many now living not to follow them in their works: for alas my brethren, how
far are some of us degenerated from their steps, how far are we fallen from
their religious devotion? aetas parentum peior auis tulit nos nequiores, mox
daturos progeniem vitiosiorem. Well might our forefathers be great giuers, and
bountiful casters, but surely now the world grows worse and worse. We are
fallen into that iron age wherein charity, the life of Christianity is waxen
cold; and the love to the poor in many is abated, if not quite
distinguished. The Natural Historian writes of the Eagle the prince of birds,
and of the Lion the king of beasts, that when they have satisfied themselves
with their pray, they leave the remains unto the inferior beasts and birds
that are unprovided: but contrariwise he observes of the Vulture, a ravenous
bird, and of the Woolfe a devouring beast, both of them of a less noble and
generous race, that either they devour their whole pray, or what they leave,
they craftily hide it from others, and couetously reserve it unto themselves:
Beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, our forefathers soared as Eagles
in their thoughts, and were Lion-like, truly noble and heroical in all their
actions: They contented themselves with a mediocritie, and as for their
superfluities, they were willing to distribute them to the relieuing of others
wants, and supplying the necessities of the needy: but many of us like the
Woolfe and Vulture being of more base and ignoble spirits, keep all unto our
selves, and grudge that poor Lazarus should so much as feed on the crummes
that fall from our table. I speak not this of all (for I know many in these
latter days as rich in good works, and it may be more truly sincere in the
doing of them, than they were in former times, as anon by Gods grace you shall
hear more at large if time will permit) but I speak this, as condemning the
backwardness of too too many, who indeed by reason of this glorious
manifestation of Christ's Gospel, should abound in these good works answerable
to their holy calling.

And here I may take just occasion to reprove two sorts of men in our land.
For my auditorie being somewhat general, I will not level the line of my
application to any one particular place. The first are they that spend much,
but where they should not, and they are foolishly prodigal: the second are
they that distribute nothing at all to any, and they are miserably covetous,
both of them offending against this doctrine of king Solomon, of rightly
casting their bread upon the waters. Of the first sort are the great ones of
this world whom the Lord has blessed with much wealth and many possessions,
but what are the fruits of so great abundance? the Prophet Amos will tell you
in his sixth chapter: They stretch themselves upon their iuorie beds, they
eat the lambs of the flock, and the calves out of the stal, they sing to the
sound of the violl, and invent to themselves instruments of music, they
drink their wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments:
but no man is sorry for the affliction of poor Joseph. O how wonderful has
the spirit of God in this place, not pointed at a far off, but even touched to
the quick, shall I say the princes of Israel, I may truly say many of the noble
wantons, and wanton nobles of our age, who spend their whole patrimonies upon
their pleasure and riotous sensuality, never remembering the afflictions of the
distressed, never regarding the necessities of their poor brethren. S. Hierom
in his 26. epistle, commends Pammachius a young noble man, for his
extraordinary love unto the poor, and calls him in respect thereof, pauperum
munerarium, a liberal rewarder of the poor: and in his 9. epistle he gave
this testimony of Nibridius, a man advanced to great honor, quicquid and
Imperatoris largitio and honoris infulae dederant, in vsus pauperum conferebat:
Whatsoever he obtained either by the Emperors largess, or by his honors
prerogative, he spent it in charitable uses, toward the poor: good patterns
for all those amongst us, whom the Lord has raised to great place and means,
either in Church or Commonwealth, to put them in mind that they be pauperum
munerarij, liberal rewarders of the poor, and to cast at the least a part of
that unto the needy, which his Highness bounty and the honorable places they
bear under him, has cast upon them. But alas my brethren how few of them are
of Nebridius and Pammachius mind, how few that expose their talents even their
many talents to so good uses? for if they do, where are the Colleges they
have founded, where are the Hospitals they have erected? where are the Schools
they have builded? where are the poor scholars they have maintained? where
are the Orphans and impotent they have relieved? where are the naked and
destitute they have clothed? where are the harbourlesse they have housed?
where are the sick and needy they have visited? No, no, beloved, what they
should bestow on these charitable uses, many of them spend it on their pride
and bravery, upon their looseness and prodigality, upon their riot and
luxury, upon their surfeiting and gluttony, upon their pleasure and
sensuality. And as Greg. in his Pastoral cau. 3. part. 1. cap. observes of
such in his time, cum fame crucientur Christi pauperes, effusis largitatibus
nutriunt histriones; instead of casting their bread upon the waters, and giving
to the poor that are pinched with famine, they wastfully cast their substance
to parasites and flatterers, to rymers and iesters, to players and tumblers, to
dicers and dauncers, to cutters and hacksters, to roisters and swaggerers: they
cast that to the devil and his ministers, that they should cast to Christ
Jesus and his poor members. When their dogs fawn upon them at their table,
they feed them with their daintiest meat, when the walls of their houses are
bare, they cloth them with their richest arresse, nay their horses and mules
whereon they ride, says Saint Chrysostom, are furnished with stately foot
clothes, and costly trappings, embossed with the purest silver and finest gold.
Their servants attending them are arraied in the most gorgeous apparel that can
be provided: when in the mean space the poor servants of Christ Jesus,
members of the same body, children of the same father, their own brethren,
their own flesh, lie hunger-starued at their gates, and wander up and down
naked in the streets, and yet they will take no pity and compassion on them.
It is reported in histories, that when Charles the Great made war against the
Saracens, that a prince of the Saracens came to entreat with him concerning the
matter of a truce to be had between them: this prince feeding at a table near
to the king, did well observe the order of his service, the gorgeous attire of
his servants, and the many dishes wherewith the table was furnished, whereon the
king and his nobles and his servants did usually feed. At last he saw certain
poor men meanly apparelled, lying on the ground, and feeding on the relics
of the table: and demanding who they were, the king answered, that those poor
men were the servants of God, for whose sake he there daily fed them.
Whereupon the Saracen angrily replied: What is this the Christians religion, to
make more account of their own servants then of Gods servants, to feed them
that need not with royal cheer, and to cloth them with costly garments; and
to suffer the poor to lie naked and almost famished on the ground? An
imputation, beloved, howsoever unjust in respect of religion, yet certainly too
true in regard of the want of charity, or at the least of the right use of
charity in many of great place in these our days: whose prodigal course the
most barbarous Saracen may justly condemn, in that they neglect the hungry:
Et illis mensam amplam adornant qui magis videntur fame ad digerendum cibum,
quam cibo ad nutriendum corpus indigere: and provide dainty fare for them, who
rather need abstinence to digest their meat, than meat to nourish their
bodies. But unto these and all of this quality, I say with Isod. lib. 3. de
summo bono, Magnum est scelus, etc. It is a heinous sin to put the poor man's
meat upon the rich man's table, and to cloth the rich with the poor man's
garment: and with S. Hierome in one of his epistles, pars sacrilegij est rem
pauperum dare non pauperibus: it is no less than sacrilege to give any thing
unto the wealthy, that belongs unto the needy: for as Elisha commanded the
widow to power her oil not into full but empty vessels, 2. Reg. 4.4. so must
the faithful extend their charitable devotion, not to the rich that are full,
but unto the poor that are empty in respect of worldly means: according to
that of our Savior; When thou make a dinner or supper, call not thy rich
neighbors, but the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind, Luc. 14.13.
knowing that the moist ground needs not the rain, nor the swelling Ocean the
drops of water, nor the thick forest the addition of wood, nor the full belly
the feast, nor the clothed back more apparel.

The 2. sort of men that offend against king Salomons precept of rightly
casting their bread upon the waters, are all covetous and hard-hearted
worldlings, whose eyes never give the poor any co^passionate look, whose
ears are never open to their cry, whose hands are never stretched out to
relieve them, whose hearts are never moved with compassion toward them, whose
bowels are never touched with any feeling of their injuries. They are like the
men of Succoth and Penuel, that deny a morsel of bread to poor Gedeon and his
weary soldiers, Judge. 8. They are like churlish Nabal, who would not afford
so much as a bit of bread, or a cup of water, or a morsel of meat to David's
servants, but instead of relieuing their necessities, they revile their persons
and condemn their cause. 1. Sam. 25. They are like sponges which with
facility do suck and draw in water, but we must first wring and squeese them
if we will have any juice out of them. So these covetous cormorants do easily
suck and draw to themselves the wealth of the world: but persuade them once to
distribute unto the poor, and then you must wring and squeese them, if you
will do any good with them, Et citius clauu^ e manu Herculis extorqueas, aut
aquam e pumice haurias, quam ab illis terunc^um elicias, as one speaks;
Sooner may a man wrest Hercules his club out of his hand, sooner may a man draw
water out of the dry pumice, nay sooner may a man pluck their very eyes out
of their heads, then get one penie of silver from them to give to the poor.
Let poor Lazarus come to their gates, and the dogs will be more compassionate
toward him then these men. Let a man beg of Jews and Pagans, Turks and
Infidels, and he shall find more relief from them, then from these. Augustus
Caesar a heathen Emperor, thought that day to be lost wherein he did not
benefit some poor person, and with money relieve him from penury: But these
think the day lost, their money lost, nay almost their life lost, wherein they
cast the least quantity of their goods unto their poor brethren. (...), says
our Lord and Savior, I have great compassion even from my very bowels, as the
word signifies, on the multitude, because they have now continued with me
three days, and have nothing to eat, Marc. 8.2. But these are so far from
the sympathizing with their brethren in their want, that they are nothing
touched or affected though they want their ordinary sustenance many years;
they are cruel, merciless, unnatural, murderers of their brethren, hoc est
enim hominem occidere vitae ei subsidia denegare, says S. Ambrose upon the
Psalms, for they do as much as in them lies kill men when they deny them
their food and daily sustenance. They are the veriest fools of ten thousand,
says Bonauenture, qui minus Dei amore^ quam denarios reputant, that more
esteem their goods than their God, their penny than the poor, their bruit
beast than their Christian brother.

We read in the book of Kings, that when there was a great famine in Samaria,
Ahab said to Obediah, Governor of his house, go unto the land, unto all the
fountains of water, and to all the rivers, if so be we may find grass to save
the horses and mules alive, lest we deprive the land of the beasts, 1. Reg.
18.5. Mark I beseech you beloved, how careful Ahab was for the preservation
of his horses and mules in the time of famine: but for the orphans and
widows, for the poor and afflicted people of the land, he takes no thought
at all. And I would to God there were not too many such Ahabs now a days in
the world, qui canibus and equis plusquam fratrum necessitati prospiciunt, as a
learned father speaks of the^: That more regard the preservation of their
beasts than of their brethren, that take more care for their worldly and
transitory commodities, than for the health and welfare of many Christians,
that gape after their gain like greedy dogs that never have enough, Es.
56.11. never regarding the burdens of Israel, never remembering the afflictions
of poor Joseph. Such were the bowels of compassion in holy Job, that he made
another man's affliction to be his own, he wept with him that was in trouble,
and his soul was in heaviness for the poor, Job 30.25. but they are so far
from this charitable commiseration, that when the poor come to crave their
devotion, their only alms are evil words, their only charity is reproach
and contumely, instead of a morsel of bread and a small piece of silver which
they should cast, they cast, says S. Chrysostom, many terms of
discouragement, and many titles of disgrace, and many tokens of their hardened
hearts. As Jobs friends, those miserable co^forters, railed on him, and accused
him of impiety, at nec pannum quidem quo vulnera sua mundaret ei porrexerunt.
But among all their uncharitable tauntings, none did so much as afford him a
cloth to wipe and cleanse his wounds: So do these, shall I say friends, nay
rather enemies of the poor, miserable comforters indeed, rail at and revile
their distressed brethren, they scorn them as the monsters of men, and the
most abject creatures of the earth, but at last they relieve them not, they
refresh them not, they send them away with empty bellies and naked backs, to
the weakening of their distressed bodies, and wounding of their afflicted souls.

Yea but me thinks I hear the worldlings apology. If I cast my bread upon
these waters, I fear I shall my self want before I die. O but hearken what
David says, I have been young, and now am old, yet did I never see the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread, Psalm. 37.25. Non memini
me audisse aut vidisse mala morte mortuum qui opera misericordiae libenter
exercuit: says S. Ambrose in his Offices: I never remember that I saw, or
heard of any man, that ever died miserably, that cheerfully performed the
works of mercy. And the Lord for thy comfort has said, I will never fail
thee, I will never forsake thee. Yea but, I have children to care for, and how
shall I then cast my bread upon these waters? O but S. Chrysostom answers
this in his 68. Hom. ad populum Antiochenum. Abraham had children, and yet he
went forth into the ways to receive strangers to lodging: So had the widow of
Sarepta, and yet it hindered not her charity to the prophet. Vnum habes filium,
says S. Augustine, Christum putes alterum; duos habes, Christum putes tertium;
december habes, vndecimum Christum facias: Have thou one son, yet let Christ
Jesus be an other: have thou two sons, yet let Christ Jesus be the third:
have thou ten sons, yet let Christ Jesus be the eleventh: give of thy love
a portion of thine inheritance unto him, who of his mercy has given al unto
thee. And if thou will respect thy child, and neglect thy Christ, then fear
this judgment from the Lord, either to leave behind thee no child at all, or
none to bear thy name, or if thou have any, peradventure they will prove
such, as shall as prodigally scatter abroad, as thou have couetously,
miserably, and injuriously scraped and gotten together thy transitory pelf.
Yea but though I now hold fast, yet at my death I purpose largely and liberally
to cast my bread upon these waters. O but remember what S. Chrysostomes opinion
is of such an one in his 18. Hom. upon the Ephesians, where making mention of a
covetous churl that would never give any thing in his life time, only at his
death he was content to leave something to be distributed unto the poor; he
thus speaks of him, Non iam das ex tuis, sed ex ipsa necessitate, morti est
gratia non tibi: it was necessity, and not charity that procured from thee
thy alms, a man may thank death and not thee for this devotion. Yea but I
have but a little, and how should I then cast my bread upon the waters? O but
remember the widows mite was but a little, and yet it was commended above
greater gifts, Mark. 12.43. A cup of cold water is but a small thing, and yet
it shall not be unrewarded, Matthew. 10.42. Magnitudo eleemosynae non ex
multitudine pecumarum, sed ex alacritate dantium iudicatur, says S. Hierome on
the fifth chapter of Amos: The greatness of our charity is not esteemed
according to the multitude of our gifts, but to the alacrity of the giver.
Mentem deus misericordem requirit, non pecuniae quantitatem, says S.
Chrysostom, God more respects a merciful mind, than a mass of money.
Coronat Deus intus bonitatem, vbi non inuenit facultatem, says S. Augustine:
yea our God crowns a willing mind, where he finds not ability. And
therefore if thou have but a little, be not afraid to give a little, Tob. 4.8.
and if thou art not able by reason of thy estate, to give any thing at all, yet
at the least put on the bowels of mercy, as the Apostle speaks, Colos. 3.12.
and say with Peter, aurum and argentum non habeo, Silver and gold have I none,
but such as I have I give unto thee, Act. 3.6. Give thy best counsel and
advice, if thou can give nothing else, Saltem loquere vt verbo iuues qui
opere non potes: give comfortable words if thou can not perform charitable
deeds. Yea but I suspect him to be a lewd-liuer, and why should I then cast my
bread upon such water? O but charity is not suspicious, tribuamus non
quaerentes cui sed quare, says S. Hierome in one of his Epistles: Give not,
regarding the person what he is, but the cause why thou give. Laertius in his
5. lib. and 1. cap. reports, that when one reproved a philosopher for giving
his alms to a vicious person, he answered, Dedi non homini malo sed humanae
sorti: I pitied him as a man, not as an evil man. And so must thou do, says
S. Augustine, Et si peccator est qui petit, da non tanquam peccatori: quod
homo, opus dei est; quod peccator, opus hominis est; da operi Dei, noli operi
hominis. If a notorious sinner crave thine alms, give him as he is the work
of God, a man endued with a reasonable soul, and made after the similitude and
likeness of God; not as he is the work of man, a most wicked and sinful
creature. And so was it with him in Gregory, non quia peccator, sed quia homo:
I gave him my benevolence, not because I suspected him to be a sinner, but
because I knew him to be a man, one of mine own nature and condition; humanum
est humanis casibus ingemiscere: and if thou will not give him for the love
thou bear to man, yet give him for the love thou owe to God. Such was the
love of David to Jonathan, that he said to his son Mephibosheth, even halting
and lame Mephibosheth, Fear not, for thou shall eat meat at my table
continually, and I will show thee kindness for Jonathan thy fathers sake, 2.
Sam. 9.7. So such should our love be to almighty God, that we should not
scorn to feed his poor members at our table, and to show them all the
kindness we may: if not for their own sake, yet for the Lords sake their and
our heavenly father, ever thinking on that of S. John, Whosoever has this
worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his compassion
from him, how dwells the love of God in him? 1. Ioh. 3.17.

Wherefore O man, if either the necessity of the needy may constrain thee,
or the bowels of charity persuade thee, or the shame of the world enforce
thee, or the rules of humanity allure thee, or the fear of thy God compel
thee, or the love of thy brother entreat thee, give at the last thine alms
unto the poor, cast thy bread upon the waters. Remember that fearful
sentence of this wise Solomon in an other book; He that stops his ear at
the crying of the poor, he shall one day cry and not be heard, Prou. 21.13.
Remember that saying of a learned Father, Frustra manus ad Deum expandit qui
has ad pauperes non extendit: In vain he stretches out his hands in prayer
unto God, that does not exercise his hands in pity unto the poor. Remember
that thou art Gods minister, as Origin speaks, to distribute a portion to thy
fellow servants: (...). Do not then like Judas in carrying of the bag cosen
the poor; do not appropriate that to thy self, that belongs to others: tua
non sunt tua: says S. Hierome in his 8. epistle ad Demetriadem: those goods
which thou call thine, are none of thine: It is the bread of the hungry
which thou do detain, it is the coat of the naked which thou lockest in
thy wardrope; the shoes of the barefoote which lie drying in thy house, and
the gold that should relieve the poor, that lies cankering in thy coffers, as
Basil speaks. Lastly remember this and remember all, it is the saying of
Gregory in one of his Hom. and worthy to be remembered of every faithful
Christian: Quod iacenti in terra porrigitis, sedenti in coelo datis: What thou
give unto the poor lying on the ground, thou give to Christ Jesus sitting
in heaven: What the poor beggeth of thee, Christ beggeth of thee, it is Christ
that asks thy house to lodge him; it is Christ that craves thy garment to
cover him; it is Christ that desires thy bread to feed him; it is Christ that
entreats thy drink to refresh him. And therefore as Christ said to the woman
of Samaria; If thou knew who it is that says, unto thee give me drink,
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given to thee the water of
life, Ioh. 4.10. So did thou consider that when the poor craves, it is
Christ that craves thy charitable benevolence, and when thou castest thy bread
upon the waters, thou castest it upon Christ Jesus, thou would not only
give unto him of thy transitory treasure, but entreat of him a greater alms,
even the water of everlasting life, and after many days thou should be sure
to find it. And so I come to my second general part, to wit, the reward here
proposed, noted in the last words; For after many days thou shall find it.

Pars secunda.
FOr after many days thou shall find it.] Although it might seem sufficient
which the holy Ghost by king Solomon had set down in the first words of my
text, to persuade us to a Chrstian commiseration of the poor, for the will of
a master is a sufficient reason unto his servants, and the good pleasure of a
king unto his subjects, and (...), he spoke the word, gave sufficient credit to
the scholars of that Philosopher to believe the truth, and follow the
prescription of his precepts: yet the blessed spirit of God considering the
dullness of flesh and blood in any thing that might concern their instruction
in the way of godliness, and well waying how the nature of man is ever stirred
up by rewards, the rather to allure us to this holy duty, proposes the
promise of a reward to be received upon the performance of this precept: For
after many days thou shall find it. Wherein he frames this argument, ab
vtili, a most forcible argument of all other to flesh and blood: Think not
much to cast your bread upon the water; to distribute your alms unto the
poor, yea to lose your money for your neighbors sake, for by this loss
comes great gain, for this, after many days you shall find many temporal
blessings in this life, and eternal glory in the life to come: for so the
whole current of Interpreters expound these last words of my text. And here my
brethren as the carkase of Amasah lying in the midst of the way caused the
people to stand still, 2. Sam. 20.12. So me thinks in the very entrance of
this second part, there arises a scruple to stay my passage, and hinder my
course, which when we shall remove, we may the better proceed and go forward
in the same. For whereas the spirit of God by Solomon does here implicit set
down a temporal and eternal reward to all them that are plentiful in their
charitable deeds toward the poor: hereupon the adversaries of the truth
misinterpreting the place, do presently conclude, that these works of mercy
did merit and deserve this reward at the hand of Almighty God. The vanity of
which conceit, shall God willing plainly appear unto you, if you will
vouchsafe herein a little to afford me your Christian patience and
accustomed attention. And if there be any here present, that have been
seduced to favor the doctrine of popish merits, and are not yet fully
satisfied and settled in the truth, let me desire them in the bowels of Christ
Jesus (unless they will obstinately continue in error) to lay aside all
preiudicate conceits, either of my person or of this cause, and with
indifferent ears to hear, how in this one point, by the disciples of
Antichrist, our Church has been wronged, these weak ones abused, the
Scriptures perverted, and the faithful generally scandalized. For after many
days they shall find it.

A temporal and eternal reward, say they, is here promised to him that
casts his bread upon the waters, that gives his alms unto the poor, ergo
this charitable alms merited this reward. And the Rhemists in their
annotations upon Romans 2. sect. 2. affirm that Christians good works are
meritorious, and the causes of salvation: and upon 1. Cor. 3. sect. 2. men by
their good works deserve heaven: and Bellarmine their great champion in his 4.
lib. 3. cap. de bonis operibus, is of opinion, that good works, and namely
alms deeds, (whereof Solomon here especially speaks) do merit eternal
life, not only ex congruo, by a kind of congruitie, which some of the
Schoolmen allow, but also ex co^digno, of condignitie, or worthiness in the
highest degree, which many of the schoolmen do deny. The reason of this
their assertion they fetch from that place, Luc. 10.7. The labourer is worthy
of his wages; but the faithful are laborers, and eternal life is their wages
promised, Matthew. 20.8. ergo the faithful are worthy of, and by their works
do merit eternal life. But mark, I beseech you brethren, how like the
ancient heretics, our Romanists by their cursed glosses corrupt this
Scripture, and violently wrest it from its true meaning: for whereas our
Savior there says; The labourer is worthy of his hire, he does not by hire
or wages understand the kingdom of heaven or eternal life, but rather a
temporal reward, as the circumstances of the text do manifestly declare it.
For Christ Jesus there sending his disciples to preach the Gospel, biddes them
carry no bag nor scrip, nor shoes with them: but into what house soever
they did enter, they should tarry there, eating and drinking such things as
were set before them: for the labourer, says he, is worthy of his hire. His
meaning there is nothing else but as Saint Paul speaks, 1. Corint. 9. that
his disciples preaching the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, and sowing
spiritual things unto the people, should be rewarded with their corporal
relief. Again, suppose that wages or hire did signify eternal life, as out
of Matt. 20. they prove, yet shall we think by our good deeds to demerit the
same? seeing in that very chap. you shall find, that they who were called at
the last hour, had as large a reward as they that came at the first: which had
never been if merit had been respected: and therefore as Saint Ambrose says
in his lib. 1. cap. 3. de vocat. gentium: Cum hi qui in multo labor sudarunt,
seeing they which were in all the labor received no more than the last,
intelligant donum se gratiae, non operum accepisse mercedem: let them
understand they received a gift of Gods grace, and had nothing in them to merit
this reward of their works.

Yea but in the Revelation the words are more plain, and the spirit there
pronounces them worthy, Revel. 3.4. Thou have a few names yet in Sardi, which
have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white for they
are worthy. But how beloved? non (...), sed (...), they are not absolutely
worthy, but respectively in comparison of those wicked ones in Sardi, that had
consented to idolaters, and polluted their consciences with evil, and were
altogether profane. So does S. Ambrose expound it writing on the 2. Timoth. 1.
quantum ad caeterorum comparationem digni sunt, quantum ad rem ipsam omnes
indigni: in respect of others they are worthy, but in regard of the thing it
self, they are all unworthy. Or else they are worthy not simply of
themselves, but because God did so accept them in Christ Jesus. Non ex operibus
sed pura gratia: as a good writer will have it: Not by the merit of their
works, but by the imputation of Christ's worthiness, not because they are
cleansed by their alms, but because their robes are made white in the blood of
the Lamb, Revel. 7.14.

Yea but that place, Matthew. 24. cannot be answered: Receive the kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world, for I was hungry and ye fed
me, naked and ye clothed me, etc. ergo, alms deeds are the efficient causes
of everlasting life, and the casting our bread upon the waters, shall merit
heaven for us. Indeed my brethren this is the Scripture they most press: but
if you will a little consider this place with me, I doubt not, but as that
Egyptian was slain with a spear taken out of his own hands, 2. Sam. 23.21.
So our adversaries shall be confuted out of these words, which they allege
for the defense of their own cause. For if we look into the text, we shall
find that this kindgome was prepared for them from the beginning of the world.
Whence we may frame against them this argument: If this kingdom were provided
for the faithful before they had done any alms deeds at all, then did not
the faithful by their alms deeds as by precedent causes merit or deserve the
same: But this kingdom was provided for the faithful before they had done any
alms deeds at all, even before the foundation of the world was laid: ergo, the
faithful did not by their alms deed merit or deserve the same.

Again, our works are said to be meritorious, when we do them of our own
free will and pleasure, and not of due debt, for when we do that which we
are bound to do, we do no more but our duty. But behold, beloved, and
consider what the Apostle says, We are his workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus, to good works, which God has ordained we should walk in them, Ephesians.
2.10. and the particular good works of alms deeds are in my text and in many
other places of holy scripture required of us. We are not left to our own free
will and pleasure whether we will do them or no, but as Saint Paul says of
himself concerning the preaching of the Gospel, Necessity is laid upon me,
and woe be unto me if I preach not the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.18. So may all
Christians say of themselves in this behalf, there is a necessity laid upon
us to relieve the poor, to cast our bread upon the waters, and woe be unto us
if we do it not. And shall we then make our alms meritorious, when necessity
requires that at our hand? Did the master thank his servant because he did
that which was commanded him? Luc. 17.9. and do we think that when we have
done all that is commanded us, we shall be in any better rank then
unprofitable servants? or do we look the Lord should thank us, or that he
should bestow the kingdom of heaven on us for the worthiness thereof?

Lastly, between the work and the reward there should be an equal
proportion, otherwise it cannot be said to merit: for if the reward be more
than the works, it is not a reward of desert, but a gift of good will. Whence
it is manifest, that our best alms can never merit this kingdom of heaven,
because none of them can equal it. What is a cup of cold water to eternal
life? what is a morsel of bread to a crown of glory? what is a small mite to
the kingdom of heaven? Nay what are our best works to such an immortal
reward? All the afflictions of this life are not worthy of that glory that
shall be showed unto us, Romans 8.18. Quid possumus dignum facere praemijs
coelestibus, says S. Ambrose in his 20. sermon. in Psalm. 119. what can we do to
deserve heaven? Beatae vitae nullus potest aquari labor, nulla operatio,
passiones nullae, says Gregory in Psalm. 142. to blessed life no labor, work,
or suffering can be equal, Quid sunt merita nostra ad tantum gloriam? says
S. Bernard in his 1. sermon. De Annuntiatione. What are all our merits, even our
best merits in comparison of so great glory? To these I might add the
testimonies of S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, and the rest
of the ancient fathers of the Church, who in many places of their works (being
rightly understood) do beat down this monster of popish merits, to the shame
of our fugitive countrymen, who are not ashamed to publish to the world, that
all the Fathers, Councels, Reasons, Scriptures, are in this point for them, and
against us. Whereas you see the contrary has been in part, and might be in
the whole proved, if time would permit. And the word of God herein is so
opposite unto them, that I marvel not if that godly martyr was so thoroughly
persuaded of this truth, that he said unto his enemies: He that can show me
in any Scripture that our alms deeds or best works do merit heaven; for the
first Scripture, I will without any further judgment lose both mine ears, for
the second my tongue, for the third my neck, as in our Acts and Monuments it is
reported of him.

Thus you see (right Honorable, etc.) the Babel of self justifying merits,
whereby our adversaries persuade themselves they ascend up into the highest
heavens, is at the last fallen down, because it is built upon the sands of
man's invention, and not on the true rock Christ Jesus: Vbi enim Christus non
est fundamentum, nullum est boni operis aedificium, says Gregory: Where
Christ is not laid as the corner stone for a good foundation, there will be no
place to erect the building of good works. I speak not this, nor any thing in
this argument, to withdraw men from doing good, or to discourage them in their
charitable devotions, as our adversaries in their books most falsely accuse us,
most uncharitably slander us, and most injuriously traduce us. For we both
allow of good works, and preach good works, daily call upon our hearers as true
professors to manifest their faith by these fruits, as this place this day, and
many other places in this city almost every day can sufficiently witness.
Nay, we confess a necessary use of good works, by them we set forth Gods
glory, Matt. 5.16. by them our faith is made known for the good example of
others, Iac. 2.18. by them our consciences are quieted, and our election daily
made sure unto us, 2. Pet. 1.10. Yea we attribute so much unto them, that some
of our Church have published whole Treatises that good works are necessary
unto salvation. What can they say more than we do in the behalf of good
works, unless they will forsake the truth? And yet see the malice of these
men; notwithstanding we thus speak, and we thus write; they are not ashamed to
say, that our Gospel is a Gospel of liberty, epicurisme, and sensuality;
that we have slacked men's charity, and quenched their devotion, that we
condemn good works as unclean, sinful, and hypocritical; that we pluck
them up as weeds by the roots, and cast them forth of the doors as children
of the bond woman, not worthy to inherit with the free borne; that we preach
nothing but sola fides, sola fides; and whereas their bona opera have built many
goodly Colleges and Schools, and Hospitals, our sola fides has plucked them
down again.

Beloved in our Lord and Savior, to remove this false imputation: what our
opinion of good works is, you have already heard, what our practice in good
works is, let the world judge. Indeed in the time of Popery the seely people
were taught, that if they would do such a good work they should thereby merit
heaven, and God were unjust if he did not give it them. And if they would do
such a good work, they should receive pardon not only for their own sins,
but also for the sins of their posterity to many generations. No marvel
then (being thus deluded by iugling friars) if in those days they did
plentifully cast their bread upon the waters, if they did abound in
distributing to the poor. For what will not a man give to purchase heaven, and
to save his own soul? and I confess, that we live in the dotage of the
world, wherein our Savior has told us; Charity shall wax cold, and the
hearts of many shall be hardened from doing good. Yet for all this I dare
undertake that for this last age, and in the remembrance of some yet living
since the clear sunshine of the Gospel has enlightened the Hemisphere of our
Church, there have been more Colleges founded, more Hospitals erected, more
Schools builded, more poor Scholars maintained, more Orphans and impotent
relieved, more charitable deeds exercised, generally in our land, particularly
in this famous city, ever renowned for her good works, I dare be bold to say,
than in any, I think I may truly say, than in many ages under popery and
superstition. Yet God forbid we should think that they who have most excelled
in those holy duties, did hereby merit heaven: For eternal life is the gift
of God, Romans 6.23. and ye are justified freely by grace, Romans 3.24. Gratis per
Gratiam* gratia autem nullo modo est gratia, nisi omni modo sit gratuita. As
he speaks; And by grace ye are saved through faith: not of your selves, it
is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast. Ephesians. 2.8.9. I
confess here in my text is a reward proposed to our alms deeds, that if we
cast our bread upon the waters, after many days we shall be sure to find it:
but reward is as well of favor as of debt, Rom 4.4. and if God in promising
this reward be a debtor unto us, it is but in that sense as S. Aug upon the 83.
Psalm. speaks, Debitorem ipse se dominus fecit non accipiendo, sed
promittendo: non ei dicitur, read quod accepisti, sed read quod promisisti:
God has made himself a debtor unto us by promising, not by receiving any
thing at our hands to deserve the same. Quicquid autem promisit, indignis
promisit, vt non quasi operibus merces promitteretur, sed gratia gratis
daretur: as the same Father speaks: And whatsoever God has promised, he
promised unto those that were unworthy, that it should not be promised as a
reward unto works, but as grace freely given.

Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing the Lord has promised everlastingly
to reward all them that cast their bread upon the waters, not for the merit of
their work, but for his own free favor and mercy, discamus de nostris
diffidere meritis: Let us henceforth learn to distrust our own merits:
quaerant alij meritum, nos gratiam inuenire studeamus: Let others, (such as all
popish fauorits are) seek after heaven by these means; but let us labor to
find grace, saying with S. Bernard, Meritum meum miseratio domini, my merit is
the Lords mercy: and with S. Augustine, Si misericordiae domini multae, multus
ego in meritis: If God be rich in mercy, I shall surely abound in merits. Thus
if we conceive humbly of our selves, God will esteem highly of us; and if
with a lowly mind, we do good to others for Gods sake, God will with a liberal
hand do good unto us for his mercies sake: and if we will cast our bread upon
the waters, not thinking of any merit in so small a work, God will cast
everlasting ioies upon our souls, not respecting our many wants. And so
passing from this controversy, I come at last to the particulars of the
rewards here proposed: For after many days thou shall find it.

Wherein two things offer themselves to our consideration: first, the time when
this reward shall be received, in these words, for after many days. Secondly,
the reward it self in the last words, thou shall find it.

For after many days.] Some read the words, in multitudine dierum, in the
multitude of days thou shall find it: as if he said, Si in pauperes
liberalis fueris, deus vitae tuae dies producet: If thou will be liberal
toward the poor, God will prolong the days of thy life. A true
interpretation, for I doubt not but God does many times bless them with long
life and many years, that look upon his poor members with merciful and
compassionate eyes.

Others, and those in number many, and in judgment most authentical, do
thus read the words; Post dies multos, after many days thou shall find it:
thereby giving us to understand, that howsoever God in his wisdom deferreth
the remuneration of our Christian charity, yet certainly he has a reward in
store for us, which at the last we shall assuredly receive. And this I take to
be the natural and proper sense of king Solomon in this place: For after many
days thou shall find it. For whereas in the former part he had used a pretty
kind of prolepsis, or preoccupation, which a worldly minded man to this purpose
might have used: Whatsoever I give unto the poor is assuredly lost, as if I
cast my bread into the sea, and I shall never expect a recompense for the same:
He now answers this doubt, Et occurrit hominum impatientiae, qui, nisi e
vestigio compensationem accipiant, ilico animum abijciunt: as one speaks, and
he here meets with the impatiencie of those men, who presently despair, if
God reward not their alms out of hand: But Solomon here tells them, that if
the Lord has not yet rewarded them, yet they must expect and wait his
leisure, they must tarry a day and a day, nay many days, and then at the last
they shall be sure to receive it: and if in the mean season they live in want,
and take up the cry of those faithful souls, Vsquequo domine, vsquequo? how
long Lord, how long shall we expect our reward? the spirit shall testify to
their spirits, that Christ himself does say unto them; Behold, I come quickly,
and my reward is with me, to give to every man according unto his works, Revel.
22.12. For so it is, beloved brethren, sometimes God presently rewards the
charitable benevolence of his children, as he did the widow of Sareptah, who
immediately upon her releeuing of Eliah, had her meal and oil increased
according to the word of the Lord, 1. Reg. 17.16. Sometimes differtur
retributio, non deficit, says Bonaue^ture: Well may Christ defer it for a
time, but he does not forget it for ever. It may be that for thy love to the
poor members of Christ, God in his love to thee will in time increase thy
corn, thy wine, thy oil, and thy stock, and then in thy self and thine own
estate after many days thou may find it. It may be, that those poor
children whom thou now feedest at thy table, and clothest with thy garments,
may one day be so enabled by Almighty God in their estate that they may feed
and cloth thy children, when they may be brought to much want and miserable
necessity: and then in thy children, after many days thou may find it.
The sum and effect of all is this: God that is before all time in
recompensing the good works of his children, will not be tied to this or that
circumstance of time: only we may be well assured, that one time or an other
he will restore our liberality manifold into our bosom, by giving us, ant
quod petimus, aut quod melius est, aut quod sufficit: either what we desire,
or that which is better, or that which is sufficient.

Learn then, my brethren, a similitude of the husbandman, he casts his seed
into the ground, the corn dies, the winter comes, frost and snow and
tempestuous weather falls thereon, and who would not think he had labored
in vain? yet the husbandman patiently abides and tarrieth the time of
harvest, and then he receaueth a plentiful increase. So when we give our alms,
what do we else but cast, shall I say our seed, upon the ground, nay (whereof
there may be less hope) our bread upon the waters? Yet certainly as that,
though in man's judgment cast away, springs and grows, and bears much
fruit: So this in time shall return unto a happy harvest. Si enim non perit
semen quod in terram proijcis, quid times periturum quod in domini manu
reponis? If the seed perish not which is cast into the earth, much less shall
that be lost that is left in Gods hand, that is laid up in Christ's storehouse,
the poore-mans bag. Learn a similitude of great purchasers; they give many
times great sums of money for reuersions, which themselves sometimes never
live to enjoy, but their children after them receive the benefit thereof: so
let not us think much to disburse our sums, our many sums, toward the
relief of our poor brethren, knowing that if the benefit hereof come not
presently to our selves, yet it will come opportunely to our posterity: For
after many days we shall find it.

Yea but, will some men say, how is this true? I have oftentimes cast my bread
upon the waters, given mine alms unto the poor, and I have a long time
expected this reward, and as yet I can find nothing. O but hearken what S.
Chrysostom answers in one of his Hom. Examine thy self O man, has not God
rewarded thy charity with any blessing: who then has given thee thy health,
thy wealth, thy food and apparel: or if thou have not yet in a full measure
tasted hereof, expect notwithstanding, and wait the Lords leisure, surely he
deferreth these blessings for thine advantage, that he may pay thee at the
last with the greater interest. For God is not like that king in Plutarch, who
would always say (...), I will give to all men, and yet for all this, gave
nothing to any man. He is Yea and Amen in all his promises, and in time
convenient he will perform them. The promise of the woman's seed was instantly
made and opposed as a comfort against Adams fall, yet it was performed 3900.
years after in Christ Jesus. The promise of Isreal's return out of Egypt, is
made a comfort unto Abraham, yet 400. yeees servitude must be first endured,
but in time convenient this promise shall be performed. The promise of the
Scepters continuance till Siloes coming is made to Judah, yet shall many step
in of other tribes; Moses out of Leuies tribe, Ioshuah out of Ephraims tribe,
Saul out of Beniamins tribe; yet in time convenient a poor David shall be
restored to the scepter of Judah. Joseph was not presently lifted up above his
brethren, but many bitter greefes were before endured. Judah did not instantly
find release by Cyrus, but many sorrowful songs by the waters of Babylon must
be chaunted: but at length the ones dignifying, the others delivery, were in
time convenient performed. He that deferred the promised seed so many hundred
years, and then sent; Isreal's deliverance so many score of years, and then
wrought; crossed Iudahs and Joseph's hopes so many ways, and then granted: why
should we doubt but that the same God with whom the present and future tense is
all one, will in convenient time reward them that relieve his? Why should we
doubt but that if we thus lay out our money for the Lord, the Lord at the last
will restore it? Why should we doubt, but that if we thus lend unto the Lord,
the Lord at the last will repay it? Why should we doubt, but that if we thus
cast our bread upon the waters, the Lord at the last will reward it, though we
expect it many days? And so from the time here specified, after many days,
I now come to the reward it self here proposed in the last words, thou shall
find it, whereof by your patience a word or two, and so I will commit you to
God.

Thou shall find it] inuenies illum, that is, says Bonauenture, retributionem
pro illo, a recompense for it. And what is this recompense? It is, says one,
septuplum, centuplum, millecuplum: seuenfold, an hundred fold, nay, a thousand
fold more than the morsel of bread we cast upon the waters, more than the
measure of alms we give unto the poor: it is merces temporalis in hoc seculo
and aeterna in futuro: a temporal reward of things transitory here on earth,
and a full fruition of things eternal there in heaven: as the Caldie
paraphrase and other interpreters do expound it. And here you see my brethren
what a large field I have yet to walk in, and what a sea of matter lies before
me: but my purpose is not to tread every path, nor to sound every Ocean. I
will pass over this point tanquam canis in Nilo lambens, vel vt Ladas in
puluere cursitans, as the dogs use to lap in Nilus, and as Ladas trips it upon
the sands, catching a little here and there, and scarce leaving the print of my
speech any where: commending the rest to your private meditations, and to the
effectual operation of Gods holy spirit in your obedient hearts.

Thou shall find it] That is both a temporal and eternal reward. First thou
shall find a temporal reward. Honor the Lord, says Solomon, by thy riches,
that is, in distributing them unto the poor: So shall thy barnes be filled
with abundance, and thy presses shall burst with wine, Pro. 3.9.10. For as a
fountain, says Clemens Alexandrinus, the more it is drawn, the more it is
filled with fresh, and, for the most part, sweeter water: So the more we draw
the fountain of our bounty, by casting unto the poor, the more is our store
replenished with a new supply of many blessings. And as when Jesus brake and
distributed those five loaves to the five thousand me^, the bread was
miraculously multiplied, to no less than twelve baskets full, John 6. So when
be break our bread unto the needy, God does as it were by a miracle multiply
the same, that in our basket and in our store, we may never want. When the
widow of Sarepta made the Prophet a little cake with all her provision, for
this she was the richer, for behold the barrel of meal wasted not, and the
oil in the cruse ceased not, 1. reg. 17. 16. when one Bonifacius gave all his
mothers corn unto the poor, for this she was the richer, for behold he
prayed and the Lord restored it in greater abundance than before, Greg. li. 1.
dialog. ca 9. When John the Patriarch of Alexandria, gave five crowns unto the
poor, for this he was the richer: for behold, a noble Lady for these five
gave him fifty crowns to the use of his church, as Surius writes in his
life: Qui enim terrena subsidia largitur, ditior dando caelesti remuneratione
redditur, says S. Hierome on the Proverbs: He that is made poor by giving
his alms, God makes him rich again by rewarding his alms. He that thus
scatters is the more increased, Prou. 11.29. Would you then beloved learn
the heavenly thrift, lo here it is, bestow your treasure upon the poor, and
it shall bring you more profit then gold, Eccles. 29.11. Would you know where
to find much treasure, lo here it is, a man's alms is a purse with him, and
it shall pay every man his reward upon his head, as it is in the 13. verse of
the same chap. Would you live in plenty all the days of your life, lo here
it is, he that gives unto the poor shall never lack, Prou. 28.27. Would you
be assured of the reward of your charity, lo here it is, Cast your bread
upon the waters, and after many days you shall find it. God is the same God
still as able to requite, and as ready to reward the deeds of mercy as ever he
was: And therefore if the bowels of thy charity shall be so far enlarged,
that thou cast all unto the poor, and leave nothing for thy self, yet be thou
comforted with that which Tiberius the Emperor sometimes comforted himself
withal, who having spent almost his whole treasury in the works of charity,
and being blamed by some of his friends for the same, returned them this
answer: Though my money be gone, yet here is my comfort, Deus non deerit fisco
nostro, God will never be wanting in my exchequer: which afterward he found
true: for he did not so liberally give to the poor, as God did liberally
reward him with temporal blessings for the same, as Paulus Diaconus in his 3.
libr. and 6. cap. of his History reports.

Hearken to this O all ye covetous usurers and extortioners, you that beat
your brains and busy your heads how you may make the greatest gain and
commodity of your gold and silver, shall I here teach you a new kind of usury,
a more commodious course, which I think you never yet heard of, or hearing it,
I presume you never yet put in practice. If I should say unto you as our
Savior did to the rich man in the Gospel, Sell all that you have and give to
the poor, and you shall have a great reward in heaven; surely you would then
say, Durus est hic sermo, this is a hard saying, and with that rich man, you
would not abide it. But yet let me tell you, if you will purchase the greatest
gain by your riches, if you will set out your money to usury for the best
commodity, cast, if not all, yet the superfluities of your abundance unto the
needy, and I will assure you by this means your gold shall bring you greater
increase, than by all other kinds of usury whatsoever: for you know the world
is deceitful, in setting your money to usury; sometimes you are deceived by a
cousening Lawyer, and he will teach your debtor a trick to make your bond of
none effect: Sometime you are deceived by a beggarly bankabrupt, and where
there is nothing, as the old saying is, not only the subject but even the king
must lose his right: and suppose the best, that both your debtor and his bond
stand good, yet the most that you get by this means, is some ten in the
hundred, or I will suppose twenty, and that peradventure with such a perplexed
conscience, as if all the furies in hell were already tormenting of you: But in
this usury which I propose, behold every thing safe and certain, Qui dat
pauperi foeneratur domino, he that gives unto the poor sets out his money to
usury to God, and he will recompense that which he has given, Pro. 19.17.
Here beloved, your debtor is a sure play master, almighty God: the bond or
obligation wherewith he tieth himself unto you, is his word, the least jot and
tittle whereof shall never pass: the use which he gives, is not ten in the
hundred, but more than ten times beyond the principal, many temporal
blessings in this world, which if it be too little, behold a greater reward,
(which now comes to be touched in the last place) everlasting happiness in
the world to come; and he that casts his bread upon the waters shall be sure
to find it.

Thou shall find it.] That is, thou shall also find this eternal reward. To
cast our bread upon the waters. To give our alms unto the poor, says S.
Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. is, ars omnium quaestuosissima, the most gainful
art of all other; for that is true of this kind of piety which S. Paul
speaks of godliness in general, (...), it is profitable unto all things,
having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4.8. It
is Viaticum in mundo, and thesaurus in coelo, instead of our iourneying
provision, while we are wandering in this pilgrimage of our mortality, and a
never failing treasure reserved in heaven for us: Of the first you have already
heard; of the second how should you hear any thing, seeing flesh and blood is
able to speak thereof little or nothing, it is too deep a mystery to be
sounded, too intricate a point to be searched, too great a matter to be
apprehended by the shallow conceit of a mortal man; had the Cherubin
sanctified my lips as he did the Prophet Es. 6.7. had I the tongue of men and
angels, I were not able to express it: Let us suppose all the pleasures and
delights in this world composed in one, all the glorious shows the eye has
seen, all the heavenly sounds the ear has heard, all the pleasant odors the
nose has smelt, all the variety of sweet and mellifluous sauors the tongue has
tasted, all the delightful objects the hands have touched: Add heereunto, not
only what nature, but whatsoever art in her deepest knowledge can invent, and
al shall be nothing, but as a shadow in respect of that substance, as dross in
respect of that gold, as a cottage in respect of that palace, as toies and
trifles in respect of that heavenly reward, which these Amners of the Almighty
God shall receive in that day. Then they that have fed the hungry, and
clothed the naked in this life, shall be made to sit down at a table, and
Christ himself shall come forth and serve them: their meat shall be of the
tree of life, in the midst of the paradise of God: their drink shall be of the
water of life, ever flowing and never wasting, their apparel shall be white
arraie, their light shall be Christ himself, their companions shall be angels
and archangels, their continual exercise shall be singing and saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, which was, which is, and which is to come. Here
is that everlasting reward of the lovers of the poor: thus shall it be done to
them in heaven, who have pitied the needy here on earth. O what a forcible
argument should this be to every one of us, now with a liberal hand to cast
our bread upon these waters, seeing at the last we shall be so respected,
seeing at the last we shall be so honored, seeing at the last we shall find
so great and so glorious a reward! O what a cooling card will this be to thee,
O thou hard hearted worldling, when thou shall see the liberal giver rewarded
with heaven, and thy self thrust down to hell! for how will thou answer the
Lord one for a thousand, when thou can not give account to the Lord of one
part in a thousand, that thou have given unto the poor: How will thou answer
him, when it shall be told thee, that thou wast but Gods steward of all that
thou did possess, and therefore thou must make an account unto him, how thou
have laid out all thy wealth and substance? What a miserable taking will thou
be in, when thou can not but confess that thou have spent thus much money on
thy belly in dainty fare, and thus much money on thy back in gaie apparel,
and thus much money in vanity, and thus much money in villainy, and thus much
money in the sin of wantonness, and thus much money in other wickedness,
and peradventure scarce one penny in the works of mercy? Nay what a miserable
taking will thou be in, when thou can not but confess that thou had so
many thousand pounds abroad at usury, and so many thousand pounds at home
rusting in thy treasury, and yet in thy life did never bestow one pound in
the deeds of charity? Let such rich and wretched men howl and weep, for the
miseries that shall come upon them: their riches are corrupt, their garments are
moth-eaten, their gold and silver is cankred, and the rust thereof shall be a
witness against them at the last day: Easier shall it be for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, then for such to enter into the kingdom of heaven.
And therefore let all such bunchbackt camels know, if they will be saved, they
must cast away their burdens that hinder their course to this goal, they must
pare away their bunches that hinder their passage through this strait and
narrow gate: they must distribute their goods that otherwise will for ever
bar them from their God. But to leave them, and the torments unless they
repent, that shall never leave them, and to conclude with our selves: Many of
the ancient autors in their writings do make report of a certain country
whose fashion was yearly to choose their king, who had for that year absolute
authority to do what he list, but the year being ended, he was deposed from
his place, and thrust naked into a remote Island, there to end his life in
hunger and cold, and much want. Whereof one being advertised, thought aforehand
to prevent this inconvenience, and in that short time of his reign, he sent
over his wealth and treasure into that Island, whereinto himself at the years
end being thrust naked and without means, he was relieved by that which
carefully aforehand he had there provided. Beloved in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, were we all kings and princes never so noble, never so mighty,
never so rich, we have no assurance of any long continuance in this world, no
not so much as for one year: for here we have no abiding city, but we look
for one to come, Hebr. 13.14. our year, that is, our short course of life, at
last must have an end: and as we came naked into the world, so must we return
naked out of the world, as Job speaks of himself, Job 1.21. Let us then my
brethren with that wise king now in the time of plenty provide against the
future famine let us now make us friends of that unrighteous mammon, that when
we want, they may receive us into everlasting habitations: let us now make us
bags that wax not old, a treasure that can never fail in heaven: let us now
send away wealth in distributing to the poor, Quod enim pauperi damus ante nos
praemittimus, says S. Aug. and hoc ibi inueniemus quod hic damus. And we shall
find that in heaven which we give them here on earth. Let us now play the
wise merchants, as they venture much upon the waters, so let us upon these
waters. Regnum coeloru^ venale est, this day the kingdom of God is as it were
set at sale unto us; O let us sell all that we have to buy this pearl: and yet
we need not sell all, for a small matter will buie it, an ouer-worne garment
will buie it, a morsel of meat will buie it, a loaf of bread will buie it, a
draught of drink will buie it, a cup of cold water will buie it, a mite of
silver will buie it; not in respect of the merit of so small a gift, but in
regard of the mercy of so great a God: for the word of God must be true when
every man shall be a liar: they that feed the poor when they are hungry, and
refresh them when they are thirsty, and lodge them when they are weary, and
cloth them when they are naked, and visit them when they are sick, shall
then be comforted with a Come ye blessed, inherit an everlasting kingdom.
Contrariwise, they that have hardened their hearts, and shut up the bowels of
compassion against them, shall receive that doleful sentence; Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, Matthew. 25.

Wherefore (right Honorable, etc.) to conclude all at the last: as Moses said
to the people of Israel, I call heaven and earth to record this day, that I have
set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life,
that both thou and thy seed may live, Deuteronomy. 30.19. So our witnesses are both in
heaven and earth, that this day both life and death are set before us, the
everlasting reward which God has provided for the cheerful giver, and the
heavy judgment which he has prepared forth covetous worldling. O then let us
follow the president of the one, and hate the practice of the other, that so
we may hope for comfort, that so we may live for ever: let us now admit the
poor to our presence, that then we may be admitted to the presence of God: let
us now give them our earthly mammon, that then God may give us heavenly manna:
let us now receive them to our table, that then we may be received to eat and
drink in the kingdom of God: let us now make them our companions in earth,
that then we may be made companions with angels and archangels in heaven. Let
us now help to sustain their life in this pilgrimage of man, that then we may
live for ever in the city of God: let us now crown them with our temporal
blessings, that then we may be crowned with the crown of glory: let us now
cloth them with our apparel, that then we may be clothed with the garment of
immortality: let us now show mercy unto poor Jesus in them, that then our
Jesus the God of mercy, may have compassion upon us. Finally, let us now cast
our bread upon these many and troubled, and salt, and running waters in this
world, that then we may find bread and water, the bread of life and the water
of life, the riches of Gods treasury, and the abundance of his house in the
world to come. Which the Lord of his infinite mercy grant unto us all to enjoy
after the miseries of this woeful and wretched life: not for our own merits
and deserts, but for the most glorious passion and joyful resurrection of
Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father, and the blessed spirit be ascribed al
honor and glory, etc.

The Author to the Reader.
BEing over entreated at this time to publish this Sermon, and having my self
so many necessary employments otherwise, I was constrained to send unto the
Printer, that one and only imperfect copy which I had thereof; wherein if (by
reason of mine own absence) there happen to be many faults, the Christian and
well disposed Reader, I hope, will charitably censure them. As for the carping
companions of our time, as I never desired to please them, so do I not now
seek to satisfy them.


