THE COPIES OF CERTAIN LETTERS WHICH HAVE passed between SPAIN and ENGLAND
in matter of RELIGION.

Concerning the general Motives to the Roman obedience.

Between Master JAMES WADESWORTH, a late Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition in
Civil, and W. BEDELL a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in SVFFOLKE.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby for William Barret and Robert Milbourne.
1624.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND EXCELLENT PRINCE, PRINCE CHARLES.
I Should labor much in my excuse, even to mine own judgment, of the highest
boldness, in daring to present these Papers to your Highness, if there were not
some releeuing circumstances, that give me hope, it shall not be disagreeable
to your higher goodness. There is nothing can see the light, which has the
name of Spain in it, which seems not now properly yours, ever since it
pleased you to honor that Country with your presence. And those very Motives
to the Roman obedience, which had been represented unto you there, in case
you had given way to the propounding them, are in these Letters charitably and
calmly examined. Between a couple of friends, bred in the same College (that
of the foundation of Sir WALTER MILDMAY of blessed memory, whom with honor and
thankfulness I name) chosen his Scholars at the same election, lodged in the
same Chamber, after Ministers in the same Diocese. And that they might be
matchable abroad as well as at home, attendants in the same rank as
Chaplains, on two Honorable Ambassadors of the Majesty of the King your
Father in foreign parts; the one in Italy, the other in Spain. Where, one of
them having changed his profession, and received a pension out of the holy
Inquisition house, and drawn his wife and children thither, was lately often
in the eyes of your Highness: very joyful I suppose to see you there, not
more I am sure, then the other was solicitous to miss you here. These passages
between us I have hitherto forborne to divulge, out of the hope of further
answer from Master Wadesworth according to his promise; though since the
receipt of my last (being silent to my self) he excused him in sundry his
Letters to others by his lack of health. Nor should I have changed my
resolution, but that I understand that presently after your Highness departure
from Spain, he departed this life. Which news though it grieve me as it
ought in respect of the loss of my friend, yet it somewhat contenteth me, not
to have been lacking in my endeavor, to the vndeceiuing a well-meaning man
touching the state of our differences in Religion; nor as I hope to have
scandalized him in the manner of handling them. And conceiving these Copies may
be of some public use, the more being li^ted up above their own meannesse by
so high patronage, I have adventured to prefixe your Highness name before
them. Humbly beseeching the same, that if these reasons be too weak to bear
up the presumption of this Dedication, it may be charged upon the strong
desire some way to express the unspeakable joy for your Highness happy
return into England, of one amongst many thousands,

Of your Highness most humble and devoted servants W. BEDELL.

THE CONTENTS.
1. A Letter of Master Wadesworth, containing his Motives to the Roman
obedience. Dated at Seuill in Spain, April 1. 1615. printed as all the rest
out of his own handwriting. page 1. 2. Another Letter from him requiring
answer to the former, from Madrid in Spain, April 14. 1619. page 16. 3. The
answer to the last Letter, Dated Aug. 5. 1619. page 17. 4. A Letter from
Master Wadesworth upon the receipt of the former. From Madrid. Dated Oct. 28.
1619. received May 23. 1620. page 23. 5. The answer to the last Letter. June
15. 1620. page 25. 6. A Letter from Master Wadesworth, from Madrid, June 8.
1620. page 29. 7. A Letter of Master Doctor Halls sent to Master Wadesworth,
and returned into England with his marginall notes. page 30. 8. A Letter
returning it enclosed to Master Doctor Hall. page 36. 9. A Letter sent to
Master Wadesworth, together with the Examination of his Motives. October. 22.
1620. page 36. 10. The Examination of the Motives in the first Letter. page 39.
The heads of the Motives reduced unto twelve Chapters, answering unto the like
figures in the Margint of the first of Master WADESWORTHS Letters.
Chap. I.
OF the Preamble. The Titles Catholic, Papist, Traitor, Idolater. The
uniformity of Faith in Protestant Religion. page 39.
Chap. II.
Of the contrariety of Sects pretended to be amongst Reformers. Their
differences, how matters ^f Faith. Of each pretending Scripture, and the holy
Ghost. page 44.
Chap. III.
Of the want of a humane external infallible Judge and Interpreter. The
objections answered. First, that Scriptures are often matter of controversy.
Secondly, that they are the Law and Rule. Thirdly, that Princes are no Judges.
Fourthly, nor a whole Council of Reformers. The Popes being the Judge and
Interpreter ouerthrown by reasons; And by his palpable misse-interpreting the
Scriptures in his Decretals. The style of his Court. His Breues about the Oath
of allegiance. p. 50.
Chap. IIII.
Of the state of the Church of England, and whether it may be reconciled with
Rome. Whether the Pope be Antichrist, PAVLO V. VICE-DEO, OUR LORD GOD THE POPE:
the Relation de moderandis titulis, with the issue of it. page 72.
Chap. V.
Of the safenesse to join to the Roman being confessed a true Church by her
Opposites. Master P. Wottons peruersion printed at Venice. The badge of Christ's
sheep. page 82.
Chap. VI.
Of fraud and corruption in alleging Councels, Fathers, and Doctors. The
falsifications imputed to Morney, Bishop Jewel, Master Fox, Tyndals Testament:
Parsons four falsehoods in seven lines. A taste of the for^eries of the Papacy.
In the ancient Popes Epistles, Constantines Donation, Gratian; The Schoolmen
and Breuiaries by the complaint of the Venettan Divines. The Fathers not
untouched. Nor the Hebrew Text. page 91.
Chap. VII.
Of the Armies of evident witnesses for the Romanists. Whence it seems so to
the inexpert Soldier. The censure of the Centurists touching the Doctrine of
the Ancients. Danaeus of Saint Augustines opinion touching Purgatory. An
instance or two of Imposture in wresting Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine. p.
108.
Chap. VIII.
Of the inuisibilitie of the Church said to be an e^asion of Protestants. The
promises made to the Church, and her glorious Titles, how they are verified out
of Saint Augustine; falsely applied to the whole visible Church, or
representative, or the Pope. page 118.
Chap. IX.
Of lack of uniformity in matters of Faith in all ages and places. What
matters of Faith the Church holds uniformly; and so the (...). Of Wicliffe and
Hus, etc. whether they were martyrs. p. 12^.
Chap. X.
Of the original of Reformation in Luther, C^luin, Scotland, England Whether
King Henry the eight were a good head of the Church. Of the Reformers in
France and Holland. The original growth and supporting of the Popes Monarchy
considered. page 122.
Chap. XI.
Of lack of Succession, Bishops, true Ordinations, Orders, Priesthood. The
fabulous Ordination at the Nags-head examined. The Statute 8. Elizabeth. Boners
sleighting the first Parliament, and Doctor Bancrofts answer to Master
Alablaster. The form of Priesthood inquired of. page 139.
Chap. XII.
Of the Conclusion. Master Wadesworths agonies and protestation. The
protestation and resolution of the Author, and conceit of Master Wadesworth,
and his account. page 158.
The Copies of certain Letters, which have passed between Spain and England
in matter of RELIGION.
Salutem in Crucifi^o* To the Worshipful my good friend Mr. WILLIAM BEDE^^*
etc.
Master Bedell,
MY very loving friend After the old plain fashion, I salute you heartily,
without any new fine complements or affected phrases. And by my inquiry,
understanding of this Bearer that after your being at (...)* you had passed to
Con^tantinop^e. and were returned to Saint (...), in (...) and with health, I
was exceeding glad thereof* for I wish you well as to my self: and he telling
me further that to morrow, God willing* he was to depart from hence to imbarke
for England, and offering me to deliver my Letters if I would write unto you, I
could not omit by these hasty scribled lines to signify unto you the
continuance of my sincere love, never to be blotted out of my breast (if you
kill it not with unkindness like Master Joseph Hall) neither by distance of
place, nor success of time, nor difference of Religion. For (contrary to the
slanders raised against all, because of the offenses committed by some) we are
not taught by our Catholic Religion, either to diminish our natural
obligation to our native Country, or to alter our moral affection to our
former friends.

And although for my change becoming Catholic, I did expect of some Reuilers
to be termed rather then proved an Apostata, yet I never looked for such
terms from Master Hall, whom I esteemed either my friend, or a modester man;
whose flanting Epistle I have not answered, because I would not foil my hands
with a Poetical Rayler, more full with froth of Words then substance of
Matter, and of whom according to his beginning, I could not expect any sound
Arguments but vain Flourishes, and so much, I pray, let him know from me if
you please.

Unto your self, my good friend, who do understand better then Master Hall,
what the Doctors in Schools do account Apostasy, and how it is more and
worse then Heresy, I do refer both him and my self, whether I might not
more probably call him Heretic, then he term me at the first dash Apostata:
but I would abstain from such biting Satyrs. And if he, or any other, will
needs fasten upon me such bitter terms, let them first prove that in all
points of faith I have fallen totally from Christian Religion, as did Julian
the Apostata: For so is Apostasy described and differenced from Heresy.
Apostasia est error, h^minis baptizati, contrarius fidei Catholicae ex toto:
and, Haeresis est error pertinax, hominis baptizati, contrarius ^idei
Catholicae ex part. So that he should have showed, first, my errors in
matters of Faith; not any error in other Questions, but in decreed matters of
Faith (as Protestants use to say) necessary unto salvation. Secondly, that
such errors were maintained with obstinate pertin^cy, and pertinacy is, where
such errors are defended against the consent and determination of the Catholic*
Church; and also knowing that the whole Church teaches the contrary to such
opinions, yet will persist in them: and yet further, if there be any doubt, he
must manifest unto me which is the Catholic Church. Thirdly, to make it full
Apostasy, he should have convinced me to have swarued and back-slidden (as
you know the Greek word signifies) like Julian renouncing his baptism, and
forsaken totally all Christian Religion* a horrible imputation, though false,
nor so easily proved as declaymed: But I thank God daily that I am become
Catholic, as all our Ancestors were till of late years, and as the most of
Christendom still be at this present day, with whom I had rather be
mis-called a Papist, a Traitor, an Apostata, or Idolater, or what he will, then
to remain a Protestant with them still For in Protestant Religion I could
never find uniformity of a settled faith, and ^o no quietness of conscience,
especially for three or four years before my coming away, although by
reading, studying, praying, and confe^ring, I did most carefully and diligently
labor to find it among them.

But your contrariety of Sects and opinions of (...), Zwinglians, Caluinists,
Protestants, (...), Cartwrightists, and Brownists, some of them damning each
other; many of them auouching their Positions to be matters of Faith (for if
they made them but School questions of opinion only, they should not so much
have disquieted me) and all these being so contrary, yet every one pretending
Scriptures, and arrogating the Holy Ghost in his favor. And above all (which
did most of all trouble me) about the deciding of these and all other
Controversies which might arise, I could not find among all these Sects any
certain humane external Judge, so infallibly to interpret Scriptures, and by
them and by the assistance of the Holy Ghost so undoubtedly to define questions
of Faith, that I could assure my self and my soul, This Judge is infallible;
and to him thou ought in conscience to obey and yield thy understanding in
all his determinations of Faith, for he cannot err in those points. And note
that I speak now of an external, humane, infallible Judge. For I know the
Holy Ghost is the Divine internal and principal Judge; and the Scriptures be
the Law or Rule by which that humane external Judge must proceed. But the
Holy Scriptures being often the Matter of Controversy and sometime questioned
which be Scriptures, and which be not, they alone of themselves cannot be
Judges: and for the Holy Ghost likewise every one pretending him to be his
Patron, how should ^ certainly know by whom he speaks, or not? For to Men we
must go to learn, and not to Angels, nor to God himself immediately. The
Head of your Church was the Queen (an excellent notable Prince) but ^ Woman,
not to speak, much less to be Judge in the Church; and since a learned King,
like King Henry the eight, who was the first temporal Prince that ever made
himself Ex Regio jure, Head of the Church in spir^tuall matters, a new strange
Doctrine, and therefore justly condemned by Calvin for monstrous. But suppose
he were such a Head, yet you all confess that he may err in matters of
Faith. And so you acknowledge may your Archbishops and Bishops, and your whole
Clergy in their Conuocation-house even making Articles and Decrees: yea,
though a Council of all your Lutherans, Cal^^^nists, Protestants, etc. of
Germany, France, Engiana, etc. were all joined together, and should agree all
(which they never will do) to compound and determine the differences among
themselves, yet by your ordinary Doctrine of most Protestants they mig^t in
such a Council err, and it were possible in their Decrees to be deceived. But
if they may err, how should I know and be sure when and wherein they did or
did not err? for though on the one side ^ posse ad esse non valet semper
consequentia. yet (...) valet, and on the other side (...) potentia, quae
nunquam ducitur in actu^. So that (...) neither in general nor in particular,
in puo^^que (...) private, in head nor members, ioynely nor ^euerally you have
no visible, external, humane, infallible Judge, who cannot err, and to whom I
might have recourse for decision of doubts in matters of faith. ^ pray let
Master Hall tell me, where should I have fixed my foot? for God is my witness,
my soul was like Noah Dou^, a long time houering and desirous to discover
land, but seeing nothing but moveable and troublesome deceivable water, I
could find no quiet center for my conscience, nor any firm foundation for your
faith in Protestant Religion. Wherefore hearing a sound of harmon^e and consent,
that the Catholic Church could not err, and that only in the Catholic
Church, as in Noah's Arc was infallabilitte and possibility of salvation; I
was so occasioned, and I think had important reason, like Noah's Dove, to seek
out, and to enter into this Arc of Noah. Hereupon I was occasioned to doubt,
whether the Church of England were the true Church, or not* For by consent of
all, the true Church cannot err; but the Church of England, head and members,
King, Clergy, and People, as before is said, yea a whole Council of
Protestants by their own grant may err, ergo, no true Church. If no true
Church, no salvation in it; therefore come out of it: but that I was loath to
do. Rather I labored mightily to defend it, both against the Puritanes, and
against the Catholics: But the best arguments I could use against the
Puritanes from the Authority of the Church, and of the ancient Doctors
interpreting Scriptures against them, when they could not answer them, they
would reject them for Popish, and f^ye to their own arrogant spirit, by which
forsooth they must control others This I found on the one side most abs^rd,
and ^o b^eede an Anarchy of confusion: and yet when I come to answer the
Catholic Arguments on ^he other side against Protestants, ^rging the like
Authority and uniformity of the Church, I perceived the most Protestants did
frame euasions, in effect like those of the Puritanes inclining to their
private spirit, and other uncertainties.

Next therefore I applied my self to follow their opinion, who would make the
Church of England and the Church of Rome still to be all one ^n essential
points, and the diff^rences to be accidental. confessing the Church of Rome to
be a true Church though sick, or corrupted, and the Protestants to be derived
from it and reformed: and to this end I labored much to reconcile most of our
particular controversies: But in truth I found such contrar^eties, not only
between Catholics and Protestants, but even among Protestants themselves
that I could never settle my self fully in this opinion of some
reconciliation, which I know many great Scholars in England did favor. For
considering so many opposite great points, for which they did excommunicate and
put to death each other, and making the Pope to be Antichrist, proper or
improper, it could never sink into my brain how these two could be
descendent, or members ^ound nor unfound participant each of other Rather I
concluded, that ^eeing many of the best learned Protestants did grant the
Church or Rome (...) true Church, though (...) And contrarily, not only the
Catholics, but also the Puritanes, Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. did all deny
the Church of England to be a true Church: therefore it would be more safe and
secure to become a Roman Catholic, who have a true Church by consent of both
parties, then to remain a Protestant, who do alone plead their own cause,
having all the other against them: For the testimony of our selves, and our
contraries also, is much more sufficient, and more certain then to justify
our Church, which is, cardo negotij (and herein because the Bearer ^taies now a
day or two longer, I will enlarge my self more then I purposed) and so I would
needs peruse the Original quotations and Texts of the Councels, Fathers, and
Doctors, in the Authors, themselves which were alleged on both parts, to see
if they were truly cited, and according to the meaning of the Authors: a
labor of much labor, and of travel sometime to find the Books, wherein fraud
committed by the Protestants; and that the Catholics had far greater and
better armies of evident witnesses on their sides, much more then the
Protestants; in so much, that the Centurists are feign often to censure and
reject the plain testimonies of those Ancients, as if their new censure were
sufficient to disaucthorize the others ancient sentences. And so I remember
Danaeus in Commentarijs super D. Augustine Enchirid* ad Laurentium. Where Saint
Augustine plainly avouches Purgatory: he reiects Saints Augustines opinion,
saying, hic est naeuus Augustini: but I had rather follow Saint Augustins
opinion, then his ce^sure; for who are they to control the Fathers?

There are indeed some few places in Authors, which prima facie seem to
favor Protestants, as many Heretics allege some texts of Scriptures, whose
sound of words seem to make for their opinions: but being well examined and
interpreted, according to the analogy of faith, and according to many other
places of the same Authors where they do more fully explain their opinions;
so they appear to be wrested, and from the purpose.

In fine, I found my self evidently convinced, both by many Authorities, and
by many Arguments, which now I do not remember all, nor can here repeat those
which I do remember: but only some few arguments I will relate unto you which
prevailed most with me, besides those before mentioned.

First, therefore I could never approve the Protestants Inuisibility of their
Church: For though sometime it may be diminished and obscured, yet the
Catholic Church must ever be visible, set on a hill, and not as light hid
under a Bushel; for how should it enlighte^ and teach her children, if
invisible, or how should Strangers, and Pagans, and others, be converted unto
her? or where should any find the Sacraments, if invisible?

Also the true Church in all places and all ages, ever uniformity and concord
in all matters of Faith, though not in all matters of ceremony or government:
But the Protestants Church has not in all ages, nor in all places such
uniform concord, no not in one age, as is manifest to all the world, and as
Father Parsons proved against Foxes martirs, Wickliffe, Husse, and the res^:
ergo the Protestants Church, not the true Church.

Haereses ad originem reuocasse est refutasse; and so considering Luthers first
rancour against the Dominicans, his disobedience and contempt of his former
Superiors, his vow breaking, and violent courses, even causing rebellion
against the Emperor, whom he reuiles, and other Princes most shamefully,
surely such arrogant disobedience, scisme, and rebellions, had no warrant nor
vocation of God to plant his Church, but of the Devil to begin a scisme and a
sect. So likewise for Calvin, to say nothing of all that D. Bolsecus brings
against him. I do urge only what Master Hooker, Doctor Bancroft, and Sarauia
do prove against him, for his unquietness and ambition, reuoluing the
Commonwealth, and so vniu^tly expelling and depriving the Bishop of Geneua,
and other temporal Lords of their due obedience, and ancient inheritance.
Moreover, I refer you to the stirs, broiles, sedition, and murders which
Knoxe and the Geneua Gospellers caused in Scotland against their lawful
Governors, against their Queen, and against our King, even in his Mothers
belly. Nor will I insist upon the passions which first moved King Henry
violently to divorce himself from his lawful wife, to fall out with the Pope
his friend, to marry the Lady Anne Bullen, and soon after to behead her; to
disinherite Queen Mary, and enable Queen Elizabeth; and presently to
di^inherit Queen Elizabeth, and to restore Queen Mary; to hang Catholics
for traitors, and to burn Protestants for heretics, to destroy Monasteries,
and to pill Churches: were these fit beginnings for the Gospel of Christ? I
pray was this man a good head of Gods Church? for my part, I beseech our Lord
bless me from being a member of such a head, or such a Church. I come to
France and Holland, where you know by the Hugenots and Geuses all Caluinistes,
what civil wars they have raised, how much blood they have shed, what
rebellion, rapine, and desolations they have occasioned principally for their
new Religion, founded in blood like Draecos laws: But I would gladly know
whether you can approve such bloody broiles for Religion, or no? I know
Protestants de facto, do justify the civil wars of France and Holland for
good against their Kings, but I could never understand of them quo lure: if the
Hollanders be Rebels (as they are) why did we support them if they be no
rebels, because they fight for the pretended liberty of their ancient
privileges, and for their new Religion; we see it is an easy matter to
pretend liberties, and also why may not others as as well revolt for their old
Religion: Or I beseech you, why is that accounted treason against the State in
Catholics, which is called reason of State in Protestants? I reduce this
argument to few words, That Church which is founded and begun in ma^ice
disobedience, passion, blood, and rebellion, cannot be the true Church: but it
is evident to the world that the Protestant Churches in Germany, France,
Holland, Geneua, etc. were so founded, and in Geneua and Holland are still
continued in rebellion: ergo, they are not true Churches.

Succession both of true Pastors and of true Doctrine, there is no true Church:
But among Protestants is no succession of true Pastors, (for I omit here to
treat of Doctrine) ergo, no true Church. I prove the minor: where is no
consecration nor ordination of Bishops and Priests, according to the due form
and right intention required necessarily by the Church and ancient Councels,
there is no succession of true Pastors* but among Protestants the said due
form and right intention are not observed, ergo, no succession of true
Pastors. The said due form and right intention are not observed among
Protestants in France, Holland, nor Germany, where they have no Bishops, and
where Lay men do intermeddle in the making of their Ministers. And for
England, whereas the Councels require the ordines minores of Subdeacon and the
rest, to go before Priesthood; your Ministers are made per saltum without ever
being Subdeacons. And whereas the Councels require three Bishops to assist at
the consecration of a Bishop, it is certain that at the Nags-head in
Cheap Side where consecration of your first Bishops was attempted but not
effected (whereabout I remember the controversy you had with one) there was
but one Bishop, and I am sure there was such a matter: and although I know and
have seen the Records themselves, that afterward there was a consecration of
Doctor Parker at Lambeth, and three Bishops named, viz. Miles Couerdall of
Exceter, one Hodgeskin Suffragan of Bedford, and another whose name I have
forgotten, yet it is very doubtful that Couerdall being made Bishop of Exceter
in King Edwards time (when all Councels and Church Canons were little observed)
he was never himself Canonically consecrated; and so if he were no Canonical
Bishop, he could not make another Canonical: and the third unnamed, as I
remember (but am not sure) was only a Bishop Elect, and not consecrated, and
so was not sufficient. But hereof I am sure, that they did consecrate Parker by
virtue of a Breue from the Queen as Head of the Church, who indeed being no
true Head and a Woman, I cannot see how they could make a true consecration
grounded on her authority. Furthermore, making your Ministers you keep not
the right intention; for neither do the Orderer nor the Ordered give nor
receive the Orders as a Sacrament; nor with any intention of Sacrificing. Also
they want the matter and form with which according to the Councels and Canons
of the Church holy Orders should be given; namely for the matter, Priesthood is
given by the delivery of the Patena with bread, and of the Chalice with wine:
Deaconship by the delivery of the book of the Gospels; and Subdeaconship by
the delivery of the Patena alone, and of the Chali^e empty. And in the
substantial form of Priesthood you do fail most of all, which form
consists in these words, Accipe potestatem offerendi sacrificium in Ecclesia
pro viuis and mortuis, which are neither said no^ done by you, and therefore
well may you be called Ministers, as also Lay men are, but you are no Priests.
Wherefore I conclude, wanting Subdeaconship, wanting undoubted Canonical
Bishops, wanting right intention, wanting matter and due form, and deriuing
even that you seem to have from a Woman the Head of your Church, therefore you
have no true Pastors, no true Church. And so to conclude, and not to weary my
self and you too much, being resolved in my understanding, by these and many
other Arguments, that the Church of England was not the true Church, but that
the Church of Rome was and is the only true Church, because it alone is
Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic, having Succession, Unity, and
Visibilitie, in all ages and places; yet what agonies I passed with my will,
here I will ouer-passe. Only I cannot pretermit to tell you, that at last
having also mastered and subdued my will to relent unto my understanding, by
means of prayer, and by God Almighties grace principally, I came to break
through many tentations and impediments, and from a troubled unquiet heart to a
fixed and peaceable tranquillity of mind, for which I do most humbly thank
our sweet Lord and Savior Jesus, before whom with all reverence I do avouch
and swear unto you, as I shall answer it in the dreadful day of judgment
when all hearts shall be discovered, that I forsook Protestant Religion for
very fear of damnation; and became a Catholic with good hope of salvation;
and that in this hope I do continue and increase daily: and that I would not
for all the world become a Protestant again. And for this which here I have
written unto you in great haste, I know there be many Replies and Reioynders
wherewith I could never be satisfied; nor do I desire any further Disputation
about them, but rather to spend the rest of my life in devotion; yet in part to
give you, my dear good friend, some account of my self, having now so good an
occasion and fit a messenger, and by you if you please to render a reason of my
Faith to Master Hall, who in his said printed Epistle in one place desires to
know the motives thereof, I have thus plainly made relation of some points
among many. Whereunto if Master Hall will make any Reply, I do desire it may
be directly and fully to the points and in friendly terms, upon which
condition I do pardon what is past: and of you I know I need not require any
such circumstances. And so most seriously entreating and praying to our
gracious Lord to direct and keep us all and ever in his holy Truth, I commend
you unto his heavenly grace, and my self unto your friendly love. Seuill in
Spain, this first day of April. 1615.

Your very affectionate and true loving friend, JAMES WADDESWORTH.

To the Worshipful his respected friend Master WILLIAM BEDELL, at his house in
Saint Edmundsbury, or at Horinger, be there delivered in Suffolk.
Kind Master BEDELL,
MIne old acquaintance and friend having heard of your health and worldly
welfare, by this Bearer Master Austen your neighbor, and by him having
opportunity to salute you with these few Lines, I could not omit; though some
few years since I wrote you by one who since told me certainly he delivered
my Letters, and that you promised answer, and so you are in my debt, which I
do not claim not urge so much, as I do that in truth and before our Lord I
speak it, you do owe me love in all mutual amity, for the hearty
affectionate love which I have and ever did bear unto you with all sincerity.
For though I love not your Religion (wherein I could never find solid Truth,
nor firm hope of salvation, as now I do being a Catholic, and our Lord is
my witness who shall be my judge) yet indeed I do love your person, and your
ingenuous, honest, good, moral condition, which ever I observed in you: nor
do I desire to have altercations with Master Joseph Hall (especially if he
should proceed as Satyrically as he has begun with me) nor with any other
man, and much less would I have any debate with your self, whom I do esteem
and affect as before I have written: nor would I spend the rest of my life
(which I take to be short, for my lungs are decaying) in any Questions, but
rather in devotion, wherein I do much more desire to be hot and feruorous,
then in Disputations, beseeching our Lord to forgive my coldness, yea my
neglect therein, and to pardon and free me from all sin, and to guide and
keep you in all happiness even as I wish for mine own soul, through the
Redemption of our sweet Savior, and by the inter^ession of his holy Mother,
and all Saints, Amen. Written in haste from Madrid, 14. April. 1619.

Your assured true friend, JAMES WADDESWORTH.
Received I^ne 4. 1619.



To the Worshipful my very good friend Master JAMES WADDESWORTH at Madrid,
deliver this.
Salutem in Christo Jesus.
THe late receipt of your Letters (good Master Waddesworth) did diversely affect
me with joy and shame; and I know not with whether most. I was glad to hear of
you, and your prosperous state, much more to receive a kind Letter from you.
Ashamed, therein to be called upon for debt; who have ever endeavored to live
by that rule of the Apostle; Owe nothing to any man. Yet not so much for that
which you must urge the debt of love, since by that Text it appears, that it can
never be so discharged, as there should not be more behind to pay. And your
self who challenge this of me, do owe me as much or well more. For let me
tell you, I have the advantage of you herein by my profession, for where your
love is to me as to a man, or to an honest man, nor can by your present
persuasion go any further, I can and do love you as my dear brother, and
fellow member in the mystical body of our Lord Jesus Christ. And from this
ground (to his knowledge I do appeal) I do heartily pray for you, and bear
with you, and as the Apostle enioynes, Romans 15. 7. Receive you with a true
brotherly affection. I am not therefore ashamed of this debt, but do rejoice
as much in the owing of it, as in the payment. But my shame grows from the
being behind with you in the office of writing. Wherein yet hear my honest
and true excuse. Neither will I go about to set off one debt with another. For
you may remember how at our parting you promised to write to me touching the
state of Religion there, which if we shall make out a perfect reckoning, I
account to be a good debt still. But this I say, when your Letters of the first
of April, 1615* came to my hands, I purposed to return answer by the same
B^arer, who as he told me, was to return about the Midsommer following. But
I had a sudden and extraordinary iourny which came between, and kept me from
home till after the Commencement, so as that opportunity was lost. Besides,
upon the reading of your Letters, I perceived your intention was to have them
imparted to Doctor Hall, expecting in a sort some reply from him. To him
threfore did I send them. After some months I received this answer, which
though I had once purposed to conceal, as not willing to be the mean of any
exasperation between you, yet now hoping of your wisdom and patience I send
you enclosed, that it may be some evidence of my true excuse. Upon the receipt
of it, I began to frame an answer to the points of your Letter, according to
your desire, full, and in friendly terms. I had well-nigh finished it, when I
was presented to this Benefice, and thereby entered into a world of
distractions. These, together with the labor of writing it over, and
uncertainty of safe conueighing my Letters to you, did make me procrastinate
my payment, till now to my shame you should need to demand it. And that I may
by the more shaming my self obtain a more easy penance from you; I confess
to you, I was sometime half in the mind (having especially differred it so
long) to suppress it altogether. First, out of mine own natural disposition,
who have ever abhorred contention: and whereas in matters of Religion there
ought to be the fairest wars, I could never yet meet with any of that side of
so patient a mind, but by opposition he would be unsettled. For your self,
though I knew your former moderate temper, and (as I remember I wrote to Doctor
Hall) believed you in that which you protest, that out of conscience you were
such as you profess; yet me thought I perceived by your quick manner to him,
and some passages in the conclusion of your Letter, you were rather desirous to
enjoy the quiet possession of your own opinion, then come to any fur^her
disputation whose is the right. And in truth the time of that trial had been
proper, before your departure: nor you had to^ far engaged your self; and
were to justify by your constancy, the wisdom of your change. Besides,
since the sum of the error of that side, as I have ever conceived it, is
believing rather too much, then failing in any point necessary to salvation,
that notable place of the Apostle, Romans 14. 1. came to my mind, especially
after that I had once occasion to preach of it, where he forbids controversies
of disputations with those that are infirm in faith. Who art thou (says he)
that iudgest another man's servant? he stands or falls to his own Master.
Why should I grieve you, and perhaps make my friend mine enemy (as Saint Paul
the Galathians) by saying the truth. The world is full enough of contentious
writings, which as by your letter appears you had seen ere ye resolved. If
those had not satisfied you, what could I hope to add to them? These things
moved me; but as you say, they did not yet satisfy me. For all men are
interessed in the defense of truth, how much more he that is called to be a
Preacher of it? All Christians are admonished by Saint Jude, to fight for the
faith once given to the Saints; how much more those that are leaders in this
warfare: How could I say I loved our Lord Jesus Christ, if his honor being
questioned I should be silent? How could I approve to mine own soul that I
loved you, if I sufered you to enjoy your own error, suppose not damnable.
Besides that, you and perhaps others also might be confirmed in it, perhaps
interpreting my silence for a confession that your Motives were unanswerable.
But therein I was not only resolved self to the contrary, but thought it so
easy to resolve any indifferent mind, as me thought it was more shame not to
have done it at the first, then praise to do it at the last. As for the
success of my endeavor, I was to leave it to God. Many and secret are the
ways of his Providence, which serves it self sometimes even of our errors,
to the safer conduct of us to our final happiness. Some I had known, and
heard of more, who being at first carried away with the shows of Unity, Order,
Succession, Infallability; when they found them empty of Truth, and the
cloakes of Pride, ambition, coue^ousnesse, joined with an obstinacy to defend
all corruptions how palpable so ever, by finding the difference of these Hulles
from their Fathers Table, had with the prodigal Son returned home again. To
conclude, I accounted my self still in debt, and was I confess to you
unwilling to die in it; and sometimes vowed to God, in the midst of my
troubles, if I might once see an end of them, to endeavor to discharge it. And
now having by his mercy not only attained that, but a new occasion presented
me presently thereupon, by your calling for satisfaction to pay it, and means
offered me to send it safely: I take this motion to proceed from God, and do
humbly desire his Majesty to turn it to good. It remains therefore, good
Master Wadesworth, that I do entreat your pardon of that slacknesse that is
past, and gentleness to take it as I shall be able to pay it. My employments
both ordinary and extraordinary are many: the bulk of it is to great to convey
in one Letter, consisting of sundry sheets of paper; and at this present there
lies an extraordinary task upon me, so as I cannot presently writ it out. I
do therefore no more now but acknowledge the debt, and promise speedy payment.
Unless I shall add this also, that I do undertake to pay interest for the
forbearance; and according as I shall understand by Master Austen shall be
fittest, and safest, to send it in parts, or all at once. To the conclusion of
your last Letter, wherein you profess your desire to spend the rest of your
life rather in the heat of devotion, then of disputation, desiring pardon of
coldenesse that way, and of all other your sins, and that it would please God
to guide and keep me in all happiness as your self, through the redemption
of our sweet Savior, and by the intercession of his holy mother and all
Saints. I do most thankefully and willingly subscribe Amen: returning unto you
from my heart your own best wishes. Neither is it my purpose to call into
question the soliditie of truth, or firmness of the hope of salvation, which
you find in your present way. This only I say. Even for us also has Christ
died, and for our redemption has he shed his blood. Sinners indeed we are,
but of his flock, and among his poor sheep are we numbered.
Et pro nobis Christus mortuus est, and pro nostra Redemptione sanguinem suum
fudit. Peccatores quidem, sed de ipsius grege sumus, and inter eius ouiculas
numeramur: This is my tenet. And if the doctrine of the holy Bible do contain
solid truth, and believing in the name of the Son of God do give firm hope of
salvation, according to Gods own record, 1 John 5. 10. 11. 12. we are persuaded
we have both. I will add this more; We know that we are translated from death
to life, because we love our brethren. With this Oil in our Lamps, which we
desire may be always in store in our Vessels also our hearts, we attend the
coming of the Bridegroom; and say cheerfully, Even so come Lord Jesus.
Etiam veni Domine Jesus. To whose gracious protection I do most heartily commit
you, and do rest,

Your assured friend and loving Brother, W. BEDELL.
Horningesherth this fifth of August 1619.
To the Worshipful Master WILLIAM BEDELL at Horningesherth near Saint
Edmundsbury in Suffolk, these.
Salutem in Crucifix^.
WORTHY SIR,
I Was exceeding glad to perceive by your kind, modest, and discreet Letters
of 5. of August last, that you are still permanent in your own good nature, and
constant in your love to me: not like Master Joseph Hall, neither bitterly
reuiling nor flourishing impertinently. Unto whom I pray you return* his
scoffing railing Letter, with these few marginall noates. I pray God forgive
him, and make him a more humbler and meeker man. And I for my part do freely
pardon all his foul terms against me. And though in gratitude and justice I
am bound and so do love and respect you more then him, for your greater
courtesy to me, and for your better value in your self; yet even him I can and
do and am bound to love not only as an enemy, or a creature of God, or as I
do you for an honest, moral, good, discreet man, but even further and beyond
that which you seem to understand that we cannot by our doctrine proceed in
love: viz. as men having souls for whom our Savior has died; and so as
possible members though indeed not actual branches of his mystical body: yea
for such as may come to be ingrafted and bear fruit in him, when we may be
withered, cut off, or fallen away. As for your serious Apology and excuse for
not answering my first Letters all this while, I do easily admit it, and
assure my self that all the circumstances, impediments, and occasions were
such, as you affirm: nor did I expect, nor urge, in my first nor second
Letters any answer about Controversies in Religion (for I ever said we could
say nothing of substance which before had not been said) but only gave you by
Masters Hals occasion some few reasons of my faith, wherein still I protest I
had rather be devout then be troubled to dispute, not for fear or doubt, but
because I am so fully resolved in my self, and do think it a very superfluous
labor toties and melius ab alijs actum agere. So that I desired rather answer
of courtesy then of controversy, which now by Master Astons means I received,
and do much esteem it, and heartily thank you for it. Nevertheless, when
your Reply unto my plain and few reasons come, I will for your sake both read
them over, and according to my little health, less leisure, and my poor
ability (which is least of all) return you some such short reioynder as it
shall please almighty God to enable me, being glad to perceive by your last
that you do subscribe to our Intercession by our blessed Lady, and other holy
Saints; which also I hope and wish you would fully extend to our Invocation of
Saints as Intercessors, not as Redeemers, for that were Blaspemie indeed and
Idolatry; from which our sweet Savior deliver us, and ever keep you my good
dear friend, as I desire.

Madrid, in haste, 26. October. 1619. JAMES WADDESWORTH.

To the worshipful my very good friend M. JAMES WADDESWORTH, at Madrid,
deliver this.
Salutem in Christo Jesus.
YOur Letters of the 26. of October (beloved Master Waddesworth) were long upon
the way and came not to my hands till the 23. of May. In them I received your
courteous acceptance of my excuse for my former silence, and censure of Doctor
Hall Letter with the profession of your love to me and him, further then I
accounted you could by your Doctrine proceed, viz. as redeemed by Christ, and
possible members of his mystical body. Truly Sir, I will not change words
with you here abouts, but I account still to be an honest man, restrains from
that, to be redeemed by our Savior, since that is as large as humane nature,
this is given to fewer, of whom a man may say as our Lord does of one in the
Gospel, that they are not far from the Kingdom of God. Howsoever, I have
still my intention that we out of our profession may love you better then you
can us: since it is more to be an actual, then a possible member of Christ;
and the Communion of Saints is a staighter bond, then Redemption by Christ, and
possibility of being ingrafted and bearing fruit in his mystical body. And I
would to Christ that of all other Controversies this were the vehementest
between us, which should love each other most. Wherein although I would strive
and do my best to have the better, yet see how equally I would contend. For
both I would acknowledge freely, my self far short of that which I may by my
profession do in this kind, and persuade my self better of your secret
affection to us, then you may by your pofession express. I will not easily
believe that you can find in your heart to count that man a Dog, and out of
the Church, and in state of damnation, that steadfastly believes in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by him in the B. Trinity; that confesses all the Doctrine
of holy Scriptures, the sum whereof is in the Creed; that lastly, with a
charitable affection embraces all that hold this faith, throughout the world,
yea even those that hate and persecute him to the death. Wherein I forbear for
the present to enlarge, because I speak more of it in my answer to your first
Letters; which Master Aston gives me hope that himself ere long will consigne
into your hands. Now by his direction, I send you only advice of the receipt
of your last, with hearty thanks for them, desirous not to run further in
arrerages with you in this office of writing. This one thing I add, that where
you write you are glad I do subscribe to your intercession by the Saints,
wishing me fully to extend it to invocation of Saints as Intercessors, though
not as Redeemers; I should be very glad if I could as well content you in all
other points, as that one: coming thus prepared in all controversies with you,
and all men, to yield whatsoever I may, saving the truth. But as I conceive
it, there is great odds between these two. To desire God to grant us this or
that good thing by the intercession of the Saints; and, To use invocation of
themselves. The one supposes only that the Saints in glory generally knowing
the warfare of those on earth, are careful for them, and omit not this act of
never failing charity to pray for them. These prayers it hopes, and desires of
God may be helpefull to us, by the only merit of our Lord Jesus Christ; in the
same sort as those of the Saints wheresoever on earth; as 2 Cor. 1. 10. 11.
Ephesians. 6. 1. Philem. ver. 22. The other, that the Saints departed know our
wants, and states in particular, and hear our prayers, and by consequent know
our hearts: which is flatly contrary to the Scriptures 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. Esaias
63. 16. To omit now that you do not only desire them to pray for you, but
ask at their hands grace and glory, trust in them, vow to them, swear by
them, offer and receive the sacrifice of the New Testament to their honor and
glory, and desire it may be accepted by their patronage. Wherefore as I am glad
to perceive that you do reuerse those blasphemies indeed, Salua me Saluatrix;
Redime me Redemptrix; and will not subscribe to those words of Bellarmine, non
erit absurdum si sancti viri redemptores nostri aliquo modo, id est secundum
aliquid, non simpliciter; and largo modo; non in rigore verborum esse dicantur:
and again, cur inepte dicantur Sancti viri aliquo modo passionibus suis
delicta nostra posse redimere? so I hope and wish you would do the like for
calling upon them, and presenting their merits unto God; and as ye may more
safely and sweetly speak unto our Jesus, who is our Advocate with the Father,
entered into the Holy of Holies to appear before God for us. To his gracious
protection I commit you, and do rest

Horningshearth this 15. of June, 1620. Your assured friend and loving Brother
W. BEDELL.

To the worshipful his much respected friend Master WILLIAM BEDELL at
Horningshearth by Saint Edmundsbury in Suffolk, these.
My very good Friend
MAster BEDELL, my last unto you was by a Gentleman who went from hence about
six months since; but I have understood he fell sick at Paris, by the way,
and so was first hindered there in his journey, and afterward again at
Brussels fell to a relapse, which detained him so long, that although now very
lately I hear he is recovered and gone forward into England, yet in so long
delays and so often sickenesses, I know not whether he have lost or forgotten
my former Letters: wherefore out of this consideration, and by the opportunity
of this Bringer, and by the true hearty affection which I bear you, being
desirous to signify unto you the continuance of my sincere love, I could not
pretermit this so good an occasion, though hereby I have nothing else to say,
nor entreat, but if we have ^arres, yet our dissension may be rather in the
matter and cases, then betwixt our persons, as discreet Lawyers use to plead
vehemently each for his Clyents justice, and yet remain betwixt themselves
without breach of amity, and abstaining from opprobrious injury; wherein I
have great confidence that you will proceed both more moderately in all the
circumstance, and to better purpose in the substance then Master Joseph Hall,
unto whose Letter directed to you, and by you sent unto me, I wrote certain
Marginall Notes only, and so returned the same by the above named Gentleman,
whereof also (if it return to your hands) I would entreat you to send me a
Copy both of his Text and my Gloss, for then being in haste I remained with
neither. Our Lord keep you, and guide us all to his truth, and to heaven.

Madrid, 8. June, 1620. JAMES WADDESWORTH.

The Letter of Master D. HALL, mentioned in the formerwith Master WADDESWORTHS
marginall notes.
GOod Master Bedell, what a sorry crabbe has Master Waddesworth at last sent
us from Civil? I pity the I pray see within how short a compass he proves
himself a Poetical rai^er by his Epithets, not only against me, but ^euiling
a whole Nation, and the Religion of the best part of all Christendom.
impotent malice of the man; sure that hot Region, and I pray see within how
short a compass he proves himself a Poetical rai^er by his Epithets, not
only against me, but ^euiling a whole Nation, and the Religion of the best
part of all Christendom.
sulphurous Religion are guilty of this his choler. For ought I see he is not
only turned Papist but Spaniard too. Ibi vi^itur ambitiosa paupertate: The
great man would not foil his fingers (for that is his word) with such an
adversary as my self; he should have found this conflict his foyling
indeed; but he scorns the match; and what wonder if he that has all this
while This m^cke if it were true yet would I rejoice in ^t, not only to ^it on
his stairs, but to m^ke clean his shoe^s.
sat on Father Creswels stairs, scorn the unworthiness of him whom an
English University scorned not to set in the chair of Divinity? But whence
is this my contempt? I see but two vices to clear my self of; Poetry and I
termed him a Poetical Ra^ler, not accusing nor (...) him for a Poet (...)
taxing him for raising poe^^cally using the word as sometimes it is in the
worst sense when it is abused: neither condemning Poetry nor ^o^rouing him for
a Poet* out a po^ticall Ra^^er: as he does ^^^selfe by that Epistle (...)
better Letter.
Railing; of the latter you shall acquit me if you will but read that my
poor Epistle which he sleights thus: Let your eyes judge whether ever any
thing could be written more mildely, more modestly, more lovingly. Of the
former I must acquit my self; Cuius vnum est sed magnum vitium Poesis: what
were I the worse if I were still a lover of those studies? If he could have had
leisure to tend upon any thing besides that Fathers Packets, he might have
seen most of the renowned and holy Fathers of the Church eminent in that
profession for which I am scornd; amongst many others Tertullian, Lactantius,
Nazianzen, Prudentius, Fulgentius, Apollinarius, Nonnus, Hilarious, Prosper, and
now in the vpshot I willingly pardon (...) is pe^^icall railing and false
^pithites, for that one true word (...) Bernard to be devout.
devout Bernard, and why should their honor be my disgrace? But the truth is,
these were the recreations of my minority; nun^ oblita mihi. And if Poetry
were of the deadly sins of their Casuists, I could smart for it in my (...):
Is this a fit scandal to ^ake up from so far? What my proficiencie has
been in serious studies, if the University and Church has pleased to
testify: what need I stand at the mercy of Pardon for S. Bernards sake.
a fugitive. But if any of A brave man a^ arms, etc.
his Masters should undertake me in the cause of God, he should find I had
studied prose. As for these vain flourishes of mine, if he had not taken a
veny in them, and found it smart, he had not struck again so Pardon for S.
Bernards sake.
churlishly? Was it my Letter that is accused of Poetry? there is neither
number, nor ryme, I would there were not.
nor fiction in it: Would the great School man have had me to have packt up a
Letter of syllogismes? which of the Fathers (whose high steps I have desired
to tread in) have given that example? what were to be expected of a Monitorie
Epistle which intended only the occasion if he had pleased of a future
discourse? We I slanders Satis pro imperio.
list not learn to write Letters from beyond the Pyrenees. Howsoever, I am not
sorry that his scorn has cast him upon an adversary more able to convince
him; I am allowed only a looker on; therefore I will neither ward nor strike;
his hands are too full of you: my only wish is, that you could bear him sound
again; whereof I fear there it little hope. There was never adversary that
gave more advantage: he might have served in th^se Coleworts nearer home. I
profess I do heartily This ap^eares by your railing on him, as he that
justified himself from swearing, by ^^wd swearing By God he did not (...).
pity him; and so if it please you let him know from me. What Apostacy
(which is the only hard word I can be charged with) This were in pro^e one
a^surdi^y by a greater and to vndert^ be that some one Text of Scripture is
false or f^ged because all the whole Bible is (...) Or having called one a Jew
or Bas^ard etc. to make him amends by ^elling him all his kindred were such. But
that Book^ and Chapter is indeed ^ittifully professed: And by it and (...)
nuating here (...) offense of ^oo much chari^e may be easily (...) the ^^stance
of your proficiencie on (...).
impute to the Roman Church I have professed to the world in the first Chapter
of my Roma Irreconciliabilis: if I offend not in too much charity, there is no
fear: say what you will for me, I have done, and will only pray for him that
answers me with contempt: farewell, and commend me to Master Sotheby, and your
other loving and reverend Society; and know me ever,

Your truly loving friend and fellow labourer, IOS. HALL.
Waltam. Ian, 10. 1615. Good Master Bedell, this Letter has lien thus long by
me for want of carriage. I now hear you are settled at Horningsherth. whereby I
wish you much joy. I am appointed to attend the Ambassador into France, whither
I pray you follow me with your prayers.

May 15.


To my Reverend and worthy friend Master Doctor HALL, at Waltham deliver this.
SAlutem in Christo. Good Master Doctor, this Letter of yours since my receipt
of it, has been a traveler, further then you or I; which being some months
since returned into England, I return to you that it may relate what
entertainment it has found in foreign parts. It is now a year and more that
I received a Letter from Master Waddesworth, challenging an old debt of me, an
answer to his Letters which occasioned this of yours. I wrote back, and among
other things enclosed this your Letter, which he has censured as you see. His
answer by reason of the sickness of the Gentleman that brought it, first at
Paris, and after at Bruxels came not to me till the latter end of May, and now
lately another I received from him, wherein he desires a Copy both of your
Text and his Gloss, as he calls it, as having reserved none for haste. I have
not yet sent him my answer to his Motives which has long layen by me for
lack of leisure to copy it out, and means safely to convey it, being well
toward a quire of Paper. My ancient fault, tediousness. But the Gentleman
that brought me his former Letter, has undertaken ere long to consigne it into
his hands. Therein I endeavor to use him with the best respect I can devise,
only oppugning the Papacy and Court of Rome. Now Sir, that which I would
entreat of you, is this: You know the Precept of the Apostle touching them
that are fallen, lend me your hand to set him in joint again. And be pleased
not only not to reflect upon the weakness of his Gloss, but not so much as
upon the strength of his stomach ^ though that be also weakness, as Saint
Augustine well calls it, (...)
infirmitas animositatis Writ a letter to him in the Character (...) Which
shall either go with mine, or be sent shortly after. Who can tell what God may
work? Surely, at least we shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Although
if all be true that I hear, it is not to be despaired but he may be delivered
out of the snare of error, the rather because he has not that reward or
contentment which he expected. He lives now at Madrid with the Persian
Ambassador Sir Robert Sherly, and has good maintenance from him, being as his
Steward, or Agent. The kind usage of his ancient friends, may perhaps bring
him in love with his country again, etc. This for that business. Now. etc.

October 2* 1620.
To the worshipful my very good friend Master JAMES WADDESWORTH at Madrid
deliver this.
Salutem in Christo Jesus.
SIr, I received by Master Fiston your letters of the eight of June, and as I
hope ere this time you understand, the former which I mention in them: to which
I wrote in answer, and delivered the same to Master Aston the 15. of the same
Month. Doctor Hals letter with your marginall Notes which in your last you
require, I send you herein enclosed. Though if I may persuade or entreat you
both, neither should the Text nor Gloss make you multiply any more words
thereabout. Upon the receipt of your Letter I spoke with Master Aston, who told
me that he held his resolution for Spain, whereupon I resolved also to send by
him mine answer to your first: as thinking it better to do it more safely,
though a a little later, then sooner, with less safety. And here Sir at
length you have it. Wherein as to my moderation for the manner, I hope you
shall perceive that setting aside our difference in opinion, I am the same to
you that I was when we were either Scholars together in Emmanuell College, or
Ministers in Suffolk. For the substance, I do endeavor still to write to the
purpose, omitting nothing material in your Letters. If sometimes I seem
ouerlong, and perhaps to digress somewhat from the principal point more then
was necessary, I hope you will pardon it, since you required a full answer, and
the delay it self had need to bring you some interest for the forbearance.
And because you mention the vehemency of discreet Lawyers (although me
thinks we are rather the Clients themselves, that contend, since our faith is
our own and our best freehold) let me entreat of you this ingenuitie) which I
protest in the sight of God I bring my self.) Let us not make head against
evident reason, for our own credit, or fashion, and factions sake, as Lawyers
sometimes are wont. Neither let us think we loose the victory, when truth
ouercomes. We shall have part of it rather, and the better part, since error
the common enemy to us both, is to us more dangerous. For truth is secure and
impregnable; we, if our Error be not conquered, must remain servants to
corruption. It is the first praise, says Saint Augustine, to hold the true
opinion, the next to forsake the false. And surely that is no hard masterie to
do, when both are set before us, if we will not be either retchlesse, or
obstinate. From both which our Lord of his mercy evermore help us, and bring
us to his ever lasting Kingdom. Amen.

Horningshearth, Octo. 22. 1620. Your very loving Brother W. BEDELL.

THE COPIES OF CERTAIN LETTERS, etc.
Salutem in Christo Jesus.
CHAP. I.
Of the Preamble. The titles Catholic, Papist, Traitor, Idolater.
SIr, I do first return you hearty thanks, for the truth and constancy of
your love, and those best effects of it, your wishing me as well as to your
self, and rejoicing in my safe return out of Italy. For indeed further I was
not: though reported to have been both at Constantinople and Jerusalem, by
reason of the neerness^ of my name to one Master William Bidulph, the Minister
of our Merchants at Aleppo, who visited both those places.

I thank you also, that your ancient love toward me, has (to use that word
of the Apostle) now flourished again, in that after so many years, you have
found opportunity to accomplish your promise of writing to me: though not as
ye undertook of the state of Religion there, yet which I confess I no less
desired, the Motives of the forsaking that you had professed here. Whereof
since it has pleased you, as ye write, now to give me an account, and by me
to Master Doctor Hall, with some expectation also as it appears of reply from
one of us, I will use the liberty which you give me, and as directly as I can
for the matter, and in Christian terms for the manner, show you mine opinion
of them, wherein I shall endeavor to observe that Precept of the Apostle;
(...), whether it be to be interpreted, loving sincerely, or seeking truth
lovingly. Neither soothing untruth for the dearnesse of your person, nor
breaking charity for diversity of opinion. With this entrance, my loving
friend, and if you refuse not that old Catholic name, my dear brother, I come
to your Letter. Wherein though I might well let pass that part which concerns
your quarrel with Master Doctor Hall, with aetatem habet; yet thus much out of
the common presumption of charity, which thinks not evil, give me leave to
say for him, I am verily persuaded he never meant to charge you with Apostasy
in so horrible a sense as you count, viz. a total falling from Christian
Religion, like that of Julian, an obstinate pertinacy ^n denying the principles
of the Faith necessary to salvation, or a renouncing your Baptismee The term
Apostasy, as you know, does not always sound so hainously. A Monk forsaking
his Order, or a Clerk his habit, is in the Decretals styled an Apostata.
Granatensis says not untruly, that every deadly sin is a kind of Apostasy.
The Apostle Saint Paul speaking of Antichrists times, says, there must come an
Apostasy before Christ's second coming: and how this shall be he shows
elsewhere. Men shall give heed to spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils,
and such as speak falsehood in hypocrisie^ Whereby it seems that Antichrist
himself shall not professedly renounce Christ and his Baptism. His Kingdom
is a mystery of iniquity; a revolt therefore, not from the outward
profession, but inward sincerity and power of the Gospel. This kind of
Apostasy might be that which Master Hall was sorry to find in you, whom he
thought fallen from the truth, though not in the principles of Christian
doctrine, yet in sundry conclusions which the reformed Churches truly out of
them maintain. He remembered our common education in the same College, our
common oath against Popery, our common calling to the same sacred function of
the Ministry, he could not imagine upon what reasons you should reuerse these
beginnings. And certainly, how weighty and sufficient soever they be, we are
not taught by our Catholic religion to revenge our selves, and render reproach
for reproach with personal terms; much less to debase and auile the excellent
gifts of God, as is Po^sie, the honor of David and Salom^n, by the testimony
of the holy Ghost himself. These courses are forbidden us when we are reiled
upon, and calumniated; how much more when as Saint Peter speaks, we are
beaten for our faults; as it falls out in your case, if these motives of yours
be weak and insufficient; which we shall anon consider.

You say, you are become Catholic. Were you not then so before? The Creed
whereinto you were baptized, is it not the Catholic faith? The conclusion
^ertes of Athanasius Creed, which is but a declaration thereof, says, Haec est
fides Catholica. This is the Ca^holike (...).
Or is not he a Catholic that holds the Catholic faith? That which was once
answered, touching the present Church of England, to one in a Stationers shop
in Venice, that would needs know what was the difference betwixt us and the
Catholics. It was told him none: for we accounted our selves good Catholics.
When he unwilling to be put of in his answer, for lack of due form in his
question, pressed to know what was the difference betwixt us and them there. He
was a swered, This; that we believed the Catholic faith conta^ned in the
Creed, but did not believe the thirteenth Ar^^cle which the Pope had put to it.
When he knew not of any such Article; the Extrauagant of Pope Boniface was
brought, where he defines^^ to be altogether of necessity to salvation, to
every humane creature to be under the Bishop of Rome. This thirteenth Article,
of the thirteenth Apostle, good Master Wadesworth, it seems you have learned,
and to are become, as some now speak and write Catholic Roman. That is in
true interpretation Vniuersall-particular^ which because they cannot be
equalled, the one ^estraining and cutting off from the other, take heed that by
streightning your faith to Rome, you have not altered it, and by becoming
Roman, left off to be Catholic.

Thus, if you say, our ancestors were all till of late years. Excuse me Sir,
whether you call our ancestors the first Christian Inhabitants of this I Will, or
the ancient Christians of the Primitive Church; neither those, nor these were
Roman-Catholikes; Namely, the Fathers of the African Council, and amongst
these Saint Augustine: and therefore by Pope Boniface his sentence be
undoubtedly damned for taking upon them, by the Devils instinct (if we believe
another (...).
Pope Boniface) to wax proud against the Church of Rome. Such Catholics, if
ye mean the most of Christendom be at this day. Beware of putting your self
upon that issue. Believe me, either ye must frame a new Cosmography, yes, a
new world, or else ye are gone if it come to most voices in Christendom.
Touching the names of Papist, Traitor, Idolater. The first is no mis-calling
you, as comprizing the very character that difference^h you from all other
Catholics. Neither by our Rhemists advice should you be ashamed of it, since to
be a Papist, (...)
by their interpretation is nothing else, but to be a Christian man, a child
of the Church, and subject to Christ's V^car. The wise State of Venice have a
little different notion of their Papaelines, excluding from sundry their
consultations under that name, such of the Nobility as are obliged to the Pope
by Ecclesiastical promotions. True it is that they apply it also to Papalines
in faction, such as are superstitiously devoted to the maintaining of all the
Popes usurped authority; in which sense shope you are no Papist.

A Traitor I am assured M^ster Doctor Hall will never call you, unless he
know that you have drunk so deep of the Cup of error, as to believe the Pope
^y depose your Prince; that you are not bound to obey him being so deposed;
that in that case, it is lawful, yea meritorious to kill him; that they are
Mar^yrs that are executed (...) plotting to blow him up with Gunpowder, though
vndeposed; hoping it would be no less agreeable to hi^ Holiness, then (that
which he desired) to have kep^ him from coming to the Crown at first. If you
be thus perfectly a Papist, not only we here in England, but I believe his
Catholic Majesty, under whose obedience now ye live, whenever he should be
that Prince, would account you a Traitor, and punish you accordingly. I hope
you are far from these furies.

For Idolatry, if to give divine honor to creatures, deserve that name,
consider how you can defend or excuse those prayers to the Blessed Virgin, Tu
no^ ab ^oste protege. and ^or a mortis suscipe. And to the Cross, Augepus
^^stitiam re^sque dona veniam: I omit to speak of the Popes Omnipotency. I
hope also you keep your self from this Idolatry.

In Protestant religion, you say, you coui^ never ^^nae V^^formitie of a
settled Faith. How so? when you had that same (...)
one only immovable and vnreforma^ie ^nie of ^aith as Tertullian calls it,
every Lords day recited ^n your ^earing, if not by your mouth. I mean the
Creea, of which Irenaeus (...).
says, that he which is able to say much of (...) exceeds it not, nor he
that less (...). which Saint Augustine calls the rule common to great and
(...); which mig^^ well enough have settled and quieted (...) conscience.
wh^lest you labored to find the truth in all doubtful questions. Whereto how
carefully and diligently you used the means of reading, studying, and praying
for three or four years, God and your conscience best know. For conferring, I
cannot yield you any testimony, notwithstanding our familiarity, and that we
were not many miles asunder, and you were also privy, that I had to do in
these controversies with some of that side, and saw some sample of the work. I
come now to your motives.

CHAP. II.
Of the Contrariety of Sects pretanded to be amongst Reformers.
IN the front whereof is the comm^on exception, to our contrar^etie of sects
and opinions, etc. First, what are all these to the Church of England, which
follows none but Christ? Then, if it be a fault of the reformed Churches,
that there is strife and division amongst them, as who will justify it; yet
let it find pardon, if not for Corinths sake, 1. Cor. 3. 3. Socrat. 1. 4. c.
2^.
and the Prim^tiue Churches what time Themistius was feign to excuse it with an
Oration to Valens the Emperor, yet even for Romes: where also you cannot but
know, that in very many and most important points, Divines hold one thing and
Canonists another; The French, and lately also the Venetian Divines, resist to
his face, him, that others say no man may be so hardy as to ask, Domine cur
ita facus? though he should draw with him innumerable souls to hell. Your
Spanish Prelates and Divines, would never acknowledge in the Council of Trent
(the mysteries whereof are come out at last) that Episcopal authority was
derived from him, nor consent to that circum^enting clause Proponentibus
Legatis, etc. and were strong that residence is, de iure diuino; howsoever they
were ouerruled by the Italian faction: whether they have yet changed their
minds, you can better tell then I. The old faction of the Thomists and
Scotists is yet a foot, as I perceive by Rada his Controversies. In the
beginning whereof the Censor of the Book has this sentence. Qua prop^er
audiendi nullatonus sunt, qui has Theologicas contentiones e medio omnino
expl^dendas arbitrantur. There is another lately risen between the Dominicans
and the Jesuits; both in as great matters, and pursued with as great
vehemency, as those of the reformed Churches, excepting only a few fiery
spirits of Saxony. But in the Church of England, as reformation was not brought
in by any one man, but by the joint consent of the whole, so it is yet
continued. Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists, are not known among us, save by
hearesay. Whereof it is some sign, that your self do not know them well, as
it seems, when you distinguish them from Protestants. A name first given to
the Princes and free Cities of Germany, that sought reformation in the Diet at
Spire, Anno 1529. and from them passed to us and other Countries where it was
effected. Who are then Protestants, if the Lutherans and Zuinglians be not?
For of both these there were in that Diet; the Heluetians and parts adjoining
of Germany, having been reformed at home, first by the preaching of Zuinglius;
the Saxons, and the remnant of Luther. Who much about one time and without any
correspondence, began to oppose the Popes Indulgences, and differed not for
ought that ever I could yet understand, save in the manner of Christ's presence
in the Eucharist. Yea, in that also taught uniformly, that the body and blood
of our Savior are present; not to the Elements, but to the receiver, in the
use, and without Transubstantiation. As for those whom you call Caluinists; and
the rest Puritanes, Cartwrightists, and Brownists, tell me in good sooth,
Master Wadesworth, how do they differ from the reformed Churches in Helueti^,
or the Church of England, save in the matter of government only? See th^n all
this contrariety of Sects meetly well reconclled. For Puritanes,
Cartwrightists, and Brownists, are in substance of Doctrine all one with
Caluinists, and these with Zwinglians, who were of the first Protestants, and
differ little or nothing from those whom ye call Lutherans. Whereof this may
be a sensible proof, that commonly their Adversaries and your self after
call them by the same name, the Protestant Churches in Germany, France,
Holland, and Geneua. And Pope Leo the tenth in his condemnatorie Bull; and
likewise Charles the fifth in his Imperial Edict, do reflect wholly upon
Luther and his followers, without any mention of the other at all. To conclude
this matter; as it is undoubtedly a sign of a good mind to dislike
contention, and diversities of opinions, and it may have pardon to apprehend
sometimes more then there is indeed; like to the melancholic old man in the
Comedy, whose suspicion makes him to multiply on this manner. Plaut. Aulular.
Qui mihi intromisisti in aedes quingentos coquos, so to muster up empty
names, without any real difference, as Pur^tans, Cartwrightists, Brownists; to
make differences in a few opinions about Government or Sacraments, Sects and
contrarieties, has not the character of ingenuous and sincere dealing, which
from you Master Waddesworth, I did and do expect.

But some of these damn each other, auouching their Positions to be matters of
Faith, not School questions of opinion only. Here indeed there is fault on all
sides in this Age, that we cannot be content with the bounds which the ancient
Church has set, but every private opinion must be straight-wayes an Article of
Faith. Every decision of a Pope, every Decree of a Council. And then as men
are easily enamored of their own conceits, and as Gerson wisely applies that
of the Poet, Qui amant sibi somnia fingunt; as if the very marrow of Religion
consisted in those points, those that think otherwise are Heretics, and in
state of damnation. The Roman faction goes further, to Fire and Faggot, and all
exquisite torments, as if those things that make against the Papacy, were more
severely to be punished then the blasphemies of the Jews, or Mahumetisme it
self. I do not excuse the reformers of this bitterness, wherein after your
departure out of England, my namelesse Adversary that undertook Master
Alablasters quarrel, giving me over in three of his demands, ran riot in the
first, about this point of opposition among our selves, and raked together all
the vehement speeches of Luther, and some of his followers, against those whom
they call the Sacramentaries. Why, who will undertake to defend Lutbers
speeches, or all that falls from contentious pens? But even out of those
testimonies, which himself brings for the worst that he could on the
contrary part; it appears, this eagrenesse is not mutual. And in truth, both
we in England, and the Helue^ians, and French, do maintain a brotherly
affection toward them of Saxony, how spitefully soever some of them write of
us. And even of those whom he calls Lutherans, as I perceived while I was at
Norimberg, the moderater sort are alike affected toward us. But as touching
the auouching our opinions to be matters of Faith (which exception is common to
you with him) that which I should have answered him, if I had found in him any
thing but spite and scorn, I will say now to you. Verily in some sort even the
least conclusions in Divinity are matters of Faith. For both Faith has to do
with them, and they are fetched by discourse, from the first Principles holden
by Faith, whence our whole Religion is called by Saint Jude, the Faith once
delivered to the Saints. And the least error in them, by consequence
overthrows the same principles whence they are deduced. That makes some, to
move attention in their Readers to say, The questions are not about small
matters, but of the principal Articles of Religion, even about the foundation.
As Cu^aeus whom he cites, says, the question is of two Articles of Faith.
First, of that which teaches that in Christ two natures are united. Secondly,
of the Article, He ascended into Heaven. Why? do not both sides agree to
these? Yes. But one side fetches arguments against vbiquitie from these places,
and thereupon says, the question is about these Articles; perhaps also
charge the other to deny them. He cites Pappus writing thus, Agitur inter
nos de Omnipotentia Dei, etc. The controversy betwixt us, is about the
Omnipotency of God. The personal union of the two natures in Christ. The
communication of properties. The glorious body of our Savior, etc. Lo again,
every place of argument or defense is made the matter of Controversy. Out of
these and such like confessions on either side, my namelesse Adversary will
needs enforce, with great pomp and triumph; what think ye? That such
sanctified men (this is his scoffing language) go not together by the ears
for Moonshine in the water. Again, That all those Myrmidonian fights and
bloody encounters be not de lana Caprina aut de vmbra asini -- Why, who said
they were? I will set down here my words, that you may judge of the
conscience of this man, and have with all the substance of my answer to this
objection. And what if some outrageous spirits on each side, trans^ported with
passion in their oppositions, have used most bitter and unbeseeming speeches to
their Adversaries, and sometimes have showed each other small humanity; are
you so simple as not to discern between the choler of some few opinionate
men, and the consequence of their opinions? Have you forgotten Saint Hierome
and Ruffinus deadly foe-hood, which was rung over the world? or Epiphanius and
Chrysostomes, or Victors and the Greek Bishops? which proceeded so far about
a trifle, that he excommunicated them; which is little less I think then to
condemn to the pit of Hell. And yet if I should put it to your judgment, I am
persuaded you would grant they held all truth necessary to salvation. For you
must remember Pope Boniface had not yet coined the new Article of the Faith,
that I mentioned before. What shall I speak of Saint Paul and Barnabas, which
grew to such bitterness, and that about a very little question of conueniency,
that though they were sent out together by the Holy Ghost, they brake off
company. These be humane passions, which wisdom would we should pity, when
they grow to such extremities, upon so small cause; rather then from their
outrage to gather there is just cause to increase. Do we not see that even
natural brethren do sometimes defy one another, and use each other with
less respect then strangers? Now from hence would you conclude they be not
brethren; and hearten them on, and say to the one, that since his half brother
is not so near to him, as he with whom he is thus at odds, he must fall out
worse with him. You should well so deserve the hate of God, for a make-hate
between brethren. These were all my words set down in answer to his
obiecting our own contentions and condemning each other, to prove that
therefore we could not hold continuitie with the ancient Church of England,
from which we dissented much more. I held as you may perceive, that neither
amongst our selves, nor from our predecessors we disagree in any truth
necessary to salvation. He makes me to say, our dissentions are about Moon
shine, and de vmbra asini, and de la^a caprina, and tr^fles, and matters of no
consequence. To return to you, good Master Waddesworth, let men avouch as
confidently as they will touching their own positions, Est de Fide. N^hil
certius apud Catholicos, and of their contraries cry out. They are Heretics,
renew ancient heresies, race the foundation, deny the Articles of the Creed,
Gods ^^^ipoteney, etc. all because themselves by discourse, can (as they
think) fasten such things upon them: A sober Christian must not give heed to
all that is said in this kind. These things must be examined with right
judgment, and ever with much charity, and patience, remembering that our
selves know in part, and prophecy in part. In a word^ this should not have so
much disquieted you.

Nor yet that which you add, That every one pretends Scripture. Best of all,
Hom. 33. (...) Act.
says Saint Chrysostom, For if we should say we believe humane reasons, thou
might with good reason (...) troubled, but when as we receive the (...), and
they be simple and true, it will (...) thing for (...) to i^dge, etc. And to
what purpose indeed serves the faculty of ^^^son perfected and polished with
learning? wherefore the supernatural light of Faith? wherefore the gift of God
in us Ministers con^erred by the imposition of hands? but (...) which side
handles the Word of God deceitfully, which sincerely. But here again, Each
side arrogates the Holy Ghost in his favor. What then? If we our selves have
the anointing, 1. Ioh. 2. 20. 27 and 4. 1.
we shall be able as we are bidden to try the spirits, whether they be of God
or no? For we will not b^leeue them, because they say they have the Spirit, or
cannot be deceived, but because their Doctrine is consonant to the principles
of heavenly Truth, which by the writings inspired by himself, the Holy Ghost
has graven in our hearts. Which writings are well acknowledged by you, to be
the Law and Rule, according whereunto, in judgment of Religion we must
proceed.

CHAP. III.
Of the want of a humane external infallible Judge and Interpreter.
AS to that you say, did about all trouble you, the want of a certain humane
external infallible Judge to interpret Scripture, and define Questions of
Faith without error. What if you found not an external humane Judge, if you
had an internal divine one? And having an infallible Rule by which your humane
Judge should proceed, why should you trust another man's applying it, rather
then your own, in a matter concerning your own salvation? But i^ God have left
us no such external Judge, if Antiquity knew (...), if Religion need none,
it was no just motive to leave us, that you could find none, amongst all those
Sects which (...). And how much less if you have (...) amended your self
where you are; which we shall consider by and by?

I say then first, that to make this your motive of any moment, it must be
showed, that God has appointed such a Judge in his Church. Let that appear
out of some passage of holy Scripture. For your conceit or desire that such a
Judge there should be, to whom you might in conscience obey, and yield your
self, because he could not err^, does not prove it. You would know the Truth,
only by the authority, and sole pronouncing of the Judges mouth. A short and
easy way, which to most men is plausible, because it spares the pains of
study and discourse. To such especially, as either out of weakness dare not
trust their own judgment, or account it shall have the merit of humility, to
be led by their Teachers. But what now if God will have you call no man your
Father upon earth? If he will send you to his Word? and after you have received
the Faith by the Churches testimony out of the easy and plain places
thereof, bid you search the Scriptures, to find the Truth in the remnant, and
pick it out by your own industry. Luke 16.
The rich man being in hell torments (in whose words I doubt not but our
Savior does impersonate and represent the conceits of many men living in this
world) presumes that if one were sent from the dead his Kinsmen would hearken
to him, but he is remitted to Moses and the Prophets. The Jews as I perceived
by speech with some of them at Venice, make it one of their motives, that our
Lord Jesus is not the Christ. He should not, say they, have come in such a
fashion, to leave his own Nation in doubt and suspense; and scandalize so many
thousands; but so as all men might know him to be what he was. Miserable men!
that will give laws to God. Of which fault be you a ware also (good Master
Waddesworth) and be content to take, not to prescribe the means by which you
will be brought unto the knowledge of the Truth* to use what he has given,
not to conjecture and divine what he must give.

But God fails not his Church in such means as be necessary. Let us
therefore consider the necessity of this Judge. Where I beseech you consider
(for I am sure you cannot but know it) that all things necessary to salvation
are evidently set down in holy Scripture? This both the Sciptures themselves
do teach, and the Fathers avouch, namely Saint Augustine and Saint
Chrysostom, and others. I forbear to set down their words, or further to
confirm this Lemma, which I proved at large against another adversary, and
shall at all times make good if it be questioned. Besides these points, there
are a great many other though not of such necessity, yet evidently laid down
also in the same Scriptures, by occasion of them. Many by just discourse may
be cleared from these, and the former. If any thing yet remain in suspense,
and unknown, yea or if you will erred in, so it be not wilfully and
obstinately, yet shall it be ever without peril of damnation to him that*
receives what the holy Ghost has plainly delivered. What necessity then of
your imaginary Judge? Yes* for Unity is a goodly thing, not only in matters
necessary, but universally in all. Controversies must not be endless. But
how comes it to pass then that your Judge, whosoever he be, does not all this
while decide the question touching the Conception of the Blessed Virgin, that
is between the Dominicans, and Franciscans, nor that between the Dominicans
and Jesuits touching Grace and Free Will; and all other the points that are
controuerted in the Schools; to spare contention and time (a precious
commodity among wise men) and give this honor to Divinity alone, that in ^t
all doubts should be reduced to certainties? Or if it seem no wisdom to be
hasty in deciding such questions; wherein witty and learned men are engaged,
least in stead of changing their opinions, they should fall to challenge not
only the infallibility, but which were more dangerous the authority of their
Judge: If it be thought better to leave scope to opinions, opposition it self
profitably serving to the boulting out of the truth. If unity in all things
be as it seems despaired of, by this your Gellius himself; Cic. ^. de
Legibus.
why are we not content with unity in things necessary to salvation, expressly
set down in holy Scripture: and anciently thought to suffice, reserving
infallibility as an honor proper to God speaking there? Why should it not be
thought to suffice, that every man having embraced that necessary truth, which
is the rule of our faith, thereby try the spirits whether they be of God or
no. If he meet with any that has not that doctrine, receive him not to
house, nor salute him. If consenting to that, but otherwise infirm or erring,
yet charitably bear with him. This for every private man. As for the public
order and peace of the Church, God has given Pastors and Teachers, that we
should not be carried about with every wind of doctrine, and amongst them
appointed Bishops, (...)
to command that men teach no other or foreign doctrine, which was the end of
Timothy his leaving at Ephesus, 1. Tim. 1. 3. Then, the Apostles themselves by
their example, have commended to the Church the wholesome use of Synodes, Act.
15. 6.
to determine of such controversies as cannot by the former means be composed;
but still by the holy Scriptures, the Law or Rule, as you say well, by which
all these Judges must proceed. Which if they do not, then may they be
deceived themselves, and deceive others as experience has showed, yet never
be able to extinguish the truth.

To come to Antiquity. There is not any one thing belonging to Christian
Religion, if we consider well, of more importance, then how the purity of the
whole may be maintained. The Ancients that write of the rest of Christian
Doctrine, is it not a miracle, had they known any such infall^ble Judge, in
whose Oracle the security of all, with the perpetual tranquillity of the
Church is contained, they should say nothing of him? There was never any Age
wherein there have not been heresies, and sects* to which of them was it ever
objected that they had no infallible Judge? How soon would they have fought to
amend that defect, if it had been a current doctrine in those times, that the
true Church cannot be without such an Officer? The Fathers that dealt with
them, why did they not lay aside all disputing, and appeal them only to this
Bar? Unless perhaps that were the let which Cardinal Bellarmine tells the
Venetians, Rispos^a ad vn^ lettera, etc.
hindered Saint Paul from appealing to Saint Peter, l^st they should have made
their Adversaries to laugh at them for their labor. Well: howsoever the
Cardinal has found out a merry reason for Saint Paul's appealing to Caesar's
judgment, not Peter's, lest he should expose himself to the laughter of
Pagans: what shall we say when the Fathers write professedly to instruct
Catholic men, Tertull. de Praescript. etc.
of the forepleadings and advantages to be used against Heretics, even
without descending to trial by Scriptures? or of some certain general and
ordinary way to discern the Truth of the Catholic Faith from the profane
novelties of heresies? Vincent. Lyrine^s.
Had they known of this infallible Judge, should we not have heard of him in
this so proper a place, and as it were in a cause belonging to his own Court.
Nay, does not the writing it self of such books show, that this mattter was
wholly unknown to Antiquity? For had the Church been in possession of so
easy and sure a Court to discover and discard heresies, they should not have
needed to task themselves to find out any other. But the truth is,
infallibility is, and ever has been accounted proper to Christ's judgment.
And as has been said, all necessary Truth to salvation he has delivered us
in his Word. That Word, himself tells us, shall judge at the last day. Yea, in
all true decisions of Faith, that Word even now judges, Christ judges, the
Apostle sits Judge* Christ speaks in the Apostle. Thus Antiquity.

Neither are they moved a whit with that objection: That the Scriptures are
often the matter of Controversies. For in that case the remedy was easy which
Saint Augustine shows to have recourse to the plain Lib. de Vaitate.
places, and manifest such Eccles. c. 5. and. 19.
as should need no interpreter: for such there be, by which the other may be
cleared. The same may be said, if sometimes it be questioned, which be
Scriptures, which not. I think it was never heard of, in the Church, that
there was an external infallible Judge, who could determine that question.
Arguments may be brought from the consent or dissent with other Scriptures,
from the attestation of Antiquity, and inherent signs of divine authority,
or humane infirmity: but if the Auditor or Adversary yield not to these, such
parts of necessity must needs be laid aside. If all Scripture be denied
(which is as it were exceptio in iudicem ante litis contestationem) Faith has
no place, only Reason remains. To which I think it will scarce seem
reasonable, if you should say, though all men are liers, yet this Judge is
infallible; and to him thou ought in conscience to obey and yield thy
understanding in all his det^rminations, for he cannot err. No not if all men
in the world should say it. Unless you first set down there is a God, and
stablish the authority of the books of holy Scripture, as his voice, and
thence show if you can, the warrant of this privilege.

Where you offi^me, the Scriptures to be the law and the rule, but alone of
themselves cannot be Judges; if you mean, without being produced, applied,
and heard; ye say truth. Yet Nicodemus spoke not a^isse, Ioh. 1. 51.
when he demanded, Does our law judge any man, unless it hear him first? he
meant the same which Saint Paul, when he said of the high Priest, thou sit
to judge me according to the law: and so do we when we say the same. Neither
do we send you to Angels, or God himself immediately, but speaking by his
spirit in the Scriptures, and (as I have right now said) alleged, and by
discourse applied to the matters in question. As for Princes, since it pleased
you to make an excursion to them, if we should make them infallible Judge, or
give them authority to decree in religion as they list, as Gardener did to
King Henry the eight, it might well be condemned for monstrous, as it was by
Calvin, As for the purpose, Licere Regi interdicere populo vsum calicis in
Coena, Quare? Potestas. (...). summa est penes Regem, quoth Gardener. This was
to make the King as absolute a Tyrant in the Church, as the Pope claimed to
be. But, that Princes which obey the truth, have commandment from God, to
command good things, and forbid evil, not only in matters pertaining to
humane society, but also the religion of God, this is no new strange doctrine,
but Calums, Institut. l. 4. c. 20. August. contr. Cresco^. l. 3. c. 51.
and ours, and S. Augustines, is so many words. And this is all the Head-ship
of the Church we give to Kings. Whereof a Queen is as well capable as a King,
since it is an Act of authority, not Ecclesiastical Ministry; proceeding
from eminency of power, not of knowledge, or holiness. Wherein not only a
learned King, as ours is; but a good old woman (as Queen Elizabeth, besides
her Princely dignity was) may excel as your selves confess, your infallible
Judge himself. But in power he says, he is above all: which not to examine
for the present, in this power Princes are above all their subjects I trow; and
Saint Augustine says plainly, to command and forbid, even in the religion of
God, still according to Gods Word, which is the touchstone of good and evil.
Neither was King Henry the eight, the first Prince that exercised this power,
witness David, and Solomon, and the rest of the Kings of Judah before Christ,
And since that Kings were Christians* the affairs of the Church have depended
upon them, and the greatest Synodes have been by their Decree, Proemiol. 5.
as Socrates, expressly says. Nor did King Henry claim any new thing in this
Land, but restored to the Crown the ancient right thereof, which sundry his
predecessors had exercised as our Historians and Lawyers with one consent
affirm.

The rest of your induction of Archbishops, Bishops, and whole Clergy in their
Convocation house, and a Council of all Lutherans, Caluinists, Protestants,
etc. is but a needless pomp of words, striving to win by a form of
discourse, that which gladly shall be yielded at the first demand. They might
all err, if they were as many as the sand on the sea shore, if they did not
rightly apply the rule of holy Scriptures, by which, as you acknowledge the
external Judge, which you seek, must proceed. As to your demand therefore,
how you should be sure when, and wherein they did, and did not err; where you
should have fixed your foot? to forbear to skirmish with your confirmation
(That though, a posse ad esse non valet semper consequentia, yet, aliquando
valet: and, frustra dicitur potentia quae nunquam dueitur in actum.) To the
former whereof I might tell you, that without question, nunquam valet: and to
the second, that I can very well allow, that errandi potentia, among
Protestants be ever frustra. This I say freely, that if you come with this
resolution to learn nothing by discourse, or evidence of Scripture, but only
by the mere pronouncing of a humane external Judges mouth, to whom you would
yield your understanding in all his determinations: if, as the Jesuits teach
their Scholars, Regula 1. and 1^.
you will wholly deny your own judgment, and resolve, that if this Judge
shall say, that is black, which appears to your eyes white, you will say it
is black too; you have posed all the Protestants; they cannot tell how to
teach you infallibly. Withal I must tell you thus much, that this preparation
of mind in a Scholar, as you are, in a Minister, yea in a Christian, that had
but learned his Creed, much more that had from a child known the holy
Scriptures, that are able to make us wise to salvation, 1. Tim. 3. 15.
through the faith that is in Christ Jesus, were too great weakness, and to
use the Apostles phrase childishness of understanding. 1. Cor. 14. 20.


But at length you heard a sound of harmony and consent, that in the Catholic
Church, as in Noah's Arc was infallibility, and possibility of salvation;
which occasioned you to seek out, and to enter into this Arc of Noah. The
sound of consent and infallibility is most pleasing and harmonious, and
undoubtedly ever and only to be found in the Catholic Church, to wit, in the
rule of Faith, and in the holy Scriptures, and such necessary doctrine as
perfectly concordeth with the same. But as in song many discords do pass in
smaller notes, without offense of the ears, so should they in smaller matters
of opinion in the Church, without the offense of judicious and charitable
minds. Which yet I speak not to justify them; nay, I am verily of the mind,
that this is the thing that has marred the Church music in both kinds, that
too much liberty is taken in descant to depart from the gound, and as one
says, notae nimium denigrantur. The fault of the Italians: though they think
themselves the only songsters in the world. But to return to you, tell me, I
beseech you (good Master Wadesworth) was this the harmony that transported
you. The Pope himself says, I cannot err, and to me thou ought to have
recourse for decision of doubts in matters of faith. And whereas this is not
only denied by Protestants, but has been ever by the French, and anciently I
am sure by the Spanish, lately by some Italian Divines also, unless he use
due means to find the truth; yea, whereas it is the issue of all the
Controversies of this age; in this snare you fastened your foot, this was the
Center that settled your conscience, this the solid and firm foundation of
your faith. What? and did it not move you, that some limit this infallibility
of the Pope thus, if he enter Canonically, if he proceed advisedly, and
maturely, using that diligence that is fit to find out the truth; that is (as
you said before) proceeding by the rule, the Scriptures? Albeit to the Fathers
of the African Council it seemed incredible (as they write in their Synodall
Epistle to P. Coelestine standing for appeals to himself) that God can
inspire the right i^ t^iall to one, denying it to many Bishops in a Council.
Tell us then, who made you secure of these things? or did you in truth, never
so much as make question of them, but hearing this harmonious sound; The Pope
is the infallible Judge, you trusted the new Masters of that side, Gregory de
Valentia, and Bellarmine, that whether the Pope in defining do use diligence
or no, if he do define, Analyst Fidei Cathol. pa 8.
he shall define infallibly. Alas Sir! if this were the rest you found for the
soale of your foot, instead of moveable water, you fell upon mire and puddle;
Or rather like to another Dove mentioned in Scripture, columba seducta non
habens cor, Oseae, 2. 1^*
by the most chaffie shrap that ever was set before the eyes of winged Foul,
were brought to the doorefall. Excuse my grief, mixed I confess with some
indignation, but more love to you, though I thus write. Many things there be in
Popery inconvenient, and to my conceit weakly and vngroundedly affirmed, to
say no more; but this is so absurd and palpably a flattery, as to omit to
speak of you, for my part I cannot be persuaded that Paulus the fifth
believes it himself. For consider I pray, what needed anciently the Christian
Emperors, and sometimes at the request of the Bishops of Rome themselves, to
have gathered together so many Bishops from so diverse parts of the world to
celebrate Counsels, if it had been known and believed then, that one man's
sentence might have cleared all controversies, and put all heresies to silence?
How durst sundry holy, and learned men have rejected his decisions, whether
right or wrong is not now the question, unchristianly out of doubt on their
parts, if he had been then holden the infallible Oracle of our religion? As
when Polycrates, with the Bishops of Asia, and Irenaeus also yielded not to
Victor, excommunicating the Eastern Churches about the celebration of Easter,
when Saint Cyprian, with the first Council of Carthage of eighty six Bishops
had decreed, that such as were baptized by heretics, should be rebaptized,
and certified Stephanus of this Decree, and he opposed it, and would have
nothing innouated, would Cyprian after that have resisted and confuted
Stephanus his letter, had he known him for infallible? And how does he
confute him? as erring, writing impertinently, Epistol^ ad Pompe^um.
contrary to himself. Yea, let it be observed, that he does not only not
account Stephanus infallible, but not so much as a Judge over any Bishop. See
the Vote of Cyprian, and note those words. Neque enim quisquam nostrum
Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit, ant tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi
necessitatem collegas suos adigit, quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro licentia
libertatis and potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium, tanquam iudicari ab alio
non possit cum nec ipse possit alterum i^dicare. Sed exspectemus vniuersi
iudiciu^ Domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui vnus and solus habet potestate^ and
praeponendi in Ecclesiae suae gubernatione, and de actis nostro iudicandi. A
passage worthy to be noted also, for the clearing of the independence of
Episcopal authority from the Pope, which I now let pass. Neither was Saint
Cyprian herein alone: Firmilianus, and the Eastern Bishops, resisted Stephanus
no less, as appears by his Epistle, which in the Roman edition of Manutiu^*
set forth by the command of Pius the fourth, with the survey of four
Cardinals, whereof one is now a Saint, with exquisite diligence; is wholly
left out. And Pamelius says he thinks purposely, for himself is of the
mind that it had been better it had never come forth. But to return to our
purpose. The Fathers of the Council of Afric, and Saint Augustine amongst
them, resist three Popes succeeding each other, Zosimus, Boniface, and
Coelestinus, about appeals to Rome; shall we think they would ever have done
it, if they had known or imagined them to be the supreme and infallible Judges
in the Church? I let pass the Schism between the Greek and the Latin
Church, which had not happened, if this doctrine had been anciently received.
Nay, it is very plain in story, that the Bishop of Romes lifting up himself
to be Universal Bishop chiefly caused it. To conclude, neither Liberius, nor
Honorius, to omit many other Bishops of Rome, had ever been taxed of heresy,
if this had anciently been current, that the Pope is infallible. I will not
stand now to examine the shameful defense that Bella^mine makes for the latter
of these, bearing down Fathers, Counsels, Stories, Popes themselves, as all
falsified or deoeiued herein. Wherein because he is learnedly refuted by
Doctor Raynolds, I insist not upon it. This I press, that all those Writers
and Councels, and amongst them Pope Leo the second accursing Honorius, did not
then hold, that which by Pighius and the Jesuits is undertaken, that the Pope
is infallible. Even the Council of Basil, deposing Eugenius (for obstinately
resisting this truth of the Catholic faith, That the Council is above the
Pope) as an Heretic, does show the sense of Christendom even in these latter
times how corrupt soever, both in rule, and practice.

And because you make this infallible Judge to be also an infallible
Interpreter of holy Scripture, how happens it that Damasu^ Bishop of Rome
consults with Hierome about the meaning of sundry Texts of Scripture, when it
seems himself might have taken his pen, and set him down quickly, that which
should have taught both him and the whole Church, not only without danger but
even possibility of error? Sure we are little beholding to the diligence of
our Ancestors, that have not more carefully registered the Commentaries (or
because they have had for sundry Ages small time to write just Commentaries)
the expositions which in their Sermons, or otherwise the Bishops of Rome have
made of holy Scripture. A work which if this Doctrine were true, were more
worth then all the Fathers; and would justify that blasphemy of the Canon
Law, where by a shameful corruption of Saint Augustine, the Decretals of Popes
are enrolled amongst the Canonical Scriptures. ^. in (...) Did. 19.
I am already too long in so plain a matter: yet one proof more which is of
all most sensible. Being admonished by this your conceit of an infallible
Interpreter, I chanced to turn over the Popes Decretals, and observed the
interpretation of Scriptures. What shall I say? I find them so lewd, and
clean beside the purpose, yea oftentimes so childish and ridiculous, both in
giving the sense, and in the application, that I protest to you in the presence
of God, nothing does more loathe me of Popery, then the handling of holy
Scripture by your infallible Interpreter alone. Consider a few of the
particulars, and especially such as concern the Popes own authority.
Significasti de electione. Ioh. 21. 15.
To justify his exacting an oath of fealty of an Archbishop, to whom he
grant^ the Pall, is brought our Lord Jesus Christ who committing the ^are of
his Sheep to Peter, did put too a condition, saying, Sid diligis me pasce oues
meas. Christ said, if thou love me feed my sheep; Why may not the Pope say,
If you will swear me fealty, you shall have the Pall. But first he corrupts
the Text: Christ said not, If thou love me: Then, Christ puts not Peter's
love as a condition of feeding, but feeding as a proof and effect of his love.
And if the feeding of Christ's sheep were sought, love to him and them might
suffice to be professed, or if he would needs have more then Christ required,
to be sworn. What is this to the oath of fealty? Straight after to the
objection, that all oaths are prohibited by Christ, nor any such thing can be
found appointed by the Apostles after the Lord, or in the Councels, he vrges
the words following in the Text, Matthew. 5. 34.
Swear not at all; quod ampli^s est a malo est, that is says he, Evil
compels us by Christ's permission to exact more. It is not evil to go from the
Popes obedience? to condemn Bishops without his priuitie? to translate Bishops
by the Kings commandment? See the place, and tell me of your Interpreters
infallibility. Treating of the translation of Bishops, or such as are elected
unto other Sees, he says: Inter corpor. De translatione Episcopi.
That since the spiritual Bands is stronger then the carnal, it cannot be
doubted but Almighty God has reserved the dissolution of the spiritual
marriage that is betwixt a Bishop and his Church, to his own judgment alone;
Matthew. 19. 26.
charging that whom God has ^oyned man sever not. For it is not by humane but
rather divine power that spiritual marriage is dissolved, when as by
translation or cession by the authority of the Bishop of Rome (whom it is
plain to be the Vicar of Jesus Christ) a Bishop is removed from his Church.
An admirable interpretation of the Text, Quos Deus coni^nxit! by which the Pope
not only challenges that which is proper to Gods judgment only, as he
says, viz. to dissolve the bond of spiritual wedlock; but because that is the
stronger, of ^arnall it seems also; when it shall please him.

The anointing of a Prince since Christ's coming is translated from the head to
the shoulder, De sacra Unction. Esaias 9. 6. 1. Sam. 9. 24.
by which Principality is fitly designed, according to that which is read,
Factus est principatus super humorum eius; for signifying also whereof, Samuel
caused the shoulder to be set before Saul. Who should ever have understood
these Texts, if your infallible Interpreter had not declared them? But this is
nothing yet to the exposition of those Texts which the Pope interprets in his
answer to the Emperor of Constantinople, Solicit. De maioritate. 1. Pet, 2.
13.
as Subditi estote omni humanae oreaturae propter Deum, etc. He tells him that
Saint Peter wrote that to his own Subjects, to provoke them to the merit of
humility. For if he had meant thereby to lay the yoke of subjection upon
Priests, it would follow that every servant were to rule over them, since it is
said, omni humanae creaturae. After, Iris not barely set down, Regi
praecellenti, but there is put between, perhaps not without cause; tanquam;
And that which follows, ad vindictam malefactorum, laudem vero bonorum, Verse.
14.
is not to be understood that the King or Emperor has received the power of
the sword upon good and evil men; save only those who using the sword are
committed to his jurisdiction according to that which the Truth says, They
which take the sword shall perish with the sword. For no man ought or can judge
another servant, Matthew. ^6. 5^.
since the servant according to the Apostle stands or falls to his own
Lord. For the love of God consider this interpretation, and compare it with
Saint Chrysto^e upon Romans 13. Nay do but read the Text attentively, and judge
of the infallibility of your Interpreter. Straight after he tells the
Emperor, that he might have understood the prerogative of Priesthood out of
that which was said, not of every man but of God, not to the King but to the
Priest, not to one descending of the Royal stock but of the Priestly lineage
of the Priests, to wit, Ierem. ^. 10.
which were in Anathot. Behold, I have set you over nations and kingdoms, to
pull up, and destroy, to build and to plant. See the prerogative of the
Priesthood out of Ieremies calling to be a Prophet. O if he had been high
Priest! This had been a Text for the nonce. But he goes on. It is said in
Gods Law also, Exodus 22. ^8.
Thou shall not rail on the Gods, nor curse the Prince of ^ thy people. Genesis
1. 16.
Dijs non detrabes, and Principem populi tui non maledices. Which setting
Priests before Kings calls them Gods, and the other Princes. Compare this
exposition with David's and Paul's, Psalm. 82. and Act. 23. 5. and ye shall see
how the Interpreter has hit the mark. Again, ye ought to have known, quod
fecit Deus duo magna luminaria, etc. See the exposition, and the difference
between the Pope and Kings both in the Text and Gloss. Now although the
Gloss writer were no excellent Calculator, yet out of Clauius the account may
be cleared: who tells us the Sun exceedes the Moon 6539. times and (...)
Io^. 21. 16.
I let pass the collection out of Pasce oues meas, that ^e belongs not to
Christ's fold that does not acknowledge Peter and his Successors his Masters and
Pastors: Matthew. 16. 19.
out of Quodcuinque ligaueris, that nothing is excepted. Indeed the Pope
excepts nothing, but loses Vows, Contracts, Oaths, the bond of Allegiance
and Fealty between Subjects and their Princes: The Commandment of Christ,
Drink ye all of this, etc. But our Lord expounds himself, John 20. Whose
sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc.

Ex ore sedentis in throno procedebat gladius his acutus. 3 Ex ore. De his quae
fiunt, Tit. 11.
This is, says the Pope, the sword of Solomon, which cuts on both sides giving
every man his own. We then who albeit unworthy bold the place of the true
Solomon, by the favor of God, do wisely exercise this Sword, when such causes
as in our audience are lawfully canuassed, we do with justice determine. This
interpretation first corrupts the Text, for it has not, out of the mouth of
him that sat on the Throne, but that sat on the Horse; next, it peruerts it,
for it is not the sword of Justice but of Christ's Word, which is more piercing
then any two-edged sword that issues out of his mouth. Heb. 4. 12*
As for that of Justice, he never assumed it, but renounced it rather, 4 Per
venerabil^m. Qu^ filij sint legitim^. Deu^. 17. 8.
when he said. Man who made me a diuider to you? Luke 12. 14. To prove that
in other Regions besides the patrimony of the Church, the Pope does casually
exercise temporal jurisdiction, it is said in Deuteronomie, Si difficile sit
and ambiguum, etc. And because Deuteronomie is by interpretation ^he second
Law, Surely by the force of the Word it is proved, that what is there decreed
should be observed in the New Testament. For the place which the Lord did
choose is known to be the Apostolic See. For when as Peter fleeing went out
of the City, the Lord minding to call him back to the place he had chosen,
being asked of him, Lord whither go thou? answered, I go to Rome to be
crucified agai^e. The Priests of the Tribe of Leus are the Popes coadiutors.
The high Priest or Judge, he to whom the Lord said in Peter Quodcunque
ligaueris, etc. His Vicar who is a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck, appointed by God the Judge of quick and dead. He that contemnes
the Popes sentence is to be excommunicated, for that is the meaning of being
commanded to be put to death. Does not this well ^ollow out of the word
Deuteronomie? And Rome is the place that Christ did choose, because he went, he
said, to be crucified there. Only there is a scruple of the high Priest, for
as much as he that is high Priest after Melchisedecks order (...) has a
Priesthood that passes not into another, Heb. 7. He adds there, that Paul that
he might declare the fullness of power, writing to the Corinthians says: Know
ye not that ye shall judge the Angels? 1. C^r. 6. ^.
how much more the things of the world? Is this then the Popes plenitude of
Power, to judge secular things? or was Corinth the Apostolic See, and so many
Popes there even of the meanest of the Church? What shall we say to that
exposition of the famous Text. T^^ es Petrus and super ha^^ petram a edificabo
Ecclesiam mea^: Matthew. 16. 18. Cap. Fundament^ de Elect. in 6.
The Lord (he says) taking peter i^to the fellowship of the undivided Unity,
would have him to be called that, which he was himself, that the building of
the eternal Temple might by the maru^llous gift of God consist in Peter's
firmness. What is this undivided Unity? Not of the Trinity, I trow, or
Natures in Christ. What then? his office? of which he said a little before out
of the Apostle, that no man can lay any other foundation but Jesus Christ. Yes:
that from Peter as a certain head he should as it were power abroad his gifts
into his whole body. That the Church might stand upon Peter's firmness. This
foundation Saint Paul knew not, when he blamed I am of Ceph^s. Peter's
infirmity cannot bear up the weight of such a building, much less (which we
must remember the Romanists understand by this Iargon) the Papes his Successors.

Such another interpretation is that of Pope Boniface, Ioh. 10. 16. Extra Vnum
Testam.
that makes Vnum Ouile and vnus Pastor, the Church and the Pope. But it is
plain our Savior alludes to the prophesies, Ezekiel. 34. 23. and 37. 24. where
the Lord calls that one Pastor his servant David. What blasphemy is this, thus
to usurp Christ's Royalties? What Father, what Council, what Catholic man
ever interpreted this Text on this manner? By which the Pope while he seeks
the name of the Sheepherd, shuts himself out of Christ's fold?

Yea the same Pope calls the Church his Spouse also, Cant. 4. 9. c. quoniam. De
Immunitate.
and so other Popes since. Saint John the Baptist tells them, that he that has
the Bride is the Bridegroom. Saint Paul prepared her to one husband Christ, If
she be the Popes Spouse with her will, she is a Harlot: if against her will,
he is a Rauisher, and our Lord Jesus Christ will deliver her out of his lewd
embracements, crying out of the violence which she suffers, as it is to be
hoped shortly.

That in the Churches power are two swords, the spiritual and temporal, we
are taught by the words of the Gospel, says the same Boniface. For when the
Apostles said, Behold, there be two swords here (to wit, in the Church) when
the Apostles spoke thus, Luke 22. 38.
the Lord answered not that is was too much, but enough. Certainly, he that
denies the temporal sword to be in Peter's power, does ill observe the speech
which our Lord vtters, Put up thy sword into the sheath. No doubt an infallible
interpretation; by which it should appear that both the swords that were in
our Saviors company, hung by Saint Peter's side, or else that some other had
the spiritual, leaving none to Saint Peter, but that which he might not use.
The exposition is Saint Berenards, you will day, But in an Epistle
paraeneticall to the Pope himself; Saint Bernard might have leave to use
allusions, and after his manner to be liberal of all that the Sea of Rome
challenged, that he might have the more authority to reform the abuses of it.
As to grant Peter the temporal sword, but so, as he must not use it. Quid tu
gladium denno vsurpare tents, quem semel iussus es ponere in vaginam? and he
shows how these two swords be the Churches. The one to be drawn out for the
Church, the other also by the Church. This by the Priests, that by the
Soldiers hand, but at the beck of the Priest, and bidding of the Emperor. But
the Pope in a Decretall Epistle, pretending to teach the world, in a point as
he pronounces necessary to salvation, with such an interpretation as this;
argues little reverence to the Word of God, and a very mean opinion of the
judgments and consciences of christen men, if they could not discern this to
be a strangers voice, not Christ's. Besides that, he changes Saint Bernards
words, and clean peruerts his meaning. For, exerendus, he puts in exercendus.
For, ille Sacerdotis, is militis manu, sed sane ad nutum Sacerdotis and iussum
Imperatoris. Pope Boniface thinking iussum to absolute in the Emperor, makes
him to be the executioner and ioynes him with the Soldier, on this manner.
Ille Sacerdotum, is manu Regum and Militum sed ad nutum and patientiam
Sacerdotis. Saint Bernard makes the executiue power to be in the Soldier, the
directive in the Priest, the commanding in the Emperor. Pope Boniface makes the
Kings and Soldiers to have only the executiue, the directive and permissiue to
be in the Priest. Yea sword, he says, must be under sword. Romans 13. 1.
For where the Apostle says, There is no power but of God, que autem sunt, a
Deo ordinata sunt; more fully in the original text, the powers that are, are
ordained, that is, appointed of God: the Interpreter here dreams of order and
subordination, and cities a saying of Dionysius, that the lowest things are
reduced to the highest by the middlemost; a conceit that makes nothing to the
purpose of the Apostle in that place.

He proceeds and tells us, that of the Church and power Ecclesiastical,
Ierem. 1. 10.
is verified the prophecy of Jeremy. Behold I have set thee this day over
Kings and Kingdoms, etc. Tell me, good Master Wadesworth, what is to peruer^
the Scriptures, if this be not, to apply to the power Ecclesiastical, that
which is spoken of the word and calling Prophetical? Yet more, The earthly
power, if it swerue out of the way shall be judged of the power spiritual,
but if the spiritual, that is lesser; of that which is superior to it. But if
the highest, it may be judged of God only, not of man, the Apostle witnessing
the spiritual man judges all things, 1. Cor. 2. 15.
but himself is judged of none. We are come at length, as it were to the
fountains of Nilus to the original of the infallibility of your Judge; and
if he have here rightly interpreted Saint Paul, we learn that no earthly
power, no Magistrate is a spiritual man, unless he be one of the Popes
spirituality. For these be Saint Paul's spiritual men, that judge all things.
Yet this must receive limitation. For no man may judge the Pope, the supreme
Spiritual man, for of him it seems Saint Paul meant it, his authority he
says is not humane, but divine, by the divine mouth given to Peter, and his
successors, when the Lord said to him, Quodcunque ligaueris.

For conclusion, Romans 12. 2.
whosoever resists this power thus ordered of God, resists the ordinance of
God, unless as Manichaeus he feign two beginnings: which (says he) we judge
to be false and heretical, since by Moses record, not in the beginnings, Genesis
1. 1.
but in the beginning God created Heaven and Earth. Who would not acknowledge
the divine authority and infallibility of your Interpreter, both in
confirming his purpose, and conuincing heresies from so high a beginning, as
this first sentence of holy Writ? What rests now, but after so many testimonies
he infer* Furthermore, to be under the Bishop of Rome we declare, say,
define, and pronounce that to every humane creature it is altogether of
necessity of salvation. Thus says your infallible Judge and Interpreter of
Scripture, the center of your conscience, and foundation of your Faith, not as
a private Doctor, but as Pope, in his own Law, intending to inform and bind
the Church, and that in matters with him of the greatest importance that may
be, touching his own authority, and as he pretends absolutely necessary to
salvation, to all the sons of Adam.

I might heap up many more, but these may suffice for a sample. You may (and
so do by your self I beseech you) observe these kind of interpretations in
other points also, and in other the Decretals and Breues of Popes; which as I
hear, are lately come forth in great volumes. You shall find many mysteries
in your faith, that perhaps you know not of, as, Romans 8. 8. Syricius Epist. 4*
and Innocent. Ep. 2.
That you cannot please God because you are married: for so is that place of
the Apostle interpreted, qui in carne viuunt Deo placere non possunt. That not
only the wine in the Chalice, but the water also is transubstaniated first
into wine, then into Christ's blood. That it was Ioh. 19. 34. c. Inter cunctas.
not watery moisture, but the true element of water which issued out of Christ's
side. You shall find Romans 10. 10.
confession of sins to the Priest, proved by the text, Cord creditur a'd
iustitiam, ore autem fit confessio ad salutem. Matthew. 13* 8.
That the good ground, that received the seed in the Gospel, is the religion of
the Friars Mi^^rs. Iam. 1. 27.
That this is that pure and immaculate religion with God and the Father, which
descending from the Father of lights, delivered, exemplariter and verbaliter,
by the Son, to his Apostles, and then inspired by the holy Ghost, into Saint
Francis and his followers, contains in it self the testimony of the Trinity.
This is that, which as Saint Paul witnesses, no man must be troublesome unto,
which Christ has confirmed with the prints of his Passion. The text is, Gal.
6. 17.
decaetero nemo mihi molestus sit, ego. n. stigmata Domini Jesus in corpore nemo
porto. It is marvel, if Saint Paul were not of the order of Saint Frances.
That when Christ said, Matthew. 28. 20. Lo I am with you, etc. Clem. 3. de
Reliq. Tract. in Job 50.
Ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus, he meant it of remaining and being with
them even by his bodily presence. Saint Augustine upon the same text denies
this, and says, that according to the presence of his body he is ascended
into heaven, and is not here. That C. Ma^^nus De cognat. spirit. 4. Mat. 19. 5.
the Father of the child christened, and his Godfathers wife may not marry,
because, according to the Lords word, the husband* and the wife are made one
flesh by marriage. C. non debet De consang. 1. Cor. 7. 4.
That the number of Four, does well agree to the degrees prohibited in
corporal marriage, of which the Apostle says, The man has not the power of
his own body, but the woman, nor the woman power of her body, but the man,
because there are four humors in the body, which consist of the four
Elements. For conclusion, you shall find it by a commodious interpretation
concluded, contrary to many texts of Scripture, out of Scripture it self,
that Cum ex. De. ^aeretici^ 5.
no simple and unlearned man presume to reach to the subtility of the
Scripture, because, well it was enacted in the law of God, Heb. 12. 20.
that the beast which should touch the mountain should be stoned. Exodus 19. 13.
For it is written, Ecclu. 3. 22.
Seek not things higher then thy self. Romans 12. 3.
For which cause the Apostle says, Be not more wise then it behooves, but be
wise to sobriety.

One thing more also you shall find, that now adays this spiritual man and
sole infallible interpreter of Scripture, seldom interprets Scripture, or uses
it in his Decretalls and Br^^es, Nay the style of his Court has no manner of
smack or savor of it. A long compass of a sentence, intricate to understand,
yea, even to remember to the end, full of swelling words of vanity, with I
know not how many ampliations and alternatiues; after the fashion of Lawyers in
Civil Courts, not of sober Divines, much less of the Spirit of God in his
Word. Some man would perhaps think this proceeds from an affectation of
greatness, and the desire of retaining authority, which seems to be embased
by alleging reason, or Scripture, and interpreting texts. For my part, I
account it comes as much from necessity. For it is notorious, that neither the
Popes themselves, nor those of the Court the Secretaries and Dataries, which
pen their Bull and Breues, have any use or exercise in holy Scripture, or
soundness in the knowledge of Divinity, or skill in the original tongues,
wherein Gods Word is written; all which are necessary to an able Interpreter.
And therefore it is a wise reservedness in them, not to intermedle with that
wherein they might easily fault; especially in a learned age, and wherein so
many watchful eyes ate continually upon them. And to this very poverty and
cautelousnesse I do imp^te it, that the present Pope in his Breues about the
Oath of Allegiance, uses not aword of Scripture: But tells his faction, that
they cannot without most evident and grieu^us injury of Gods honor take the
Oath, the tenor whereof he sets down word for word; and that done, adds.
Quae cum ita sint, etc. Which things (says he) since they be so, it must
needs be clear unto you out of the words themselves, that such an oath cannot
be taken, with the safety of the Catholic faith, and of your souls, since it
contains many things which are apparently contrary to faith and salvation.
He instances in no one thing, brings neither Scripture nor reason, but a Quae
cum ita sint, without any premises. Which loose and ungrounded proceeding,
when as it is occasioned the Archpriest here, and many other of that side, to
think those letters forged, or gotten by surreption; he sends another of the
same tenor, with this further reason. Haec aut^^ est mera pura, integraque
volunt as nostra. This is now to be more then an Interpreter, even to be a Lord
over the faith of his followers, to make his will a reason. What would ye have
him do? to allege a better he could not, a weak and insufficient one he was
ashamed, he thought it best to resolve the matter into his sole authority.
Whereby he has proved himself a fallible both Judge and Interpreter, yea a
false witness against God and the truth; commanding by the Apostle Christian
men to be subject, and to give every man their dues, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor; and much more (if there be any difference) allegiance to
whom allegiance.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the state of the Church of England, and whether it may be reconciled with
Rome.
But of your interpreters infallibility enough. Your next doubt, whether the
Church of England were of the true Church or no, was resolved with a
Paralogisme, partly by reason of equi^ocation, and diverse acception of the
terms the Church, and to err, partly by composition and division in the
connection of these by those Verbes [ can, or may.] Let us examine the several
parts of your Syllogism.

The Proposition. The true Church cannot err, is confirmed by the consent of
all. Excuse me Sir, if I withhold my consent, without some declaration and
limitation. I say first it must be declared whether you mean the Catholic
Church, or a atrue part of the Catholic Church. For there is not the like
reason of these to error. Against the Catholic Church, Math. 16.
hell gates shall not prevail; against particular, when Christ does remove the
Candlestick out of his place, Revel. 2. 5.
they do. Witness the Churches of Afric, sometimes most Catholic. And thus
it seems you must take this term, since your doubt was whether the Church of
England be of the true Church or no, Besides, I must desire to know, what
manner of errors you mean; whether even the least, or only deadly, and such
as bar from salvation, which the Apostle calls (...), heresies of perdition, 2
Pet. 2. 1. Take now your own choice; for if you speak of every error, the
proposition is false, even of the Catholic Church, much more of any particular
Church. Yea, I add further, not only of the Catholic Church by denomination
from the greatest part, or by representation, as the Pastors or Prelates
thereof met in a Council, which is still the mixed Church, but even that which
is Christ's true body, whereof he is the Savior, and which shall be with him
for ever. As for deadly and damnable errors, this true and properly called
Church, both in the whole and every part of the mixed Church, is yet
privileged from them finally: (...)
for it is kept by the power of God to salvation, it is not possible the Elect
should thus be seduced. (...)
Truth it is, that by such errors particular visible assemblies, universally
and obstinately defending them, become falsely called Churches, from which we
are to separate our selves. Example in the Synagogue, and in Churches of the
Arians.

Now let us see your Assumption. But the Church of England, head, and members,
King, Clergy, and people, yea awhole Council of Protestants may err by your
own grant. I answer, the Church of England that is the Elect in the Church of
England, which only are truly called the Church, can never deadly err. This
no Protestant will grant ye. The mixed Church of England, head, members, King,
Clergy, and the residue of the people, and a whole Council of Protestants,
may err damnably, and therefore much more ^all into lesser errors. This they
grant. And if they shall so err obstinately, they shall deservedly loose the
name of a true Church. But they deny they do thus err; yea they deny that
they err de facto, at all.

What follows in conclusion? Ergo, No true Church. This shortness in
suppressing the verb, would make a man think you meant to cover the fault of
your discourse. And indeed you might by that means easily beguile another,
but I cannot be persuaded you would willingly beguile your self. Sure you were
beguiled, if you meant it thus. Ergo, it is no true Church. See your Argument in
the like: A faithful witness cannot lie. But Socrates or Aristides may lie by
his own grant. Ergo, no faithful witness. He that stands upright cannot
fall: but you Master Waddesworth by your own grant may fall, Ergo, stand not
upright. Perhaps your meaning was, Ergo, it may become no true Church, to wit,
when it shall so err damnably. But then it follows not, There is now no
salvation in it, and therefore come out of it now. When you show that, I shall
account you have done wisely to go out of it. Show that in any one point, and
take me with you. In the mean while, for my part, I shall sooner trust that
chapman that shall say to me, Lo here is a perfect yard, I will measure as
truly as I can, and when I have done take the yard and measure it your self;
then him that shall say here is thus much, ye shall not need to measure it,
but take it on my word: yea though one of his Apprentices should stand by and
say, he could not deceive me though he would; as Benedictus a Benedictus,
tells the present Pope, Volens nolens errare non potes.

Where you relate, your endeavor to defend the Church of England, and tell of
the Puritanes rejecting those Arguments you could use from the authority of
the Church, and of the ancient Doctors interpreting Scriptures against them,
flying to their own arrogant spirit: I cannot excuse them for the former, nor
subscribe to your accusation in the latter. Perhaps you have met with some more
fanaticall Brownists or Anadaptists, whom here you call Puritans. But these
that are commonly so called, which differ from the Church of England about
Church government and ceremonies only, give indeed to little to the
authority of men, how holy, learned, or ancient soever. Which is their fault,
and their great fault, especially in matters of this nature; yet they fly not
to their own spirit as you charge them.

That which you add that you perceived the most Protestants did frame the like
euasions when you came to answer the Arguments against them on the other side;
when you shall show this in particulars, I shall believe it. In the mean while
I believe you thought so; for commonly mediocrities are aggrauated with the
hatred, and slandered with the names of both extremes. But in the question
between the Popish faction and us, you might easily have discerned why the
argument from bare authority, is not of such validity. For ceremonies and
matters of order may be ordered by wise men, and are not the worse, but the
better if they be ancient, yea if they be common to us with Rome, which
Puritans will by no means allow. In doctrine, if holy men, yea if an Angel
from heaven shall innouate any thing, we are not to admit it. Now the
controversies between the Romanists and us, are most about doctrine, and they
exceed as much in extolling the authority of the ancients in their private
opinions and incommodious and strained speeches, as the Puritans in depressing
them. We hold the mean, and give as much to the authority and testimonies of
the Fathers, as may stand with the truth of holy Scriptures, and as themselves
defer to the writing of others, or require to be given to their own.

Next you tell, of your following their opinion who would make the Church of
England and the Church of Rome still to be all one in Essential points, and
the differences to be accidental. Confessing the Church of Rome to be a true
Church, though sick, or corrupted, and the Protestants to be derined from it,
and reformed. This opinion is not only as you write favored of many great
Scholars in England, but is the common opinion of all the best Divines of the
reformed Churches that are or have been in the world, as I showed in part of
another work, which as I remember you had a sight of. Wherein yet I fear you
mistake the term, accidental, which does no^ import that our differences are
but slight and of small confideration, but that all those opinions and abuses
which we reform and cut off, are not of the Faith, but superfluous and
^oraine, yea hurtful and noisome to it, as the weeds are to the corn, which
ouer-grow and choke it. And to follow this similitude, the state of the Church
under the Roman obedience, and that part which is reformed, is like a field
ouergrowne all with weeds, thistles, tares, cockle: some part whereof is
weeded and cleansed, some part remains as it was before; which makes such a
difference to the view, as if it were not the same corn. But being better
considered, it will be found all the difference is, from the weeds, which
remain there, and here are taken away. Yet neither here perfectly, nor all
where a like, but ac^ording to the industry of our weeders, or conueniencie of
the work, with care of the safety of the good corn. By this Parable, you may
see what is to be hoped of your labor to reconcile most of our particular
controversies. For although I doubt not but in some it may be performed, where
the difference is rather verbal then real; and in the manner of teaching,
rather then in the substance of doctrine. And if moderate men had the matter in
handling the flame of contention in a great many more might be trodden down and
slaked, suppose the sparks not all extinct; yet in some other, it is as
possible to make the weed and corne-friends, as your and our opinions; where
there is none other remedy but that of our Savior, Every plant that my
heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out. Neither does this
impossibility arise more out of the nature of the things, then the affection
of the persons. For the Pope and the Court of Rome, which are those that
domineere on that side, do no less out of the fear of their own ruin
deadly detest all reformation, then the reformed out of their present view and
former feeling, the tyranny of the Papacy, which they see does excommunicate,
and put to cruel death all that are of this way. And which is a prodigious
thing, where they tolerate the blasphemous and professed enemies of Christ,
even with allowance of the public exercise of their Religion, there do they
burn men professing Christ's religion, according to the ancient and common rule
thereof, with that uprightness of conscience, that if they had as many lives
as there be Articles thereof, they would give them all rather then renounce any
of them.

As for the Protestants making the Pope Antichrist, I know it is a point that
inrageth much at Rome. But if the Apostle Saint Paul, if Saint John in the
Revelation, describe Antichrist so, as they that do but look upon the Pope
well, must be forced to say as the people did of the blind man in the Gospel,
some, this is ^e; others, he is very like him; if himself and his flatterers
do, and speak such things, as if all others should hold their peace, do in a
sort proclaim, I am he; what can the Protestants do with the matter? I will
take the liberty here to relate to you, what I saw while I was in Venice, the
rather because it is not impertinent to our present purpose. And though perhaps
you may have heard somewhat of it, yet the particulars are I suppose unknown
in those parts. And yet it does more import they were known there then
otherwhere, being occasioned by a subject of the Crown, though of a name and
family whereto it is not much beholding.

In the year 1608. F. Thomas Maria Carafa, of the order of the Friars
Preachers, Reader of Philosophy in Naples, printed a thousand Theses to be
disputed thrice; once at Rome in the Church of Saint Marie super Mineruam,
twice in Saint Dominickes at Naples. Of these five hundred were in Logic,
Natural Philosophy, Metaphysicke, and Mathematickes; five hundred more in
Divinity, amongst which that was one. Solus Petrus and success^res in totam
Ecclesiam illimitatam iurisdictionem habent. These were all included in the
form of a Tower, and dedicated with an Epistle to the present Pope Paulus the
fifth, to whose arms alluding he says, idem Draco biceps qui vtrumque polum
amplexus imperio ad Ecclesiae pomoerium tanquam ad amaenissimos Hesperidum
hortos peruigil excubat, nullius Herculis vim metuens, turris etiam mea sit
custos. On the top of his Tower, was this representation curiously and largely
cut. An Altar, with two Columns, and their ornaments, according to the rules
of Architecture. In the midst for the Altar piece was the Popes picture, very
lively portraied to the breast. Over his head was the word, Vultu portendebat
imperium. Above on the top of the front, in three compartiments his arms
thus. On the one side the spread Eagle alone, the word Ipse mihi fert tela
pater. On the other a Dragon, and by it Meliora seruo. In the midst both
together in one scutchion with the cross Keys and triple crown in the crest.
On either side of these colums were depending Crowns and Scepters, whereof
six were on the right hand after the Christian fashion. The Imperial above,
other underneath, and lowest the Corno of the Duke of Venice, so they call a
certain Cap the Prince uses to wear being of Gold Embroderie, and somewhat
resembling a horn. There were also Turkish Turbanes, and Diadems of diverse
fashions, as many on the left side. By these on either side of the columns,
were two of the four parts of the world. Europe and Afrike on the one, Asia
and America on the other, in the habit of Ladies sitting upon their proper
beasts couchant, each offering unto him that was above the Altar of their
commodities, Corn, Fruits, Incense, etc. On the base of the column on the
Christian and Europaean side, was the word, Et erunt Reges nutritij tui. On the
other, Vultu in terram demisso puluerem pedum tuorum lingent, Esai. 49.
Agreeable whereto there was made flying over their heads two Angels, on each
side, one with these sentences in their hands. That over Europe and Africa;
Gens and regnum quod non seruierit illi, in gladio and in fame, and in peste
visitabo super gentem illam ait Dominus, Hier. 27. That over Asia and America:
Et dedit ei Dominus potestatem and regnum, and omnes populi ipsi seruient:
potestas eius potestas aeterna quae non auferetur and regnum eius quod non
corrumpetur, Dan. 7. Now just underneath the picture of the Pope, on the
foreside of the Altar, was this inscription, PAVLO V. VICE DEO CHRISTIANAE
REIP. MONARCHAE INVICTISSIMO ET PONTIFICIAE OMNIPOTENTIAE CONSERVATORI
ACERRIMO. The Copies of these Theses were sent as Nouelles from Rome, and did
the more amuse men at Venice, because of the controversy that State had with
the Pope a little before, and the seeing their Dukes Corno hanged up among his
Trophies, under all other Princes Crowns. But most of all the new title
Vice-Deo, and the addition of Omnipotency gave matter of wonder. The next day
it was noised about the City, that this was the picture of Antichrist; for
that the inscription P A V5 L50 O V.5 V5 I1 C100 E-D500 E O, contained exactly
in the numerall Letters the number of the beast in the Revelation 666. What
anger and shame this was to the Popish faction, I leave it to you to esteem.
But whom could they blame, but themselves, who had suffered so presumptuous and
shameless a flattery to come forth, with public approbation, annexing also
so blasphemous an inscription, as unawares to them by the providence of God,
should so plainly characterize Antichrist? But to heal up this matter again,
not long after we had fresh news went about, that Antichrist was borne in
Babylon, had done many miracles, was coming toward Christendom with an Army.
We had an Epistle stamped at Venice, pretended to be written at Rome, An.
1592. by the Reuer. D. Valentinus Granarensis touching the birth of Antichrist
his stock, progeny, country habitation, power, maruels, life, and death, out
of the holy Scriptures, and Fathers, printed Cum priuilegio. And as for the
Title Vice-Deus, as if they would have it in despite of all men: one Benedictus
a Benedictis a subject of the Venetian State, setting out a Book against
Doctor Whitakers position, De Antichrist^, at Bologn^ (for at Venice it was not
suffered to be printed) reuiues it with advantage. He dedicates it thus,
Paulo Quinto Pontifici Vniuersalis Ecclesiae Oecumenico, summo totius Orbis
Episcopo atque Monarchae and supremo Vice-Deo. These Titles he heaps upon the
Pope again, and again, and that ye may judge of his wit by one place, in the
conclusion, exhorting Doctor Whitakers to repentance; he tells him, that by his
example his King, and with the same King James the first, many Englishmen,
conuertentur ad Dominum Deum, and ipsius loco ad Vice-Deum confugient. And page
135. he says of Gregory the Great. Totum mundum quasi Monarcha ac Vice-Deus
optime and irreprehensibiliter rexit, etc. He might have learned of him, that
his other Title Oecumenicus Pontifex, is the very name of Antichrist, the name
of blaspheme, by which he doubts not to presage, that Antichrist was near,
and an Army of Priests ready to attend upon him. In this if ever in any
thing, it seems your Judge was infallible.

It will be said here, it is not in the Popes power what his followers will
say of him, he styles himself the Servant of Gods Servants. If the Canonists
will call him, Our Lord God the Pope, Apologia pro Garneto, c. 5.
first, it may be denied. Secondly, it may be laid to the ouer-sight of the
Writers or Printers. Thirdly, if it be showed to be left standing still in
the Gloss of the Canon Law, by them that were appointed to ouer-see and
correct it, what marvel if one word escaped them, through negligence, or
weariness, or much business? And yet if they thought the sense of the word
not so usual indeed in the ordinary talk of Christians, but not differing
from the custom of Scripture was to be allowed to an ancient Writer, the
matter deserves not such outcryes. But the Pope, such is his modesty, never
usurped this Title full of arrogance, never heard it with patient ears. To
this, let it first be considered, that the Censors of such things as come to
the Press, are not to be imagined such Babes, as not to know what will please
or displease his Holiness. Especially in writings dedicated to himself, a man
may be sure they will allow nothing the second time, and after some exception
and scandal taken at it, but what shall be justified. How much more in the
Popes own Town of Bologna, and when his Chaplain could not be allowed to
print it at home. But to let all these go; we may have a more sensible proof
how the Pope tastes these Titles. That which he rewards he approues:
Benedictus was shortly after made for his pains Bishop of Caorli. How worthily
he deserved it you shall judge by his book; which at my request vouchsafe to
read over, and if there be any merit, you shall sure get great meede of
patience in so doing. That you may not doubt of the Popes judgment concerning
these Titl^s, you shall further know, that the matter being come to the
knowledge of the Protestants in France, and England, made them talk and write
of it broadly, namely the Lord of Plessis, in his Mysterium iniquitatis, and
the Bishop of Chichester in his Tortura Torti. This gave occasion to the
Cardinal Gieure, to relate in the Officio Santo at Rome of the scandal taken
hereat, and to make a motion, De moderandis titulis. It was on foot sundry
months. At last the Pope reuoking it to himself, blamed those that had spoken
against these Titles, and said, they were no whit greater then the authority
of S. Peter's Successor did bear. To return thither whence I have a little
digress^d. In the question whether the Pope be the Antichrist or no, for my
part I despair of all reconciliation. For neither does there appear any
inclination at all in the Pope to reform any thing in Doctrine or Government,
nay he encroacheth daily more and more upon all degrees even among his own
subjects, and resolves to carry all before him at the breast, with his Monarchy
and infallibility. On the other side, the Reformers partly emboldned with
success, partly enforced by necessity, chiefly tied with band of conscience,
and persuasion of truth, are not like to retract what they have affirmed in
this behalf, and whatsoever their differences be in other things, in this
point they have a marvelous vn^tie amongst them. These in France having been
molested for calling the Pope Antichrist have been occasioned (as I have
heard) some few years since to take it into their Confession, thereby to
justify themselves accor^ing to the Edicts of Pacification giving them
liberty to pro^esse their Religion. In England as you know it is no part of
the doctrine of our Church, yet a commonly received opinion. Howbeit this is so
far from hindering, that the reformed Chu^ches and those which heretofore
were, or at this present are under the Popes obedience be one Church, that is,
all members of the Catholic; that the Protestants without this cannot make
good the other. For Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God, and that is in
the Church, as Chrysostom and Theophylact interpret it, and Gods people could
not be commanded to go out of Babell, if he had none there.

CHAP. V.
Of the safenesse to join to the Roman being confessed a true Church by her
opposites.
But you concluded hence, that seeing many of the best learned Protestants did
grant the Church of Rome to be a true Church, though faulty in some things;
and contrarily not only the Romanists, but Puritanes, Anabaptists, and
Brownist deny the Church of England to be so, therefore it would be more safe
and secure to become a Roman Catholic, etc. This discourse has a pret^e show
at the first blush, and perhaps was used to you since your coming to Spain,
as it was to some there before. At my coming to Venice I fell upon certain
letters and reports, set forth as it was told me by F. Posseuine, and not
unlike by his mindefulnesse to all occasions to advance the credit of his
society. Amongst them there is one said to be a true Relation of the manner
how M. Pickering Wotton was converted to the Catholic Roman faith, indicted as
it is said and subscribed by himself before his death. In which by a certain
Father of the company of Jesus an Englishman by nation, the like discourse was
used, as it is said, to him. That he should consider well, that he and other
Protestants did not deny that the Catholics might be saved in their faith,
whereas all the Catholics that either lived at the present, or ever were, hold
it as a most certain Article of Faith, that the Protestants and other
heretics cannot be saved out of the Catholic Church; therefore if he should
become a Catholic, he should enter into that way which was safe, by the
consent of both parts. This consideration be says moved him not much then. But
after praying to God, as he was also advised by that Father, to direct him into
the right way, if he were out of it, suddenly he saw a certain light very
clearly before his eyes in form of a cross. Whereupon incontinently there
was offered unto him such a heap of reasons and arguments by which was showed
that the Catholic faith is the only way of salvation, and that of the
Protestants on the contrary most absurd and abominable, that most evidently he
was convinced, without any the least doubt. And these reasons which then
offered themselves to him, were for the most part such as he did not remember
that he had ever heard them in all his life. Thereupon with unspeakable joy he
called back the Father, told him what had happened, prayed him to hear his
confession, and he examining him upon all the heads of the Catholic religion,
which he most firmly and entirely believed, heard his confession, etc. But
this narration deserves little credit. First creating Master W^tton for the
greater glory of their triumph a Baron* unless the Fathers in Spain, or
Posseuine in Italy have a ^acultie to create Barons. Next it is a very
improbable thing that Master Wotton dying of a Calenture should have so good a
memory, as to indite so exact and artificial a Narration, with such
formalitie, and enforcements in fit places, as any Reader of understanding must
needs perceive, came out of a diligent forge, and needed more hammering and
fyling then so. But that of all other is most Legendlike, that howsoever this
motive of yours is used, yet it is not made the effectual inducement, but a
heap of reasons in the twinkling of an eye, and causing him not only to
believe in the gross, but to be able to give ac^ount of all the heads of the
Catholic religion (that is all the points of controversy at this day,
between the Romists and the reformed Churches) in a fit of an Ag^e, in the
twinkling of an eye? Excuse me: this is beyond the blind beggar that
recovered his sight at Saint Albans that could tell the names of all colors as
soon as he saw them. What then? Was not Master Wotton reconciled? and saw he
not a light in form of a cross? Yes: and this your motive was used to him
also, and perhaps moved him more then all the heap of reasons besides. But
shall I tell you here what I have heard from the mouth of one that was himself
then in Spain, that both could know the truth of this matter, and had no
reason to tell me a lie, since what he said came freely from himself, without
fear, or hope, or almost inquiry? The Gentleman being sick, and weak in his
brain, the Father that Posseuine tells of, brought under his gown a picture,
and upon a sudden presented it before him: this might be the light in form of
a cross (perhaps a very image of Christ crucified) which together with the
lightness of his fancy, occasioned that your motive though it self also very
light, might carry him: as a little weight is able to sway much, where the
beam it self is false. If this be true (as I take the living God to record I
feign no thing, but do relate what has been told me) as on the one side I
doubt not, but God in his mercy did interpret of the Gentleman's religion,
according to his right judgment and persuasion in his health, and not
according to the erroneous apprehension of his fancy in his sickness (which
even in his best health was ever very strong in his sleep) as some that have
conuersed with him have told me: So on the other side, they shall bea^e their
judgment whosoever they were, that would with so cru^ll a craftiness take
advantage of his infirmity, and make his story after a stale to draw on
others. As for the heap of Arguments to convince the Protestants faith to be
absurd (that must be by the way the Articles of the Creed) Posseuines
Catholic Hyperboles are well enough known in Venice, and he has been there
told to his head, A^uertiment^al P Ant Posseuino. p. 7. and 14.
That if in things past, whereof he might have been informed, he proves a
most lying Historian, it might more easily fall out, that he should prove a
most false and ridiculous prophet in things to come.

And in truth he has proved so hitherto. Wherefore, I reckon these
garnishments of Master Wottons peruersion, to be like the rest of his news,
touching the Conquest of Moscouia by Demetrius that Impostor, whom he boasts
in a manner to have been the Scholar of his Society. W^ere he tells the
world that the army cried out often. God and the prayers of our Fathers (the
Jesuits) have subdued the hearts of our enemies, and inclined them under our
Noble Prince Demetrius. That Demetrius turning to the Priests of the company of
Jesus, was heard to say [Loe that which you foretold me, O Fathers, in the
time of that sorrowful flight of ours, is now come to pass, to wit, that as
the Lord God had afflicted me much, so on the contrary he would much comfort
me, and that therefore I should not doubt of a full victory.] These words
Posseuine stamps in his former Relation in Capital letters. But when this bold
enterprise was overthrown, and this suborned fugitive slain and shamefully
dragged up and down the streets of Mosco, then lo the repors were, That a
light was seen over his body in the night time, etc. Let them that walk in
darkness follow such lights as these be. We are no children of the night, nor
of darkness. Leaving therefore those unheard of Arguments, which Posseuine
has not only cunningly drawn a veyle over, that we may not see them, but
exempted by privilege of a miracle that we may not try them, this which he
has showed us, let us bring it a little to the clear daylight.

And even at the first view it is apparent that this Argument is merely
foreign; not drawn from any thing, a par^e rei, as what the true Church is,
what it teaches, or such like, but from opinion and testimony. What men say of
that of Rome, and of the Reformed Churches, etc. Now opinions are no certain
grounds of truth, no not in natural and civil matters, much less in
religion. So this Argument at the most is but Topicall and probable. Let us see
the parts of it. And first that ground. The testimony of our selves, and of our
contraries is much more sufficient and certain then to justify our selves
alone. Surely neither the one nor the other is sufficient, or certain. It is
true, that if other proof fail, and we will follow conjectures. he is in
probability an honester man, that others beside himself say well of, then he
that alone testifies of himself. And yet according to truth, this latter may
be a right honest man, and dwell, as we say, by ill neighbors, or where he is
not known, or requires not the testimony of other men: Whereas the other being
indeed a knave, is either cunning to conceal it, or has suborned other like
himself to say for him, or dwells b^ honest men that judge and say the best.
And in this very kind, our Savior attributes so little to testimony, Luk^. 6.
26.
as he pronounces a woe to them that all men speak well of. So in our case it
is more probable I grant, if there were no other Argument to clear it, but
opinion, and most voices, that you have the true Church, and are in the way of
salvation then we because we give you a better testimony then you do us. But
it is possible we are both deceived in our opinions, each of other; we through
too much charity, and you and others through ignorance or malice. Herein
undoubtedly we have the advantage of you and the rest, and do take that course
which is more safe and sure to avoid sin, that if we do fail of the truth,
yet we be deceived with the error of love, which as the Apostle says, hops
all things, and is not puffed up. We avoid at the least that gulf of rash
judgment, which, me thinks, if the case be not too to clear we should all
fear, With what judgment ye judge, Matthew. 7. 6.
ye shall be judged. Thou that iudgest another condemnest thy self. Romans 2.
1.


But that you may a little be ter consider the weakness of this discourse, if
the testimony of our selves and our contraries were sufficient and certain to
make truth, and ever more safe and secure to follow that side which has that
testimony, it had been better to have become a Jewish Proselyte, in the
Apostles times then a Christian ^ For the Christ^ans acknowledged the Jews to
be the people of God, heirs of the promises, and of Christ, and styled them
Brethren, notwithstanding their zeal to the ceremonies, and tradi^ions of
their Fathers, excused their ignorance, bare with them, labored to give them
content in all things. Whereas they to the contrary called those that
professed Christ, Heretics and Sectaries, accursed them, drew them out of
their Synagogues, scourged them, cast them in prison, compelled them to
blaspheme: as you do now Protestants to adiu^e, though in other cruelties I
confess you go far beyond them. By like reason a Pagan in Saint Augustines
time, should rather have made himself a Christian among the Donatists, then
with the Catholics. For the Catholics granted the Donatists Baptism to be
true, accoun^ed them Brethren. The Donatists to the contrary renounced their
Brotherhood and Baptism both, rebaptized such as fell to their side, used
these forms to their friends, Save thy Soul, become a Christian: like to
those used by your Reconcilers at this ^ay. Aug. Epist. 4^. and (...). ^9. De
(...) l. ^. c. 7.


Lastly consider, if this ground of the testimony of our contraries for our
part, and their lack of ours, for theirs be sure; you have justified the cause
of the Protestants in the maine question, which is the better religion. For
whatsoever a Protestant holds, as of Faith, you cannot deny to be good and
Catholic, nor any Christian man else. For he binds him to his Creed, to the
holy Scriptures, and goes no further: and in these he has your testimony for
him. But he denies many things which you believe, and accounts them foreign,
yea repugnant to Faith, as the Popes infallibility, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints. In all these you speak
only for your selves, in some of these you have not us only, but all other
Christians your opposites, to say nothing of the Jews and Turks, whom I might
as well chocke you withal, as you do the Protestants with Anabaptists. So by
this reason our profession is more safe and secure, and questionless is more
Catholic then yours. Neither have we in this discourse the Argument only as
you see very appliable and favorable to us, but (which I would entreat you by
the way to observe) the conclusion it self often gran^ed by moderate and sober
men of your own side, viz. that our course is in sundry things more safe then
yours. As in making no Image of God. Abulensis.
In trusting only in the merits of Christ. Bellarmine.
Faber.
In worshipping none but the Trinity. In directing our prayers to our Lord
Jesus Christ alone. Erasmus.
In allowing Ministers to marry. Cassander.
In di^ers other points also many of your side say the same with the
Protestants, Hofmeister.
Aeneas Syluius.
and defend us from the imputations which others of you lay upon us, as is
showed in the Catholic Apology, by the Reverend Bishop of Chester.

This to the proposition. Let us come to the Assumption, where you mince too
much the Protestants opinion touching the Church of Rome, when you make them
say, It is peradventure faulty in some things: Nay without peradventure, they
say, It is corrupt in doctrine, superstitious and Idolatrous in religion,
tyrannical in government, defiled in manners, from the crown of the head to
the soale of the foot no soundnes in it, as the Prophet says of another like
it; Isai 1. 6.
yet the vital parts not perished, ready to die, Doctor Raynolds. These. 5.
yet not dead. A true Church though neither the Catholic Church, nor yet a
sound member of the same. That also is false in the assumption, that the
Puritans deny the Church of England to be a true Church. Unless the Puritans
and Brownists be with you all one, which you have made diverse Sects above, and
then are you to blame as to multiply names (whereof I have told you) before, so
now again to confound them.

What is now the Conclusion? It would be more safe and secure to become a Roman
Catholic. But the Proposition will not infer thus much simply, but only in
this respect. For Topicall arguments (as you know) hold only, caeteris
paribus. We must then inquire if there be no other intrinsecall arguments by
which it may be discerned, whether cause be the better, whether pretense to
the Church and Truth, more just, more evident. Whether it may be warranted to
return to Babell, because God has some people there; when as he commands
those that are there to come out of it. How safe it may be willingly to join
with that part of the Church, which is more corrupt in Doctrine and Manners,
when we may continue with that which is reformed. These points were to have
been scanned, ere you concluded and executed as you did.

And such Arguments there want not. Christ our Lord has given us amongst
others, two infallible Notes to know his Church. My Sheep, says he, Job 10.
27.
hear my voice: Chap. 13. 35.
and again, By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if ye love
one another. What shall we stand upon coniecturall Arguments from that which
men say? We are partial to our selves, malignant to our opposites. Let Christ
be heard who be his, who not. And for the hearing of his voice, O that it
might be the issue! But I see you decline it, Therefore I leave it also for the
present. That other is that which now I stand upon: the badge of Christ's
sheep. Not a likelihood, but a certain token, whereby every man may know
them. By this, says he, shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye
have charity one toward another. Thanks be to God: This mark of our Savior
is in us, which you with our Schismatikes, and other enemies want. As Solomon
found the true Mother by her natural affection, that chose rather to yield to
her Adversaries plea clayming her child, then endure it should be cut in
pieces, so may it soon be found at this day, whether is the right Mother.
Ours, that says, give her the living child, and kill him not; or yours, that
if she may not have it, is content it be killed, rather then want of her
will. Alas, says ours, even of those that leave her, these be my children, I
have borne them to Christ in Baptism, I have nourished them as I could with
mine own breasts his Testaments. I would have brought them up to man's estate,
as their free birth and parentage deserves. Whether it be their lightness or
discontent, or her enticing words and gay shows, they leave me, they have
found a better Mother. Let them live yet, though in bondage. I shall have
patience; I permit the care of them to their Father; I beseech him to keep
them that they do none evil; if they make their peace with him, I am
satisfied, they have not hurt me at all. Nay but, says yours, I sit alone as
Queen and Mistress of Christ's family; Revel. 18. 7.
he that has not me for his Mother, cannot have God for his Father. Mine
therefore are these, either borne or adopted: and if they will not be mine
they shall be none. So without expecting Christ's sentence, she cuts in pieces
with the temporal sword, hangs, burns, draws those that she perceiues
inclined to leave her, or have left her already. So she kills with the
spiritual sword, those that subject not to her, yea thousands of souls that
not only have no means so to do, but many which never so much as have heard
whether there be a Pope of Rome or no. Let our Solomon be Judge between them:
yea judge you (Master Waddesworth) more seriously and maturely, not by ghesses,
but by the very mark of Christ, which wanting your selves, you have unawares
discovered in us, judge I say without passion, and partiality, according to
Christ's Word; which is his Flock, which is his Church.

CHAP. VI.
Of fraud and corruption in alleging Councels, Fathers, and Doctors.
YOur next Motive was, That in examining the questions especially about the
Church, where you labored to peruse the original Quotations and Texts of the
Councels, Fathers, and Doctors, you found, as you say, much fraud committed by
the Protestants. This imputation of fraud is very usual and common to both
sides; and verily I believe some on both sides are faulty. For whether out of
humane infirmity, mistaking the meaning of Authors, or slips of memory, trust
of other men's Q^otations, who tie not themselves to the words, but give the
sense they conceive; how easily may testimonies be alleged clean besides the
Authors minds? He that has strongly conceited any thing, finds it in all
that ever he reads, or falls upon. Too much heat in contention, and desire
of victory, blinds the judgment, and makes a man heedlesly lay hold upon
any thing, that he thinks may serve his turn. As we see sometimes in the
writings of the Fathers, which had to deal with ancient Heretics, alleging
the Scriptures themselves besides the purpose. Sometimes haste and desire of
contracting makes one cut off some words, and explain and press those that
make for him; and perhaps leave out something material* presently the other
side cries out clipping, forgerie, falsification, and what not? But although
all this may be called fraud in respect of the Reader, who is by this means
deceived in his evidence, and therefore if he be not aware may pronounce
amiss, yet is it nothing to that kind, when with an evil conscience and of
set purpose falsehood is set forth, and Truth out-faced. Wherein I cannot tell
what you have found. I could have desired, and do yet if your leisure may
serve, you would show the particulars. I do profess here to you, that I have
seen and even felt with my fingers such dealing in the Romish faction, as I
cannot resolve whether I should account them more shameful slanderers, and
false accusers of others, of fraudulent handling; or bold and shameless, in
the practizing of it themselves. When the Lord of Plessis his book of the
Sacrament came out, how was it calumniated in this kind, with falsification? Du
Puy in a public Chartell offered, that of 306. passages in the Preface, he
would show as clear as the Sun at noone day, 283. were falsified, corrupted,
and mangled, and the rest of no importance. The Bishop of Eureux after
Cardinal, undertook to show in the book it self 500. enormous falsities by
^ale, and without hyperbole. The matter was brought to a trial before the King
of France, and nine places examined of this number. And as was beforehand
promised the Popes Nuncio, the business should be so carried that the
advantage should remain on the part of the Church of Rome, and the Pope
receive contentment, and in these very words the lie should rest with the
Heretics. Morney was borne down. The Kings letters to the Duke of Espernon of
this victory, were blown over France, sent to Rome, printed with a discourse
thereabout, set forth at Antwerp, and translated into English, with some
alteration and Turksing by F. Parsons* Wherein he says a French Jesuit Fronto
Duc^us discovered in it at least a thousand falsehoods for his part. He
accuses Bishop Jewel, and Master Fox of the like crime; he says that in two
only leaves of his book, a certain learned Scholar did discover thirty
wilful and voluntary corruptions and falsifications that cannot be excused,
and himself besides these thirty, noted so many other plain falsehoods and
manifest wilful lies, as might well double the former number. And by
Arithmetic he multiplies this number with the number of the leaves, the
number he says will rise to 30000. by which John Fox his book will as much
exceed John Sleidans story in number of lies (in which were found only
11000) as it does in bulk and bigness. This manner of writing of these men,
brings to my mind that which Sir Thomas More writes of Tyndals New Testament,
Dialog. l. 3. c. 8.
wherein he says, were founden and noted wrong and falsely translated above a
thousand Texts by tale. The language is like, and the cause is the same. Men
were loath these books should be read. The substance of them was such as could
not be controlled; the next remedy was to forestall the Readers minds with a
prejudice of falsification, that so they might not regard them, but cast them
out of their hands of their own accord. The Vulgar sort would be brought out
of conceit at the first hearing, with vehement accusation. Even wise men would
suppose though there should not be any thing near so many wilful faults, yet
surely there must needs be a very great number, and that could not happen but
with a very bad meaning; this admitted, who would vouchsafe them the reading?
And in truth among those that favor the reformed part, I have me^ with some
that out of this buzze of falsification in the Lord of Plessis book, cared not
for reading it; whereby may be thought in what account it should be with all
those who esteem all F. Parsons Libels to be Oracles. But shortly: Since
neither the Cardinal Perone, nor F. Parsons have had the means, or will, to
decypher those hundreds and thousands of falsifications in Sleidan, Bishop
Jewel, Master Fox, or Plessis, in these so many years, as have run since they
wrote; and as for the last, he has set forth the book again, with all the
authorities at large in the margent, in the Authors own words, and has
answered all those that bayed at it, till they are silent, what remains but
that we count this multiplying of F. Parso^s, may be joined with Aequi^ocation,
to make up the art of falsehood; wherein he and his faction may justly claim
to be the worthiest Professors in the world. But without any multiplication or
other Arithmeticke, in the fifth page of that Relation of his, in the seven
first lines are four notorious, I will not say lies or falsifications, but
falsehoods by tale. The first: That the trial being begun upon the first place,
that was found false. The French discourse printed at Antwerp cum priuilegio,
and approbation of the Visitor of books, says: And as to the said first
Article, nothing was judged thereabout by the said Commissioners, nor
pronounced by my said Lord the Chancellor, and the King said that it should be
remitted to another time to deliberate thereabout. The second: He (that is,
Plessis) would have passed to the second, but the Bishop refused so to do,
except the Ministers and Protestants there present would first subscribe and
testify that this first place was falsified. He said in the page before, that
Plessis appeared at last with some four or five Ministers on his side. There
were no Ministers appeared with him on his side. No Protestants, no creature
did subscribe, or was required so to do. The third: Which at length they did,
viz. subscribe, this place was falsified. A utter untruth. Whereof there is not
a word in the said printed Narration. The fourth: as well in this as in all the
rest. There was no subscription, as I said, at all. The Commissioners were all
of the Roman profession, saving Causabon; and he no Minister. They never
pronounced, much less subscribed that any of those places examined were
falsified. Of the first place of Scotus they pronounced nothing. Of the second,
of Durand, That the opposition of Durand was alleged for the resolution. And
this they would have remitted also as the former to another time, save that the
Bishop insisted, saying, it was in vain to dispute if they would not judge,
addressing his speech diverse times to the King, to the intent he should
signify his pleasure to the Commissioners; and then his Majesty drawing near
to them, they gave their opinions upon that Article as before. This was that
which F. Parsons stumbled at when he wrote, The Ministers and Protestants
there present subscribed and testified, that it was falsified, and so all the
rest. For being ouerioyed with this news which he did not well understand (to
think the charitablest of him) he thought the Commissioners had been part at
least Protestants, and Ministers: and had subscribed, whereas they pronounced
their sentence viua voce, by the mouth of the Chancellor, never using the
term falsification; yea in some of the rest they acquitted the L. of Plessis,
as in the passage of P. Crinitus though they said Crinitus was deceived. In
that of Bernard, that it had been good to distinguish the two passages of
Saint Bernard out of the same book with an et caetera. Not to stand now upon
that, that in the rest of the places he has a reasonable and just defense with
indifferent men, for the omissions he was charged with in Chrysostom, Hierome,
Bernard, and Theodorit: and in that of Cyril, the King himself said aloud,
that both sides had reason* but F. Parsons not having as it appears received
perfect information of the particularities of this affair, was so hasty to
write according to the partial intelligen^e he received at Rome, that he
faults himself in the same kind, that he imputes to another. And if he
should meet with some severe adversary, that would multiply his falsehoods
by his leaves and lines, as he deals with Master Fox, and then extend by
proportion his pamphlet to the bigness of Master Fox his Book of Martyrs, he
would find, that he prouides very ill for himself that is to rigorous and
censorious to other men.

But I leave him, and come to the fidelity of the Popish faction, whereof I
shall desire you to take a taste in one of the questions which you name about
the Church, even that which is indeed cardo negotij, as you say, the
controversy of the Popes authority. For the establishing whereof: First, the
Epistles of the ancient Bishops of Rome for the space of about 300. years
after Christ are counterfeited. The Barbarous not Latin but lead of the style,
and the likeness of them all one to another, the deep silence of antiquity
concerning them; the Scriptures alleged after Hieromes translation, do
convince them of falsehood. And by whose practice and procurement we cannot
doubt, if we ask but as Cassius was wont Cui bono? For at every bout the
authority of the Pope, and privileges of the Roman See are extolled and
magnified.

Next, the Donation of Constantine is a senseless forgerie; Did. 96. c.
Constantinus.
and so blazed by some of the learnedest of the Roman Church. Read it
advisedly, either in Gratian, or in the Decrees of Syluester, with the
Confession, and Legend of Constantines baptism, and say out of your own
judgment if ever any thing can be more fraudulent, more sottish? And because I
have mentioned Gratian, his whole compilation is f^ll of falsification, and
corruption of Antiquity: take an example or two in the matter we have in
hand. Council. Mile^. ^. 72.
The Mileuitene and after the Africane Councils vnderpaine of Excommunication
prohibit appeals beyond the Seas. Council. A^ric. c. 12.
Which Canons were made purposely to meet with the usurpations of the Bishops
of Rome, of which I have spoken some what before. Now in the citing this Canon,
Gratian adds this goodly explication; c. placuit. qu. 9. 6
nisi forte Romanam sedem appellauerint; thus excepting that abuse which these
Councels directly sought to prohibit. De doctrina. Christt. l. 2.
Again, Saint Augustine to inform a Christian man what Scriptures he should
hold for Canonical, bids him follow the authority of the greater part of the
Catholic Church, amongst which are those, quae Apostolicas seeds habere, and
Epistolas acc^pere meruerunt, which had the honor to have the Apostles sit in
them and to receive Epistles from them. Gratian ^its it thus, inter qu^^
(Scripturas) sane illae sunt quas Apostolica seeds habere and ab ea alij
meru^runt accipere Epistolas: and accordingly, the (...) of that Canon is;
Inter Canonicas, The Decretall Epistles are numbered amongst the Canonical
Scriptures. True it i^, that in the end of the next Canon, Gratian adds a good
limitation, and worth the remembering, that this must be understood of such
Decrees, in which there is nothing found contrary to the Decrees of the Fathers
foregoing, nor the precepts of the Gospel. Belike even in Gratians time it was
not holden impossible, that in the Sanctions and Decretals of Popes, something
might be decreed contrary to the Gospel, which may be added to your Judges
infallibility, which has been touched before.

But these be old tricks of the Champions of the Papacy. At this day perhaps
it is better: yes, and that shall ye understand by the words of the children of
the Church of Rome themselves the Venetians. But first ye are to know, that
among certain Propositions set forth in defense of the state, there was one,
the fourth in number of eight, That the authority promised by our Savior
Christ to Saint Peter under the metaphor of the Keys is merely spiritual.
For confirmation whereof after other proof was said, that the authority of
the highest Bishop is over sin and over souls only; according to the words
of that prayer of the Church about Saint Peter -- qui B. Petro animas ligandi
atque soluendi Pontificium tradidisti. Cardinal Bellermine undertook to
answer these Propositions, and coming to this place, he says; that
peradventure Gods providence to take away such deceipts, whereby the author of
these Propositions would deceive the simple, with the words of the holy Church
misunderstood, inspired into the reformers of the Breuiarie that they should
take out of that Prayer the word (animas) as anciently it was not there, nor
ought to be; because that prayer was formed out of the words of the Gospel.
Quodcunque ligaueris, and quodcunque solueris. Now mark the reioinder that is
made to him by Johannes Marsilius, who numbering up his errors in the defense
of every proposition, roundly tells him? Erra XIIII. perch dice, etc. He erres
in the XIV. place for that he says, that those which have taken out of the
Breuiarie the word (animas) were inspired by the holy Ghost. I (...) Quodcunque
(...), with the word ((...)) by that text which explaineth them, (...); sins
being in the soul and not in the body, least any should believe that the Pope
were, Domi^^s in (...) and spiritualibus, of goods, of bodies, and of souls,
and that he might loose and bind every thing, as it seems the L. Cardi^all
believes. And they explained them with the word (...), by which explication a
remedy is put unto all those discords which may arise between the Pope and
Princes (...) and tuo, Whereas those which have lat^ly taken it away out of the
Breuiarie, (...) a new stirred up occasion of discords and cont^^tions. Besides
that, it is a thing known of all men, that in the Books of the Councels, of
the Canons, of other Doctors, in a word, (...) in the very Br^maries and
Missals there have been and are taken away those things which are in favor of
Princes of the Laity, to see if at length there might be established the
opinion de illimita^a Potestate Pontificis in t^mporalibus. (...) he as ^e that
compar^s together the Books printed in the year^ 30. in 50. and those at this
day, as well of the Councels as others, ^uidently (...) the vintage, that (...)
it is, that we post vindemia^, have found some few clusters for the defense of
our gracious Prince. This is a means if it go on further, to make all
writings to loose their credit, and to ruin the Church of God. Be it spoken by
the occasion that the Lord Cardinal has given ^e thereof* and for charities
(...), and for the desire that these writings be no more touched; which be also
said with all humility and reverence.

He erres in the XV. place, for that he says that in the ancient Breuiaries
there was not the word animas. And I have seen Breuiaries written with (...)
about 200. years ago, and printed above an hundred; in them is the word
animas; and if it were not* yet ought it to be put in, to take away the
occasions of discord^.

Thus he there; As for the Prayer corrected, or corrupted rather; if you look
the old Breuiaries, yea even that set forth by Pi^s the Fifth, printed by
Plantine, with the Privilege of the Pope, Ex Decreto 5*. Conc^l. T^d.
and his Catholic Maiest^e, Anno 77. upon the nine and twentieth of June, ye
shall find it to run thus. Deus qui B. Petro Apostolo ^uo collatis clauibus
r^gui coelestis animas ligandi atque solu^ndi Ponti^icium tradid^st^, concede
vt intercessionis eius auxilio peccator ^m nostrorum nexibus liberemur. Per
Dominum* Now in the late correction animas, is left out, and we understand the
reason.

In the end of the same book there is ^n advertisement to the Reader, the
beginning whereof I will not stick to set down verbatim; it is this. Because
in this Defense I have often said, that Authors are made to recant, and that
out of their books many things are taken away sincerely said, in favor of the
power of Temporal Princes, to stablish by these means the opinion, De suprema
authoritate Papae in temporalibus; I have thought good to advise the R^ader,
that the quotations by me brought, are taken, ad verbum, out of those books
which are incorrupt, and contain the opinion of the Authors sincerely. And
that the more ancient the Copies be, and further from these our times, so much
^he better they be. And in particular I desire that he be advertised, that
the Cap. Nouit de iudicijs, printed in Rome the year 1575. by Joseph de
Angelis, with license of Superiors, it the text which was followed by the
Author of the eight Positions, and by me; which contains sincerely the
opinion of Na^arrus, and of the Parisians. Which in the books printed since,
is changed in such manner as it is no more the same, but is become the
contrary, to wit, that of (...), etc.

Tell me, good Master Wad^sworth, in the ^ight of God, what is fraud, if this
be not. And thus not only the Authors of this age any way inclining to
reformation, as Erasmus, Rhe^anus, Cassander, F^rus; but, Vines, Faber,
Caietane, Pol. Virgil, Guicciardine, Petrarch, Dante, yea Authors of six or
seven hundred years old, are set to School to learn the Roman language, and
agree with the Trent ^aith. For it is not the authority and Monarchy of the
Pope alone that is sought, though that be Summa summarum, whereunto all comes
at last, but no voice must be heard discenting from that which he teaches.
Therefore it is, that Bertramus Presbyter is appointed by your Spanish Index
printed at Madrid, to be wholly abolished. The former had catechized him to
say in stead of visibiliter, inuisibiliter, with many other pretty
explications, as where he says, the Elements in the Lords Supper, Secundum
creaturarum substantiam, quod prius fuerant ante consecrationem, hoc and post
consistunt, the explication is, secundum externas species Sacramenti. But the
surest way was to take him clean away: and so indeed in the Bibliotheca Patrum
he is, and that purp^sely, as Marguerinus de la Bigne confesses in his
Preface.

The Ancient Fathers are perhaps free. For the Council of Trent appointed,
that in the writings of the ancient Catholics nothing should be changed, sa^e
where by the fraud of heretics a manifest error is crept in. But who shall be
the Judge of that? The Inquisitors and Censors themselves. For my part, I
cannot say that I have spent many hours in the trial of this point, nor have
I had ancient Copies thereto requisite. But I will entreat you to consider with
me one example, or rather two or three in one Father, and in the matter that I
named, whereby you may guess at the rest. In Saint Cyprians Works imprinted
at Rome, by P. Manutius, sent for to Venice by Pius the Fourth, to set forth
the Fathers, as himself says, most perfectly cleansed from all spots, the
Epistle of Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea, beginning, Accepimus per Rogatianum,
is wholly left out; and Pamelius thinks purposely, and adds, perhaps it had
been more wisdom it had been never set out at all. Saint Cyprian was not of
that mind, who translated it into Latin, as the style it self witnesses, and
Pamelius also is enforced to confess. The matter is, it is to quick and
vehement against Stephanus Bishop of Rome. He says he is moved with just
indignation, at the manifest folly of Stephanus, that boasting so much of the
place of his Bishopric, and that he has the succession of Peter, upon whom
the foundations of the Church were set, brings in many other Rocks, etc. He
says he has stirred up contentions and discords throughout the Churches of
the whole world. Bids him not deceive himself, he has made himself a
Schismaticke, by separating himself from the Communion of the Ecclesiastical
unity, for while he thinks he can separate all from his communion, he has
separated himself only from all. He taxes him for calling Saint Cyprian a
false Christ, a false Apostle, and a deceitful workman, which being privy to
himself that these were his own due, preuentingly he objected to another! No
marvel if this gear could not pass the Press at Rome.

In S. Cyprians Epistle, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, these words, and Primatus Petro
datur, etc. and after, Vnam Cathedram constituit: and again, Et Cathedra vna,
are foisted into the text in that Roman edition. In that of Pamelius also
besides these, another clause is added, forsooth, out of Gratian, and a Copy
of the Cambron Abbey [Qui Cathedram Petri super quam fundata est Ecclesia
deserit.] These patches being all left out, the sense is nevertheless complete
and perfect: and for the last, which speaks most for the Popes Chair, the
Superuisors themselves of the Canon Law, by the commandment of Gregory the
thirteenth, acknowledge, that in eight Copies of Cyprian entire, in the
Vaticane Library this sentence is not found: but besides these there is one
wherein his opuscula alone are contained, and another at Saint Saviors in
Bologna, in which it is found. But what account they make of it appears by
this, that supplying the whole sentence in another place of Gratian, they leave
it out. Wherein as their conscience is to be commended, and Manuti^^ his
modesty, or theirs who surueied that edition, that would not follow one Copy
against eight; so is Pamelius boldness to be corrected, that out of one, and
that not fully agreeing with Gratian, neither shames not (as himself says,
veriti non sumus) to force in this reading into the text, against all the rest
printed and manuscript, which he used above twenty in number, as he sets them
down in a Catalogue in the beginning of his edition. It is now little more
then two hundred years ago, that Friar Thomas of Walden wrote against
Witcleff. He in the second Book of his first Tome, the first Article, and
second Chapter, cites this very place of Cyprian, and cites it to fort^fie
Witclefs assertion of his own mind. For having recited Witclefs words, he
concludes them thus; Haec ibi, and then proceeds. Addam^t and nos quod
Cyprianus dicit omnes Apostolos pares fuisse and pote^tate and ho^^re. Addamus
quod Hieronymus dicit, super omnes Apostolos ex aequo fortitudo solidatur
Ecclesiae, etc. Yet, neither in that Chapter, nor in that whole discourse does
he once mention these words, now conveyed into Cyprian, nor any where else that
I can find in all his Work, though he cite this Tractate often under the name
of Liber contra haereticos and schismaticos. How fit had it been to answer
the objection out of Cyprian by Cyprian, if he had not found that Gratian
after his manner had been too bold or negligent in this passage. The same
Author in his third Tome De Sacramentalibus, Doct. 10. cites a long place out
of this same Treatise beginning at those words. An esse sibi cum Christo
videtur qui aduersum Sace^dotem Christi facit, etc. Again, Cap. 81. two
places; one immediately before the sentences charged with those former words,
another after. The one beginning, Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum* Ego tibi dico
quia tu es Petrus, etc. the other Vnitatem tenere ^irmiter and vendi^are
debemus, etc. Certainly unless Waldens^s meant by fai^t-pleading to betray
the cause he undertook, he would never have omitted so pregnant pass^ges as
these be, for Peter's Primacie, and the Popes Chair, had they been extant in
Cyprians work when he wrote, But we cannot doubt of his good affection to
the Sea of Rome, either for his orders sake, o^ his dedicating that work to
Pope Marti^e the Fi^th, or his approbation of the two first Tomes, which he
says, he caused to be seen and examined, per sollennes viros, and testifies
of to be commended of all, encouraging him to write the third. It remains
therefore that Cyprian has received this garnishment since Waldens time. And
here with this occasion of his silence about those things which are thrust into
Cyprian, I will, though besides my purpose* use his testimony about a certain
sentence of the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew, ascribed to Saint
Chrysostom, which the Romish faction will needs race out. It is in the
eleventh Homily, about the middle. The words are these: Si enim vasa
sanctificata ad priuat^s vsus transfer peccatum est and periculum, sicut
docet Balthazar qui bibens in calicibus sacris de regn^ depositus est and de
vita. Si ergo haec vasa ad priuatos vsus transfer sic (...) est [in quibus
non est verum corpus Christi (...) mysterium ^orporis eius continetur] quanto
magis vasa corporis nostri quae sibi Deus ad habitaculum praeparan^^ non
debemus locum dare Diabolo agend^ in ijs quae vult. In this sentence the words
that I have e^closed from the rest are inserted says Bellarm^e by some
Schol^er of Berengarius, De Sacram.
for they are not in all Copies. Euch. l. 2. c. 32.
No marvel. That is more marvel that they are in any, since the Canonizing of
Trans^bstantiation. But in Walde^s time, and before, the words were th^s read,
for in his third Tome, Cap. 30. they are thus cited, save tha^ by the error of
the print ministerium, is put for mysterium, and he adds there. (...) But,
says Bellarmine, These words (...) not to the matter in hand, for the Author
of the (...) spoke of the holy vessels of Salomons Temple, which (...); and in
those vessels, neither was the Lords true body, nor yet the mystery thereof.
Well, if they be not to the purpose, if they speak of the vessels of Salomons
Temple, let them stand in the Text still. What need ye purge them out of the
newer editions at Antwerpe, and Paris. Belike Father John Matthews saw further
into this matter then Bellarmine, for he casts out this sentence with the
dregs of the Arians, although there be no Arianisme in it that I can perceive.
The truth is, the Author speaks of the Vessels used in the Lords Supper in his
own time. For those words, sicut docet Balthazar, etc. are brought in by the
way, for a confirmation from a like example, the sense hanging in the mean
while, which is resumed again when he goes on, Si ergo haec vasa, as any
indifferent Reader may perceive. Yea, take away these words, and the sinews of
the sentence are cut, for the force of the argument lies in the comparison of
the profaning of the holy vessels, and of our bodies; That is a sin, yet
Christ's body is not contained in them, but the mystery thereof: but God himself
dwells in these.

These examples, to omit some other, do make me think, that howsoever the
corrupting of the texts of the Fathers, is not perhaps so usual, as of other
Writers, and good reason why, they know that many look narrowly to their
^ingers, neither is there any place almost, that is of special pith, that has
not been observed and urged in the handling of the controversies of this age,
by some one or other; yet where there is any color of differing Copies, or any
advantage to be taken that way, it is not slipped. And who knows not, that
sometimes the change of a Letter, yea, of a Point or Accent; makes the whole
sentence of another meaning? De Verbis Domini, Sermon. 15. c. 11.
As for example^ that of Saint Augustine, Qui fecit te sine te, non iustificat
te sine te. Read it interrogatiuely, and it is as strong for (...) and the
(...), as if it be read assertiuely, for Cathar^^^ and the (...).

And in very deed when I consider the eagerness of these men, to win their
purposes, and their fearful boldness with the holy Word of God, I know not
how a man should look for conscience or respect at their hands in the writings
of men. For to omit that the Trent-Fathers have canonized the Vulgar Latin
Edition, which so many times departs from the original inspired by the holy
Ghost, adding, detracting, changing, often to a diverse, sometimes to a
contrary sense. To let pass also how Sixtus V. and Clemens VIII. do
tyrannize oue^ and delude the Faith of their followers, about that Edition,
binding them unto two diverse Copies, and sometimes flat contradictorie; and
so, as the form of each must be inuiolably observed, without the least
particle of the Text added, changed, or detracted. The former, derogating all
Faith and authority from whatsoever Bibles hand^written, or printed, of the
Vulgar edition, which did not agree with that which he set forth ad verbum and
ad literam. The latter, telling, that when the same Pope endeavored to set it
out, he perceived not a few things to have crept into the holy Bible, through
the fault of the Press, and that it needed a second care, whereupon he decreed
to bring the whole work again to the Anuile, had he not been prevented by
death; so derogating all Faith from the ^ormer. Whereas the truth is Sixt^^ did
not only endeavor to set out his Bible, but prefixed his Bull before it ad
perpetuam rei memoriam, and sent one of the Copies to the State of Venice (as I
heard at my being there) howsoever since it was cunningly recovered again, set
it to sale publicly, and says in his Bull, that he corrected the faults of
the Press with his own hand, and (which most of all conuinceth Pope Clements
Preface of falsehood) the difference of these Editions is not in fault of the
prints, but in that the one follows the old erroneous reading, the latter the
reading of other Manuscripts ac^ording with the Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek, or the
Latin edition of the Catholic Kings Bible, observed by the industry of the
Divines of Lo^aine. But to forbear to urge this contradiction in the very
foundation of belief, which some man peradventure would press so far, as to
infer, that the Romanists have no faith (for he that believes
contradictories believes nothing.) What shall we say of that impiety, to
corrupt the original Text according to the vulgar Latin? See an example hereof
in the first promise of the Gospel, Genesis 3. where the Serpent is threatened,
that the seed of the Woman shall crush his head. The vulgar Edition leaving
here the Hebrew, the Seventy, and Saint Hierome himself, as appears by his
questions upon Genesis, tran^^ates Ipsa. She shall bruise thy head. So it
stands now in the authentical Scripture of the Church of Rome, and herein
Sixtus and Clemens are of accord. The Divines of Louaine observe, that two
Manuscript Copies have Ipse. That the Hebr^w, Chaldie, and Greek, have it so
likewise. Why then did not either Sixtus or Clemens, or they themselves having
Copies for it, correct it, and make it so in the authentical Text? I will tell
you. By color of this corruption, the Devil envying Christ's glory, like an
obstinate enemy rather yielding himself to any then his true Conqueror, has
given this honor to the Virgin Mary. To her it is attributed in that work
which I think to be the most ungodly and blasphemous that ever saw the Sun:
The Ladies Psalter, wherein that which is spoken of God by the Spirit of God is
writhed to her. In the 51. Psalm, Quid gloriaris in malitia, o malign
Serpens, etc. Why boastest thou in malice, o thou malignant Serpent and
infernal Dragon, Submit thy head to the Woman, by whose valor thou shall be
drowned in the deep. Crush him, o Lady, with the foot of thy valor, arise and
scatter his malice, etc. And in the 52. speaking to the same Serpent. Noli
extolli, etc. Be not lifted up for the fall of the Woman, for a Woman shall
crush thy head, etc. So in that Anthem: Haec est mulier virtutis quae contri^it
caput Serpentis. Yea which I write with grief and shame, to her does good
Bernard apply it, Hom. 2. super Missus est, and which is more strange, expounds
it, not of her bearing our Savior, but, Ipsa proculdubio, etc. She doubtless
crushed that poisonfull head, which brought to naught all manner of suggestion
of that wicked one, both of temptation of the flesh and of pride of mind. To
her does the learned and devout Chancellor of Paris apply it. Sermon. de
Natiui^ate Mar. Virginis.
Has pestes vniuersas dicimus membra Serpentis antiqui, cuiu^ caput ipsa virgo
contriuit. And what marvel in those times, when the plain Text of the
Scripture ran so in the foeminine gender, of a woman, and few or none had any
skill of the Greek or Hebrew? Who should that SHE be, but she that is
blessed among women? Now although that thanks be to God, it is known that
this is a corrupt place, out of the Fountains, yea out of the Rivers also the
testimonies of the Fathers, referring this to Christ, as Irenaaus, Iustine,
Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Hierome, yea Pope Leo himself, yet because no
error of the Church of Rome may be acknowledged, how palpable soever; they
have cast how to shadow this corruption, and set some color upon it, that
howsoever this reading cannot be true, yet it may be made like to truth. Lo
in the Interlinear Bible set forth by the authority of King Philip the father
of his Majesty that now reigns with you, the Hebrew Text is reformed
according to the Latin, See D. (...) Conf. with Heart. c. 6. (...)
IPSA. There was some opportunity hereunto, by reason that the Letters of the
Text without pricks would bear both readings. For (...) may be read (...) hu,
or (...) hiu. And this selfsame word for the Letters the base of reading, is
so pointed in this Chapter verse 19. and applied to Eve She is the mother of
all living. And so elsewhere, as Genesis 28. 1. and 21. Hereunto perhaps was
added, that the pricks are a late invention of the Rabbines, as many think,
and no part of the Hebrew Text. And that not only Leo Castro, and such as
accuse the present Hebrew Copies as fal^ified, but those that defend them also,
do many of them confess. Hereupon it was resolved, as it seems, to point
this place (...). For that it was not by mistaking but purposely done*
Franciscu^ Lucas in his Annotations upon the place does assure us; and says it
was Guido Fabricius his deed. And indeed other things there be in that
work, which savor not of the learning and integrity of Arias Montanus, as
for example, the Etymology of Missa from the word (...). But as Boldness is
not always as provident, as Ignorance or Malice is bold, these Correctors
marked not, that the gender of the Verb, and the affixe of the Noune
following, are both Masculine. So although the Orthographie would be framed to
consent, yet the Syntaxe does cry out against this Sacrilege. And yet our
Rhemists, as I am informed, in their lately set forth Bible, with a long note
upon this place, defend the applying of this Text to the blessed Virgin, and
the old reading Ipsa. What should a man say? Necessity makes men desperate,
and as the Apostle says, (...). 3. 13.
Evil men and deceivers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived.

These be frauds indeed, in the strictest sense, wilfully corrupting the Texts
of good Authors, wilfully maintayning them so corrupted; not abstayning from
the holy Scriptures themselves. For as to that other kind, deprauing the
sense, retayning the words; it were endless to cite examples. Bellarmine
alone, as I believe, passes any two Protestants that ever set pen to paper,
perhaps all of them put together.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Armies of evident witnesses for the Romanists.
WHere you add that you found the Catholics had far greater and better
Armies of evident witnesses then the Protestants, it might perhaps seem so to
you, as your mind was prepared, when you had met with such cunning
muster-Masters as the Romanists are. Who sometimes bring into the fi^ld to make
their number seem more, after the old stratagem of war, a sort of Pages and
Lackeis, unworthy to hold any rank in the host of God, under the names of the
Fathers. Sometimes to confirm their part, give out a voice confidently, that
all the ^orces which they see aloof in the field are on their side, whereas
when it comes to the battle they shall find that they will turn their arms
against them. Sometimes they change the quarrel it self; in which case how
easy is it to bring Armies, as you say, into the field, to fight against
No-bodie and evident witnesses, to prove that which no man denies? For the
purpose, that the Bishops of Rome has had a primacie of honor, and
authority; when as the question is about a Monarchy, and infallible
Judgment, an uncontrollable Jurisdiction. Herein if you please, see how
Bellarmine alleages the Fathers, Greek and Latin, in the 15. and 16. Chapters
of his first Book, de Summo Pontifice. So for proof of the verity of Christ's
Body and Blood in the Lords Supper, he spends a whole Book only in citing
the testimonies of the Fathers. To what purpose? When the question is not of
the truth of the Presence, bu^ of the manner; whether it be to the Teeth and
Belly, or Soul and Faith of the Receiver. Sometimes they will bear down the
inexpert Soldier their Reader, that he sees the Fathers fight for them; as
Pighius and Bellarmine come in often with their Vides in the end and
application of a testimony. Whereby it comes to pass that the Scholar if he
be of a pliable disposition, or loath to be counted dimme-sighted, yields
himself to his Teacher, and sees in the Fathers that which they never dreamed
of. But surely, Sir, had you given that honor to the holy Scriptures, which of
the Jews was given to them, and our Lord Jesus Christ allows it in them; and
then employed as much travel in the searching and looking into them, as you
profess to have done in the perusing the Councels and Fathers, perhaps God had
opened your eyes, as those of El^sha his servant, to have seen, that there are
more on our side then against us, horses indeed and charets of fire, able to
put to flight and scatter never so great armies of humane authorities and
opinions. But this place of the Scriptures has no place amongst all your
motives.

As touching that which you say of the Centurists often consuring and rejecting
the plain testimonies of the Ancients. It is true, that in the title De
Doctrina, they note a part, the singular and incommodious opinions the stubble
and errors of the Doctors. Wherein to tell you my fancy, if they commit any
fault, it is, that they are to rigid and strict, referring into this Catalogue,
every improper and excessive speech, which being severed from the rest of the
discourse, may often seem absurd: as it may also seem strange that our
Savior should teach a man to hate his Father and Mother, or pull out his eyes,
or give him his cloak that has bereaved him of his coat. Whereas these and
the like have in the place where they stand, admirable force and grace, being
taken with an equal and commodious interpretation. But it is are clear as the
noone day, that sundry such errors and singular opinions there be in the
Fathers, as cannot be justified. They speak not always to your own minds,
not only prima facie, and in sound of words, but being never so well examined
and salued. Witness Sixtus Senensis in the fifth and sixth Books of his
Bibliotheca. Witness Pamelius, Medina (though blamed for confessing so much by
Bellarmine) yea witness Bellarmine himself. Wherefore if the bare authority
of the Fathers must bind us, undergo the same law ye give, if as your
Belgic Index confesses, you bear in them with many errors, extenuate them,
excuse them, by devising some shift, often deny them, and give them a
c^modious sense, when they are opposed in disputations, give the liberty ye
take. Or if (as we think) these be base courses and unbeseeming the ingenuitie
of true Christian minds, acknowledge this honor as proper to the Scriptures,
to be without controversy received, examine by the true touchstone of divine
authority all human writings, how holy soever their Authors have been. Try
all things, as the Apostle commands, hold fast that which is good.

Your instance in Danaeus his Commentaries, super D. Aug. Euchiridion ad
Laurentium, was not all the best chosen. For neither does Saint Augustine in
that book treating professedly of Purgatory, avouch it plainly, or yet
obscurely. Nor does Danaeus reject his opinion with those words, Hic est nae^us
Augustini, or the like. The heads of Saint Augustines discourse are these. I.
That whereas some thought that such as are baptized and hold the Faith of
Christ, though they live and die never so wickedly, shall be saved, and
punished with a long but not eternal fire, he thinks them to be deceived, out
of a certain humane pit^; for this opinion is flatly contrary to other
Sc^rptures. II. He interprets the place of Saint Paul, touching the trying of
every man's work by fire, of the fire of tribulation, through which as well he
that builds gold and silver, that is, minds the things of God, as he that
builds hay and stubble, that is, too much minds the things of this life must
pass. III. He says that it is not incredible, that some such thing is done
after this life also; and whether it be so or not, may be enquired of. IIII.
But whether it be found or no, that some faithful people, according as they
have more or less, loved these perishing things, are later or sooner saved:
yet not such as of whom it is said, that they shall not possess the Kingdom
of God, unless repenting as they ought, they obtain forgiveness; as for the
purpose, be fruitful in alms; which yet will not serve to purchase a license
to commit sin. V. That the daily and lighter sins, without which we are
never in this life, are blotted out by the Lords Prayer. And so the greater
also, if a man leave them, and forgive others his enemies; which is a worthy
kind of alms: but the best of all is a sinners amending of his life. Lo how
plainly Saint Augustine auo^cheth Purgatory, Of which he doubts whether any
such thing can be found or no. Expounds that Scripture that seems most strong
for it, all otherwise, and so as it cannot agree thereunto. If it be found, is
sure it will not serve for greater sins. And for lesser defects, yea the
greatest shows, another a surer remedy, which intruth makes Purgatory
superfluous. In this doctrine, Danaeus is so far from controuling Saint
Augustine, that he applauds him; and says, that declaring his own opinion of
Purgatory, he pronounces plainly, that the whole defining of this matter is
uncertain, doubtful, and rash; which since that Augustine wrote being now an
old man, certainly it cannot be doubted but that he did altogether reject
Purgatory: yea and he shows this fire it self to be unprofitable. Thus
Danaeus there. But the censure that was in your mind, I believe is that upon
another passage of Saint Augustine in the same Book, where he treates,
whether the souls of the dead are eased by the piety of their friends that
are living. And thus he determines it. That when the Sacrifices either of the
Altar, or of whatsoever alms are offered for all such as are deceased after
Baptism, for such as are very good folk, they are thankesgiuings; for such as
are not very evil, they are propitiations: for those that are very evil,
though they be no helps to the dead, yet they are consolations, such as they
be to the living. And to such as they are profitable unto, it is either that
they may have full remission, or that their very damnation may be more
tolerable. Upon this Chapter thus says Dan^us. Hoc totum caput continet (...)
Augustini, and after he adds, Itaque hic foenum and stipulam aedificat vir
pius and magnus. But you, ye say, had rather follow Saint Augustines opinion
then his censure. Perhaps as one says, rather err with Plato, then hold the
truth with others. If that be your resolution, what should we use any more
words? Believe then if you please, that the commemoration of Christ's sacrifice
in the Lords Supper, or the oblations of the faithful, are to be made for all
that decease after Baptism, in the attempting of whatsoever sin they die,
yea suppose in final impenitence of any deadly crime. That such as be damned
may thereby have their damnation made more tolerable. Believe that without any
improprietie of speech, the same form of words may be a thanksgiving for one,
and an appeasing of Gods wrath for another. Believe also (if you can believe
what you will) that Saint Tecla delivered the soul of Falconilla out of hell,
and Saint Gregory the soul of Traian, and that as may seem saying Mass for
him, since he was forbidden thence forth to offer any host for any wicked man.
Bele^^e that Macarius continually praying for the dead, and very desirous to
know whether his prayers did them any good, had answer by miracle from the
scull of a dead man an Idolater, that by chance was tumbled in the way. O
Macarius when tho^ offerest prayer's for the dead, we feel some ease for the
time. Believe that on Easter even all the damned spirits in hell keep holy day,
and are free from their torments. Saint Augustine, such is his modesty, will
give you leave to believe (...), as well as Purgatory, if you please, as he
is not unwilling to give, as large scope to other men's opinions as may be, so
they reuerse not the plain and certain grounds of holy Scripture. In all
these you may if you please follow authors also; as Saint Damasce^^, Paladius,
Prudentius, Sigebert, and others. But give the same liberty to others that ye
take. Compel no man to follow your opinion, if he had rather follow Danaeus
reasons. For my self, I would sooner with Saint Augustine himself, whose
words touching Saint Cyprian, Danaeus here borrowed, confess this to be, (...)
coopertum (...), then be bound to iustif^e his conceit touching the
commemoration of the dead in the Lords Supper. And as he says of Saint
Cyprian, so would I add, Ego h^ius libri authoritate non teneor, (...)
Augustini non vt Canonicas habeo, sed eas ex Canonic^s considero; and quod in
ijs (...) scriptur (...) cum (...) quod non congruit cum pace eius resp^^.
Which words I do the rather set down, that they may be Luthers justification
also against F. Parsons, Relation (...)
who thinks he has laid sore to his charge when he cites very solemnly his
Epistle ad Equitem Germ. Anno Domini 1521. where he says, he was tied by the
authority of no Father, though never so holy, if he were not approved by the
judgment of holy Scripture. Surely this is not to deny and contemn, as he
calls it, or as you to control the Fathers, to account them subject to humane
infirmities, which themselves acknowledge. But the contrary is to boast against
the truth, to seek to fore judge it with their mistakings, which needs not so
much as require their testimonies.

I will forbear to multiply words about that, whether the testimonies of
Antiquity which favor the Protestants be many or few: whether they do
indeed so, or only seem, prima facie; whether they be wrested or to the
purpose; whether all this may not by just or reason be affirmed of the passages
cited by (...) Romanists out of Antiquity, setting aside matters of ceremony,
and government (which your self confess by and by may be diverse, without
empeaching unity in Faith) and opinions, ever to be subjected to the trial of
Scriptures, by their own free consent and desire. Judge by an instance or two,
that this matter may not be a mere skirmish of generalities. Tertullian in his
latter times, whether as Saint Hierome writes through the envy and reproach of
the Roman Clergy, or out of the too much admiring chastity and fasting,
became a Montanist, and wrote a Book de Pudicitia, blaming the reconciling of
Adulterers and Fornicators. In the very entrance almost thereof, he has these
words. Audio etiam edictum esse propositum, and quidem peremptorium. Pontifex
scil. Maximus Episcopus Episcoporum dicit. Ego and maechis and fornicationis
delict a paenitentia functis dimitto. Pamelius in his noate upon this place,
writes thus, Been habet: and annotatu dignum quod etiamiam in haeresi
constitutus, and aduersus Ecclesia^^ scribens, Pontifice^ Romanum Episcopum
Episcoporum nuncupet, and infra Cap. 13. bonum Pastorem, and benedictum Papum
and Cap. 21. Apostolicum. Thus Pamelius; and presently la^ches forth into the
Privileges of the Sea of Rome, and brings a number of testimonies for that
forgery of Constantines donation. The like note he has in the life of
Tertullian, where he makes the Pope that set forth the former Edict to have
been Zephyrinus; quem, says he, Pontificem Maximum etiam iam haereticus
Episcopum Episcoporum appellat. Baronius also makes no small account of this
place, and says, The title of the Pope is here to be noted. And indeed, prima
facie (as you say) they have reason. But he that shall well examine the whole
web of Tertullians discourse, shall find that he speaks by a most bitter and
scornful Ironie, as Elias does of Baal, when he says, he is a God. The
word scilicet might have taught them thus much. Yea, the title Pontifex
Maximus, which in those days, and almost two ages after, was a Pagan term,
never attibuted to a Christian Bishop, first laid down by Gratian the
Emperor, as Baronius also notes, in the year of our Lord, 383. because it
^auoured of Heathenish superstition, though it had been, as a title of Royalty
used by the former Christian Emperors, till that time. This title, I say,
might have made them perceive Tertullians meaning; unless the immoderate
desire of exalting the Papacy did so blind their eyes, that seeing, they saw,
and yet perceived not. In the same character, though with more mildness and
moderation, is the same title for the other part of it, used by Saint Cyprian,
in his Vote in the Council of Carthage. Neque. n. quisquam nostrum se esse
Episcopum Episcoporum constituit aut tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi
necessitatem Collegas suos adigit. Bellarmine says, he speaks here of those
Bishops that were in the Council of Carthage; and that the Bishop of Rome is
not included in that sentence, who is indeed Bishop of Bishops. What! and does
he tyranniously enforce his Colleagues to obedience also. For it is plain
that Cyprian ioynes these together, the one as the presumptuous title, the
other as the injurious act answering thereto, which he calls plain tyranny.
And as plain it is out of Firmilianus Epistle, which I vouched before, that
Stephanus Bishop of Rome heard ill for his arrogancy and presuming upon the
place of his Bishopric, Peter's Chair, to sever himself from so many
Churches, and break the bond of peace, now with the Churches of the East in
Asia, now of the South in Afric. And he was in as ill conceit with Cyprian
for his breaking good order, and communicating with Basilides and Martialis
justly deprived in Spain; as Saint Cyprian was with him, when he styled him, a
false Christ, and a false Apostle. But the holy Martyr was of a more patient
and calm spirit, then to be moved with such reproaches; nay, he took
occasion, as it should seem, thereby to write of patience. From this mildness
it was, that he so closely taxed the presumption of him, that made himself
Bishop of Bishops, and by terror (which what it was Firmilianus Epistle shows,
threatening Excommunication) would compel his Colleagues to his own opinion.
None of us says he, does thus. As the Apostle, we preach not our selves; we
commend not our selves; We are not as many, that adulterate the Word of God,
etc. Bellarmine takes the first kindly. No marvel, says he, for this the
Bishop of Romes due. But they go together, he must be content to take both,
or leave both. Such another place there is in Saint Augustines Epist. 86. the
words are, Petr^^ etiam inquit Apostolorum Capu^, coeli (...), and Ecclesia
fundamentum. Where in the Margent, the Divines of Louaine, the overseers of
Plantines edition, set this note, Petrus Ecclesia fundamen^^m. Why might they
not? The words ye will say of the text. But these words of the text be not
Saint Augustines, whose opinion is well enough known, That it is Christ
confessed by Peter; that is the foundation of the Church; but they are the
words of an indiscreet railer Vrbici cuinsd^m.
of the City of Rome, against whom Saint Augustine in all that Epistle most
vehemently inueighs. This arrogant Author endeauours so to defend the Roman
custom of fasting on the Saturday, as he reproaches all other Churches that
used otherwise. And that we may see with what Spirit he was led, he brings the
same text that is brought, in Pope Siricius, and Innocentius Epistles, against
the marriage of Clergy men, Qui in carne sunt Deo placere non possunt, and
many other Scrip^ures wrested, and far from the purpose; at last comes the
authority of Peter, and his tradition very Pope-like alleged, Peter, he
says, the head of the Apostles, porter of heaven, and foundation of the
Church, having overcome Simon the Sorc^rer, who was a figure of the Devil, not
to be overcome but by fasting, thus taught the Romans; whose faith is famous
in the whole world. I remit you to Saint Augustines answer to this tradition.
This I note, that where your Censors do race out of the Margents of former
editions, such notes as do express the very opinions of the ancients, and in
their own words, here they can allow and authorize such marginall notes, as
are directly contrary to their meaning. Yea, which are earnestly oppugned by
them; when they seem to make for the authority of the Pope. Good sir, examine
well this dealing, and judge if this be not wresting the Fathers, and applying
them clean from their purpose.

In fine, you found your self, you say, evidently convinced. Persuaded, I
believe, rather then convinced. Else if the force and evidence of the
Arguments, and not the pliablenesse of your mind were the cause of your
yielding, me thinks they should work like effect in others, no less
seriously seeking for truth, and setting all worldly respects aside, earnestly
minding their own salvation then your self. Which I well know they do not,
neither those which hitherto have been examined, nor those which yet remain
to be considered in the rereward.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Inuisibilitie of the Church, said to be an evasion of Protestants.
THe first whereof is, the dislike of the Protestants evasion, as you call it,
by the inuisibilitie of their Church. Give me leave here to tell you plainly,
ye seem to me not to understand the Protestants doctrine in this point. Else
ye would have spared all that, The Catholic Church must ever be visible, as a
City set on a hill, otherwise how should she teach her children, convert
Pagans, dispense Sacraments? All this is yielded with both hands. The
Congregations of which the Catholic Church does consist are visible. But the
promise made to this Church, of victory against the gates of hell, the titles,
of the house of God, the base and pillar of Truth (an allusion, as I take it,
to the bases and pillars that held up the veil or curtains in the Tabernacle)
the body of Christ, his Dove, his undefiled, are not verified of this Church in
the whole visible bulk of it, but in those that are called according to Gods
purpose, given to Christ, and kept by him to be raised up to life at the last
day. This doctrine is Saint Augustines in many place^, which it would be too
tedious to set down at large. In his third book, De doctrina Christiana,
among the rules of Tychonius, there is one which he corrects a little for the
terms, De Domini corpore bipertito; which he says, ought not to have been
called so, for in truth that is not the Lords body, which shall not be with him
for ever, but he should have said of the Lords true body and mixed, or true and
fained, or some such thing. Because not only for ever, but even now,
hypocrites are not to be said to be with him, though they seem to be in his
Church. Consider those resemblances taken out of the holy Scripture, wherein
that godly Father is frequent, of chafe and wheat in the Lords floor, of good
and bad fishes in the net, of spots and light in the Moon. Of the Church
carnal and spiritual, of the wicked multitudes of the Church, yet not to be
accounted in the Church. Of the lilly and the thorns; those that are marked
which mourn for the sins of Gods people, and the rest which perish, which
yet bear his Sacraments. Consider the last Chapter of the book, De Vnitate
Ecclesiae, and that large Treatise which he has of that matter, Epist. 48. The
place is long, which deserves to be read, for the objection of the
Universality of Arianisme (like to that of Papisme in these last ages) which
Saint Augustine answers in the fifth book, De Baptismo contra Donatistas cap.
27. That number of the just, who are called according to Gods purpose, of whom
it is said, The Lord knows who are his, is the enclosed garden, the sealed
fountain, the well of living waters, the orchard with Apples, etc. The like
he has. l. 5. c. 3. and 23. he concludes, that because such are built upon
the Rock, as hear the Word of God and do it, and the rest upon the sand: now
the Church is built upon the Rock, all therefore that hear the Word of God
and do it not, are out of question without the Church. In the seventh book,
cap. 51. Quibus omnibus consideratis^ -- Read and mark the whole Chapter. Out
of these and many more like places, which I forbear to mention, it appears,
that albeit the true Catholic Church is such as cannot be hid, yet
considering that it consists of two sorts of people, the one, which is the
greater part, who do not indeed properly belong to it: the other, the fewer,
truly and properly so called, to whom all the glorious things spoken of the
Church do agree. The face therefore of the mixed Church may be ouer-run with
scandals, De Vnitate Eccl. c. 24. Euarrat. in Psalm. 103. com. 1.
as in all times almost. The greatest number may sometime be Idolaters, as in
the Kingdom of Israel under Achab. The principallest in authority may be
false teachers, as the Priests and Prophets in Ieremies time: the sons of
pestilence may sit in Moses Chair, as they did in Christ's time. Yet still the
Church is the ground and pillar of Truth in the Elect: Ipsa est praedestinata
columna and firmamentum veritatis. The Sheep hear not Seducers, John 10. 8.
to wit, finally, and in any damnable point. Thus was it before Christ, thus
since, thus in the Church of England, before, yea, and since it was reformed.
Thus in that of Rome it self at this day. There is a distinction of Thomas, of
those that be in the Church, which rightly ^ interpreted agrees fully herewith.
2. 2. q. 2. ar. 9.
There are some, De Ecclesia numero tantum. Some, numero and merito. The former
are such as have only fidem informem, the latter formatam. Now though the
persons of such, as be in the Church be visible, yet the Faith and Charity of
men we see not, and to argue from the privileges of the Church, numero and
merito, to the Church, numero tantum, is a perpetual, but a palpable
para^ogisme of the Romish faction: which is grosser, yet when they argue to the
Church representative; and grossest of all when one man is made the Church, and
he (as themselves grant may fall out) a Devil incarnate.

CHAP. IX.
Of lack of Uniformity in matters of Faith, in all ages and places.
ANd in this self same Paralogisme you were beguiled with, in the next point
of Uniformity and concord in matters of Faith. The true Church, ye say, ^uer
holds such Uniformity. It is utterly false in the Visible and mixed Church,
both before Christ and since. It is false in the Church of Rome it self; whose
new-coyned faith, patched to the Creed, by Pius the Fourth, came in peece-meale
out of private opinions and corrupt vsages, nor ever was in any age uniformly
holden, or taught as matter of Faith, even in it, as it is at this day. So by
your own discourse it should be no true Church. And taking matters of faith so
largely as it seems you do, in opposition to such things as be cer^m^nies or
of government; it is untrue also of the Church of the Elect, or properly so
called. For though the Faith in the principles thereof be ever the same, yet
many conclusions of Faith have sometimes lien unsearched out, and like some
parts of the world unknown, till by the industry of Gods servants, occasioned
also by the importunity and opposition of Heretics, they were discovered.
Sundry common errors also there have been, which in succeeding ages have
been cleared and reformed: as, the ^hiliastes. That Angels have bodies: That
children after they be baptized are to be communicated: That Heretics are to
be rebaptized.

To the Assumption First, the Protestants challenge not to themselves any
Church as their own; which I must advertise you of here, because formerly also
you do use this phrase. The Church is Christ's, both the visible and invisible.
Next, taking matters of Faith for foundations or articles of Faith necessary
to salvation, the Church of Christ has in all ages had uniform concord with
the Protestants at this day in such matters, as appears by the common rule of
Faith the Creed; and so has also the Church under the Popes tyranny. As to
the Trent-additions they are foreign to the Faith, as neither principles nor
conclusions thereof: neither can your selves show uniform consent and concord
in them (and namely, in the 11. of them) in any one age, especially as matters
of salvation, as now they are canonized. How much less can ye show it in all
other conclusions of Faith; whereabout there have been among you, as are now
among us, and ever will be differences of opinions, without any prejudice for
all that unto the unity of the Faith of the Church, and title to the name of
it. As for Wicliffe, Hus, and the rest, if they have any of them borne record
to the Truth, and resisted any innovation of corrupt Teachers in their times,
even to blood, they are justly to be termed Martyrs, yea albeit they saw not
all corruptions, but in some were themselves carried away with the stream of
error. Else, if because they erred in some things, they be no Martyrs, or
because we dissent from them in some things, we are not of the same Church,
both you and we must quit all claim to Saint Cyprian, Iustine Martyr, and many
more whom we count our Ancients, and Predecessors, and bereave them also of
the honor of Martyrdom, which so long they have enjoyed: You see, I hope, by
this time the weakness of your Argument.

CHAP. X.
Of the original of reformation in Luther, Calvin; Scotland, England, etc.
IN your next Motive taken from the original of Reformation, before I come to
answer your Argument shortly coucht in form, I must endeavor to reform your
judgment in sundry points of story, wherein partly you are misse-led and
abused by Parsons and others of that spirit, partly you have mistaken some
particulars, and out of a false imagination framed a like discourse. First for
Luther, it was not his ran^our against the Dominicans that stirred him up
against the Pope, but the shameful merchandise of Indulgences, set to sale in
Germany, to the advantage of Magdalen, sister to Pope Leo X. Believe herein if
not Sleidan yet G^^cciardine l. 13. And of all that mention those affairs, it
is acknowledged, that at the first, and for a good time he showed all
obedience, and reverence to the Pope. The new History of the Council of
Trent, written by an Italian a subject and part of the Church of Rome, as
should appear by the Epistle Dedicatorie of the Reverend and learned
Archbishop of Spalato, prefixed to his Majesty, speaks thus of the matter.
Questo diede occasion, etc. This gave occasion to Martin, Page 6.
to pass from Indulgences to the authority of the Pope, which being by others
proclaimed for the highest in the Church, by him was made subject to a General
Council lawfully celebrated. Whereof he said that there was need in that
instant, and urgent necessity. And as the heat of disputation continued, by
how much the more the Popes power was by others exalted, so much the more was
it by him abased, yet so as Martin contained himself within the terms of
speaking modestly of the person of Leo, and saving sometimes his judgment.
Page ^.
Again, After his departure from the presence of Cardinal Cajetan at Augusta,
he says, he wrote a letter to the Cardinal, confessing that he had been
too vehement, and excusing himself by the importunity of the Pardoners, and
of those that had written against him, promising to use more modesty in time
to come, to satisfy the Pope, and not to speak any more of Indulgences,
provided that his adversaries would do the like. This was Luthers manner at
the first, till the Bull of Pope Leo came out, dated the ninth of November,
1518. Wherein he declared the validity of Indulgences, and that he as Peter's
Successor and Christ's Vicar had power to grant them for the quick and dead;
that this is the doctrine of the Church of Rome, the Mother and Mistress of all
Christians, and ought to be received of all that would be in the Communion of
the Church. From this time forward Luther began to change his style, Page ^.
And (says he) as before he had for the most part reserved the person and
judgment of the Pope, so after this Bull he resolved to refuse it, and
thereupon put forth an Appeal to the Council* etc. You see then how
submissiuely Luther at first carried himself. But extreme tyranny ouer-comes
often a well prepared patience.

Touching his causing rebellion also against the Emperor, ye are
misse-informed: his advice was asked about the association of the Protestants
at Smalcald, Sleidan l. ^.
he said plainly, he could not see how it could be lawful, further then for
their own defense, Ioh. Bodin, in his second Book de Repub. cap. 5. has
these words. We read also that the Protestant Princes of Almaine before they
took arms against the Emperor, demanded of Martin Luther if it were lawful.
He answered freely that it was not lawful, whatsoever tyranny, or impiety
were pretended. He was not believed; so the end thereof was miserable, and drew
after it the ruin of great and illustrious houses of Germany. As for the
war in Germany it began not till after Luthers death, neither was it a
rebellion of the Protestants; the truth is they stood for their lives. The
Emperor with the help of the Popes both money and arms, intended to root
them out; and although at the first the Emperor did not auow his raising arms
against them to be for Religion, yet the Pope in his Iubilee published upon
this occasion, did not let to declare to the world, that himself and Caesar
had concluded a league to reduce the H^retikes by force of arms to the
obedience of the Church, and therefore all should pray for the good success of
the war.

That Luther ever reviled the Emperor, I did never till now hear or read,
and therefore would desire to know what authors you have for it. Touching other
Princes, namely, King Henry the eighth, I will not defend him, who condemned
himself thereof. It is true that he was a man of a bold and high stomach, and
specially fitted thereby through the providence of God, to work upon the
heavy and dull disposition of the Almaines, and in so general a Lethargy, as
the world then was in, he carried himself (as fell out sometimes) very
^oisterously. But arrogancy, sch^sme, rebellion, were as far from him, as
the intention itself to plant a Church.

As to his Vow-breaking lastly, if that Vow were foolishly made and sinfully
kept, it was justly broken: perhaps also charitably, if he would by his own
example reform such, as lived in whoredom, and other uncleanness, and induce
them to use the remedy that God has appointed for the avoiding of them, to
wit, honorable marriage. All this matter touching Luther, unless I be
^eceiued, you have taken from (...) Harding; that at least touching his rancour
against the Dominicans, for it is his very phrase. But Master Harding both in
this, and many things else discovers his passion, and lack of true
information in this affair. When with one breath he affirms, that, first, it
was a Pardon of a Croisade against the Turks which was preached whereas it was
an Indulgence to those that should put their helping hands for the building of
Saint Peter's Church at Rome, as the Articles of this Pardon printed in English,
one of the Copies whereof I have my self, do show. Secondly, next he says
the preaching hereof was granted to Friar John Tetzet. It was Friar John
Thecel, or Tecel. Thirdly, he says, the Elector of Mentz Albert granted this
to T^ecel and the Dominicans, whereby Luther was bereft of the gain he
exspected. The truth is, it was Aremboldus a Bishop living at the Court of
Rome, whom (having before been a Merchant of Genoa) Magdalen the Popes sister
put in trust with this merchandise, that appointed the Dominicans to be the
retaylers of these Pardons. The Archbishop of Mentz had nothing to do with it,
otherwise then to allow and suffer it, which occasioned Luther to write to him,
as to the Bishop of Brandenburgh, and to Leo himself, to repress the
impudence of the Pardoners. And Luther says further in one place, that the
Archbishop undertook to give countenance to this business, with that
condition, that the half of the prey should go to the Pope, and himself
might have the other half to pay for his Pall. By these errors hea^ed together
it may appear what credit it is like Master Hardings tale be wort^y of,
touching the remnant, that of rancour and malice against the Dominicans, and
because he was bereaved of that sweet morsel, which in hope he had almost
swallowed down, Luther made this st^rre. A hard thing me thinks it is, for
any that lived at that day to set down what was in Luthers heart, what were
his hopes, his desires, rancour, and spleen; much more for Master Harding,
most of all for you and me. When the actions of men have an appearance of
good, Charity would hope the best, Piety would reserve the judgment of the
intention to God.

Let us come to Calvin, touching whom I marvel not much that you say nothing
of all that which Bolseck brings against him, who being by his means chased
out of Geneua, discovers as I remember in the very enetance, that he was
requested by some of his good Masters to write against him. I once saw the book
while I lived in Cambridge; it has no show of probability that Calvin would
go about to work a miracle to confirm his doctrine, who teaches that
miracles are no sure and sufficient proof of doctrine. I marvel rather that
even in reading Doctor Bancroft, Master Hooker, and Sarauia, all opposites to
Cal^in in the question of Church Discipline, and therefore not all the fittest
to testify of him or his actions, all late Writers, and strangers to the
Estate and affairs of Geneua: of whom therefore besides their bare word,
sufficient proof were to be required of what they say, you not only receive
whatsoever they bring, but more then they bring. You say, they prove what never
came in their minds; and what is not only utterly untrue, but even
impossible. As that Calvin by his unquietness and ambition reuolued the State of
Geneua, so vni^stly expelling and depriving the Bishop of Geneua, and other
Temporal Lords, of their due obedience, and ancient inheritance. When as the
Bishop and Clergy of Geneua, upon the throwing down Images there by popular
tumult, departed in an anger, seven years ere ever Calvin se^ foot within the
gates of that City. A thing not only clear in story, by the Writers of that
time, and since, Sleidan, Bodine, Caluins Epistles, and life, but set down by
those whom ye cite. Master Hooker in his Preface speaking of Calvin. He fell
at length upon Geneua, which City the Bishop and Clergy thereof, had a little
before, as some do affirm, forsaken, being of likelihood frighted with the
peoples sudden attempt for the abolishment of Popish Religion. And a little
after. At the coming of Calvin thither, the form of their Regiment was
popular, as it continues at this day, etc. Doctor Bancroft. The same year
that Geneua was assaulted viz. by the Duke of Sauoy, and the Bishop, as he had
said before, Page 13.) which was Anno 1536. Master Calvin came thither. If
Calvin at his coming found the form of the government popular, If he came
thither the same year that the Bishop made war upon Geneua to recover his
authority, being indeed either affrighted, or having forsaken the Town
before, how could Calvin expel him? And in truth Bodine in his second Book, De
Rep. Chapter sixth, affirms, That the same year Genoa was established in a
State Aristocraticall, which was, he says, Anno 1528. Geneua was changed from
a Monarchy Pontifical, into an Estate Popular, governed Aristocratically,
although that long before the Town pretended to be free, against the Earl,
and against the Bishop, etc. What Sarauia has written touching this point I
cannot tell, as not having his Book. But in Beza his answer to him, there is
no touch upon any such thing. He ioynes with his complaint, of the sacrilegious
usurping Ecclesiastical goods, in answer to his Proeme. He dissents in that
Sarauia accounts the Seniors of the reformed Churches like to that kind which
Saint Ambrose speaks of, brought in out of wisdom only, to rule the
disorderly. Beza says, they were not introducti, but reducti, Cap. 12. For the
rest in all that answer there is nothing of Calvin, or any such reuoluing of
the state as you accuse him of. Which makes me think, that herein your
memory deceived you. It may be that in your younger time, falling upon these
Authors, by occasion of the question of Discipline, which was then much tossed,
ere ever your judgment were ripened, you formed in your mind a false
impression of that which they say of Calvin. You conceited them out of your
zeal in the cause, to say more then they do, and thus possible unawares
received the seeds of dislike of the doctrine of Calvin, as well as his
discipline, which have since taken root in you. But you shall do well to
remember, the difference you put a little before of these two* Christian
doctrine is uniform and ever the same; government is changeable in many
circumstances, according to the exigence of times and persons. And even the
same men that write somewhat eagerly against Master Calvin, yet give him the
pra^se of wisdom to see what for that time and state was necessary. Master
Hooker says of him, That he thinks him incomparably the wisest man that ever
the French Church did enjoy since the hour it enjoyed him, and of his
platform of discipline, after he has laid down the sum of it. This device
I see not how the wisest at that time living could have bettered, if we duly
consider what the present state of Geneua did then require. But be it (and for
my part I think no less) that herein he was mistaken, to account this to be
the true form of Church policy, by which all other Churches, and at all times
ought to be governed; let his error rest with him, yea, let him answer it
unto his Judge; but to accuse him of ambition, and sedition, and that falsely,
and from thence to set that brand upon the reformation, whereof he was a worthy
instrument (though not the first either there, or any where else) as if it
could not be from God, being so founded; for my part I am afraid you can
never be able to answer it, at the same Bar; no, nor even that of your own
conscience, or of reasonable and equal men.

For the stirs, broiles, seditions, and murders in Scotland, which you
impute to Knox and, and the Geneua Gospellers, they might be occasioned perhaps
by the reformers there, as the broiles which our Lo^d Jesus Christ says he
came to set in the world by the Gospel. Possible also, that good men out of
inco^siderate zeal, should do some things rashly. And like enough the
multitude which followed them, as being foreprepared with a iusthatred of the
tyranny of their Prelates, and provoked by the opposition of the adverse
faction, and emboldned by success^, ran a great deal further then either wise
men could foresee, or tell how to restrain them. Which was applauded and
fomented by some politic men, who took advantage of those motions to their
own ends. And as it happens in natural bodies, that all ill humors run to
the part affected, so in civil, all discontented people when there is any
sorance run to one or other side; and under the show of common griefs,
pursue their own. Of all which distempers, there is no reason to lay the blame
upon the seekers of reformation, more then upon the Physicians, of such
accidents as happen to the corrupted bodies which they have in cure. The
particulars of those affairs are as I believe alike unknown to us both, and
since you name none, I can answer to none. For as for the pursuing our King
even before his birth, that which his Majesty speaks of some Puritans, is
ouer-boldly by you referred to Master Knox and the Ministers, that were authors
of Reformation in Scotland. Briefly, consider and survey your own thoughts,
and see if you have not come by these degrees^ First, from the inconsiderate
courses of some to plant the pretended Discipline in Scotland, to conceive
amiss of the Doctrine also. Then to draw to the increasing of your ill conceit
thereof, what you find reported of any of the Puritans, a faction no less
opposed by his Majesty in Scotland then with us in England. So when we speak
of religion (though that indeed be all one) ye divide us into Lutherans,
Zwinglians, Caluinists, Protestants, Brownists, Puritans, and Cartwrightists,
whenever any disorder of all this number can be accused, then lo are we all
one, and the faul^ of any faction is the slander of all, yea of the Gospel it
self, and of reformation. Judge now uprightly if this be indifferent dealing.

From Scotland you come to England. Where because you could find nothing done
by popular tumult, nothing but by the whole state in Parliament, and Clergy in
Convocation, you fall upon King Henry's passions, you will not insist upon them
you say; and yet you do, as long as upon any one member of your induction,
though it matters little whether you do or no, since F. Parsons will needs
auerre that he lived and died of your religion. Here first you mention, his
violent diuorcing himself from his lawful wife. We will not now debate the
question how his Brothers wife could be his lawful wife: you must now say so.
Whatsoever the Scriptures, Councels, almost all Universities of Christendom
determined. Yet me thinks it should move you that Pope Clement himself had
consigned to Cardinal Campegius a Breue formed to sentence for the King, in as
ample manner as could be, howsoever upon the success of the Emperors
affairs, in Italy and his own occasions, he sent a special messenger to him
to burn it. But what violence was this that you speak of? The matter was
orderly and iudiciouslie by the Archbishop of Canterbury with the assistance
of the learnedest of the Clergy according to the ancient Canons of the Church,
and laws of the Realm heard and determined. That indeed is more to be
marvelled at, what moved him to fall out with the Pope his friend in whose
quarrel he had so far engaged himself, as to write against Luther, of whom
also he was so rudely handled as you mention before; having received also for
some part of recompense, the title of the Defender of the Faith, having been
so chargeablie thankful to the Pope for it. All these things considered, it
must be said, this unkindness and slipperie dealing of Clement with him was
from the Lord, that he might have an occasion against the Pope, and that it
might appear that it was not humane counsel, but divine providence that
brought about the banishment of the Popes tyranny from among us. His marriage
with the Lady Anne Bullen, her death, and the rest which you mention of the
abling or disabling her issue to inherit the Crown, I see not what it makes to
our purpose. The suppression of the Monasteries, was not his sole Act, but of
the whole State, with the consent also of the Clergy, and taken out of
Cardinal Wolsey his example, yea, founded upon the Popes authority granted to
him, to dissolve the smaller houses of religion, on pretense to defray the
charges of his sumptuous buildings at Oxford and l^swich, wherein if it pity
you (as I confess it has sometimes me) that such goodly buildings are
defaced and ruined, we must remember what God did to Sh^loh, (...) 7. 12.
yea to Jerusalem it self, and his Temple there. Matthew. (...)
And that Oracle, Every tree that bears not good fruit shall be cut down,
and cast into the fire.

You demand, If this man, King Henry, were a good head of Gods Church? What if
I should demand the same touching Alexander the Sixth, Julius the Second, Leo
the Tenth, or twenty more of the Catalogue of Popes, in respect of whom King
Henry might be canonized for a Saint? But there is a story in Tullies Offices
of one Lutatius, that laid a wager that he was (bonus vir) a good man; and
would be judged by one Fimbria, a man of Consular dignity. He, when he
understood the case, said, He would never judge that matter, least either he
should diminish the reputation of a man well esteemed of, or set down that any
man was a good man; which he accounted to consist in an innumerable sort of
excellencies and praises. That which he said of a good man, with much more
reason may I s^y, of a good King, one of whose highest excellencies is to be a
good head of the Church. And therefore it is a question which I will never take
upon me to answer, whether King Henry were such or no, unless you will
before hand interpret this word as favorably, Lib. 16.
as Guicciardine does tell us men are wont to do in the censuring your heads
of the Church. For Popes, he says, now adays are praised for their goodness,
when they exceed not the wickedness of other men. After this description of a
good head of the Church, or if ye will that of Cominaeus, which says he is
to be counted a good King, whose virtues exceeds his vices. I will not doubt to
say King Henry may be enrolled among the number of good Kings. In special, for
his executing that highest duty of a good King, the employing his authority
in his Kingdom, to command good things, and forbid evil, not only concerning
the civil estate of men, but the religion also of God. Witness his
authorizing the Scriptures ^o be had and read in Churches in our Vulgar tongue,
enioyning the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and ten Commandments to be taught the
people in English, abolishing superfluous Holy Days, pulling down those
iugling Idols, whereby the people were seduced, namely, the Rood of Grace,
whose eyes and lips were moved with wires, openly showed at Paul's Cross, and
pulled asunder by the people. Above all, the abolishing of the Popes tyranny,
and merchandise of Indulgences, and such like chafer out of England. Which Acts
of his whosoever shall impartially consider of, may well esteem him a better
head to the Church of England, then any Pope these thousand years.

In the last place you come to the Hugenots and Geuses, of France and Holland.
You lay to their charge, the raising of civil wars, shedding of blood,
occasioning rebellion, rapine, desolations, principally for their new religion.
In the latter part you write, I confess, somewhat reseruedly, when you say,
occasioning, not causing, and principally, not only and wholly, for religion.
But the words going before, and the exigence of your argument require, that
your meaning should be, they were the causers of these disorders. You bring to
my mind a story, whether of the same Fimbria that I mentioned before, or
another, which having caused Quintus Scaeuola to be stabbed (as F. Paulo was,
while I was at Venice) after he understood that he escaped with his life,
brought his action against him, for not having received the weapon wholly into
his body. These poor people having endured such barbarous cruelties,
massacres, and martyrdomes, as scarce the like can be showed in all stories,
are now accused by you as the Authors of all they suffered. No, no, Master
Wadesworth, they be the Laws of the Roman religion, that are written in
blood. It is the bloody Inquisition, and the perfidious violating of the Edicts
of Pacification, that have set France and Flanders in combustion. An evident
argument whereof may b^e, for Flanders, that those Geuses that you mention,
were not all Caluinists (as you are misinformed) the chief of them were
Roman Catholics; as namely, Count Egmond, and Horn, who lost their heads for
standing, and yet only by petition, against the new impositions, and the
Inquisition, which was sought to be brought in upon those Countries. The which
when the Viceroy of Naples, D. Petro de Toledo would have once brought in
there also, An. 1547.
the people would by no means abide, but rose up in Arms to the number of
50000. which sedition could not be appeased, but by delivering them of that
fear. The like resistance, though more quietly carried, was made when the same
Inquisition should have been put upon Millaine, 1563.
sixteen years after. Yet these people were neither Geuses nor Caluinists.
Another great means to alienate the minds of the people of the Low Countries
from the obedience of the Catholic Majesty, has been the severity of his
Deputies there, one of which leaving the government after he had in a few
years put to death 18000.
8000. persons, it is reported to have been said, the Country was lost with
too much lenity. This speech Meursius concludes his Belgic history with all.
And as for France, the first broiles there, were not for religion, but for the
preferring the house of Guis^, and disgracing the Princes of the blood. True it
is that each side aduantaged themselves by the color of religion, and under
pretense of zeal to the Roman, the Guisians murdered the Protestants, being
in the exercise of their religion assembled together, against the Kings Edict,
against all Laws and common humanity. And tell ^ee in good sooth* Master
Wadesworth, do you approve such barbarous cruelty? Do you allow the butchery
at Paris? Do you think subjects are bound to give their throats to be cut
by their fellow subjects, or to their Princes at their mere wills against
their own Laws and Edicts? You would know, quo iure, the Protestants wars
in France and Holland are justified. First, the Law of Nature, which not only
allows, but inclines and inforceth every living thing, to defend it self
from violence. Secondly, that of Nations, which permits those that are in
the protection of others, to whom they owe no more but an honorable
acknowledgement, in case they go about to make themselves absolute
Souereignes, and usurp their liberty, to resist and stand for the same. And
if a lawful Prince (which is not yet Lord of his Subjects lives and goods)
shall attempt to despoile them of the same, under color of red^cing them to
his own religion after all humble remonstrances, they may stand upon their
own guard, and being assailed, repel force with force, as did the Macchabees
under Antiochus. In which case notwithanding, the person of the Prince
himself, ought always to be sacred and inviolable, as was Saul's to David.
Lastly, if the enraged Minister of a lawful Prince, will abuse his authority
against the fundamental Laws of the Country, it is no rebellion to defend
themselves against force, reserving still their obedience to their Sovereign
inuiolate. These are the Rules of which the Protestants that have borne Arms
in France and Flanders, and the Papists also both there and elsewhere, as in
Naples, that have stood for the defense of their liberties, have served
themselves. How truly I esteem it hard for you and me to determine, unless
we were more thoroughly acquainted with the Laws and Customs of those
Countries, then I for my part am. Once for the Low Countries, the world knows
that the Dukes of Burgundy were not Kings or absolute Lords of them, which are
holden partly of the Crown of France, and partly of the Empire. And of Holland
in particular they were but Earls. And whether that title carries with it such
a Souereigntie, as to be able to give new Laws, without their consents, to
impose tributes, to bring in garrisons of strangers, to build Forts, to
assubjects their honors and lives to the dangerous trial of a new Court,
proceeding without form or figure of justice, any reasonable man may well
doubt; themselves do utterly deny it.

Yet you say boldly they are Rebels, and ask why we did support them? It
seems to some that his Catholic Majesty does absolve them in the treaty of
the Truce, An. 1608. of all imputation of rebellion. And if they were Rebels,
especially for heresy, why did the most Christian King support them? As for
Queen Elizabeth, if she were alive, she would answer your question with
another. Why did Spain concur in practice and promise aid to that
detestable conspiracy that was plotted against her by Pius V. as you may see
at large in his life, written by Girolamo Catena? It is, you say, an easy
matter to pretend privileges. But it is no hard matter to discern pretended
privileges from true, and Treason from Reason of State, and old corruptions
from old Religion. But to take arms to change the Laws by the whole Estate
established, is treason whatsoever the cause or color be: and therefore is was
treason in the Rebels of Lincolnshire and Yorkshire in King Henry's days, and
in the Earls of the North in Queen Elizabeth's, though they pretended their
old Religion: and the same must be said of all Assasinates attempted against
the persons of Princes, as Parryes, Someruilles, Squires, against Queen
Elizab^th, and the late powder plot the eternal shame of Popery against King
James.

To your Argument therefore in form, admitting that it is no true Church,
which is founded and begun in malice, disobedience, passion, blood, and
rebellion, no nor yet a true reformation of a Church (for in truth the
Protestants pretend not to have founded any.) The Assumption is denied in every
part of it. And here I must needs say you have not done unwisely to leave out
the Church of England, as against which you had no pretense, all things having
been carried orderly, and by public counsel. But you have wronged those which
you name, and either lightly believed, or unjustly surmised your self,
touching Luther, Calvin, Knox, the French, and the Hollanders, when you make
them the raysers of rebellion and shedders of blood. Whose blood has been
shed like water in all parts of those countries, against all Laws of God and
Man against the Edicts and public Faith, till necessity enforced them to
stand for their lives. Yet you presume that all this is evident to the world,
whereas it is so false and improbable, yea in some parts impossible, as I
wonder how your heart could assure your hand to write it.

Give me here leave to set down by occasion of this your motive, that which I
profess next to the evidence of those corruptions which the Court and faction
of Rome maintaynes, has long moved my self. And thus I would enlarge your
Proposition. That Monarchy (as now without lisping it calls it self) which was
founded, supported, enlarged, and is yet maintained by pride, ambition,
rebellion, treason, murdering of Princes, wars, dispensing with perjurie,
and incestuous marriages, spoils and robbery of Churches, and Kingdoms,
worldly policy, force and falsehood, forgerie, lying, and hypocrisy, is not
the Church of Christ, and his Kingdom, but the tyranny of Antichrist. The
Papacy falsely calling it self the Church of Rome is such. Erg^. The
Assumption shall be proved in every part of it, and in truth is already by
the learned and truly noble Lord of Plessis in his Mysterium iniquit at is. But
his book I suppose you cannot view, and it would require a just volume to show
it, though but shortly. It shall be therefore, if you will, the task of
another time. And yet because I do not love to leave things wholly at randon,
consider a few instances in some of these. Pope B^niface III. obtained that
proud and ambitious title of Oecumenicall, so much detested by Saint Gregory.
Pope Constantine and Gregory the second, revolted Italy from the Greek
Emperors obedience, forbidding to pay tribute or obey them. Pope Zachary
animated Pipine high Steward of France, to depose Chilperick his Lord, and
dispensed with the oaths of his subjects. Pope Stephen II. most treacherously
and unjustly persuaded the same Pipine not to restore the Exarchate of Ranenna
to the Emperor, after he had recovered it from Astulfus King of Lombards, but
to give it to him. Pope Nicholas II. and Gr^gorie VII. parted the prey with the
Normans in Calabria, and Apulia, creating them Dukes thereof, He^ri^ (...)
to hold the Emperor of Constantinoples country in vassallage of them. This
latter also was the first as all Historians accord, that ever attempted to
depose the Emperor, against whom he most impiously stirred up his own
children, which most lamentably brought him to his end. Pope Paschal II. would
not suffer (for the full accomplishment of this Tragedy) his son to bury
him. Pope Adrian IV. demanded homage of the Emperor Frederick, Alexander III.
trod on his neck. Celestine III. crowned Henry VI. with his feet. Innocent
IV. stirred up Frederick the seconds own servants to poison him, practiced
with the Sultan of Egypt to break with him. This is that Innocent, of whose
extortions Matthew Paris relates so much in our story; whom the learned,
zealous, and holy Bishop of Lincoln on his deathbed proved to be Antichrist,
and in a vision struck so with his Crosier-staffe that he died. Boniface
VIII. challenged both swords, pretended to be superior to the King of France
in temporal things also. Clement V. would in the vacancie of the Empire, that
all the Cities and Countries thereof should be under his disposition, made the
Duke of Venice, Dandalus, couch under his Table with a chain on his neck like
a dog, ere he would grant peace to the Venetians. This Clement the V.
commanded the Angels to carry their souls to heaven, that should take the
Cross to fight for the holy Land.

What shall I say more? I am weary with writing thus much, and yet in all this
I do not insist upon private and personal faults, blasphemies, perjuries,
necromancies, murders, barbarous cruelties, even upon one another, alive and
dead, nor on whoredoms, incests, sodomies, open pillages, besides the
perpetual abuse of the censures of the Church. I insist not upon these, more
then you did upon King Henry's passions. I tell you not of him that called the
Gospel a fable, or another that instituted his Agnus Deis to strangle sin
like Christ's blood. Of him that dispensed with one to marry his own sister
(for the uncle to marry with the niece, or a woman to marry two brothers, a
man two sisters by dispensation, is no rare thing at this day.) The faculty to
use Sodomie, the story of Pope Ioane, are almost incredible, and yet they have
Authors of better credit then Bolseck. It may be said that John the two and
twentieth called a devil incarnate, that Alexander VI. the poisoner of his
Cardinals, the adulterer of his son in laws bed, incestuous defiler of his
own daughter, and rival in that villainy to his son, sinned as men, which
empeacheth not the credit of their office. That Paulu^ V. Vice-deus takes too
much upon him, when he will be Pope-almightie; but the chair is without
error. Wherein, not to insist for the present, but admitting it as true that
wickedness of men's persons does not impeach the holiness of their functions,
which they have received of God, nor make Gods ordinances, as his Word and
Sacraments of none effect. But tell me for Gods love, Master Waddesworth, is it
likely that this Monarchy thus sought, thus gotten, thus kept, thus exercised,
is of God? Are these men that wholly forsaking the feeding of the flock of God
dream of nothing now but Crowns and Scepter^, serve to the Church to no use in
the world, unless it be to break the ancient Canons, and oppress with their
power all that shall but utter a free word against their ambition and tyranny,
are they, I will not say with you, good heads of Gods Church, but members of
it, and not rather limbs of Satan? Consider those Texts: My Kingdom is not of
this world, Vos autem non sic. Consider the charge which Saint Peter gives to
his fellow Presbyters, 1. Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4. Now I beseech our Lord deliver his
Church from this tyranny, and bless you from being a member of such a Head.

CHAP. XI.
Of lack of succession, Bishops, true Ordinations, Ord^rs, Priesthood.
I Come now to your motive from succession. Where I marvel first, that leaving
the succession of Doctrine, which is far more proper and intrinsecall to the
Churches being, you stand upon that of Persons and Offices. Yea, and about them
too, immediately pass from that which is of Essence, to the external
formalities in consecration and ordination, according to the ancient Councels.
Have you forgotten what you said right now, that matters of ceremony and
government are changeable? Yea, but in France, Holland, and Germany, they have
no Bishops. First, what if I should defend they have? because a Bishop and a
Presbyter are all one, as Saint Jerome maintains, and proves out of holy
Scripture, and the use of Antiquity. Of which judgment, as Medina confesses,
are sundry of the ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latine^ Saint Ambrose,
Augustine, Seduliu^, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodorit, Oecumenius, and
Theophylact: which point I have largely treated of in another place, against
him that undertook Master Alablasters quarrel. Besides, those Churches in
Germany have those whom they call Superintendents, and general
Superintendents, Cap. 8.
as out of Doctor Bancroft by the testimony of Zanchius, and sundry Germane
Divines, you might perceive. Yea, and where these are not, as in Geneua; and
the French Churches, yet there are, says Zanchius, ^sually certain chief men
that do in a manner bear all the sway, as if order it self and necessity
led them to this course. And what are these but Bishops indeed, unless we
shall wrangle about names, which for reason of State those Churches were to
abstain from. As for that you say Lay men intermed^le there with the making of
their Ministers, if you mean the election of them, they have reason; for
anciently the people had always a right therein, as Saint Cyprian writes to
the Churches of Leon and Astorga there in Spain, Plebs ipsa maxim habet
potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes vel indignos recusandi; and in
sundry places of Italy this usage does continue to this day. If ye mean it
in Ordination, ye are deceived, and wrong these Churches, as Bellarmine
himself will teach you, lib. De Cl^ricis, cap. 3. For amongst the Lutherans
and Caluinists also, says he, which have taken away almost all
Ecclesiastical rites, they only lay on hands and make Pastors and Ministers,
who though they be not Pastors and Bishops indeed would be so accounted and
called.

In England you miss first the lesser orders, and say, we are made Ministers
per saltum, as if all that are made Priests among you were Psalmists, Sextens,
Readers, Ex^rcists, Torch-bearers, Subdeacons, and Deacons before. Remember I
pray what the Master of the Sentences says of Deaconship and Priesthood. Hos
solos primitiu^ Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his solis praeceptum Apostoli
habemus. He means in the Epistles to T^^othy and Titus. Again, Subdiaeonos
vere and Acolythos precede^te tempore Ecclesia sibi constituit. What? and were
the Primitive and Apostolic Churches no true Churches? or need we to be
ashamed to be like them? Besides, those Councels that ye speak of, it should
seem were of no great either antiquity or authority, when not only
Presbyters, without passing through any order, but Bishops without being so
much as baptized, were ordained. As Nectarius of Constantinople, Synesius of
Cyrene, Ambrose of Millaine, Constantine II. of Rome it self. This therefore
is a very slight exception.

Your next is well worse, touching the Ordination at the Nags-head, where the
Consecration of our first Bishops, as you say was attempted, but not effected.
It is certain, you say, and you are sure there was such a matter, although you
know, and have seen the records themselves, that afterward there was a
Consecration of Doctor Parker at Lambeth. Alas Master Wadesworth, if you be
resolved to believe lies, not only against public Acts, and your own
eyesight, but against all probability, who can help it? I had well hoped to
have found that ingenuitie in you, that I might have used your testimony unto
others of that side, touching the vanity of this fable, as having showed you
the Copy of the record of Doctor Parkers consecration, which I had procured to
be transcribed out of the Acts, which your self also at your return from
London, told me you saw in a black Book. Now I perceive by your perplexed
writing, and enterlining in this part of your Letter, you would feign discharge
your conscience, and yet uphold this lie, perhaps, as loath to offend that side
where you now are: and therefore you have devised this temper, that the one was
attempted, the other effected. But it will not be. For first of all, if that
at the Nags-head were but attempted, what is that to the purpose of our
Ordinations, which are not derived from it, but from the other, which as you
say was effected at Lambeth? And are you sure there was such a matter? How are
you sure? Were you present there in person, or have you heard it of those that
were present? Neither of both I suppose: but if it were so that some body
pretending to have been there present told you so much, how are you sure that
he lied not in saying so; much more when you have it but at the third, or
fourth hand, perhaps the thirtieth or fortieth. But consider a little, is it
probable that men of that sort, in an action of that importance, and at the
beginning of the Queens reign, when especially it concerned both them and her
to provide, that all things should be done with reputation, would be so
hasty and heedlesse, as to take a Tavern for a Church? Why might they not
have gone to the next Church as well? They thought to make the old Catholic
Bishop drunken. Thus the Wisbich and Framyngham Priests were wont to tell the
tale. Is it likely that they would not forethinke that possible this good old
man would not drink so freely as to be drunken, and if he were, yet would
not be in the humor to do as they would have him? for who can make any
foundation upon what another would do in his cups? What a scorn would this
be to them? Men are not always so provident in their actions. True, but such
men are not to be imagined so so^tish, as to attempt so solemn an action, and
joined commonly with some great feast, and as you observed well out of the
Acts, with the Queens mandate for the action to be done, and hang all upon a
drunken fit of an old man. Besides, how comes it to pass that we could never
understand the names of the old Bishop, or of those whom he should have
consecrated, or which consecrated themselves, when he refused to do it. For
so do your men give it out; howsoever you say, it was not there effected. And
in all the space of Queen Elizabeth's reign, wherein so many set themselves
against the reformation by her established, is it possible we should never
have heard word of it, of all the English on that side the Seas, if it had
been any other then a flying tale? After forty five years, ^^ristophorus a
Sacro bosco Dubliniensis.
there is found at last an Irish Jesuit that dares put it in print, to prove
by it as now you do, that the Parliamentary Pastors lack holy orders. But he
relates sundry particulars, and brings his proofs. For the purpose, this
ordainer or consecrater, he says, was Laudasensis Episcopus home senex and
simplex. His name? Nay, that ye must pardon him. But of what City or Diocese
was he Bishop? for we have none of that title. Here I thought once that by
error it had been put for Landaffensis of Landaffe in Wales, save that three
times in that Narration it is written La^dasensis; which notwithstanding, I
continued to be of the same mind, because I found Bishop Boners name twice
alike false written Bomerus. But lo in the Margent a direction to the Book,
De Schismate fol. 166. where he says this matter is touched, and it is
directly affirmed, that they performed the Office of Bishops, without any
Episcopal consecration. Again, that great labor was used without an Irish
Archbishop in prison at London to ordain them, but he could by no means be
brought thereto. So it seems we must pass out of Wales into Ireland, to find
the Sea of this Bishop or Archbishop. But I believe we may sail from thence to
Virginia to seek him; for in Ireland we shall not find him. Let us come to
those that he should have ordained, what were there names? Candidati, if that
will content you, more ye get not. Why they might have been remembered as well
as the Nags-head, as well as Boners name, and his See, and that he was Dean^
of the Bishops, he means of the Archbishopricke, sede vacant, and that he
sent his Chaplain (his name also is unknown) to forbid the Ordination. At
least their Sees. To cut the matter short. Quid plura? Scoraeus Monachus post
Herefordensis pseudo-episcopus coeteris, ex coeteris quidam, Scor aeo manus
imponunt: fiuntque sine patre fili^ and pater a fili^s procreatur, res seculis
omnibus inauditae. Here is at length some certainty: some truth mingled among,
to give the better grace, and to be as it were the Vehiculum of a lie. For John
Scory, in King Edward his times, Bishop of Chichester, and after of Hereford,
was one of those that ordained Doctor Parker, and preached at his ordination.
But that was the ordination effected as you call it: we are now in that which
was not effected, but attempted only. And here we seek again, who were
these quidams that laid hands on S^ory? We may go look them with La^dasensis
the Archbishop of Ireland. Well; hear the proofs. Master Thomas Neale, Hebrew
Reader of Oxford, which was present, told thus much to the ancient Confessors,
they to F. H^lywood. This proof by Tradition as you know is of little credit
with Protestants, and no marvel: for experience shows that reports suffer
strange alterations in the carriage, even when the reporters are not
interessed. Iremeus relates from the ancient Confessors, Lib. 2. c. 29.
which had seen John the Disciple, and the other Apostles of the Lord, and
heard it from them, that Christ our Savior was between forty and fifty
years of age before his passion. I do not think you are sure it was so. For
my part, I had rather believe. Irenaeus and those ancients he mentions, and
the Apostles; then F. Haliwood and his Confessors, and Master Neale. But
possible it is, M. Neale said, he was present at Matthew Parkers ordination by
John Scory. These Confessors being before impressed, as you are, with the buzze
of the ordination at the Nags-head made up that tale; and put it upon him for
their Author. Perhaps Master Neale did esteem John Scory t^ be no Bishop, and
so was scandalized though causelessly, at that action. Perhaps Master Neale
never said any such word at all. To help to make good this matter, he says,
It was after inacted in Parliament, that these Parliamentary Bishops should be
holden for lawful. I looked for some thing of the Nags-head Bishops, and the
Legend of their ordination. But the lawfulness that the Parliament prouides
for, is (according to the authority the Parliament has) ^iuill, that is,
according to the Laws of the Land. The Parliament never intended to justify
any thing as lawful, iure diuino, which was not so; as by the Preamble it
self of the Statute may appear. (...)
In which it is said, That diverse questions had grown upon the making and
consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops, within this Realm, whether the same
were, and be duly and orderly done according to the Law or not, etc. And
shortly to cut off F. Halywoods surmises, the case was this, as may be
gathered by the body of the Statute. Whereas in the five and twentieth of
Henry the Eight, an Act was made for the electing and consecrating of
Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm. And another in the third of Edward
the Sixth, for the ordering and consecrating of them, and all other
Ecclesiastical Ministers, according to such form as by six Prelates, and
six other learned men in Gods Law to be appointed by the King should be
devised, and set forth, under the great Seal of England. Which form in the
fifth of the same Kings reign, was annexed to the Book of Common Prayer, then
explained, and perfected; and both confirmed by the authority of Parliament.
All these Acts were 1. Mariae and 1. and 2. Philippi and Mariae repealed;
together with another Statute of 35. Henr. 8. touching the style of supreme
Head to be used in all Letters Patents and Commissions, etc. These Acts of
repeal in the 1. Elizabeth were again repealed, and the Act of 25. Hen. 8.
revived specially. That of 3. Edwar. 6. only concerning the Book of Common
Prayer, etc. without any particular mention of the book or form of ordering
Ministers and Bishops. Hence grew one doubt, whether ordinations and
consecrations according to that form were good in Law or no. Another was,
Queen Elizabeth in her Letters Patents touching such Consecrations,
Ordinations had not used as may seem, besides other general words importing
the highest authority in causes Ecclesiastical, the title of Supreme Head,
as King Henry, and King Edward in their like Letters Patents were wont to d^:
and that notwithstanding the Act of 35. Hen. 8. after the repeal of the former
repeal might seem (though never specially) revived. This as I ghosse was
another exception, to those that by virtue of those Patents were Consecrated.
Whereupon the Parliament declares. First, that the Book of Common Prayer, and
such order and, form^ for consecrating of Archbishops and^ Bishops, etc. as was
set forth in the time of King Edward the Sixth, and added thereto and
authorized by Parliament, shall stand in force and be observed. Secondly, That
all Acts done by any person about any consecration, confirmation, o^ in^esting
of any elect to the Office or Dignity of Archbishop or Bishop, by virtue of
the Queens Letters Patents or Commission, since the beginning of her reign
be good^ Thirdly, That all that have been ordered or consecrated Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, etc. after the said form and order, be rightly made,
ordered, and consecrated, any Statute, Law, Canon, or other thing to the
contrary notwithstanding. These were the reasons of that Act; which as you see
does not make good the Nags-head-ordination as F. Halywood pretends, unless
the same were according to the form in Edward the Sixth days. His next proof
is, that Bo^er Bishop of London while he lived, always set light by the
Statutes of the Parliaments of Queen Elizaboth, alleging that there wanted
Bishops, without whose consent by the Laws of the Realm there can no firm
Statuee be made. That Boner despised and set not a straw by the Acts of
Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's time, I hold it not impossible, and yet there
is no other proof thereof, but his bare word, and the ancient Confessors
tradition, of which we heard before. Admitting this for certain, there might
be other reasons thereof, besides the ordination at the Nags-head. The
stiffenesse of that man was no less in King Edwards time, then Queen
Elizabeth's. And indeed the want also of Bishops might be the cause, why he
little regarded the Acts of her first Parliament. For both much about the time
of Queen Mary's death dyed also Cardinal Poole, and sundry other Bishops: and
of the rest some for their contemptuous behavior in denying to perform their
duty in the Coronation of the Queen were committed to prison, others absented
themselves willingly. So as it is commonly reported to this day, there was none
or very few there. For as for Doctor Parker and the rest, they were not
ordained till December, 1559. the Parliament was dissolved in the May before.
So not to stand now to refute Boners conceit, that according to our Laws there
could be no Statutes made in Parliament without Bishops (wherein our
Parliament men will rectify his judgment) F. Halywood was in this report twice
deceived, or would deceive his Reader. First, that he would make that exception
which Boner laid against the first Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's time, to be
true of all the rest. Then, that he accounts B. Boner to have excepted against
this Parliament, because the Bishops there were no Bishops as not canonically
ordained: where it was, because there was no Bishops true or false there at
all. His last proof is. That D. Bancroft being demanded of M. Al^blaster,
whence their first Bishops received their orders? answered, that he hoped a
Bishop might be ordained of a Presbyter in time of necessity. Silently
granting, that they were not ordained by any Bishop: and therefore, says he,
the Parliamentary Bishops are without order Episcopal, and their Ministers
also no Priests. For Priests are not made but of Bishops, whence Hierome. Qu^d
facit, etc. What does a Bishop, saving ordination, which a Presbyter does not?
I have not the means to demand of D. Alablaster, whether this be true or not.
Nor yet whether this be all the answer he had of D. Bancroft. That I affirm,
that if it were, yet it follows not, that D. Bancroft silently granted they
had no orders of bishops. Unless he that in a false discourse, both where
propositions be untrue, denies the Mayor, does silently grant the Minor. Rather
he iested at the futilitie of this Argument, which admitting all this lying
Legend of the Nags-head, and more to; suppose no ordination by any Bishops had
been ever effected, notwithstanding shows no sufficient reason why there
might not be a true consecration, and true Ministers made, and consequently a
true Church in England. For indeed necessity dispences with Gods own positive
Laws, Mark (...)
as our Savior shows in the Gospel much more then with man's: and such by
Hieromes opinion are the Laws of the Church, touching the difference of
Bishops and Presbyters, and consequently touching their ordination by Bishops
only. Whereof I have treated more at large in another place, for the
justification of other reformed Churches, albeit the Church of England needs it
not. To confirm this Argument, it pleases F. Halywood to add^, That King
Edward the Sixth, took away the Catholic rite of ordaining, and in stead of
it, substituted a few Caluinisticall prayers. Whom Queen Elizabeth followed,
etc. And this is in effect the same thing which you say, when you add, that
Couerdale being made Bishop of Exceter in King Edwards time, when all Counsels
and Church Canons were little observed, it is very doubtful he was never
himself canonically consecrated, and so if he were no canonical Bishop, he
could not make another canonical. To F. Halywood I would answer, that King
Edward took not away the Catholic rite of ordaining, but purged it from a
number of idle and superstitious rites prescribed by the Popish Pontifical. And
the prayers which he scoffs at if they were Caluinisticall, sure it was by
prophecy, for Calvin never saw them^ill Queen Mary's time; when by certain
of our English exiles, the Book of Common Prayer was translated and showed
him; if he saw them then. Some of them, as the Let any, and the Hymn Veni
Creator, etc. I hope were none of Caluins devising. To you, if you name what
Counsels and Church Canons you mean, and make any certain exception, either
against Bishop Couerdale, or any of the rest as not canonical Bishops, I will
endeavor to satisfy you. Mean while remember I beseech you, that both Law,
and reason, and Religion should induce you in doubtful things to follow the
most favorable sentence, and not rashly out of light surmises to pronounce
against a public and solemn ordination, against the Orders conferred
successively from it, against a whole Church. Wherein I cannot but commend
Doctor Carriers modesty, Page 7.
whose words are these. I will not determine against the succession of the
Clergy in England, because it is to me very doubtful. De des^erata (...)
causa. ^. 11.
And the discretion of Cudsemius the Iesuire, which denies the English Nation
to be Heretics, because they remain in a perpetual succession of Bishops.
And to take away all doubt from you, that some of these Ordayners were only
Bishops elect, and unconsecrated; besides Miles Couerdale, in King Edwards time
Bishop of Exceter, cast in prison by Queen Mary, and released and sent over
Sea to the King of Denmark, know that William Barlow was another; in King
Edwards days Bishop of Bath and Wells, in Queen Mary's beyond the Seas in
the company of the Duchess of Suffolk and Master B^rtie her husband; at the
time of Doctor Parkers ordination Elect of Chichester. A third was, John
Scorie, in King Edwards time Bishop of Chichester, and at the time of the said
ordination Elect of Hereford. A fourth was John Hodgeskin, Suffragan of
Bedford. And these four, if they were all ordained according to the form
ratified in King Edwards days, were presented by two Bishops at least to the
Archbishop, and of him and them received imposition of hands, as in the said
form is appointed.

One scruple yet remains which you have, in that these men did consecrate
Doctor Parker by virtue of a Breue from the Queen, as head of the Church who
being no true head, and a woman, you see not how they could make a true
consecrationr grounded on her authority. But to clear you in this also, you
must understand the Queens mandate served not to give power to ordain (which
those Bishops had before in^rinsecally annexed to their office) but leave and
warrant to apply that power to the person named in that Mandate. A thing,
unless I have been deceived by reports, used in other Countries, yea in the
Kingdoms of his Catholic Majesty himself. Sure I am by the Christian
Emperors in the primitive Church, as you may see in the Ecclesiastical
histories, and namely, in the ordination of Nectarius, that I spoke of before.
Yea, which is more in the consecration of the Bishops of Rome, as of Leo VIII.
whose Decree, with the Synod at Rome touching this matter, is set down by
Gratian, Did. 63. c. 23. taken from the example of Hadria^, and another
Council which gave to Charles the Great, Ius and potestatem eligendi
Pontificem, and ordinandi Apostolicam sedom, as you may see in the Chapter next
before. See the same Did. c. 16. and 17. and 18. and you shall find, C.
Lectis.
that when one was chosen Bishop of Reate, within the Popes own Province, by
the Clergy and people, C. Reatina.
and sent to him by Guido the Count to be consecrated, the Pope durst not do
it till the Emperors license were obtained. Yea, that he writes to the
Emperor for Colonus, C. Nobis.
that receiving his license he might consecrate him either there, or in the
Church of Tusculum, which accordingly upon the Emperors bidding he performed.

Yet another exception you take, to the making our Ministers, that we keep
not the right intention. First, because we neither give nor take Orders as a
Sacrament. By that reason we should have no true marriages amongst us neither,
because we count not Matrimony a Sacrament. This Controversy depends upon the
definition of a Sacrament, which if it be put to be a sign of a holy thing,
these be both so, and a many more then seven. If a seal of the New Testament,
so are there but those two, which we properly call Sacraments; Lib. 4. did. 12.
Baptism, and the Lords Supper. In which last, as to the intention of
sacrificing, surely, if ye allow the doctrine of the Master of the Sentences,
that it is called a Sacrifice and Oblation, which is offered and consecrated by
the Priest, because it is a memory and representation of the true Sacrifice
and holy immolation made on the Altar of the Cross. And, that Christ once dyed
on the Cross, and there was offered up in himself, but is daily offered up in
a Sacrament, because in the Sacrament there is a remembrance of that which wa^
once done; De Consecrat. did. 2.
which he there confirms by the authorities of the Fathers, cited by Gratian
in the Canon Law. If this Doctrine, L^c. The^. lib. 12. cap. 12.
I say, may yet pass for good, and this be the Churches intention, we want
not this intention of sacrificing. Add to this the confession of Melchior
Canus, who says, the Lutherans do not wholly deny the sacrifice, but grant a
Sacrifice of thanks giving, which they call the f. Fucharisticum.
Eucharist: they will have none for sin which they call propitiatory. If he
had put hereto, unless it be in a mystery, he had rightly expressed the
opinion of the Protestants.

Thirdly ye object, we want the matter and form with which orders should be
given: namely, for the matter in Priesthood the delivery of the Patena with
bread, and the Chalice with wine: in Deaconship the delivery of the book of
the Gospel, etc. By which reason the seven first Deacons had no true
ordination, for then there was no Gospel written to be delivered them. Nor
those Priests whom the Pope shall make by his sole word, saying, Esto Sacerdos.
Whom notwithstanding sundry famous Canonists hold to be well and lawfully
ordained; and Innocentius himself says, that if these forms of Ordination
were not found out, any other Ordainer might in like manner make Priests, with
those words, or the like: for as much as these forms were in process of time
appointed by the Church. And if we list to seek for these Metaphysicall
notions of matter and form, in Ordination, which at the most can be but by
Analogy, how much better might we assign the persons deputed to sacred
functions to be the matter (as those that contract are by your selves made the
matter in matrimony) and the imposing of hands, with the expressing the
authority and office given to be the form? In Dionysius though falsely called
the Areopagite, yet an ancient Author, ye shall find nothing else; nor which
I may tell you by the way, any other orders, save Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

And to come to that wherein you say we fail most of all, the substantial
form of Priesthood, tell me ingenuously, good Master Wadesworth, how do you
know that our Lord Jesus Christ made his Apostles, or they others Priests with
this form, which has no mention or footstep in the Gospel, or otherwhere in
holy Scripture! Nor so much as in the Council of Carthage; that from whence
the manner of giving other orders is fetched, nor in Gratian, nor in any other
ancient Author that I can find, save in the Pontifical only. And is the
present Pontifical of such authority with you, as the form of Priesthood,
the substantial form, can subsist in no other words then those that be
there expressed? To omit the late turkesing whereof, consider what Augustinus
Patritius writes in his Preface before that which at Pope Innocent VIII. his
commandment he patched together: That there were scarce two or three books
found that delivered the same thing: Quot libri tot varietates. Ille deficit,
hic superabundat, alius nihil omnino de ear habet, raro ant nunquam
conueniunt; saepe obscuri, implicati, and librariorum vitio plerung mendosi.
And in truth in this your essential form of Priesthood, the old Pontificals
before that which he set forth, either had other words at the giving of the
Chalice and Paten as may seem; or wanted both that form and the matter also
together. The Master of the Sentences declaring the manner of the Ordination of
Priests, and the reason why they have the Chalice with wine, and Paten with
hosts given unto them, says it is, Vt per hoc sciant se accepisse potestatem
placabiles Deo hostias offerendi. Hugo in like manner, Accipiunt and Calicem
cum vino, and Patenam cum hostia de mann Episcopi, quatenus potestatem se
accepisse cognoscant, placabiles Deo hostias offerendi. Stephanus Eduensis
Episcopus, in the same words: Datur eis Calix cum vino, and Patena cum hostia,
in quo traditur ijs potestas ad offerendum Deo placabiles hostias. So Johannes
Ianuensis in his Sum, entitled, Catholicon, verbo Presbyter. If ye ascend
to the higher times of Rabanus, Alcuinus, Isidorus, you shall find that they
mention no such matter, of delivering Chalice or Paten, or words used at the
delivery; and no marvel, for in the Canons of the fourth Council of Carthage
they found none. Diony^ius falsely called Areopagita, whom I mentioned before,
setting down the manner of ordaining in his time. The Priest upon both his
knees before the Altar with the Bishop^ right hand upon his head, is on this
manner sanctified by his Consecrator with holy inuocations. Here is all, s^ue
that he says, after he has described that also which pertaines unto the
Deacon, that every one of them is signed with the cross when the Bishop
blesses them, and proclaimed, and saluted by the Consecrator himself and
every one of that sacred Order that is present. The Greek Schol^ast very
l^uely shows the meaning and manner of this proclaiming. Her says, The
Ordayner pronounces by name when he signeth him, (...). Such a man is
consecrated from being Presbyter to be a Bishop in the name of the father, etc.
and s. in the Presbyter and Deacon. Clemens Romanus ^ F. Turrian and the rest
of the Romish ^action deceive us (...) be not deceived themselves, in
attributing to him the (...) books of the Apostolic Constitutions that (...)
name) cuts the matter yet more short, and without (...) crossing or
proclaiming, appoints the Bishop to lay his (...) upon him, in the presence of
the Presbytery and the Deacor^ using a Prayer, which you may see at length in
him; (...) the increase of the Church, and of the number of them that by word
and work may edify it: for the party elected unto ^he ^^fice of Priesthood,
that being filled with the operations of healings, and word of Doctrine, he may
instruct Gods people with meekness and serve him sincerely with a pure mind,
and willing heart, and perform holy services without spot for his people
through his Christ, to whom etc. These last words which are in the Greek,
(...). Carol^^ Bouius Bishop of (...) interprets, and sacrificia pro populo tuo
immaculata (...). Marvel that he added not, tam pro (...) quam pro defunctis.
Sure if Saint Paul, Romans 15. 16. had not added the word' (...), he had
sacrificed also. This was the ^^cient and Apostolic manner of ordination, if
the Author be worthy of credit. But that ye may perceive what tampering there
has been to bring ordinations to the form which the present Pontifical
prescribes, consider with me the words of Amalarius Bishop of Triers in his
second Book de Ecclesiast. Offic^s, where in the office of the Subdeacon thus
he writes; Miror qua de re sumptus vsus in Ecclesia, etc. I marvel whence the
use was taken in our Church, that very often the Subdeacon should read the
Lesson at Mass, since this is not found committed unto him, by the Ministry
given him in consecration, nor by the Canonical writings, nor by his name. And
straight after, Nam primaro tempore; For in ancient time the Deacon read not
the Gospel which was not yet written; but after it was enacted by our Fathers,
that the Deacons should read the Gospel, they appointed also that the
Subdeacon should read the Epistle or Lesson. It appears, then that in
Amalarius time, who lived with Charles the great and Jews his Son, that
ridiculous fo^me was not in the Pontifical, where the Book of the Epistles is
given to the Subdeacons, and power to read them in the holy Church of God, as
well for the quick as the dead. The same Author coming to speak of Deacons,
tells of their consecration by prayer, and imposition of hands, and confuteth
that in the present Pontifical (which he says he found in a little Book of
holy Orders) made he knows not by what Author, that the Bishop alone should
lay hands on the Deacon. At last he adds, There is one Ministry added to the
Deacon, viz. to read the Gospel, which he says, does well befit him, quia
Minister est. But of the delivery of the Book of the Gospels, with authority
to read the Gospel for the quick and dead, not one word. In the next Chapter
of Presbyters he expounds their name, and says further, hunc morem tenent
Episcopi nostri. Our Bishops have this fashion, they anoint the hands of
Presbyters with oil, which ceremony he declares; touching imposition of hands
upon them, he remit^^s to that he said before in the Deacon. Then he shows out
of Ambrose, and Hierome, that these are all one Order with Bishops, and ought
to govern the Church in common, like Moses with the seventy Elders: as for
delivery of Chalice and Wine, or Paten and Host, with power to sacrifice so
well for the quick as the dead, he makes no mention. Judge you whether these
were thought to be the matter and essential form of Priesthood in his time.
Yet one Author more will Iname in this matter, not only because he is a famous
Schooleman, and one of Luthers first adversaries, and therefore ought to be of
more account with that side, but because he professes the end of his writing
to be, circa Sacramentum ordinis cautos reddere, ne pertinax quisquam aut leuis
sit circa modum tradendi aut recipiendi ordines. It is Cardinal Caietane, in
the second Tome of his Opuscula, Tit. De modo tradendi seu recipiendi Ordines.
Read the whole where these things I observe for our present purpose. 1. If all
be gathered together which the Pontificals, or which reason or authority has
delivered, the nature of all the rest of the orders except Priesthood only,
will appear very uncertain. 2. The lesser Orders and Subdeaconship according
to the Master of the Sentences, were instituted by the Church. 3. The Deacons
instituted by the Apostles, Act. 6. were not Deacons of the Altar, but of the
Tables and Widows. 4. In Deaconship there seems to be no certain form for
according to the old Pontificals, the laying of hands upon the Deacon has no
certain form of words, but that prayer. Emitte q^aesumus in eos S. Sauctum:
which according to the new Pontificals is to be said after the imposition of
hands. For the giving of the Book of the Gospels, has indeed a form of
words, but that impresseth not the Character for before any Gospel was
written, the Apostles ordained Deacons by imposition of hands. 5. In the
Subdeaconship also there is no Pontifical which has not the matter without
form, viz. the delivery of the empty Chalice, etc. These things with more
which he there sets down he would have to serve to the instruction of the
learned touching the uncertainty of this whole matter to ^each men to be wise
to sobriety, that is, every man to be content with the accustomed Pontifical
of the Church wherein he is ordained. And if ought be omitted of those things
which be added out of the new Pontificals, as for example, that the Book of
the Epistles was not given, with those words (Take authority to read the
Epistles as well for the quick as the dead) there is no need of supplying
this omission by a new ordination, for such new additions make no new law.
Learn then of your own Caietane, that the new additions of delivery of the
Chalice with wine, and Paten with Hosts, and authority to offer sacrifice for
the quick and dead make no new Law. Learn to be content with the Pontifical of
the Church, wherein you were ordained. Wherein first is verbatim all that which
your Pontificals had well taken out of the holy words of our Savior, Accipe
Spiritum Sanctum quorum remisseris peccata remittuntur eis and quorum
retinueris retenta sunt. Which me thinks you should rather account to contain
the essential form of Priesthood then the former, both because they are
Christ's own words, and joined with that ceremony of laying on hands, which
anciently denominated this whole action, and do express the worthiest and
principallest part of your Commission, which the Apostle calls the Ministry of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 18. 19. Then, because this office is not only
deputed to consecrate the Lords body, but also to preach and baptize (which in
your Pontifical is wholly omitted) in a larger, and more convenient form, is
added out of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 1. and be thou a faithful dispenser of the
word of God and of his holy Sacraments. In the name of the Father, etc.

As to that you add, that we offer no sacrifice for the quick and dead, and
therefore well may be called Ministers, as all lay men are, but are no Priests.
I have met with sundry that pull this roape as strongly the other way, and
affirm that because by the very form of your ordination you are appointed
Sacrificers for the quick and dead, well may ye be Mass Priests as ye are
called, but Ministers of the New Testament, after S. Paul's phrase ye are none.
For that office stands principally in preaching the word, whereof in your
ordination there is no word said. And as little there is in Scripture of your
sacrifice, which makes Christ not to be a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech, etc. with much more to this purpose. Where my defense for your
Ministry has been this, that the form Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins
ye remit they are remitted, etc. does sufficiently comprehend the authority of
preaching the Gospel. Use you the same equity toward us, and tell those hot
spirits among you, that stand so much upon formalities of words, that to be a
dispenser of the word of God and his holy Sacraments, is all the duty of
Priesthood. And to you I add further, that if you consider well the words of
the Master of the Sentences which I vouched before, how that which is
consecrated of the Priest is called a Sacrifice and oblation, because it is a
memorial and representation of the true sacrifice and holy offering made on
the altar of the Cross, Heb. 10. (...)
and join there to that of the Apostle, that by that one offering Christ has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified, and as he says in another place,
through that blood of his Cross reconciled unto God all things whether in
earth or in heaven; you shall perceive, that we do offer sacrifice for the
quick and dead, remembering, representing and mystically offering that sole
Sacrifice for the quick and dead, by the which all their fins are
meritoriously expiated, and desiring that by the same, we and all the Church
may obtain remission of sins, and all other benefits of Christ's passion.

To the Epilogue therefore of this your last motive, I say in short. Since we
have no need of Subdeaconship, more then the Churches in the Apostles times,
and in truth those whom we call Clerks and Sextens perform what is
necessary in this behalf. Since we have Canonical Bishops, and lawful
succession. Since we neither want due intention to depute men to Ecclesiastical
functions, nor matter or form in giving Priesthood; deriuing from no man or
woman the authority of ordination, but from Christ the head of he Church; ye
have alleged no sufficient cause, why we should not have true Pastors, and
consequently a true Church in England.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Conclusion. Master Waddesworths agonies and protestation, etc.
YEt by these (you say) and many other arguments, you were resolved in your
understanding, to the contrary. It may well be that your understanding out of
it own heedlesse haste, as that of our first Parents while it was at the
perfectest was induced into error, by resolving too soon out of seeming
arguments, and granting too forward assent. For surely, these which you have
mentioned, could not convince it, if it would have taken the pains to examine
them thoroughly, or had the patience to give impartial hearing to the motives
on the other side. Bu^ as if you triumphed in your own conquest, and
captivity, you add that which passes yet all that hitherto you have set
down, viz. That the Church of Rome was and is the only true Church, because
it alone is Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic, having succession, unity, and
visibilitie in all ages, and places. Is it only ancient? To omit Jerusalem,
are not that of Antioch, where the Disciples were first called Christians, and
Alexandria, Ephesus, Corinth, and the rest mentioned in the Scriptures ancient
also? and of Antioch ancienter then Rome. Is it Catholic and Apostolic only?
Do not these and many more hold the Catholic faith received from the
Apostles, as well as the Church of Rome? For that it should be the Universal
Church, is all one as ye would say the part is the whole, one City the world.
Has it only succession? where to set aside the inquiry of Doctrine, so many
Simoniacks, and intruders have ruled, as about fifty of your Popes together,
were by your own men's confession Apostaticall, rather then Apostolical? Or
Unity, where there have been thirty Schisms, and one of them which endured
fifty years long, and at last grew into three heads, as if they would share
among them the triple Crown? And as for diffentions in Doctrine, I remit you
to Master Doctor Halls peace of Rome, wherein he scores above three hundred
mentioned in Bellarmine alone; above threescore in one only head of Penance
out of Nauarrus. As to that addition, in all ages and places* I know not what
to make of it, nor wher^o to refer it. Consider, I beseech you, with your
wonted moderation what you say, for sure unless you were begu^led, I had
almost said bewitched, you could never have resolved to believe and profess,
that which all the world knows to be as false, I had (welnigh) said as God is
true, touching the extent of the Romish Church to all ages and places?

Concerning the agonies you passed, I will say only thus much, if being
resolved though erroniously that was truth, you were withholden from professing
it with worldly respects, you did well to break through them all. But if
besides these, there were doubt of the contrary (as me thinks needs must be)
unless you could satisfy your self touching those many and known exceptions
against the Court of Rome, which you could not be ignorant of) take heed, lest
the rest ensuing these agonies were not like Sampsons sleeping on Dal^lahs
knees, while the locks of his strength were shaven, whereupon (the Lord
departing from him) he was taken by the Philistims, had his eyes put out, and
was made to grind in the prison. But I do not despair, but your former
resolutions shall grow again. And as I do believe your religious
asseueration, that for very fear of damnation you forsook us (which makes me
to have the better hope and opinion of you, for that I see you do so seriously
mind that which is the end of our whole life;) so I desire from my heart the
good hope of salvation you have in your present way may be as happy, as your
fear I am persuaded was causeless.

For my part, I call God to record against mine own soul, that both before my
going into Italy, and since, I have still endeavored to find and follow the
truth in the points controuerted between us, without any earthly respect in
the world. Neither wanted I fair opportunity had I seen it on that side,
easily, and with hope of good entertainment to have adjoined my self to the
Church of Rome, after your example. But (to use your words) as I shall answer
at the dreadful day of judgment, I never saw, heard, or read any thing, which
did convince me: nay, which did not finally confirm me daily more and more, in
the persuasion, that in these differences it rests on our part. Wherein I have
not followed humane conjectures from foreign and outward things (as by your
leave me thinks you do in these your motives, whereby I protest to you in
the sight of God, I am also much comforted and assured in the possession of the
truth) but the undoubted voice of God in his word, which is more to my
conscience then a thousand Topicall Arguments. In regard whereof I am no less
assured, that if I should forsake it I should be renounced by our Savior,
before God and his Angels, then in the holding it be acknowledged and saved;
which makes me resolve, not only for no hope if it were of 10000. worlds, but
by the gracious assistance of God, without whom I know I am able to do
nothing, for no terror or torment ever to become a Papist.

You see what a large distance there is between us in opinion. Yet for my
part, I do not take upon me to foreiudge you, or any other that does not with
an evil mind and self condemning conscience only to maintain a faction,
differ from that which I am persuaded is the right. I account we hold one and
the same faith in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and by him in the blessed
Trinity. To his judgment we stand or fall. Incomparably more and of more
importance are those things wherein we agree; then those wherein we dissent.
Let us follow therefore the things of peace, and of mutual edification. If any
be otherwise minded then he ought, God shall reveal that also to him. If any
be weak or fallen, God is able to rai^e him up. And of you good M.
Waddesworth, and the rest of my Masters and Brethren of that side, one thing I
would again desire, that according to the Aposiles profession of himself, you
would forbear to be Lords over our Faith, nor straightway condemn of heresy,
2 Cor. 8. 24.
our ignorance or lack of persuasion concerning such things as we cannot
perceive to be founded in holy Scripture. Enjoy your own opinions; but make
them not Articles of our Faith: the analogy whereof is broken as well by
addition as subtraction. And this self same equity we desire to find in
positive Laws, Orders, and Ceremonies. Wherein as every Church has full
right to prescribe that which is decent and to edification, and to reform
abuse; so those that are members of each are to follow what is enjoined, till
by the same authority it be reuersed.

And now to close up this Account of yours, whereof you would have Doctor Hall
and me to be as it were examiners and Auditors. Whether it be perfect and
allowable or no, look you to it. I have here told you mine opinion of it, as
directly, plainly, and freely as I can; and as you required fully, if not
tediously. I list not to contend with you about it. Satisfy your own
conscience, and our common Lord and Master, and you shall easily satisfy me.
Once yet by my advice review it, and cast it over again. And if in the
particulars you find you have taken many nullities for signifying numbers,
many smaller signifiers for greater* correct the total. If you find namely
that out of desire of Unity, and dislike of contention, you have apprehended
our diversities to be more then they are: conceived a necessity of an
external infallible Judge, where there was none: attributed the privilege of
the Church properly called, to that which is visible and mixed. If you find the
reformed Churches more charitable, the proper note of Chists sheep: The Roman
faction more fraudulent, and that by public counsel, and of politic
purpose, in framing not only all later writers, but some ancient, yea the holy
Scriptures for their advantage: If you find you have mistaken the Protestants
doctrine touching inuisibilitie, your own also touching uniformity in matters
of Faith: If you have been misinformed and too ha^^ie, of credit touching the
imputations laid to the beginners of reformation: For as touching the want of
Succession and the fabulous Ordination at the Nags head, I hope you will not be
stiff, and persist in your error, but confess and condemn it in your self:
If (as I began to say) you find these things to be thus; give glory to God,
that has heard your prayer, entreating direction in his holy truth; and
withhold not that truth of his in unrighteousness. Unto him that is able to
restore and establish you, yea to consummate and perfect you according to his
almighty power and unspeakable goodness, toward his elect in Christ Jesus, I
do from my heart commend you: and rest you,

Your very loving brother in Christ Jesus, W. BEDELL.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
PAge 3. line 30. for them read him. p. 6. l. 17. for (...) V. p. 7. l. 4. for
come r. came. p. 33. l. 19. for whereby r. whereof. p. 49. l. 36. for them r.
thee. p. 54. l. 35. for Court r. course. p. 55. l. 4. for (...) b E^^l. r. ^ate
Ecclesiast. p. 63. l. 14. for bumorum r. humerum. p. 64. l. 7. for you r. thee.
p. 65 l. 8. for To prove r. ^. To prove. p. ^8. l. 31. side, one r. side one,
p. 82 l. 3. for These r. Those. p. 83. l 1. for to all r. to take all. p. 85.
l. 36. for report r. reports. p. 87. l. 24. for adjure r. abjure. p. 90. l. 32.
for word r. sword. p. 97. l. 15. for the state r. that State. l. 3. for
Gratian, neither r. Gratian neither, ibid. l. 1. for force r. farce. p. 103. l.
32. for sernone r. ser^^^^. p. 108. l. 1. for (...) For. r. (...) hi^. For. p.
109. l. 13. for Bishops r. Bishop. p. 112. l. 4. for greatest shows, r.
greatest, shows another. p. 114 l. 16. for just or r. iuster. ibid. l. 13. for
maechis r. maechiae. p. 116. l. 13. (...) But the r. But that, ibid. l. ^26.
for Such. r. ^. Such. p. 11^. l. 72. for whererein-frequent r.
wherein-frequent. p. 119. l. for Com. 1. r. Cou^. 1. p. 120. l. 13. for
grosser, yet r. grosser yet, ibid. l. 19. for and in this r and this. p. 130.
l. 10. for affairs, in Italy r. affairs in Italy, p. 135. l. 1. for a ubiects
r. assubiect. p. 147. l. 22. for both where r. where both p. 148. l. 19. for
Letany r. Litany. p. 151. l. 33. for Gospel r. Gospel p. 154. l. 9. for
primaro r. primaero.


