A LOOKING-GLASS FOR PAPISTS: To see their own Deformities in matters of
Faith, and Religion: And for formal Protestants; to make them more careful of
the true profession of JESUS CHRIST: lest at any time they fall away from the
sincerity of the Gospel of Christ.

With a brief History of the Popes lives, from the first three hundred years
after Christ, until Paul the fifth.

Of Babylon, There came a voice from heaven, saying: Come away from her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins; lest ye be partakers of her
plagues.

Reu. 18. 4. depiction of the destruction of Babylon (Revelation 18.4)

Printed at London by T. S. for Nathaniel Newbery. 1621.

TO HIS COVNTRIMEN, the Papists in ENGLAND, R. W. wishes all increase of
knowledge in Spiritual things, with a desire to know the Truth, and power of
CHRIST crucified.
BRETHREN, my hearts desire (with Paul) and earnest prayer to God for you, is,
that you might be saved. For of many of you I may say, You have a zeal, but
not according to knowledge: whom I chiefly pity. But I can not so say of many:
who withold the truth in unrighteousness, their consciences daily accusing
them, that they strive against the light, which shines in darkness; namely,
the word of God: which is a Lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our
paths, to direct us in all doubts and difficulties in matters of salvation: The
want of the knowledge whereof, is the maine cause of all error, as says our
Savior Christ, Math. 22. 29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, etc. Again,
John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye have eternal life: and they
are they that testify of me. But indeed the god of this world, even the
Devil, and Sathanas (who knows that his kingdom is assaulted by them, and
finally shall be overthrown by this breath of his mouth) labors by all
possible means, to stop the course thereof. And therefore has set his
Agent, the Pope, on work, to take from you the knowledge thereof, to the end,
to keep you in the darkness of Idolatry and superstition; that so his king
dome may be continued, and increased, amongst the chilaren of unbelief. Else
why has he caused the Scriptures in our mother tongue to be publicly burnt?
and the owners of such Books, held, and condemned for heretics, and their
bodies also consumed with fire? Again, why does he deliver the small
portions, or fragments of Scripture (which he uses in his Lyth^rgie unto the
people) in an unknown tongue: Teaching them also to pray in Latin, which they
understand not; whereas the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 19. says: I had rather, in the
Congregation, speak five words to edification, then ten thousand words in a
strange tongue: verse 11. and 16. how shall they that occupy the room of the
unlearned say, Amen, at the giving of thanks? And again, verse 23. If one
come in unlearned, will he not say, ye are out of your wits? etc. See the
whole Chapter: Notwithstanding the Pope, as the Devils instrument, has taken
from you the use of your own language in Gods service (pre^ended) the
fountain of living water, I mean the Scriptures, and have dug pits that
will hold no water; I mean their own decrees, traditions, and constitutions:
which they put upon the people instead of the word of God, as a rule of life to
be observed, and kept, upon pain of the Popes curse. Beloved Countrymen,
consider I beseech you, what I say, and suffer not the Devil, by him, to keep
your souls captive, and refuse not the voice of the wise Charmers, Psalm 58.
5. Come, and hear our Ministry, our prayers, and preaching: and suspect
betimes (as others have done of late, as zealous in your profession as your
selves) that all is not well on your side: while they keep from you the
knowledge of your own evidence, I mean the Scriptures, which propounds unto
you your right in that immortal inheritance in heaven; purchased unto you
only by his most precious bloud-shedding: and by faith in him alone obtained.
The Lord give you a right understanding in all things. And accept, I pray you,
of my poor Labors, which is but the gleaning after other men's haruests. Let
not prejudice, or old error, cause you to refuse the gift of a friend, that
means well unto you. It will ease you of the search of many Authors, and most
of them Papists, for religion, as your selves, etc. You dwell not in Rome, nor
under the Popes command (except the fault be in your selves;) where indeed it
would be the danger of your lives to have any English Book of the Scripture,
or other books against the Pope, or any point of Popery: But in a kingdom
(which through Gods mercy) has banished the Pope and Popery many days since.
Use therefore your liberty: and see what they whom you hold for enemies, can
say against your errors. If you refuse this advice, it is not the Pope that
can stand you in stead in the day of Judgment: but your condemnation shall be
so much the more just, because you have refused counsel, Ezech. 2. 5. The Lord
give you a heart to consider of these things aright.

Your well-willer in Christ Jesus, R. W. a poor Minister in Norffolke; Aetatis
suae. 74.

The Printer to the Reader.
CHristian Reader; by how much the shorter the time of the Devils rage against
Gods Church is to endure, by so much the more fiercely does he incite his
Instruments to bestirre themselves for to persecute the people of God; yea, if
it were possible, to destroy them for ever: which, although it be restrained by
Almighty God, who does so govern and protect his Children, that the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against them; insomuch, that all true Lovers of Truth
and Godliness, may rejoice and be comforted in assurance thereof: yet may we
not so slumber in security, as to neglect the means of our safety, and of the
impugning of the powers of Satan, especially the kingdom of Antichrist; but
every one must endeavor diligently to do that which belongs unto him.

To this end, not long since (according to the trust reposed in me by that
Reverend and worthy man, master Doctor Burges) I adventured upon thy courteous
acceptance, with one Treatise, called, The Popes deadly Wound, which, having
already found some kind entertainment at thy hands, I could not keep back
this second, committed unto my dispose by the same Learned man, a little before
his Travails into foreign Countries, that so, as with two Stones out of one
Siing, the great blaspheming Giant may the more easily be laid groueling. It is
the work of a very ancient and grave Minister of GODS Word; and very brief
and pithie. I hope thy acceptance of my good will: and I beseech GOD for
CHRIST'S sake, to make it profitable unto thee.

Farewell.
The Contents of this Book.
1 THAT Peter had no Supremacy over the Apostles. fol. 1. 2 That Peter never
sat Bishop of Rome. 7 3 An Examination how the Popes succeed Peter. 10 4 The
time when the Pope began: with the History of their lives, in brief, from
the first three hundred years after Christ, until Pope Paul the fifth, etc. 11.
12. 13. etc. 5 A brief Recapitulation of their lives, the better to find out
the Histories. 6 The Conclusion for Doctrine, with the examination. 79 7
Arguments to prove the Pope Antichrist. 101
A LOOKING-GLASS FOR PAPISTS.
1. Against Peter's Supremacy.
MARK 10. 42. The Lords of the Nations have domination over them, etc. But it
shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your servant; and whosoever will be chief, shall be servant of all: for even
the Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, etc.

Luke 22. 26. Let the greatest among you be as the least, and the chiefest as
he that serves.

Matthew 20. 26. Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your servant;
and whosoever will be chief, let him be your servant, etc.


The Papists places for Supremacy. 1 COR. 12. 22. The head cannot say to the
feet, I have no need of you. Say they: This must be the Pastor over the
Flock: Ergo, Of Peter in respect of the Apostles.

Answer. THE Apostle speaks of no headship, but considering the consent of
the members one for another, he intends that so it should be in the Church
for avoiding of contention; not as the Popes, that disgrace, subject, yea,
kills Kings, the chief members of the Church, and many other great Divines,
as John Hus, and Jerome of Prage, worthy men; only because they would not
assent with them.

Matthew. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Peter, will I build my Church.

Answer. With shame enough, for the vulgar, which upon pain of the Popes
curse no man must al^er, has Super hanc petram; that is, upon this Rock:
which was Peter's confession Christ meant, even himself the foundation of the
Church; as a Rock. Hereunto Tunstall and Stokeley, two Popish Bishops agree. 1
Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which
is, Jesus Christ, the chief Shepherd. 1 Pet. 5. 2. 4. Where the chief
Shepherd shall appear, etc. Not the Pope I trow.

Matthew 16. 19. To thee will I give the Keys, etc. By this they understand
the fullness of power Ecclesiastical, to make him head.

Answer. The question being propounded to them all, Peter answering, one for
all; therefore together one for them all received this power: and therefore
whatsoever Christ promised to Peter, he promised to him, to them alike; as
Matt. 18. 18. and Ioh. 20. 23. it is said, not to Peter alone, but to them all:
Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be, etc. And whosoever sins ye remit, etc.

Chrysostom on this place says; What therefore did Peter, the mouth of all
the Apostles, and crown of the whole Company? When all were asked the
question, he alone answered, and being asked of the opinion of the common
people, they all answered: but when he asked them of their own opinion, Peter
presently start forth, and preventing the rest, said; Thou art Christ that
Son of God: Again, Upon this Rock; that is, that Faith, and Confession: And
again, The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. the same is common to them
all, John 20. 21. 22. 23. Peter after dissuaded Christ to die, whereupon
Chrysostom says: From hence surely we plainly see, that he spoke not before
of himself. Keys. This is a Metaphor, intending the public Office of the
Apostles, the public preaching of the Gospel through the World, which yet
they were not to enter upon, till they were fully furnished. Luke 24 47. Acts
1. 4. These Keys are not delivered to Peter alone, for he says in the future
tence; I will give; not do, or have given. Luk 24. 49. Where the commission is
given to them all, not naming Peter. Mat. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 15. Ioh. 20. 21. Go
into all the World, preach the Gospel to every creature. But the full power
was not until the fiftieth day after the resurrection, when the holy Ghost
came upon every one of them; and now they executed their Office in preaching
the Gospel, which was, the Keys to open the Kingdom of Heaven. If Peter
only had the Keys to open the kingdom of heaven, what should have become of
the greatest part of the World: yea, of us Gentiles?

Their fourth place, Luke 22. 31. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to sift
you, etc. If to strengthen the Apostles; then he must be supreme head.

Answer. Whereas the Papists understand by you, the other Apostles, that were
to accuse Christ, that choosing twelve men to work, being Master to all, (and
giving graces alike to all) would send them to a fellow laborer, to be taught
after his departure: but Peter shall give answer in this point, that he meant
not so; but by brethren he means all the faithful. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore
brethren give always diligence to make your calling and election sure, etc.

So the rest of the Apostles call the faithful, brethren, as children of one
Father, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. We beseech you brethren, etc. and 3. 1. Furthermore,
Brethren pray for us: and verse 6. Romans 12. 1. I beseech you brethren by the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 9. So that by Brethren, our
Savior meant the faithful, whom Peter, and the rest should strengthen. To
this end, verse 2. he exhorts to feed the Flock, and to take care of them.
And Paul, Acts 14. 22. Strengthened them.

Their fifth place, John 21. 15. 17. Feed my Sheep. This they understand of
Peter to the rest of the Apostles.

Answer. This was a Commandment given before of Christ in his former
Commission, John 20. 21. Given to Peter with all the Apostles: As my Father
sent me, so send I you. Receive the holy Ghost. Whosoever sins ye remit, etc.
Therefore this was no new charge: but wills him to look to that, lest he
might start aside, as he had done before; Matthew 16. 22. Go after me Satan.
And Matthew 26. He denied him three times.

Feed my Lambs. Sheep: This is a Metaphor taken from a Flock of Sheep, and
Lambs. Now Christ is the good Shepherd, that has given his life for the
Sheep; John 10. 11. and 1 Peter 1. 4. The Sheepe-fold is the Church, and the
Sheep and Lambs, are the faithful, to be gathered into the Sheepe-fold; John
10. 1. 16. By his Substitutes, Apostles, Pastors, etc. Ephe. 4. 11. The Church
is called, a Flock. Luke 12. 32. Fear not little Flock. Acts 20. 28. Take
heed unto all the Flock. Paul speaking to the Pastors, 1 Pet. 1. 5. speaking
to the Elders. Feed the Flock of Christ, which depends upon you. Therefore
Peter had no authority over the other Apostles, but they and he had one
commandment and commission to go into the whole World, to preach the Gospel,
and ordain Ministers.

The sixth place, Acts 1. 15. Peter propounds an election to be made of a new
Apostle; Ergo head of the rest.

Answer. This proves that he was the Prolocutor, or common-speaker, as with
us in Parliament, and might be the first in place, for Order, but not the
Elector; for that was done by them all: as Acts 1. 22. And they appointed two,
not Peter alone, and the election was of God disposing the Lots.

The seventh place, Acts 15. 7. He is president of the Counsel of the
Apostles. He speaks first, he concludes, with lie and all.

Answer. The Text shall confute this. He, as is said, was first in order, (but
not in authority) as the common speaker: verse 12. Barnabas and Paul spoke with
great silence of the rest, and when they ceased, verse 13. James answered;
Whose sentence prevailed: And then not Peter, but all the Apostles and Elders,
and the whole Church concluded. So Peter's primacy of order, was not the Popes
supremacy.

The eight place, Gal. 1. 18. Paul after three years came to see Peter, (say
they) to do him honor: Ergo Superior.

Answer. If it were so that he came to honor Peter, this proves not his
primacy; for then should Wives be superiors to their Husbands: For, 1 Pet. 3.
7. says; Let Wives be subject to their Husbands: yet he says, They must give
them honor. Ahashureosh honored Mor decai, yet he was not above him.

Chrysostom, 1 Gal. says; That Paul was Peter's Peer in dignity. Ambrose
there says, Paul was even such another as Peter.

Augustine there says; Their authority to be equal, and for Paul's honor,
what he wanted in time, is supplied by Christ's glory; not as the rest, made an
Apostle on the earth, but from heaven, while he now reigned in Majesty.

Gal. 11. Paul himself says; He was an Apostle, not of men, nor by men, but
by Jesus Christ: Again, 2. 6. Of them which seemed to be chief, I was not
taught: And verse 11. he says; When Peter came to Antioch, I withstood him to
his face: for he was worthy to be blamed.

The ninth place, Gal. 1. 18. as before. That he tarryed with him fifteen
days: no small honor, say they.

Answer. Mary, the chief of women, went a great journey to salute Elizabeth,
and tarried with her three months, no small time; the Babe sprang in her womb
at her salutation, yea, she was filled with the holy Ghost: You will not say,
I trow, Elizabeth was above Mary. Therefore Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom.
Theodoret, Jerome, and others say, that Paul came to Peter, not to learn of
him, but of reverence and love to be acquainted with him: Ergo Paul
acknowledged no supremacy.

The tenth place, John 10. 16. There shall be one Flock, and one Shepherd:
which is, the Bishop of Rome.

Answer. The Text plainly shows it to be Christ, who by the preaching of
the Gospel gathers them that are not yet called, and so to the end of the
World; that so there may be one Sheepe-fold, John 10. 16. Himself being the
chief Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5. 4.

In all these places we can find no supremacy in Peter, yet the Pope will
needs be his successor. Now let us see how he succeedes; and because he
stands much on the place, though many wretches succeed good men in place,
yet we will examine it: but if he be Peter's successor, he must succeed him
rather in labor, in preaching the Gospel of Christ, and in holy life and
conversation.

First of the place, whether Peter sat ever Bishop of Rome.
PEter was an Apostle. Now the Apostles were not deputed to any certain place;
but had the whole World for their Diocese.

Mark 16. 15. Go into all the World, preach the Gospel to every creature,
etc.

1 Pet. 1. Therefore Peter writes unto the Churches which he had planted in
Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and Bethinia, making no mention of Italy, or
Rome; though I deny not, but he might be there as an Apostle, but not to
reside there: for that had been to go beyond his Commission.

The Papists allege for their proof, Hierome de viris illustribus: That Peter
sat Bishop at Antioch 7. years, and then went to Rome the second of Claudius,
where he sat 25. years, even to the 14. year of Nero, at what time he dyed.

Now let us examine this point. Paul was converted the first year after
Christ, and tarryed in Arabia three years: Gal. 1. 17. 18. Then he went to
Jerusalem to visit Peter, the fourth year after Christ, and the 22. of
Tiberius. Then Peter was one at Jerusalem, Acts 12. 3. Again, Peter was put in
prison the second, or third of Claudius, Anno Christi 11. and Acts 13. 14, Paul
preached at Antioch the eight of Claudius; where it is not like that Peter was:
for then there had been little need of him. Again, Luke would have made some
mention of him: for Paul came twice to Antioch, Acts 14. 21. 26. and there they
abode long time with the Disciples; no mention of Peter's being there. About
this time Paul and Barnabas go up to Jerusalem, to confer with the Apostles
about Circumcision; where the Apostles called a Counsel about that matter:
where Peter was the first speaker, but James concludes the point; and this was
the eleventh year of Claudius: And they wrote Letters unto to the Brethren that
were at Antiochia: So we see that Peter was not yet there, but at Jerusalem,
Anno Christi 18. Claudij 10. That he might be at Antioch as an Apostle, we
deny not, but when he went, or how long he tarried, the Scripture shows not,
neither can Papists prove.

But Peter being at Jerusalem the tenth of Claudius, and Claudius dyed four
years after. Now Nero succeeding, reigned but 14. years; four and 14. make
but eighteen: How could Peter sit seven years Bishop of Antioch, and after
25. years at Rome; which makes 32. years? So they must put 4. or five
Emperors reigns to make up the number, that is, the first of Domitian: for
Galba reigned but seven months, Otho but three months, Vespasian nine
years, Titus two years, Domitian fifteen years: out of which if you take
two years, makes it up the 32. and Peter was dead 14. years before, by their
own confession, the last of Nero: and then we find another in the place, one
Anaclet. To conclude, they can never prove he sat Bishop at Antioch seven
years, nor at Rome at all.

Here a Friar of their own, one Onuphrius, skillful in Antiquities, and the
Popes Secretary. It is clear (says he) and manifestly known by the Acts of
the Apostles, and Paul's Epistle to the Galathians, that for nine years space
after Christ's death, until the second of Claudius, Peter never went out of
Jury: Wherefore, if he came to Rome at that time, it follows of necessity,
that he did not sit seven years at Antioch before he came thither. For from
the second of Claudius, until his death, is about 25. years: and though the
ancient Writers say, He sat at Rome, yet it follows not, that he aboade
still in the City: For in the fourth year after his coming thither, he
returned to Jerusalem, and was present at the Counsel there: Thence he came to
Antioch, and there continued seven years, until the reign of Nero, when he
came to Rome, where he repaired the Roman Church, which was decaying. After
that, when he had traveled almost through all Europe, he returned to Rome, in
the first of Nero, and there was put to death. Thus far Onuphrius. Therefore it
is but a tale, that he sat Bishop of Rome 25. years, or at all; but that he
was there as an Apostle, as has been said before.

Now come we to examine how the Pope succeeds Peter.
PEter, if he were at Rome, it was, as he was an Apostle, to preach the
Gospel, and to establish the Church there, as he did in other places, even as
Paul did, and the rest of the Apostles through the World; according to their
commission and commandment given by Christ; Matthew 28. 19. Again, he was
there to confirm with his blood the Doctrine taught, and was obedient to the
Emperor, and suffered death at his command: whereby he left an ensample for
doctrine, and manner of living to his successors.

Now let us see how the Pope succeeds Peter.

He teaches not Christ the only means of salvation, but his own traditions,
merits, worshipping of Saints, etc. and persecuteth, and puts them to death,
that obey not his decrees, and commands. Secondly, he yields not obedience to
authority, as Peter taught, and practiced. 1 Peter 2. 13. Submit your selves
unto all manner or dinances of men, for the Lords sake, whether unto the King,
as the Superior, or to Rulers sent by him for punishment, etc. And Paul, Romans
13. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. Whosoever resists
power, resists Gods ordinance.

But the Pope commands Kings, curses them, and kills them; to that end he
has his triple Crown, and elaymeth sovereignty over the Church, and
commands the treasure of the World: whereas Peter had neither gold, nor
silver, Acts 3. 6. The Lot of the Church is to be persecuted, not to persecute:
we must not look to fare better then our Master, says Christ; John 15. 20.
Remember the words: I said unto you, the servant is not greater then the
Master; if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If the Pope
be Christ's servant, as he calls himself, Servant of Servants; let him show
his marks for Christ: as Paul, Gal. 6. 17. Behold, I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus. See 2 Cor. 11. 23. And therefore we conclude, the
Pope to be Antichrist, not Christ's servant, nor Peter's successor.

Now enquire we the time when it is like the Pope began.
Revelation 20. 2. We have a manifest Prophecy, that Satan should be bound,
which ranged at pleasure in the unchristian World, that is, before Christ; who
shall lighten things that are hid in darkness, 1 Cor. 4. 5. and Luke 1. 79.
and Ioh. 1. 5. and Ioh. 3. 19. This is condemnation, that light is come into
the World, and men loved darkness, etc. Act. 17. 30. The time of this
ignorance God regarded not, but now bids all men, Every, etc. Now this light
is Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel. Satan therefore must be bound one
thousand years from Christ's preaching, that he should not through the
darkness of error, vex men as he had done, though their bodies be not freed
from the Cross, and persecution, that they may be like their Master. Now the
Apostles and Bishops of Rome, with other Bishops, Jerusalem, Antioch,
Constantinople, and the rest that succeeded, not at Rome, but wheresoever; for
preaching Christ crucified, were so occupied, what with preaching, and under
the Cross, for the space of the first 300. years, as they had no leisure to
dream of Supremacy: After which time (as Rest breeds Rust) so by little and
little they grew ambitious, and now and then one Bishop or other, would affect
priority: so as about the end of the next 300. years, they began to desire
primacy, but not supremacy: As Policarpe Bishop of Jerusalem challenged the
first place, 426. years after Christ. Gelacius Bishop of Rome, after him about
445. Iustine Emperor of Rome, made Misda Bishop of Rome Patriarch, about 520.
About the same time, John of Constantinople, Bishop, was called universal
Bishop. John the first Bishop of Rome, a good man, was put in prison, and dyed
for the truth. Pelagius Bishop of Rome, was the first that challenged the
primacy by Scripture. John Bishop of Constantinople, called himself universal
Bishop, 582. Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, first of that name, reproved
John of Constantinople, for calling himself universal Bishop, 591. Before him
John the third, Bishop of Rome, decreed that none should be called summus
Sacerdos, or universal Bishop, about 566. All this while no thought of a Pope,
or of Peter's successor in Rome.

Now Phocas, servant to Mauricius Emperor, killed his Master, the Empress, and
children most cruelly: At this time Boniface the third Bishop of Rome, obtained
of this Butcher the title to be called universal. Bishop, Anno 607.

Note that the primacy of the Bishop of Rome was established by a murderer,
and a Traitor, who dyed miserably: for the 612. of Christ, he was slain by the
Soldiers of his Guard. Abbas Vesper, and others say, that Heraclius and
Persius slew him, cutting off his hands and feet: others add, that his privy
members were cut off, and his body burnt. Estate Church.

Boniface the 3. lived but 9. months (so soon his pride came to an end) whose
life and decrees perished together, Anno 607.

Martin the 1. Bishop of Rome, was buffeted by the Emperor for reproving him,
being an heretic, and was further vilely entreated, banished from
Constantinople, (whither the Emperor sent for him) to Pontus, with his tongue
cut out, 649. Yet Rome no Supremacy, but subject to the Emperor, both in
creation, and deposing.

Constance Emperor, spoiled Rome (because the Bishops were not willing he
should remove thither) more in seven days, then all the Barbarians did in 360.
years. Anno Christi 662.

Vitelian, called Bishop of Rome, to him the Emperor by singular grace
confirmed the privileges of the Church, which notwithstanding, he after
brake, and made them of no force, Fasci. Temporum.

The sixth Counsel of Constantinople, approved Mass in the Latin tongue. The
Greek Priests were permitted to live in marriage, but not the Priests of the
West-Churches: None to answer for a Child, but such as knew the Lords Prayer,
and the Belief of the faithful. In the second Volume of Counsels, none to vow
not to marry, and that Priests which separated themselves from their Wives,
because of their sacred Orders, should be excluded from the Communion. Peter
viret in dialogo, to them of Orb.

In the 12. and 13. Counsel of Tolledo, such were Anathamised, as forbid
eating of flesh. Pet. Viret.

Benet the 2. Bishop of Rome, obtained of the Emperor, that the election of the
Bishop of Rome, made by the people, Clergy, and Soldiers, without attending
any more the authority of the Emperor, should be lawful. Anno Christi 685.

Sergius the 1. was chosen in a Schism: he was in danger for condemning the
Heresy of the Monotholites: He sent Vmbred to the Frisons to convert them to
the faith, 688.

Philippicus Bardanius, Emperor, made an Edict that all the Images of Saints
should be taken from Churches. 717. and that by consent of John, Patriarch of
Constantinople. No marvel though Pope, and Papists be of another mind; for
they have left the second Commandment out of the number of Commandments,
which the Church of Rome approues.

Gregory the 2. excommunicated the Emperor Leo, and discharged his people from
obedience. 714.

Leo Emperor, reformed the Church of Images, although the Pope with-stood. 720.

Gregory sent Boniface, alias Wenefred, an English Monk, into diverse places,
to preach the faith; he was martyred, as was one Willobrordus sent before to
preach by Sergius Nauclere.

Priests marriages against, Purgatory, Relics, Fraternities. Albertus Gallus,
Clement, and Scotus, with many other learned men in France and Germany,
withstood the Bishop, reformed Boniface in relics, single-life, Images,
Purgatory, and Popes Supremacy. An. Christi, 735. The Pope is not yet settled
in his nest.

Constantine the fifth Emperor, was vehement against Images. Anno Christi, 741.

Sergius the 2. absolved Pippin, and the French, of their oath to the King, 752.

Paul the 1. sat ten years and odd: He was vehement against the Emperor for
Images, 758.

Theodor Bishop of Jerusalem, maintained Images, 758.

Nicholas, Bishop of Constance, was against Images, 766.

Adrian the 1. gave authority unto Charles the Great, to choose the Pope, and
to inuest Bishops, and Archbishops, 772.

Leo the fourth Emperor, was against Images, 777.

Raiginbald in Lumbardie would not obey the decree of Adrian, but kept their
Wives still, 779.

Leo the 3. Bishop of Rome, sat 20. years: He was imprisoned of the Romans
for his cruelty, but Charles the Great pacified all, 796.

Stephen the 4. Bishop of Rome, sat one year: He sought his confirmation of
Lodowicke Emperor, 816.

Gregory the 4. Bishop of Rome, would not take the Bishopric, before he was
confirmed of the Emperor, 827. Yet no Supremacy.

John the 8. a woman Pope, sat two years and one month. By general consent
she was chosen Pope, but not long after being great with child by her
servant, having for a while hid her great belly, in the end going to Lateran,
between the Theater, which they call the Collosse of Nero, and Saint Clement,
falling into her throws, she was delivered; having sat two years, and one
month, and four days: and was buried without honor. Anno 158. See Platina,
Marianus, Scotus, Sigisbertus, Ranulphe, Volateran, Bergonius, Martin.

Benedict the 3. sat three years, being chosen, he received the Office
weeping, taking God to witness that he was not worthy of such a charge; he
continued three days in fasting and prayer, desiring God to give him grace to
govern the Church. Sup. Cron. Nauclere. He was deposed from the Papacy, by the
conspiracy of certain wicked persons, and a Cardinal usurped the place but
after again he was restored. Estat. Church, 857.

Nicholas the 1. sat ten years, he began to compel single life, but could not
prevail; his decrees were greatly resisted. Huldrike Bishop of Asburge in
Almaigne, writ a worthy Epistle unto him, Extant 859. Plat. Esta. Church, In
his Epistle he puts him in mind of the like decree made by Gregory, who
finding the fruit of his single life, (namely, 6000. Infants heads found in a
Pond, whither he sent for Fish,) whereupon he greatly repented himself of his
decree, which he confessed was the cause of so lamentable a murder, and so he
altered his former decree. Esta Church, the Epistle at large, 859.

Adrian the second, sat six years: he was chosen without the Emperor, and
excusing the matter, the Emperor was appeased, he was saluted Pope, Plat. To.
Barus. after he granted the Election to the Citizens of Rome. Nauc. and Chron.
Abb. 869. There was great division between the Greek and Latin Church, only
for the primacy, and for the diversity of Ceremonies. To: Barus. Nauclere.

John the ninth, sat ten years: he wrote Saint Gregory's life in four
Volumes, he gave occasion of great contention and wars, in choosing of the
Emperor. The Pope was committed to prison, but by the help of his friends he
escaped, and fled into France, where he remained a year. In the mean time
Charles the third, Emperor, was at Rome, and kept it. He sent for the Pope to
Rome, who returned, and so they reigned two years together: Platina, Florent,
and To. Barus. Finally, he was poisoned, or as some say, slain with the blow
of a mallet, upon a conspiracy made against him. Chron. Abb. Vestper. To:
Barus. 880.

Martin the second, sat one year and five months: he restored Formosus
Bishop, disgraded by his Predecessor; This Pope entered the Popedom by evil
arts. Supple. Chron. 884.

Adrian the third, sat one year and three months, he decreed the Emperor to
be no more looked for in choosing of the Pope, but that the Election of the
Clergy should be free: Did. ^. Anno 886.

Leo the sixth, sat seven months and fifteen days.

Stephen the fifth, sat six years and ten months.

Formosus Bishop of Portuens: was appointed Pope, and sat five years and six
months, against the will of some Romans, which pretended that Cardinal
Sergius was chosen, whereupon proceeded a great schism, cruel and scandelous,
and endured a great time; this Formosus bought the Papacy. John le Maire. Supp.
Cron.

Boniface the sixth, sat fifteen days.

Stephen the sixth, sat one year and six months, he euilly requited his
predecessor Formosus, who made him Bishop of Anania, he condemned his acts,
caused his body to be taken out of his Tomb, threw his two fingers into Tiber,
and buried his body in lay men's apparel: Plat. Naucler. To. Barus. At last he
repented his faults, and became a Monk. Supp. Cron.

Roman, sat three months and 22. days, he established the acts and
decrees of Formosus, and disanulled the acts and decrees of Stephen. Naucler.
Anno 900.

Theodor the second, sat 22. days, he was a seditious man, and a very monster
in nature; he condemned Stephen, he restored the acts and favorers of
Formosus: Naucler. 900.

John the tenth, sat two years, he was a sedicious monster, he restored
Formosus, and burned Stephens acts; he moved sedition in Rome, and for fear
fled to Rauenna: To. Barus and Sigeber. 905.

Benet the fourth, sat three years, he did nothing worthy of memory. Platt.

Leo the fifth, sat forty days; a Cardinal his familiar^ called Christopher,
imprisoned him, and by violence obtained the Papacy. Leo dyed of grief, 905.

Christopher sat seven months, he entered by violence, and so he lost it;
for he was deposed, and imprisoned, was constrained to be a Monk, which was
the only refuge of the miserable; wherein disordered Churchmen were detained,
and enclosed in strong Monasteries, and there he dyed. Naucler and Cron. Abb.
905.

Sergius the third, sat seven years, he condemned Formosus acts, he took up
his body, and cut off his head, and threw him into Tyber: he begat John the
twelfth upon a fair Whore, Wife to Guido. Luithorandus. Anno 906.

Note, Formosus: Boniface the sixth, Stephen the sixth, Roman, Theodorus the
second, John the tenth, Bennet the fourth, Leo the fifth, Christopher, Sergius
the third; All these Popes condemned one another acts, ten succeeding one
another, above 20. years: where is now their consent they boast so of, a maine
mark of their Church?

Anastasius the third, sat two years and two months, an honest Pope: Supp.
and Cron.

Laudo sat five months, and more.

John the eleventh, sat thirteen years and two months, he was Pope Sergius
son, and proved no better then his Father, saving he proved a good Soldier;
His own Soldiers stifled him to death: Naucler. 917.

Stephen sat two years, and twelve days.

John the twelfth, son to Pope Laudo, sat four years, ten months, and
fifteen days: he did nothing worthy memory, and of some is not numbered in the
Catalogue of Popes: Supp. Chron. He obtained the Popedom by his Harlot
Theodora: he was strangled with a cushion by the Soldiers of Guido: Premonstra
917.

Leo the seventh, sat three years and six months. The Heresy of the
Anthropomorphites (which say, that God has a corporal form) was at that time
renewed. The Bishop of Verone writ against it.

Stephen the eight, sat three years, four months, and twelve days; some
say he was murdered in a sedition, insomuch as he was never publicly seen:
Chron. Abb.

Martine the third, sat three years, six months, and fourteen days; he
was peaceable, and gave himself to repair Temples, and to nourish the poor:
says Supp. Chron.

Agapatus the second, sat nine years, he did nothing memorable.

John the thirteenth, sat nine years, and three months. This man's Father
Abaric, being of the greatest power of Rome, caused the noblest and chief
Rulers to promise and swear, to choose after the death of Agapatus, his eldest
son, this John: He was a vile monster in life, he committed incest with both
his Sisters, and his Fathers Concubines; at Dice he would call to the Devil,
and drink to the Devil, he maintained a public stews. He was deposed by the
Emperor in a Counsel; was again placed, and soon after was taken again in
adultery, and was slain by the husband of the wife, about 960. Plat. To.
Baras. Chron. Sigesb. Naucler. and Ioh. Maire: Others say, that the devil
brake his neck Anton Chro. Fasci Baronius.

Benet the fifth sat six months and five days: He was deposed by the
Emperor, and banished into Almaine, where he dyed, and Leo placed in his
room: Anno 963. Naucler.

Leo the eight sat one year and four months: He established to the
Emperor, the choosing of the Pope, with inuesting. Naucler. and Did. 63. cap.
in Synod. 964.

John the fourteenth sat six years, eleven months, and ten days: He was
imprisoned by the Citizens, and Peter, Provost of Rome, but was restored by the
Emperor Otho the first; and Peter was delivered to the Popes devotion, who
gave him to the tormentors hands, who vnapparrelled him, cut off his beard, and
set him upon an Ass, his face to ward the tail, and his hands bound under the
tail, and so was led through the Town, and beaten with rods: after he was
brought to prison, and finally, was banished into Almaine. Naucler. Volateran.
Anno 965.

Benet the sixth sat one year, and six months: He was put in prison at
Saint Angelo, wherein he was strangled by Cynthius. Naucler. 973.

Boniface the seventh sat seven months: the greatest in Rome conspired
against him, for he entered by evil means. He pilled the most precious
treasures of the Church of Saint Peter, and fled into Constantinople, where
he continued eight months, and having turned all into silver, he returned into
Rome. In his absence they lifted up one, whom they called John the fifteenth:
He sat eight months: But Boniface corrupted the vilest and wicked persons of
Rome. This done, he took Pope John, and put out his eyes, and made him die
with hunger in the castle of Saint Angelo, and so possessed the place, but he
died incontinently after of a sudden death, and his corpse was drawn with a
cord by his feet through the streets, and pierced with pikes by the Romans:
but the Clarks buried him. Naucler. To. Barus. Cro. Abb. Anno 976.

Benet the seventh sat eight years and six months: he did nothing worthy
memory.

John the fifteenth died in prison, as before: in Bonif. 7.

John the sixteenth sat four months: for giving the goods of the Church to
his parents, friends and allies, he was hated of the Clergy, and people, and
was enclosed in the Castle of Saint Angelo, where he died of hunger. Supp. Cron
To. Barus. 976.

John the seventeenth sat ten years: for fear of Crescentius the Roman
Rebel, he fled to Hitruria, craving aid of the Emperor, and Gregory the fifth
was placed in his room. 987.

Gregory the fifth sat three years: He was deposed after the Emperors
departure, and John the eighteenth was placed in his room: but the Emperor
killed both the new Popes, John and Crescentius, and placed Gregory. 995. and
so was a Schism of two Popes. Naucler. Supp. Cron. and Plat.

Siluester the second sat four years: He was a Magitian, and came to the
Seat by the Art of the Devil, unto whom he had done homage, that all his
affairs might go after his wish. He had most curious books of Magic, which
he got from a Philosopher, by the help of his daughter; and fearing to be
surprised of it, he vowed himself to the Devil, upon condition he would bring
him to France, and at last he came to be Pope: And desiring of the Devil to
know how long he should be Pope, the Devil answered; until he said Mass at
Jerusalem. Then he followed his delights: but on a day in Lent celebrating the
Mass in the Church of the holy Cross of Jerusalem, he was suddenly taken
with a great fever, etc. and suddenly he heard a great tumult of Devils in
his presence, etc. and surprised with fear, he sent for his Cardinals, and
commanded his body should be hewn in pieces; but specially, such of his
members whereby he had worshipped the Devil, and then that all should be put
in a Cart, and unto what place soever the Horses which drew the Cart went, and
should stay, there he should be buried. The horses, without any direction,
carried his body into the Church of Laterane, where he was laid in a Sepulcher.
And at this day his Sepulcher is a pronostike token of a Popes death. 999. To.
Barus. Suppl. Cron. Bermo and Naucler.

John the twentieth sat four years and five months: He was suspected to have
made away his predecessor.

From Siluester until Hildebrand these Popes gave themselves to diabolical
Arts: He died not without suspicion of poison. Naucler. 1006.

Sergius the fourth sat two years and six months: He entered by Art Magic.
1006.

Benet the eight sat twelve years: He was deposed by the Cardinals and
people of Rome, and at the length got his place again; and soon after dyed.
Supp. Chron. He appeared after his death unto a Bishop his familiar, upon a
black horse, and complaining of his torments, showing how he might, by
Suffrages, Masses, and Almsdeeds be discharged from Purgatory. Anno 1010. Plat.
Naucler. To. Barus. Supp. Chron. Fasci. temporum, with others.

Note we here, the Pope that can give Indulgences for twenty thousand years,
and deliver what souls he will out of Purgatory, cannot now ease himself.
Quomodo constat?

John the twenty one sat ten years: He crowned Conrad Emperor; and
therefore he defended him against the Romans. Theophilact, alias Benedict the
ninth. John, Gratian, Laurence, Massican, Brazutus, Heldibrand: all Coniurers
ruled at Rome, Anno 1031.

Benet the ninth sat ten years, four months, and nine days. Supp. Chron.
He was an horrible Coniurer, who by enchantment having got the Popedom to his
two Uncles, Benedict, and John, now himself obtained it. He stirred up Peter
of Hungary against the Emperor Henry: He chose another Pope to him, Siluester
the third; and sold the Popedom to a third, Gregory the sixth, Three Popes.
and so three were Popes together; but the Emperor deposed them all, and
placed Clement the second. 1033.

Henry the third, Emperor, called Niger, cut off the Schism of the Popes.
1041.

Siluester the third sat fifty and five days: after Benet was deprived he
was chosen Pope, by gifts and corruptions. Supp. Chron.

Gregory the sixth sat two years and six months: In the time of the former
Schism he was adjudged a Symoniacke, and Homicide, yet he bought the Popedom
of Benet. To. Barus.

Clement the second sat nine months: After the four aboue-named were
deposed: He was chosen in full counsel: He crowned Henry the third Emperor,
who before he departed from Rome, constrained the Romans, by oath, to renounce
their right of Election, without any more meddling therein hereafter, to avoid
Schism, and Scandals, which commonly arise of such Elections. Naucler. The
Romans, after his departure, forgetting their oath, imprisoned this Pope,
after he had governed nine months. Some say that Damasus his Successor was
Author thereof: others say, Gerard Brasier and Heldibrand, a man expert in
poisoning. Benno. In his time men forged Visions and Miracles, to establish the
Sacrament of the Mass, which then was called the Sacrament of the Altar: this
Pope was poisoned soon after the Emperors departure. Naucler.

Damasus the second sat three and twenty days: He entered by force, for he
occupied the Popedom without Election, either suffrage of people, or Clergy.
Chron. To. Barus. He poisoned Clement, and himself was poisoned by Brazutus.
Anno 1048.

Leo the ninth sat six years: He being sent by the Emperor, rejecting the
Election, was chosen by the people through Hildebrand. Plat. He condemned
Beringarius doctrine. He was poisoned by Brazutus, and Benedict the ninth got
his place again, and dyed; and after appeared in the likeness of a Bear.
1049.

Popescannot save themselves from Purgatory.

Victor the second: The people of Rome fearing the Emperors displeasure in
choosing of a new Pope (having before forgotten their oath) sent Hildebrand
toward the Emperor, to choose a Pope, and in the mean while, Victor was
chosen, not so voluntarily, as to please the Emperor, in electing an Almaine,
borne of Bauier: he ruled two years and three months: he was poisoned by
Brazutus. 1054.

Stephen the ninth sat ten months, after other four months, he brought
Millane under the obedience of Rome, which from the Apostles time was free.
Plat. To. Barus. Naucler.

Benet the tenth sat nine months: the Romans corrupted with silver, elected
him against the Cannons, though the Glergie were against it. But he was
constrained to give over the Popedom, and led a private life.

Nicholas the second sat three years and six months: he called a Counsel at
Rome, where they decreed Transubstantiation. Nicholas caused Berengarius to
recant. He was poisoned by Brazutus. Hildebrand expelled Benedict from the
Popedom, because he said he entered not in by the door, but by force, and
gifts. Plat. So were two Popes together until Benedict resigned. 1058.

Alexander the second sat eleven years: He had Candalus chosen against him,
who coming to Rome with a strong band; Alexander met him with the Romans, and
the battle was hard and sharp, where was a great slaughter, where Alexander
got the day. The war betwixt them continued two years. Candalus was
constrained to yield, and to redeem his life with six hundred marks. John
le maire 1062.

Alexander was buffeted by Hildebrand, was imprisoned, and died, about 1074.
Others, 1062. Benno Cardinal.

Gregory the seventh, before called Hildebrand, sat twelve years, and one
month: rather a monster in nature then a man. He poisoned seven or eight
Popes by the service of Brazutus, the sooner to come to the Papacy; he
usurped the Papacy without Emperor, Clergy, or people. He cruelly hand^ed
the family of Quintius, who had imprisoned him; he caused the Emperor three
days to attend bare foot for absolution. He stirred Rodulph against him, and
two more, one after the death of another: he used to carry about him a curious
book of Nigromancy, which one day forgetting, he sent two of his trusty
servants, in such matters, to fetch it him (being now at the door of the
Lateran) with a special charge, not to look into it. But they of a curious
mind opened it and read in the Book; and suddenly the Angels of Satan
presented thems^lues, the multitude whereof, and the horror of them, brought
these two young men almost out of their wits, and as themselves reported, these
evil spirits insisted strongly, saying; Wherefore have you called us? Command
us quickly what you will have us to do, else we will fall upon you, etc. One
of the young men answered, Cast us down these walls strait-way, and showing
them certain high walls, in a moment, the evil spirits threw them to the
earth. They thus terrified, and trembling, almost without breath, came to their
master: this writes Benno, a Cardinal, who was in this time. This Pope
practiced treasons and murder against the Emperor, insomuch as he sought to
have slain him even in the Church as he should have been at his prayers. He
prayed often in the Church of Saint Mark in mount Auentine. The Pope suborned
one, promising great sums of money, to lay great stones upon the beams of
the Church, over the place where the Emperor usually prayed, and to be let
down upon the Emperor to crush him to death: but this wretched creature
removing a stone too heavy for him, fell down with it upon the pauement of
the Church, and it burst him all asunder. John Bishop of Port the Popes
Secretary, openly in the Pulpet confessed Hildebrand to have done such a thing,
and we also as deceivers should be burned alive; giving to understand, that
which he had done of the Sacrament of the Supper of our Lord, that is, the
decree of Transubstantiation: whereof Hildebrand commanding Counsel of a
certain thing (as of old the Painims did of their Idols) he cast the Host
into the fire, because it gave him no answer, though the Cardinals spoke
against it. Thus far Benno a Cardinal.

Note a beginning of the fruits of that cursed decree of Transubstantiation
applied unto charms and enchantments. Moreover, as he rose up from his seat
to excommunicate the Emperor Henry the fourth, the seat (lately made of new
and strong wood) of it self brake into many pieces in terrible manner. Benno.
He decreed single life to the Clergy, where-about he moved marvelous
tragedies, yet in Almaine, and in France were twenty four Bishops and more,
which together with their Clergy, were married, and defended, and constantly
maintained their marriage. He commanded the vow of Chastity: he ordained the
offering of the Mass. He was deposed, and fled to Salerne. An. 1086. where he
died in exile. Abb. Vesp. Benno Balenus poisoned.

Clement the third was chosen Ante-pope to Gregory the seventh; so were two
Popes together sixeteene years: he sat three years and five months. Plat.

Victor the third was made Pope, not by election of Cardinals, nor people of
Rome, but was there inthronized, by Mathilde, Gregory's lover only, and the
Normans of that faction: he sat four months. He entered and intended to
follow the example of his predecessor Gregory, in moving of wars, and
against the Emperor, and Pope Clement: he died of poison, which was put into
the Challice by his Subdeacon, as he sung Mass. Herman. Contract. Carsulan.
praemonst. 1086.

Urban the second, chosen by Mathilde only, against the will of the Emperor,
sat twelve years, four months, and nineteen days. He was Hildebrands
familiar, he watered, and caused to grow his pernicious seeds. He excommunicated
the Archbishop of Rauenna, and Clement the third, because he had bin chosen by
the Emperor: some call him the Perturber of the World. He would absolve none
excommunicated by Hildebrand: and fearing to fall into danger of his life, he
went secretly out of the Town, and celebrated many Synods at Melph, two at
Troy, three at Plaisance, four at Cleremont, five at Toures, in which he
confirmed the acts of Hildebrand, and made new Ecclesiastical ordinances, to
fortify the Papacy. This Pope cursed the Emperor, and the Ante-pope Clement,
and he him again. He heard Anselme against William Rufus 1088.

Paschal the second sat eighteene-yeeres, and six months, and seven days:
He followed the steps of Hildebrand: He employed all his time in wars: he
put from their dignities all Ecclesiastical persons which had been ordained by
the Emperor. He assembled a Counsel at Rome. 1101. because of an opinion of a
Bishop of Florence, touching Antichrist already borne. Sabellicus. Seeing so
many mischiefs committed in the Church, he prohibited Ministers marriages. He
renewed the excommunication of Gregory the seventh, and Urban the second,
against the Emperor Henry the fourth, causing the son to take up Arms
against his father, an inhumane, and horrible cruelty. The son most
unnaturally besieged his father, took him traitorously, dispoiled him of all
his Imperial dignities, and made him die a poor miserable man, in great
captivity and heaviness: and all at the instigation of Christ's pretended Vicar.
Yet this Papal monster, not appeased with his death, commanded by his Letters,
that his body should be unburied, and cast out of the Church, etc. and to be
deprived for five years of Sepulture. Eusebius. Chron. He dispoyled the
Archbishop of Rauenna of his lands, applying them to his own profit: and after
commanded the Archbishop of the same place to be taken up, who had been chosen
Pope by the Emperor, in the time of Gregory the seventh, six years after he
had laid in the Sepulcher. The Emperor and the Pope accorded, yielding to Henry
the fifth inuestitures: but after he revoked it and excommunicated the Emperor.
But the Emperor coming to Rome, the Pope fled to Apulia, where he dyed. Anno
1114.

Gelasius the second sat one year and six months, was chosen without the
Emperor: he was imprisond by Cinthius a great man of Rome, but he was delivered
by the people: the Emperor sent his Army to Rome. The Pope fearing, fled to
Gayette. The Emperor created another Pope called Gregory the eight, the
eighteenth Schism of two Popes. Gelacius condemned the Emperor, and the
Ante-pope. R. Barus. Gelacius came secretly to Rome; he was known, and hardly
escaped into France. Supp. Chron. 1118. He dyed of a plurifie at Clugni, where
he was buried.

Calixt the second sat five years: he was chosen by the Cardinals. The
Ante-pope came against him. He was overcome in battle; and being taken by Pope
Calixt, he was set upon a Cammell, his face toward the tail, and so made him
go, and after imprisoned him. John le Maire. Fasc. temporum. 1119.

Honorius the second sat five years, and two months: Arnulph Archbishop of
Lions had at that time a singular grace in preaching; and after he had preached
in (...) and came to Italy, he came to Rome, but because he rebuked too
sharply the vices, delights, and pompes of the Churchmen, he was slain. The
Pope seemed to be grieved at it, yet made he no great search for the
murderers. Plat. Sabellicus. Bonifac. Simo.

This Popes Legate John, was taken in bed with a whore at London. Grafton.

Innocent the second sat fourteen years: he warred against Roger the
Norman; but Innocent was overthrown in battle, and led away prisoner: while
he was in prison, the Romans elected another, but Innocent agreeing with Roger,
he was constrained to go into France for succor, where he held two
Counsels: after he returned toward the Emperor, who promised his aid, and
so he returned into Italy. Anaclete the Antepope hearing thereof, stole away
all the treasure and relics of the Church, to wage them which were of his
band: He dyed with grief, and his Cardinals craved pardon. Thus two Popes
continued six years. 1136.

Celestine the second sat five months, and eight days: he died of the
pestilence.

Lucius the second sat one year: he willing to take away the dignity of the
Patritian, died of the pestilence. Supp. Chron. Fasci. temporum.

Eugenius the third sat eight years: having excommunicated certain Romans,
he was constrained to flee into France, 1145. coming again he was honorably
received; but he soon after dyed at Tyber, going to recreate himself. He was
brought to Rome, and buried in the Temple of Saint Peter. Supp. Cron. 1145.

Saint Bernard against the impiety of the Popes, and the Ecclesiastical sort:
see his 67. Sermon, where he calls them the Ministers of Antechrist. Item 57.
in his book to Eugenius. Item in the 33. Sermon upon the Canticles, he often
says that Prelates are but Pilats. He reproves Eugenius, that leaving the
word of God, he advanced humane Traditions. And Hugo Cardinalis, in his
Postill upon Saint John alleges that Bernard says in a certain place: It
seems, O good Jesus, that all the university of Christians have conspired
against thee, and they are the chief of the conspiration which obtain the
Primacie of the Church.

Anastasius sat one year.

Adrian the fourth sat five years and six months: he would not go to the
Church of Lateran to be consecrated, until first Arnold Bishop of Brixe was
cast out of the Town, who opposed himself against the administration of
Civil things, and Temporal Sword, which the Clergy had usurped. He was
angry with the Emperor for holding his left stirrope at his lighting. He
stirred up all Italy to rebel against him, for receiving homage of his own
Bishops. He was troubled of the Romans for their ancient Liberties. John of
Salisburie Bishop of Chartyrs, was a worthy man: He reproved many things in
the Clergy, and Popes, and being very familiar with Adrian, he was heard to
say to John, That there were many Popes which rather succeeded Romulus in
murder, then Saint Peter in feeding the sheep. He excommunicated William King
of Sicilie, and Pouill. Finally, he was choked with a fly: he said, the life
of a Pope was most miserable. 1154.

Alexander the third sat about two and twenty years: He was chosen by one
half of the Cardinals, and Victor on the other side; and so continued a
Schism of two Popes twenty years, even all the days of Alexander: For after
Victor, came Paschalis the third, then Calixt, lastly, Innocent: unto these all
the Bishops of the Empire were sworn. Alexander granted the ancient Liberties
to the Romans. He caused all Italy to rebel against the Emperor: he troade
upon the Emperors neck. He defended Becket against Henry the second, King of
England 1160. He seeking the Emperors death (while he was busied with the
Turk) sent a Letter to the Turk, with the lively Image of the King, to seek
to slay him. The Emperor with his Chaplain on a hot day going to wash him,
was surprised by an ambush of the Sultans, and brought before the Turk, where
he fained himself to be the Emperors Chaplain; but the Turk showing him his
Image, and the Popes Letters, he confessed the truth, and desired favor: at
length the Turk sent him away, under certain conditions agreed betwixt them.
The Emperor returning, assigned a day at Noremberg, and assembled his Court,
declared the Pope Alexander his treason, showing his Letters, and the Image.
Briefly, every one promised his help to pay his ransom, and to do justice
upon the said Alexander. The Pope understanding his treason was come to light,
and what the Emperor intended against him, he fled from Rome in the habit of
his cool, and came to Venice. The Venetians maintained the Pope. The Emperor
sent Ambassadors to demand Alexander; finally, he sent his son Otho: the
youth led with his Company, gave battle: he lost the victory, and was taken
prisoner; which the Pope seeing, would not agree with the Emperor, except he
came to Venice, and received the means he would offer. The Emperor to help
his son, came to Venice. The Pope would not absolve him of excommunication,
until he presented himself at the door of Saint Marks Church: When he came
thither, the Pope commanded him, in the presence of all the people, to cast
himself upon the ground, and demand pardon; which he doing, the Pope set his
foot upon the Emperors neck, and pressing it down, said: Thou shall go upon
the Aspe and Basiliske, and tread under thy feet, the Lion and the Dragon. The
Emperor answered; This was not said to thee, but to Peter. But the Pope
stepping again upon his neck, answered, Both to me, and to Peter. The Emperor
fearing some danger, held his peace; and so was absolved, and upon conditions
agreed. Estate of the Church, and Plat. Now let the world judge, whether this
be Christ's Vicar, Peter's true Successor, a servant of servants, or a
Luciferian proud Pope, the son of perdition, and Antechrist himself, that
^itteth in the Temple of God, and boasts himself above all that is called
God. 1180.

Lucius the third sat four years, and two months: while he went about to
expel the Consuls and Patricij of Rome, he was cast out, and withdrew himself
to Venice: Such as took his part, had their eyes put out; others were set upon
Asses, with their faces toward the tail, and ignominiously handled. Platin.
He dyed at Veron.

Urban the third sat one year, and six months. Sup.

Gregory the eight sat fifty seven days.

Clement the third sat three years, and six months: he made a Decretall
against all such Priests as celebrated Mass in wooden vessels, and with
common bread. Here is nothing respected but outward things, and the
commandment of God neglected. Note again, common bread was now in use in the
Lords Supper.

Celestine the third sat six years: He crowned the Emperor with his feet,
sitting in his Pontifical Chair, and holding the Imperial Crown between his
feet; and the Emperor bowing down his head, and likewise the Empress,
received it from his feet: and immediately he kickes it off again to the
ground, in token that he had power (if he so deserve) to depose him. The
Cardinals standing round about, reverently took it up, and set it on their
heads again. Baronius. Ranulph. Mystery of Iniquity.

Innocent the third sat eighteen years: he absolved the Princes from their
oath to the Emperor, caused them to choose Otho the fourth, and after
excommunicated Otho also. This Pope added a very dangerous pestilence unto the
Articles of the Faith, that is, Transubstantiation, as a thirteenth Article of
the Faith. See the Decretalls. Tit. 1. De Summa Trinitate and fide Apostolica.
cap. Firmiter credimus. This Decretall was made in the year of Christ 1215.
and promulged in the Counsel of Lateran. He made another Decree of the Cannon
of the Mass, and commanded it to be received, as from the Apostles: Thus they
place in the room of the doctrine of the Apostles, their own Decrees. He
also commanded confession in the Priests ear, at the least once a year. See
Decretal. Tit. 38. cap. Omnes vtriusque sexus. He dyed at Pice. Anno 1216.

Honorius the third sat ten years, and seven months: he excommunicated
the Emperor: he raised the French against the Earl of Thelossa, for
favoring Albingenses. He was denied in France the exactions of two Prebends in
every Church, and two Monks in every Abbey 1216. He confirmed the order of
the Iacobines, which his predecessors had refused to do; and confirmed the
order of the Mendicants. He commanded the Host should be kept in a place by it
self, and well enclosed. When the Host was lifted up, the people to do
reverence, and bow to it; and also, when it was carried to the sick. He
confirmed the order of Saint Francis. Fasci. temporum. Thus the fullness of
infection is come into the Church by the four plagues of begging Monks.

Gregory the ninth sat fourteen years, and three months: This Pope heaped
up Decretalls, and commanded them to be kept through all Christendom, in
Schools and Judgment. Thus the word of God is set aside for their traditions.
Peter de Vienna complained, That all the world cannot fill the insatiabilitie
of the Pope; That the turpitudes of the Clergy are so great, and enormious, as
shame forbids to speak thereof. He also maintained, that the Pope, neither
by divine, nor humane right, has any power of the Sword. The Pope
excommunicated him. William the Goldsmiths at this time, shows that the Pope
is Antichrist, Rome Babylon, the Prelates, members of Antichrist. Caesarius 10.
Distinct. 3. of his Dialogues. The Pope was driven out of Rome by the Romans.
He cursed the Emperor Frederike for not going to the holy Land: and the second
time, for punishing Rebels, and received 12000. ounces of gold, for absoluing
him. Vide Plat. and the Mystery of Iniquity. pa. 360. He cursed the Greek
Church, and they him again: he plagued the Clergy of England by exactions,
four marks of every Church: the fifth part of every Ecclesiastical person:
10000. marks for maintaining of the wars against the Emperor: he stirred up
his son against him. He wrote to the Sarazens, not to agree with him. He fell
out with the Cardinal Columna, because he would not do a vile message to the
Emperor, saying; I hold thee not henceforth for Cardinal: Nor I thee for
Pope, said Columna: and so he departed: Math. Paris. See the Mystery of
Iniquity. fol. 304. Gregory afflicted with so many mischiefs, fell sick, and
dyed with sorrow and grief. 1241.

Celestine the fourth sat eighteen days: was poisoned.

Innocent the fourth sat eleven years, and six months: He canonized many
Saints, made much of begging Friars. He prescribed the Emperor Frederike, and
Conrade, and then commanded William to be chosen against him. He exacted in
England the third of all Church-goods: and the yearly fruits of vacant
Benefices, and half of all Non-residences: and all the intestate
Ecclesiastical. Again, of some Priests, fifteen, of some ten, of some,
five able men, furnished with horse and harness to the wars, for one whole
year: besides 10000. marks, and after 70000. marks to this war, in despite
of King Henry; besides Peter Pence: 60000. marks yearly of A^ent Clerks: He
revoked Friars privileges, excommunicated them, and all religious persons. The
Emperor said (foreseeing what would follow when he was chosen Pope;) I have
lost a Cardinal my friend, and have chosen a Pope mine enemy: Plat. So
honors change manners; and the very pride of the place makes them forget all
duty to God, and man. He dyed miserably at Naples, sooner than he thought.
Naucler. 1250.

Alexander the fourth sat seven years: he was set up against Conrade the
Emperor: he revoked the acts of Innocent, condemned the Books of Gulielmus
de Sancto amore, written against Begging Friars: Plat. popish Clergy, calling
the Pope Antechrist. He lost his army in Nicrea, and coming to Viterbe, he
dyed there 1261.

From Siluester the second that devilish Magitian, until this time, the Popes
have reigned as incarnate devils, in all trumperies, deceits, oppression of
the good, and manifest tyrannies, and have tormented by their infernal furies,
the greatest monarkes; Henry the fourth and fifth, the second Frederick, and
other princes of the earth.

Vrbane the fourth sat three years and one month: he raised up wars
against Maufroy, and after against Conradin, and overcame them both, and so
obtained the lands; but the end was miserable: for the Sicillians, after the
year 1282. rebelled against him, and slew all his French army in an evening
suddenly, and opened their women great with child, and cast away their fruit,
that they, nor none of that generation might remain. This occasion was
afterward commonly called, the Euensong of Sicilie: This Pope dyed at Peruse.

Clement the fourth sat three years and nine months: He had wife and children.
He was the King of France his Chancellor. After his wifes death, he was Bishop
of Pauy: after Archbishop of Narbon: after Cardinal, and was chosen Pope. He
demanded a certain tenth in Almayne. John, Glossator of the Decree, and
Provost of Saint Stephen de Alberstate, opposed himself against it, and
appealed to the next Counceil, for the which he was excommunicated of the
Pope, and deprived of his office. Sea of Histories. Clement had a nephew which
held three Benefices; he constrained him to forsake two of them. Naucler. He
died at Viterbe.

Gregory the tenth sat four years: he assembled a Counsel at Lions, where
was agreed the tenth part of the goods of the Church, to be given for six
years, to maintain the wars for the conquest of the lands beyond the Seas.
He labored to bring the Greek Church unto Rome, but all in vain; so as he is
not universal Bishop, nor his Successors. 1272. He came to Aretinum, where he
died.

Innocent the fifth sat six months, and two days.

Adrian the fifth sat forty days: he died at Viterbe. 1276. before he was
consecrated.

John the two and twentieth sat eight months, promising himself long life,
foretold by the Stars, as he affirmed it, but in the presence of his people,
a new Vault, Valerius calls it a playing Hall; Stella, a rich and precious
chamber, which he had built in his palace at Viterbie, fell the fourth day
following suddenly upon him, in the year 1277. and the seventh day after the
said ruin, he was found miserably slain, betwixt the stones and the timber,
and was buried in the great Church. Here the Pope found by experience the
vanity of his divination. At this time was the doctrine of the Waldois, holding
but two Sacraments, baptism and the Communion: The Mass an abominable and
detestable thing, and therefore to be abolished: All humane tradition to be
rejected, as not necessary to salvation: against many other toys of Popery;
against the Popes Supremacy; called Rome very Babylon, and the Pope the
fountain of all evil.

Nicholas the third sat four years: He transported to himself the dignity
of the Senator of Rome. He made a Park for Hares and Conies, for his pleasure
to hunt in. He gave much to his nephew, or rather bastard, called Barthand,
that he took from others by force: as some say, he ingendered upon a
Concubine of his bastards, a monster, whose hair and nails were like a
Bears. See John de Naion, in his Institutions of Beda.

And as he was determined to prefer the house of the Vrsins, of which house
he was, and therefore had caused to be painted the pictures of Bears in the
Palace, being in the town of Sutry, he was taken with an Apoplexy, of which
he died suddenly, and without speech. Anno 1291.

Martin the fourth sat two years and eight months: he excommunicated Peter
King of Aragon, and exposed his kingdom for a prey to the first that could get
it, because he ordained an army by Sea into Sicilie against Charles; and
absolved his subjects of their oath. Note that all the pastime of Popes, is, to
set Princes together by the ears. He granted to Rome the choice of two
Senators, of the Nobility, and excommunicated Paliolagus Emperor of Greece.
He took the Cencubine of his predecessor Nicholas: but lest such an accident
might happen him as did unto others; namely, that if he had a child, it should
be like unto a Bear, he commanded all the Bears which had been painted in
the Palace by a Pope of the house of the Vrsins, should be defaced: For he
knew well, that the figure of things upon which women think, when they
conceive, oft-times, is certainly imprinted in them. The. Cooper Abridgement
of Chron. But as once he was taking his ordinary refection with his Captains,
he was taken with a secret mallady whereof he died. See Cusalanus.

Honorius the fourth sat two years: he excommunicated Peter King of Aragon,
who then occupied the kingdom of Sicilie against Charles, and confirmed the
Edict of his Predecessor against him. Thus they succeed one another in
cruelty: he confirmed the Sect of August. He died. 1288.

Nicholas the fourth sat four years, and one month. Naucler. Some say six
years. Many cruel wars, murders, dissentions, and brawles in his time
happened in Rome, upon his occasion, giving more countenance to the one part,
then to the other: and this continued two years. Fasci* temporum. Nicholas
died of grief, because all things happened not after his wish. 1291.

Celestine the fifth sat two years and five months: he went about the
reformation of the Clergy: they grinding their teeth at him, called him Sot
and Dotard: one of these companions killed Benet; suborned another, who making
a cranny in his chamber, many nights cried as it had been an Angel from
heaven, Gelestine, Gelestine, renounce thy Papacy, for that charge exceeds
thy force. Some also in the day time counseled him to give over his Popedom,
and provide for his salvation. Note we here that Rome cannot abide to hear of
reformation. As he returned from Naples, he dismissed himself of that charge,
etc. See Christian Massius: yet first he made a constitution by all their
consents, That it should be lawful for a Pope to give over such a charge:
which Boniface his successor subtly confirmed, and placed it in the sixth
book of his Decretalls: But this Boniface fearing that the people despising
him, should cleave unto Celestine, caused him to be put in close prison, where
he dyed. 1295.

Boniface the eight sat eight years and nine months: He obtained the place
(as before) by fraud and violence, to his predecessor Celestine. This is he of
whom it is spoken, that he entered as a Fox, reigned as a Lion, and died as a
Dog. He was a terror to Emperors, Kings and Princes, Nations and People,
which he more respected then Religion, which gave and took away kingdoms at
his pleasure, extraordinarily thirsting after gold from all places. He was also
cruel against the dead, for he caused a godly man, buried twenty years
before, to be taken out of his grave, and burnt for heresy, as he decreed. His
pride and arrogancy was so hateful to Princes, as Philip King of France, to
bring under his pride made forces against him, invaded him privily in the night
at Anagni, and breaking down the gates, took him in his fathers house, and
carried him to Rome prisoner, where through grief of mind he died, thirty
five days after, and all his goods and treasure went to pillage. Platin. John
de la Maire. On Ashwednesday he gave Ashes unto the people of Genes: and
Porchat the Archbishop of the Town presented himself before him, and
understanding that he was of the Gebellins, whom he hated, he being on his
knees uncovered, respecting neither day nor place, people, or religion, in his
malice he cast an handful of ashes in his eyes, and abusing Scripture said:
Remember that thou art a Gebelline, and that with Gebelius thou shall be
brought to ashes: and strait deprived the Archbishop of his dignity, though
after he restored him. Platina. Crinis. Cor. Abb. 1295.

Benet the eleventh sat eight months: he was a good man, and studied for
concord: he contemned Friars, revoked Bonifaces Decrees. Coming to Peruse, he
there fell sick, and dyed: But it was after proved, that a certain Abbess
presented unto him poisoned figs, whereof he dyed; and Leander affirms he
dyed of poison. 1304.

Clement the fifth sat at Auignon eight years and ten months: he was
enthronized at Lions, in the Church of Saint Just, with a mighty concourse of
the Clergy, and all estates. But their great pomp was mixed with great
mourning: for as an innumerable multitude were mounted upon an old wall of
Saint Just, the said wall fell, and slew Duke John of Britain: The King was
there wounded, and the Pope thrown over his horse, and trodden under foot,
where he lost a rich Carbuncle out of his triple Crown, esteemed at six
thousand florens of gold, ( Pride must have a fall:) besides, more then twelve
other noble persons were there wounded, and dyed. These things done, the King
departed, and the Pope made his residencie at Auignon. This Pope kept his Roman
Court, not at Rome, but at Auignon, where it abode by the space of seauentie
three years, before it returned to Rome. See John le Maire. He sent three
Cardinals to govern Rome. This Clement was a public whoore-monger, and a
great maintayner of harlots. Chron. Herm. Paralip. Vesp. He gave to them that
offered themselves against the Turk, four souls out of Purgatory, at their
will, Agrippa de vanitat. This Pope commanded the Angels to carry into the
joys of Paradise, and draw out of Purgatory, the soul of him whosoever should
die in the way going in pilgrimage to Rome: moreover, that the pains of hell
shall no way be inflicted upon them. In a Bull which is kept by Copy at Vienna
and Limego at this day. Agrippa de vanit. Scient. He condemned them that would
not worship the bread of the Eucharist. He ordained, That the oaths delivered
to Princes, were not oaths of subjection, but of fidelity. He ordained a
feast instituted in the honor of the bread in the Eucharist, which the Papists
call Gods feast. He pronounced that the Relics of Saints ought to be greatly
honored. Finally, he being tormented with a flux of the belly, and pain of
the stomach and sides, he deceased in a Castle called Rocquemaure upon Bosue
1314.

Behold here how humane traditions do increase instead of the word of God.

John the three and twentieth sat nineteen years and four months. He
condemned the Constitutions of Nicholas. Deer. 6. tit. 12. He made a
Constitution against Friars Minors: he taught certain errors, amongst others,
that souls so soon as they were dispoyled of the bodies, should not see God
before the last Judgment. Massius witnesses, his father had so taught him
before. He writ to the Grecians, that there was but one Church, whereof he was
chief, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ. The Grecians answered, We believe
surely that thy power is very great over thy subjects; we cannot endure thy
extreme pride, nor satisfy thy covetousness: the Devil be with thee, for
God is with us. John de la Mandauill in his sixth book rehearses it. He
declared Jews de Bauiere a Rebel, Schismaticke, and Heretic, because (being
chosen Emperor) he took the government without any oath to the Pope of
subjection. Hiero Marius. The Emperor came to appease the Popes rage to
Millaine, and sent to Auignon, to the Pope, that he would grant him kindly,
the ornaments of the Empire, the Pope refused his Ambassadors, with great
shame, and cited the Emperor peremptorily, that he would come to Auignon, and
submit himself to the ordinances of the Church. The Emperor knowing their
tyranny, would not submit himself; as if he were his servant, and would not
go, but sent again to make the same request. The Pope persisted in his
opinion, etc. The Emperor calling unto him many Princes and Lords of Italy,
came to Rome, where he was honorably received of the people. The greatest
Lords of Rome sent Ambassadors to the Pope, beseeching him to visit the town,
and grant to the King of the Romans the imperial ornaments: which if he
refused to do, they protested to observe the ancient Law, and to use the
right of the Roman people. The Pope hearing the Embassage, drove them back
shamefully with vile words, and threats; which the Roman people seeing,
departed, and so by the commandment of all the Clergy, and people, he was
crowned, etc. Hereupon the Pope accused him as one guilty of divine treason,
and an heretic, and published against him a very rigorous Process. (Oh
Luciferian pride, unbeseeming Peter's successor.) The Emperor fortifying
himself, published in all parts of the Empire, an appellation against the
Pope, that he for his part does execute the Testament of Jesus Christ,
teaching peace; which the Pope disturbeth in all Christendom, and remembers
not, that all the honor he now has, was granted by Saint Constantine, to
Siluester, when he was yet hid, and therefore accuses him of Ingratitude, etc.
and then they agreed to bring into the Church of Christ, the ancient custom
observed in electing the Pope; namely, that being chosen by the people, he
should be confirmed by the Emperor: and therefore one, called Peter Carbaria,
a Friar, was created Pope, and called Nicholas the fifth: and Pope John was
declared an heretic, a tyrant of the Church, and not a Pastor, but a
perturber of the peace of Christians: which proceedings the Emperor and the
Princes, assistant at the Counsel held at Rome, submitted to the judgment of
the Catholic Church. Marius. This done, the Emperor returned into Almaine,
and Pope Nicholas remained in Italy. But finally Boniface, County of Pise,
delivered him to Pope John, and he died in great misery, being straightly
detained. See Suppl. Chron. Platin. 1334.

Benet the twelfth sat seven years and three months: he was enemy to the
Emperor Lewis, as his predecessor; for he renewed the excommunication, and
dispoyled him of all honor. Marius. Lewis assembled at Frankford all the
Electors, etc. He showed, that it only pertains to the Electors of the
Empire, and not to any other, to choose the King of Romans, or Emperor, for in
substance they are all one: which Emperor may exercise the affairs of the
Empire, without any confirmation of the Roman seat: Who ought to be sacred by
the Pope, after notice by the Princes, that he is legittimately chosen: But if
the Pope refuse, he may be proclaimed Emperor Augustus, by any Catholic
Bishop whatsoever, as has been long time used: and all such Unctions are
only certain ceremonies, invented by Popes, which give only the name, not the
thing. The Emperor makes not an oathe of fidelity to the Popes, but for the
defense of the Faith; not to give him any superiority in things which concern
the Temporaltie. Further, he showed in the vacancie of the Empire, it is
false, that the right is deuolued unto the Pope, and that this is against the
liberty and dignity of the Empire: but that by a custom approved, and used of
long time, without any contradiction, during the vacation of the Empire, it
pertains to the County Palatine of Rheine, to have the managing of the
affairs of the Empire. This done, he yielded a reason of his faith, and purged
himself of all things objected against him, by John and Benet the twelfth.

The integrity of this Lewis so prevailed with Pope Bennet, as a peace was
after concluded between them; insomuch as the French Ambassadors called the
Pope, the Protector of Heretics. Bennet absolved him of his excommunication;
but being menaced by the King of France, he left the Sentence given by his
predecessor against Lewis. This Pope was an old adulterer, and bought dear
the Sister of Francis Petrarke a fair woman, of her brother called Gerard. He
contradicted his predecessors heresy, affirming, that the souls of the
godly, as soon as they be departed from the body, do see the face of God.
Decret. Benedictus Deus in donis. He said the Pope had no parents. Fasci
Temporum. He dyed at Auignon, to the great joy of many. Opposition. Andrew de
Castra. and Bardosanes. He defended Grace against Free Will. John de Rupe
Scissa taught, the Pope to be Antechrist, and the Church of Babylon.

Clement the sixth sat eleven years in Auignon: he was a man very desirous of
women, of honor and power: Led with a diabolical fury, he fixed letters
upon the gates and doors of Temples, by which he threatened the Emperor upon
grievous punishment, that within three days he should renounce the right of
the Empire. H. Marius.

The Emperor came to Frankeford, and sought the Popes favor. The Pope
answered the Ambassadors, that he never would pardon Lewis, but upon very
unjust and cruel conditions, and so gave a formulary to the Ambassadors.
Lewis showed this to the Princes, etc. The Princes judged them to tend to the
destruction of the Empire, and promised aid: but the Pope most cruelly
excommunicated Lewis. He deprived John Bishop of Magunce, one of the
Electours, and solicited the Electors to choose a new Emperor: they chose
Charles the fourth, who was crowned in Bohemia, during the emperie of Lewis;
but he was not reputed Emperor, no not after the death of Lewis. Lewis was
poisoned, as is said, having drunk of the cup of Jane Duchess of Austrich;
at the point of death he cried: O God be merciful to me a poor sinner.
Munster, and others. 1348. The Pope died suddenly, being stricken with an
impostume. 1353.

Opposition. Conrad Hagar taught, that the Sacrament of the Mass was
available neither for quick nor dead. Francis Patriarcha condemned Monks and
Friars, called Rome the whore of Babylon, the School of Error, the Temple of
Heresy. Epist. 20. with many others.

Innocent the sixth sat nine years: He would have gathered a Tenth of the
Clergy, but was denied, and so ceased. He was sparing in his diet, and living;
but in expenses of war, very large. This Pope ordained the feast of Jesus
Christ's Lance and Nails: to the end those dead Idols might be adored by the
Christians. Before his death was such an Eclipse of the Sun as was never
seen. Massius. Plat. As he was preparing an army by Sea against the Turk, the
Romans being in troubles and seditions, he was so vexed in mind, that he dyed
with grief. Anno 1362.

Urban the fifth sat eight years: He sent a Legate into Italy, with full
power, and so repressed the Vicounts, and other Governors of Towns;
threatening great losses, if they would not submit themselves under the
obedience of the Roman Church. Armacan a learned man and Bishop of Ireland,
published Conclusions against Friars, teaching that it was a villainous thing
for a Christian to beg without need. Volater. He said he could not find
four Bibles in Oxford. Jesuits began by John Columbau, and Francis Vincent of
Burgony. Volat. Sabell. John Wickecliffe of Oxford in England, a rare
Theologian, he touched lively the abuses of the Popedom, against begging
Friars and Monks; he had King Edward to friend. The Pope as he returned into
France dyed at Marcellus, not without suspicion of poison. Sabell.

Charles the fifth Emperor and King of France, caused the Scripture to be
translated into French. 1366.

Gregory the eleventh sat at Auignon seven years and five months: Many of
the towns of Italy revolted from his obedience: At the persuasion of a Nun,
he pronounced sentence of Interdiction against the Florentines the first
Authors, and seized all the towns about them, and made war upon them.
Naucler. Gregory dyed, being tormented with an intolerable pain in the
bladder. Plat. 1378.

Urban the sixth sat eleven years: he was a cruel man, of whom by prayer
nothing could be obtained. Crautzius. He being come to the Popedom, sought to
revenge himself: he was forsaken of his Cardinals, as a false Pope, and
Clement the seventh chosen.

Clement the seventh sat in Auignon fifteen years: and thus began the two
and twentieth Schism of two Popes 29. years, until the Counsel of Constance,
the one cursing and warring with the other, that about 200000. were miserably
slain and drowned. Clement was chosen three months after Urban. Urban made
thirty new Cardinals in one day, and displaced the old, and put them in
prison. He was under the safe keeping of the King of Naples, for his pride
certain days; at the length, desiring that he might go to new Cesarea for
his health, he was set at liberty, where he gathered forces against the
King: But Raymundus the General of the Kings forces, Urban coming with all
his Court to the next shore, he shipped them, and brought the Pope to Genua,
and of seven Cardinals being taken at new Cesarea, putting five of them into
sackes, he drowned them in the Sea, because he thought they favored Clement.
The Pope Urban succeeding unhappily in his Popedom, dyed the eleventh year of
his Popedom, few lamenting his death, as a rude and execrable person.
Plattina. Theodor. Cerinth. The waters and fountains were poisoned, whereof he
dyed, and all his nobility. Naucler. These two Popes sent terrible Bulls into
diverse parts of the world, and so sowed defamatorie books, wherein they named
one another Antechrist, Schismatickes. Heretics, tyrants, traitors, thieves,
unjust, sowers of tares, and children of Belial. John de Ligni, in a Treatise
in favor of Urban, and the Abbot of Saint Vast: the Kings Chancellor of
France, in favor of Clement; That the Pope is Antechrist, no better witnesses
then themselves. Clement dyed at Auignon 1394. Matthias a Bohemian proves the
Pope to be Antechrist, and Friars, heretics. Walter Brut: In likewise, many
Noble men in England maintained Wickecliffes doctrine; The Lord Montague, Lord
Clifford, Earl of Salisburie. Swinderby a priest wrote against
Transubstantiation. 1387.

Boniface the ninth sat at Rome fifteen years. He was chosen after Urban.
He made a Law whereby he obtained the seigniorie of all the world, that is,
that no Parson should be promoted to any Benefice, before he had paid to the
Apostolic Chamber, all the revenues of the first year. He made great
merchandise of Indulgences, and sold them for money.

Bennet the thirteenth sat at Auignon one and twenty years: He gave to
Charles the sixth, King of France, the tenth part of all Ecclesiastical goods,
to make him his friend, and to divide the spoil. And as he was in his
Country, Catalongue, in a strong Castle called Pauiscole, maintaining himself
the true Vicar of Jesus Christ, he was condemned many ways by the authority
of the said Counsel. Finally, dying at Pauiscole, he commanded his Cardinals,
that presently they should choose another in his place, and they elected one
Giles Menios, and called him Clement the eight. Plattina.

This Pope made Cardinals at the instigation of Abphonsus King, and did all
that a Pope should do. But after Martin 1. had agreed with Alphonsus, by his
commandment Giles renounced all his right to the Popedom, and was declared
Bishop of Maiorque; and the Cardinals made by him willingly renounced their
dignities.

Innocent the seventh was chosen after Boniface the ninth sat at Rome two
years: he being Cardinal, was wont to tax the negligence and fearfulness
of the former Popes: for he said, it came to pass through their sloth, that
the Church of Rome, and the destruction of the whole Christian Commonwealth,
was not yet cut off. But when he came to the Papacy, he followed the steps
of Urban, and Boniface, whom being a private man, he had taxed. He warred
with the Citizens of Rome. The Antipope Benedict reclayming. Plattina. With
the neglect of his sepulcher his memory perished. He had a care that Nicholas
the fifth should be restored to his Popedom. Plat. 1404.

Gregory the twelfth sat eight years: he was chosen after the death of
Innocent, and an oath taken to yield, if the profit of the Church required it,
but he would not, though he promised before a Notarie, before he was
confirmed Pope, 1407. Benet, and Gregory, were persuaded by Charles the sixth
Emperor, for the good and union of the Church, to give over their rights.
Benet gave no answer: but dismissed the Ambassador without farewell; and for
fear to be constrained, provided for himself. A Counsel was held at Pice, to
unite the universal Church, whereunto Gregory and Benet were cited, but had
no care to appear, but derided it. So at the said Counsel, Gregory and Benet
were both deposed, and one called Alexander was instituted; so were three Popes
together: but Gregory fled to Austrich, etc. To their deposition all Christian
Nations consented, except a part of Spain, and the Count Arnimacke, and the
King of Scots, who favored Benet.

Alexander the fifth sat eight months. He was a learned man, a worthy and a
godly man: he was chosen with the consent of all the Cardinals in the
Counsel of Pice. Thus Gregory and Bennet not giving over, were three Popes at
once. Alexander was so liberal to the poor, and to men worthy of his charity,
as within a while he left nothing to himself. Whereupon, in merriment, he was
wont to say: He had been a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope.
After the Counsel of Pice, he goes to Bononie, where he fell grievously
sick; and knowing Death to be near, the Cardinals coming unto him, he
exhorted them to concord and peace, and to preserve the dignity of the Church,
and testified, though Death were before his eyes, yet he did not fear, etc.
And when he could hardly utter the words, he said, My peace I give unto you,
my peace I leave with you. See Plat. 1409.

It is thought he had a poisoned drink given him of a Physician, Marcellus of
Parma, hired by Balthazar a Cardinal (whom he favored) with a great sum of
money. Panecius recites in his 56. Sermon, and Estate of the Church.

Note, Rome cannot abide an honest man to be Pope.

John the twenty four succeeded Alexander, before Balthazer Cosse, Cardinal:
he sat five years at Bolognie; he came to the Popedom, rather by force and
violence, then by free Canonical Election: For being at Bolognie, rather as a
Lord and Master then a Legate, the Fathers being assembled to choose a Pope,
he exceedingly threatened them, if they elected not such a one as pleased him:
Therefore many were presented; but he approved none. Then said the Cardinals
unto him, Name him whom you like. Then he answered, Give me Saint Peter's
Mantle, and pontifical habit, and I will give them to him, whom I would have
to be Pope. When he had received them, he put them upon himself, and said;
It is I that am Pope: and though they were not pleased therewith, yet they were
feign to dissemble; so furious terrible, and environed with soldiers was he.
This reports Stella. After his Election he went to Rome to hold a Synod. In
the first Session, the Pope sitting on a high seat, etc. there came an Owl,
and sat upon one of the balkes of the Temple, looking directly upon the Pope,
saluting him with a fearful song: The company could scarce keep themselves
from laughing. The Pope began to be ashamed, to sweat, and to be tormented in
himself; and finally, finding no way to ease himself, he dismissed the
company, and retired. There was another Session after this, wherein came the
like; but this Owl could not be chased away, neither with cries, nor stones,
nor for staves that were thrown at him. Nicholas Clemengis Archdeacon of
Baieux.

The Counsel of Constance assembled, where the Pope appeared. 1414. This
Counsel endured four years; six of Gregory's Cardinals approved the
Counsel. Naucler. John Husse, and Hierome of Prage were sent for, and had the
Emperors safe conduct: and because they would not recant, they were
notwithstanding both burnt. Many crimes were objected against the Pope;
whereupon he fled away in a disguised habit; and used many places for his
defense. Naucler. He was taken, and brought to Constance, and there detained in
prison: After they proved against him fifty and four criminal Articles. He
was deposed by all the Counsel. Himself approved his depositions, etc.
Naucler. 1416. They cited also Gregory the twelfth, but he resigned his
Papacy into the hands of the Counsel. He was created Legate in the
Marquesdome of Ancon: where he dyed soon after. John de la Maire.

Martine the fifth (though Benets Cardinals choose Clement the eight, but
prevailed not) was chosen of thirty three Cardinals in the Counsel of
Constance, he sat fourteen years. He condemned all the acts of the former
Popes in the Schism. John being delivered out of prison comes to Florence
unto Martine, kissed his feet, and acknowledged him true Pope, and Christ's
Vicar. Martine receiving him into the number of the Cardinals, created him
Bishop of Tusculane: but he (as it is thought) not enduring a private life,
through grief of mind, after certain months, dyed. Martine of a Bishop of
Florence, created an Archbishop. The year after, the River Tibris did so
increase as it drowned all the plains in Rome, and filled the Temple Pantheon,
even unto the high Altar. A great plague ensued, that compelled them to change
the place and time of the Counsel intended. Certain Cardinals, after the
death of John the four and twentieth, created a new Pope, and called him
Clement the eight: but after a while he gave over, the rest were put in
prison. Pope Martine died of an Apoplexy. 1431.

Eugenius the fourth sat sixeteene years: after his creation, he appointed a
certain day for a general Consistory; whither came so great a multitude,
that the beams of the place cracking, it bred such a fear, that in the flying
away of the people, the Bishop of Senagal, a Citizen of Rome was boren down,
and dyed. The Popes pride provoked much wars in the City, and abroad, and he
was often driven to his straits, being pressed with wars every way. The
Emperor and other Princes and Prelates, admonished him twice or thrice, to
appoint a convenient place at Basil for the Counsel, which was concluded in
the Counsel of Constance, from ten years to ten years, and to come
thither with his Cardinals: otherwise they would deal with him as with an
enemy, and an obstinate person. Whereunto he assented; But he was so vexed
with wars on every side, as he had scarce liberty to rest. But he
confirmed the Counsel of Basil, begun by Martine his predecessor; and he
was by the same deposed, and condemned an Heretic, and Schismaticke. Plat.
The Counsel of Basil chose Faelix. 1448.

Faelix the fifth Duke of Sauore, was chosen by the Counsel of Basil,
Anti-pape; but Eugenius deposed, and would not yield; so there was a Schism of
two Popes thirteen years: some say sixeteene together, till Faelix was
contented to give over to Nicholas the fifth. Plattin. 1439. Some followed
Eugenius, some Faelix, some Newtrails, and obeyed neither. Platt. Who was then
Christ's Vicar?

Nicholas the fifth sat at Rome eight years: He was crowned the nineteenth of
March 1447. yet ceased not the Schism of two Popes: for Faelix counted
himself still Pope. In the year 1448. Faelix renounced the Popedom, and
Nicholas reigned alone. Nicholas held a Jubilee at Rome, 1450. whither resorted
such a multitude of people, as many were stifled as they entered and came out of
the Churches: There perished about two hundred persons, besides a number which
fell into the flood as they passed over the bridge of Saint Angelo. This Pope
died of a fever and gout. Naucler. Plattina. Others say he was poisoned, as
appeared by his intrailes, opened. Sea of Histories.

Calixt the third, sat three years: he stirred up Christians against the
Turk; he ordained, that no person should appeal from the Pope to the
Counsel. He sold letters of pardons for five ducats a piece, says Valerius,
whereby he left unto his successors, an hundred and fifteen thousand Ducats;
he died in July. 1458.

Pius the second sat six years: he was very ambitious: he published a
voyage against the Turk; under color of warring against the Turks, the Popes
gat great store of silver. He exceeded in cruelty: before he was Pope, he
had written with singular diligence, two books of the Acts of the Counsel of
Basil: but being Pope, he sought to repress them, laboring, not to lessen
the Papal tyranny, but to increase it in what he could. Stella.

He made wars with Borge Duke of Mutine, because he favored Sigismund
Malatest, with many other great cruelties. For his profit he deposed many
Bishops: He was sumptuous in building: he made a Sepulcher of Marble for his
fathers and mothers bones. See Plattina. Amongst many things left in writing,
this was one: With great reason (says he) was Marriage taken from Priests; yet
there is a far greater reason, wherefore it ought to have been yielded them
again. Also in his second book of Counsels he says: It may be that it were
not the worse if a many Priests were married: for many being married Priests
should be saved; which in their barren singleness are damned. Himself
abolished the Monasteries of S. Brigit, and S. Clare, commanding them out, that
they might burn no more, and under the habit of Religion, they should not
hide whoredom. Caelius secundus. He was surprised of a slow fever, whereof
he died at Ancon. 1464. Plattina. Sabellicus.

Paul the second sat seven years: he was of a proud spirit, ambitious, and
covetous. He exceeded all his ancestors in sumptuous attire, and all kind of
precious attire. Plattina. O noble Successor of Peter!

He was an enemy to learning: he put away many learned men, as forreiners,
and strangers, with their books given to the spoil: But diverse, with Plattina
himself, desiring the matter might be referred unto the Judges, the Pope in
great anger answered: Do you not know, that all Judgment is placed in our
breast? Plattina wrote a letter to the Pope, desiring, that if without cause he
would spoil them of their just purchase, yet it would please him, they might
have leave to complain of their wrong, and unjust ignominy: For being banished
of you, we must pass unto Kings and Princes; and we will entreat them that
you appoint a Counsel, wherein you may be constrained to give a reason of your
doing. Paulus having read the letter, he presently charge me of Libells
spreading out against him. And though I freed my self of that charge, because
I had set my name thereto: yet I was bound with grievous fetters, and put into
a high Tower, in the midst of winter, exposed to all winds, four months. At
the length, at the importunate suite of a Cardinal, I was set at liberty;
with admonition, that I should not depart the City, affirming, that if I went
among the Indies, Paul would fetch me thence. He was suddenly put in fear by
a report that youths, having Calimacho their Captain, had conspired against
him, whereby he feared to be surprised at home, and abroad; whereupon he put
many to torture, with Captain Calimacho, whereof many died in the torture. He
was a great eater of Melons; he eat the same day that he died, in the night,
two very great Melons: he died of an Apoplexy, the tenth of the Kalends of
August. 1471. being alone in his Chamber, no man seeing him; when that day
being very merry he had a Consistory: He went about to establish Priests
marriages, but he was prevented by death. It was said, when he came abroad,
he was wont to paint his face, with all kind of precious stones about him,
Aaron-like, desirous to be seen and wondered at. He was a great drinker, but
of small wines. He so hated the study of humanity, as he called the students
thereof by one name, Heretics. Hereupon he persuaded the Romans, they should
no longer bring up their children in learning, it was enough if they learned to
read and write Plattin. Others say, the Devil brake his neck, as he was
committing Sodomatrie.

Sixtus the fourth sat thirteen years: he was in great danger of his life at
his Coronation, by reason of a mutiny, whilst they carried him in his Litter
to the Church of Lateran: he was in danger of his life, being assailed with
stones, so as he was forsaken almost of all that accompanied his Litter. He
made many wars against Ferdinand King of Pouill. He builded in Rome Stews
for both kinds. Cornelius Agrippa. cap. 64. he granted to Cardinals the use
of Sodomatry, for three hot months. Sextus being sick of a fever,
understanding that a peace was made betwixt the Venetians and other Potentates,
suddenly yielded the spirit. Naucler. The rents of the Curtizans amounted to
the value of twenty thousand ducats yearly. Onuphrius. Agrippa de vanit.
Scient. Wisellus de Indulgentijs. Witnesses. Naucler. 1484.

Innocens the eight sat eight years: he was once a poor child, he was
nourished amongst the servants of Ferdinand king of Sicilie: afterward he came
to Rome, he remained long time with Philip Cardinal of Bolongne. After he was
made Bishop of Sauonne, at the length he was made Cardinal, and Pope. He was
of a great stature, but far from learning. Almost from the beginning of his
Popedom, he conspired against Ferdinand (that brought him up) with the
Princes of the Kingdom, and warred against him, etc. but being wearied with
wars, he gave himself to all pleasures. He advanced his bastards, as
Francis, and enriched his daughter, Theodorin, which he married to a rich man
of Genoa. He begat eight sons and as many daughters. Marcellus poeta. No
marvel though Rome calls him Father. See his Epitaph following: Why seek
thou witness to prove Cibo a man?
Look on his brats, fair gages, deny't and you can:
Eight bastard sons he begat, as many daughters,
Worthily then may Rome count this man Father,
says Marcellus.

Alluding to the trial of the Sex, ordained after the deceit of Pope Ioane:
Uncleanness, Avarice, Sloth, Gluttony,
Are here octaue, entombed, where thou do lie.


Alexander the sixth, called Borgia, before a Cardinal: seeking to mount
higher, being a Negromancer; he used the help of the Devil, who promised him
upon agreement by oath, and writing, so as he would in all things thew
himself a faithful protector of Satan. Afterward the Devil came unto him
(having promised he should not appear in any hideous or fearful form)
honorably apparrelled, who after certain talk had betwixt them, assured the
Cardinal he should be Pope. Borgia being very joyous, he inquired how long
he should reign: The Devil gave him an ambiguous answer, viz. that he
should reign, the space of eleauen and eight. The Cardinal foolishly promised
himself nineteen years; but Satan meant eleven years and eight months.
Now being chosen Pope, he named himself Alexander the sixth: he made his
bastard son called Valentine, being a Cardinal, a Duke, and surnamed him
Caesar Borgia: he shed much blood, says Valerius. He gathered silver as much
as he could, to satisfy his lust. He sold offices for 750. ducats apeece:
he advanced his bastards as his predecessors had done: he made the youngest
of his sons a Prince of Sicilie: his second son called Caesar Valentine,
he made Cardinal; the eldest he made Duke of Spain, he was slain at Rome:
and his brother Cardinal being weary of Priesthood, he espoused one of King
Lewis his kinswomen: his daughter Lucrece, whose carnal copulation himself
had, was married to three Princes successively. See John Functius. He was
odious to the whole world: and except God had shortened his days, by an error
of his Cup Bearer, giving him a poisoned Cup for another; as he poisoned some
of the Cardinals, he had a purpose to have poisoned all, whose goods he had
challenged after their death. See Guiccinard. li. 5. Onuphrius. Alexander
supping under a vine near the Vatican, to enjoy the coolness of the air, he
was suddenly carried away, desperately sick, into the Palace. The next
morning he dyed, black, swollen, and beyond all credit deformed. Baleus. Being
sick in bed, he sent his servant Madena to his wardrobe, to fetch him a little
book enriched with gold, and precious stones: This book contained all manner
of illusions and enchantments, whereby he would have been certified of his
life: The servant running thither, saw one in the Popes Chair, very like
himself; whereat being afraid, he ran to his master, pale, and wanne, half
dead; which the Pope perceiving, suffering him to recover, willed him to go
the second time; where finding the man still in the Chair, he was wonderfully
afraid, and being demanded of him, what he had to do there: he answered, To
fetch a certain garment for the Pope: At which words the Devil being then in
the Chair, making an horrible noise, said, I am the Pope. These things
reported to the Pope. His evil began to increase, and Death approached. A
short time after, a man apparrelled like a Lackey knocked at the Popes chamber
door, saying he must needs speak with the Pope. All other drew aside, and
great speech was between them. The Pope pleaded, his time was not yet come;
for he promised him nineteen years continuance; but the Lackey answered; He
promised him eleauen years and eight months, which was accomplished, and
therefore he must needs die. The Pope pleading for longer time, could not be
heard: This talk was heard by them in the next chamber. Finally, as Satan
went away, the Pope with great cries, and sighs, and fearful sobbes, died.
See Onuphrius the Popes Historiographer. Guicciardin. Volateran. John Baleus.
much more these Authors report. This Pope had with his son, a daughter, with
whom both the father and son lay. Pontanus, and Samozarius have left written.
1502.

Opposition. John Weselne an excellent Divine called Fax mundi, against the
Pope and his doctrine. Rodolph Agricola was of the same opinion. Hierom
Sauanorola, with two more Friars, were against Justification by works, merits,
pardons; they were hanged, and burned. Sabellicus. 1499. This Pope caused to be
cut out, the tongue, and both the hands of Anthonius Mancenellus, a learned
man, because he had written a very elegant Oration against the wicked manners,
villainies, and dishonest life of him.

Pius the third, as soon as he was made Pope, he intended war with France,
because they had occupied a part of Italy under their subjection; whom the Pope
hoped to have driven clean out of those Lands: he intended also an army
against the Turks; but while he went about this, he dyed the 27. day after
his election. Anno 1503.

Note from Siluester the second, Anno one thousand, until Innocent the fourth,
1240. the space of 240. years, the grasshoppers were sent out from the
bottomless pit to devour Christians, in soul and body. From Innocent the
fourth, until Julius the second, 1504. that is, 196. they have been permitted
to nourish, and maintain it, obscuring all truth, that by false doctrine, and
lying miracles, they might seduce (if it were possible) even the Elect, by
Friars Mendicants, and massing Priests, and have cruelly put to death the
gaine-sayers: But from that time, under Julius the second, and ever since, the
Papacy has, and, through Gods mercy, is like to decay still, even till the
coming of Christ; who shall confound Antechrist with the breath of his mouth.

Julius the second, a man (as it were) chiefly borne for war. He besieged
Rauenna, and took it, and from diverse Princes he took diverse Towns, not
without great effusion of blood. He excommunicated the king of France, and
king of Navarre, and gave their Kingdoms to whomsoever could first occupy
them. Massius. cap. 20. Chron.

The Counsel of Latterane was begun by Julius. 1512. This monster died the
year following, after he had begun the Counsel, having committed an in
finite number of murders, and wickednesses unheard of before. Julian meaning
to go to war against Maximilian, and Lewis, passing over the bridge, he cast
Saint Peter's keys into Tyber, and took the Sword of Saint Paul, saying: The
Keys of Saint Peter serve us to no purpose: it may be Saint Paul's Sword will
do something. He dispensed with King Henry the eight for his marriage: he
excommunicated Lewis the French King, and gave away his kingdom.

Epigram.
By fraud the Merchant Julius rakes in pelf,
For heaven he sells, yet has it not himself.
1513
Leo the tenth: he gave himself to pleasures, and lusts of the flesh: he had
Singers and Musicians at his Table. He hated mortally the Gospel, and on a day
Bembo the Cardinal uttering a thing out of the Gospel, he answered, It has
ever sufficiently been known, what profit the fable of Christ has brought
us, and ours. The same day that Leo made thirty one Cardinals, in the very
Temple where they were assembled, happened such a great tempest, which shook
and carried away the Image of Christ out of his Mothers lap, and the Keys
out of the hands of Saint Peter there; 1517. At which very time, Luther began
to thunder against the Pope. He commanded Luthers books to be burnt at Rome,
and Luther burnt his Cannons, and popish Decretalls, at Wittenberge. The Pope
rejoicing at the overthrow of the French King, making good cheer, suddenly
died at his Table. Baleus. 1524. Opposition. Picus Mirandola against real
Presence, the worship of the Cross, and Images.

Adrian the sixth sat two years: the Books of a certain Physician and
Magitian were burnt at Rome; some of which were brought to Adrian, whereof he
made great account, and they were, after his death found amongst his secret
papers. Adrian after he had persecuted the truth of the Gospel (as his
predecessors) in the person of Luther, and Occolampadius dyed, suspected of
poison. Abb. Vesp. Others say, he was too good to be a Pope; for seeing the
abuses of the Court of Rome, and going about to reform them, he was taken away
by death. 1523. See a Bishop of their own Espenseus, a learned man, who says
that he delivered by his Nuncio, to the assembly of the States of Germany his
resolution that way. Therefore they would ever since choose none but Italians.

Clement the seventh sat eleauen years: The twentieth of January following,
1522. the journey of Swises was held at Lucerne, where they wholly confirmed
the Popes doctrine, and condemned that of the Gospel. The Pope was besieged a
long time with his Cardinals in the Castle of Saint Angelo; he was taken
prisoner by Charles Emperor, and was ransomed with our money from England, at
40000. ducats. At Berne he held a Disputation, wherein Swinglius, Bucer,
Cappo, and Blaurer, vanquished by Scripture the adverse part. Finally, they
confirmed by the authority of the Magistrates through all their land, the said
Articles; abolished the Mass, and threw down Images and Altars. Rome was
sacked by the Emperor more miserably then ever by Goths, and Vandalls. The
Pope dyed in the end of September, of a disease in the stomach: Others think
he was poisoned by the smell of a Torch. See John Paptist. Fulgentius 1534.

Paul the third sat fifteen years: King Henry the eight banished the Popes
authority, who challenged to be Supreme head of the Church of England. Fisher
Bishop of Rochester, and Thomas Moore Chancellor were beheaded, because they
would not agree to the Kings Edict. This Paul was an Astrologian, a Magitian,
and a Divine. He had a familiar, one Denis Senila, a Magitian, whom he made
Cardinal, with one Gaurice of Portugal, Cecius, and Mercell, Negromancers,
and wicked villains. Of these he did inquire the fortunes of himself, and of
his bastards. He had a Sister called Iulia Fernese, which he gave to Pope
Alexander, to be Cardinal and Bishop of Hostia, which he obtained, for these
are good prises (or their younger brethren) to maintain their whooredomes, or
that which is worse: See Agrippa. This muttherer poisoned his mother and
nephew, that all the succession of the Ferneses might fall upon him. He had
another sister, whose carnal company he sometime had: but because she loved
others company more then his, he poisoned her also: He defloured another maid
of a noble house, pretending to be a Gentleman of the Legates, and promised
marriage, who finding the truth, she ran mad. Again, one Nicholas de
Chesme finding him one day adulterously abusing his wife Laurea Fernese (who
was also the said Paul's niece) he wounded so well with his dagger, as he
carried the marks to his grave. Moreover, this good father Paul, took his
pleasure with his daughter Constance, and poisoned her husband. He also had in
his Table the number of 45000. whores, of whom he exacted every month tribute,
to have liberty to exercise their whoredom. See Baleus, and Eusebius captive.
He cursed King Henry the eight, and gave his kingdom to whomsoever could get
it. He gave leave by an Indulgence, to communicate the Lords Supper under both
kinds, and to eat all manner of meats, at all times. The Ministers of the
Lantzgraues Country, refused the Indulgence. Estate of the Church. He ordained
the Counsel of Trent the first of November 1542. The Pope dyed, the tenth of
November.

Julius the third sat five years. Because of ancient custom the Pope might
give his red Hatre to whom he would, he made Cardinal a young boy, called
Innocent: The Cardinals being against it, asked what he saw in this young man
that deserved it. He answered, I pray you, what found you in me to do me this
honor, to make me Pope, without any desert? Advance this young man, and he
will merit it. He was a ribbald and a mighty blasphemer: he loved Swines flesh:
his Steward and Physician said, it was not good for the gout: He cried out,
Bring me my porke flesh, All di spitto di Deo: that is, In despite of God. At
another time for his Peacocke detayned, being very angry, etc. he said, If God
were so angry for an Apple, as to cast our first Parents out of Paradise,
wherefore should it not be lawful for me, that am his Vicar, to be angry for a
Peacock, better then an Apple? He had three bowls at feasts for euacuation.
Estate of the Church.

Marcellus the second sat twenty days: he was President of the Counsel of
Trent, where he put out James Nichiantes Bishop of Fossa Claodia, because he
would not allow Traditions to be received, and allowed with like reverence as
the Gospel. Also Guillam de Venice said, that the Counsel of Venice was above
the Pope: and Vergerius was also put from the Counsel, because he denied the
Legend of Saint George, and Saint Christopher to be true, which he proved from
Paul the third: for he has commanded, that both these Legends should be taken
out of the Breuiarie, and commanded that all such should be taken out, which
were not true. He died of the Iaundise the 20. day after his election. 1555.

Paul the fourth sat four years, two months, and twenty seven days: This
Pope invented a new sect of Monks, and called them Jesuits. Before he was
Pope, he writ a Book unto Paul the third, touching the reformation of the
Church: but being Pope, he cared neither for Jesus Christ, nor for his Church:
In his book he confirms almost all the points we use to reprehend in Popery.
He grieved the people of Rome, because of his wars, and exactions, that
scarce had he yeeleded up the spirit, but the Roman people, whihc wished death
unto him, because of his wars, and exactions, and tyrannies; broke the
prisons of the Inquisitions, delivered the prisoners, fired the whole building,
threw down the Popes Image, cutting off the head and right hand thereof, which
were drawn three days together through the Town, and then cast into Tyber.
He kept openly a Gentleman's wife. He used to eat Snailes, and to drink
strong wine, called Magnagarra, for lust. He died in bed with his whore.
1565. Estate of the Church.

Pius the fourth sat six years: He caused to be strangled, the fifth of
March, 1561. in the night, in Saint Angelo, the Cardinal Charles Caraffe. He
beheaded also in another prison, the County of Palliane, and certain other
Cardinals, showing their bodies the next day unto the people. He cited the
Queen of Navarre, because of the profession of the Gospel, to answer in the
Popes Consistory; and for want of appearance within six months, her Country
to be given to the next Conqueror. The fourth of December was ended the Counsel
of Trent, 1563. which from the beginning to the ending, continued eighteen
years, wherein all the Articles of Popish doctrine were confirmed. The eight
of September Pius the fourth died.

Pius the fifth sat six years: John Functius, a learned Chronographer,
amongst all of our time was beheaded, because he, with other Preachers of the
Gospel, were against the dreams of Osiander. The Pope sent a great Present to
the Duke of Alua, as a recompense of so great pains he had taken to maintain
the Popedom. He sent his roaring Bull of Basan against Queen Elizabeth. 1571.

Gregory the thirteenth sat thirteen years. The Pope, by adding of ten
days in October, so as for the fifth they should reckon fifteen: This, to
eternize the Popes name, was called the Gregorian Kallender. The Pope daily
urged the performance of his Kallender in Germany, D. Chytreus 1585. Whereupon
presently sedition burst out. This Pope renewed the hatred of his predecessor
Pius the fifth against Queen Elizabeth of England; First, by sending his great
Armada into Ireland; then, by sending Parry, and others. This Pope had his
Concubine before he was Pope, and after he was Pope; by whom he had two
little sons, which said unto him such graces, as made him laugh: Philippicus
his sons grace was, That the Pope his Father gave him five thousand crowns a
year. M. Cyp. Volater. He died at Rome. April 11. 1585.

Sixtus the fifth sat six years: This Foelix, so called before, being a poor
man's son, was brought up by a Gentlewoman so long, as he grew proud: then
she caused him to be beaten: Then he fled to Rome, and the Pope took him
into service; at the length he made him a Cardinal; and by his good friends in
Spain he was made Pope. M. Cyp. Volater. One day talking of his mean birth,
he said he came of an illustrious house: for, said he, the upper part of the
house being always torn and uncovered, the Sun made it most glorious with
his beams. See Antonius Caracalla De vitis Pontificum. This Pope
excommunicated the King of Navarre, and Condie, giving his Country to such as
could get it; declaring him incapable of the succession of the crown of
France. He approved a Nun, called Maria de Visitatione, who long deluded the
people: She grew so famous, as the king of Spain inquired of her his good
success for England 1588. She promised good success: and that Duke Medina,
General, (she pronounced openly) should return a victorious Prince. So
prosper all Gods enemies. But the next year after, all her holiness, false
miracles, and great dissimulations were soon found out, and she punished for
the same. See M. Cyp. Volater. The most Christian Prince of Condie, whom the
Pope excommunicated, and cursed, was poisoned. The king of France, whom he
also excommunicated with many threats, was slain by a Iacobine Friar, in his
priuy-chamber; under color of delivering a letter out of his sleeue, he drew
forth a poisoned knife out of his sleeue, wherewith he killed him. D. Chytreus
1589. No Religion will stay the Papists. The Pope at Rome made an Oration in
the commendation of this Friar, comparing him with Eleazer, and Judith: and,
not thus satisfied, he denied any honor to be made at his burial, or any man
to pray for him. This Pope died the seven and twenty of August, 1590. He made
many new Holidayes, M. Cyp. Volater.

Urban the seventh sat twelve days: There happened a great earthquake upon
the day of his Election at Vienna and Austria. The next day after his election
he fell sick, and determined to remove his Court to the hill of Quirinus, a
better air: but he tarried, because it was against the custom to go abroad
before he was crowned. But he dyed the twelfth day after. Arthur Cicer.

Gregory the foureteenth sat ten months and ten days: he was proclaimed
by the high Court of Parliament, Chalnut and Toures, an enemy to the common
peace, and to the union of the Catholic Religion, and to the king and his
royal seat, adherent to the conspiracy of Spain, a favorer of Rebels,
guilty of the most cruel, most inhumane, and most detestable death of Henry
the third most Catholic King: Again, an Act was made against the Popes
Bulls: he dyed of a quartane fever. He was troubled with a continual flux
which he had. Arthur Cicer. 1591.

Innocent the ninth sat two months and odd days, and died being threescore
and ten years of age: so that in the space of fourteen months, four Popes
dyed; Sixtus, Urban, Gregory, Innocent, as it is to be thought, the most, or
all died of poison: for Bazutus is not dead, that killed six Popes with
poison. See the life of Damasus the second. 1591.

Clement the eight sat nine years: The Earl of Fuentes practiced with Lopus,
and promised 50000. crowns to poison Queen Elizabeth. He also dealt with
Emmanuel Adrian to kill the King of France, with the odious smell of a
poisoned rose. Da. Chytreus. 1594. John Castill a Scholar of the Jesuits
struck the King of France with a knife: but the King stouping to take up the
Lords before him, he struck out one of his teeth, and was apprehended, etc.
The King after two years entreating the Pope, was received into the lap of
the Church, and declared Christian King of France, with condition to receive
the Counsel of Trent, and to remove the young Prince of Condie from the
company of Heretics: That he should restore the reuenews, and goods taken from
the Bishops and Abbeys, and testify his conversion to the Catholic Princes,
etc. Da. Chytreus. The Pope discontented at Caesar Est, who enjoyed the Empire
after the death of the Emperor Rodolph, whom he declared his heir in his life
time, struck him with the Thunderbolt of Excommunication, and made war upon
him. Caesar Est Duke of Ferrara, the matter being taken up, yielded Ferrara to
the Pope, who united it to the Popedom. Pope Clement made thirteen
Cardinals, amongst whom was Rob. Bellarmine Jesuit. 1599. This year 1600.
Richard L. Bishop of London, with two other Commissioners. Doctor Parkins, and
Doctor Swale, were sent in Embassage to Embden, to treat with the
Commissioners from the King of Denmark, and returned the eight of July
following. 1600.

Paul the fifth renewed the Index expurgatorius; wherein is contained, MERCVRIVS
GALLO-BELGICVS. The humble supplication of Roger Widdrington, an English
Catholic, unto the most holy Lord Pope Paul the fifth. Item, a little Book
tituled Marcus Anthonius de Dominicis; Archbishop of Spalato, with others.

Now to conclude this point by recapitulation. The Popes that claim to be
Peter's Successors, you see they neither succeed in place, as has been proved
(for six or seven Popes sat at Auignon about fourscore years,) nor in manner
of living, as by their own Chronicles, with others do appear: for some were
covetous;

Covetous: Boniface the eight: Calixt the third: John the twenty three:
Boniface the ninth.

Proud: Bennet the twelfth: Adrian the fourth: Celestine the third: Innocent
the fourth: Alexander the third: Gregory the thirteenth: Clement the fifth,
sixth, seventh: Boniface the eight: Paul the second: John the three and twenty.

Ambitious: as may be seen since about five hundred years after Christ, when
they labored for superiority, Policarp Bishop of Jerusalem: Misda Bishop of
Rome: John Bishop of Constance: Pelagius Bishop of Rome: John Bishop of
Constance, opposed by Gregory the great: and John the third Bishop of Rome.
See fol. 6.

Blasphemers: Leo the third: John the thirteenth: Julius the third: Leo the
tenth.

Heretics: Leo the seventh: Boniface the eight: John the twenty three:
Eugenius the fourth.

Schismatickes, as two, yea three Popes together; some two years, sixeteene
years, six years, twenty years, thirty nine years, seven years, thirteen
years: See Alexander the second, third and sixth: Hildebrand: Paschalis: Calixt
the second: Honorius the second: Innocent the second: Bennet the thirteenth:
Three Popes together seven years. See Faelix 5.

Coniurers: Siluester the second, and so forth; nine or ten Popes together. See
Gregory the seventh: Paul the third: Alexander the sixth.

In league with the Devil: Alexander the sixth: Siluester the second.

Incestuous: John the thirteenth: Alexander the sixth: Paul the third.

Sodomites: Sixtus the fourth.

Whoremongers, John the eight, and thirteenth: Victor the third: Paul the
third, and fourth: Innocent the fourth: Clement the third: Sergius the third:
Sixtus the fourth: Gregory the thirteenth.

Cruel John the foureteenth: Urban the second, and sixth: Boniface the seventh:
Alexander the sixth: Pius the fourth.

Murderers: Pius the fourth: Gregory the seventh: Stephen the eight: Sixtus
the fifth: Gregory the foureteenth: Honorius the second.

Poysoners one of another: Damasus the second: Victor the second, and third:
Celestine the fourth: Paul the third.

Treacherous: Alexander the third: Gregory the seventh, and ninth: Innocent
the ninth.

Cousoners: Alexander the third: Boniface the eight: Celestine the fifth:
Benedict the tenth.

Warriers, setting Princes together by the ears, rather then Peter's
successors, Bennet the ninth: Martin the fourth: Alexander the second:
Innocent the second and seventh: John the eleventh: Julius the second:
Eugenius the third: Paschal the second: Urban the third and sixth: Clement the
seventh: Gregory the foureteenth: yea in the Schism of Popes, they cursed
and warred one with another. See Victor 3. and Paschal 2. as in a fight
between Urban the sixth, and Clement the seventh, there were miserably slain
two hundred thousand men and many more, and many besides were drowned. See
Clemen. 7.

Diverse condemned one another Decrees, John the twelfth: and under Sergius the
third: Martine the fifth.

John the twenty three, chose himself Pope, Damas. 2.

Now to conclude with Cornelius Agrippa de Vanitat. He having spoken of the
wickedness of Popes in general, says; I pass by those other monsters of the
Roman Popes, such as was Formosus, and those nine that followed, which sometime
ruled filthily in the Church. I say nothing also of those latter Popes, Paul
the second: Sixtus the fourth: Alexander the sixth: Julius the second; the most
famous troublers of the Christian world: besides Eugenius, which for breaking
faith with the Turk, did cast all the Christian Commonwealth into most mortal
and bloody wars; as if faith were not to be kept with an enemy. Moreover,
how much danger Alexander the sixth brought to the Christians, by taking away,
by poison, Zizimus Pazaithe, the Turks brother, is sufficiently known unto
all men. Thus far Cornelius. cap. 6.

Thus did not Peter, who taught faithfully, preached Christ diligently, and
sought and taught peace amongst men; was holy, humble, and sober, in
conversation; and in the end, gave his life for the truth. The Pope therefore
in life, being thus contrary unto Peter, is the successor of Antechrist, not
of Peter.

Now come we to examine the Doctrine:
And first for Justification.
AS for the Law, that should have condemned us for ever, Christ has satisfied
his Fathers wrath, and has fulfilled it for us; and no man in the world could
have done it but he, Esaias 53. 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, and by
his stripes we are healed. 2 Cor. 5. 11. He which knew no sin, was made
sin for us, that we might be made the, etc. Christ was made sin by
imputation, that we might be made righteous before God, by imputation of his
righteousness to us; Romans 5. 19. As by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners, etc. Note a comparison between Adam and Christ, Job 9. 2. How shall
man, compared with God, be justified? Romans 3. 10. 11. 12. They have gone all
out of the way, etc. Romans 4. 5. To him that works not, but believes, etc.
and 5. verse 1. Being justified through faith, we etc. Ephesians. 2 8. By grace ye
are saved through faith, not of your selves, etc. Romans 8. 20. Whom he has
called, them also he has justified. 1 Cor. 4. 4. See: from these places I
reason thus: If Christ has satisfied the Law for us: If he be our peace with
God: If by his stripes we be healed: If his righteousness be ours by imputation
only: If by his obedience only we be made righteous: If there be none that can
do good, no not one. If justified through faith, we have peace with God. If
saved by grace, not of works. If never so righteous, yet we are not thereby
justified. Then our Iustfication, is plainly without us, and it comes only
by Christ's righteousness imputed, and by faith receined. Though these be as
evident as the Sun at noone, yet they cavil with us from other places of
Scripture, to maintain Justification from our selves, or at least to part
stakes with Christ.

Papists first place Psalm. 7. 8 Judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness. Solut. This is not spoken of our righteousness before God: but
David being falsely accused unto Saul, by his enemies (his heart being free from
any intention of evil against him) desires God to be Judge between him, and
them; and therefore this serves not for the Justification of a sinner before
God.

The second place, 2 Corint 4 14. Our light afflictions which are but for a
moment, causes unto us a far more excellent weight of glory. If afflictions
(say they) work our salvation, much more good works. Solut. Afflictions (say
we) work our salvation, not as causes procuring it, but as means directing us
thereto. Bernard. They be via regni, non causa regnandi. Psalm 119. 71. It is
good for me that I have been in trouble; for, etc.

Of Sacraments, the number.
The Papists teach seven Sacraments, contrary to Scripture, by a foolish
mystical taking the number of seven in Scripture, as a number of perfection:
as it was said to Naaman. 2 King. 5. 10. Go wash seauentimes. Again, Job 4.
2. Offered seven Bullockes, and seven Rams, seven Stars, seven
Candlestickes: These are too idle to be answered, and therefore I leave them to
former answers: for this number may as well ferue for a mystery of iniquity,
Revel. 17. 18. Sacraments, both in the old and new Testament, were of Gods
ordinance; men may not make Sacraments. Christ putting an end to the old
Testament, was the Author of the Sacraments of the new Testament: and
appointing outward signs of holy things, he instituted two, Baptism, and the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; no more are to be found in the new Testament of
his making, or commandment. The first he sanctified in his own person, Mat.
3. 16. for he was baptized of John: The same he commended, and commanded to his
Apostles, after his resurrection, Mat. 28. 19. The Lords Supper: this he
instituted, and ministered in his own person also, Luke 22. 19. commanding to
do this in the remembrance of him. The remission of sins is represented in
Baptism, Acts 2. 38: The death of Christ is set forth in the Lords Supper, 1 Corinthians. 11. 26. Whereby our faith is strengthened, and our hope confirmed in
the promises of God. The like commendation is not given of any other of their
Sacraments. Many other ceremonies Christ used; but he has not laid his
commandment upon them as upon these. Thus our doctrine for the number, is more
ancient then the Churches of Rome.

Of Baptism.
For the outward sign thereof, we have only water, according to Christ's
Institution; representing the blood of Christ, in washing away of our sins:
For the form we baptize only, In the name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, according to Christ's commandment, Mat. 28. 19. Papists (to omit
their trifling about Godfathers and Godmothers) that Fathers nor Mothers
should not be witnesses to their children. 936. that man and wife may not
answer for one child: that gossips may not marry, nor Monckes nor Nuns to be
Gossips, etc. None are to be baptized before the Priests, through their
coniurations, breathings, spittings, and salting, do drive the Devil out of
them. Pope Celestine 428. Clement commanded Oil and Cream to anoint the
forehead, and to be crossed therewith: if this be not to be subject to the
curse of God, for adding to the word, etc. Thus our doctrine and use, for
Baptism, and the ceremonies thereof, is more ancient then the doctrine of Rome.

The Supper, or EVCHARIST.
For this we have the Sacramental signs, or outward Elements, Bread and Wine,
representing the Body and Blood of Christ, offered to the faithful, with the
signs, for the feeding of their souls, and strengthening of their faith, and
putting them in mind of the precious bloodshed in his bitter death and
passion, according to Christ's institution. Papists minister this Sacrament but
in one kind, that is, Bread only; for (say they) Christians are not bound by
any commandment of God, to receive the Sacrament in both kinds. Council of
Trent cap. 21. Bellarmine lib. 4. cap. 20. De Eucharist, and Counsel of
Constance. Though Christ ordained the Sacrament in both kinds, and the eldest
Churches did so receive it; yet for all that, they shall be punished as
Heretics, that do minister or receive it. Sess. 13. See their proofs. Luke
24. 30. Christ appearing to the two Disciples going to Emaus, entering into an
house, as he sat at Table, he took the Bread, and gave thanks; therefore one
kind is sufficient. Again, Acts 2. 24. And they continued in the Apostles
doctrine, and in fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer. Solut.
There is no reason to understand these places of the breaking of bread in the
Sacrament, but in usual repast. As for Luke 24. Christ was not ministering the
Sacrament, for the two Disciples intended Supper; and Christ (as his manner
was) gave thanks, and brake the bread, and they by this knowing him, he
vanished out of their sight. Again, if this had been the Sacrament, Christ had
not said true, when upon the Cross (before he gave up the Ghost) he said, All
things are fulfilled. John 19. 29. Again, Matthew. 26. 29. I say unto you, I
will not drink of the fruit of the Vine tree: If not drink, then not eat.
For the place, Acts 2. 24. This proves no sacramental eating; but continuing
together, according to their Masters commandment, until the coming of the
Holy Ghost, they did eat and drink together: expounded in the six and forty
verse, breaking bread at home, did eat their meat together with gladness,
and singleness of heart. For John 6. 11. It makes as little to the Sacrament,
as yet being not instituted; and Christ expounds himself in verse 63.
saying, The words that I speak unto you, are spirit and life. Besides, if they
will admit this place to be spoken of the Sacrament, then they are cast, in
receiving in one kind: for there he never speaks of Bread, but he speaks of
Drink also. So that we conclude in the Institution of the Supper, according
to the analogy of the Signs, Christ had respect unto our full nourishment,
Bread and Drink, that so we might find in Christ, whatsoever is needful to
salvation; for no man can live with Bread alone, and although Christ teach us
to pray for daily bread (which is a marvel you here escaped) yet by
Synechdoche, he means drink also, and all things necessary to this present
life. Note we here, while Papists will give but Bread alone (we will beat
them with their own weapon:) They falsely charge us in our communion, that we
give but a dry morsel, they giving only Bread to the people, should choke
them, but that they are constrained to give a little Wine (not as any part of
the Sacrament) but to help down their breaden god, to his place.

Thus our doctrine and practice in the use of this Sacrament, is far more
ancient, being from Christ, and the Scriptures, then theirs being from men, in
one kind, about the year 1552. in the Counsel of Trent. Item, in the Counsel
of Constance before, 1416. where they cursed all those that should say it was
lawful to communicate in both kinds: and yet by an Indulgence, he gave leave
to them of Almaine to communicate in both kinds. See Paul the third: therefore
the Pope may add and take away at pleasure, but not without Gods curse.

Real Presence.
We teach, that at the Lords Table, the Bread and Wine, must not be considered
barely in themselves, but as outward signs, having relation to the Body and
Blood of Christ, arising from the very Institution of the Sacrament: That when
the Bread and Wine, are present to the hand and mouth; at the very same time,
the Body and Blood of Christ are present to the mind. Thus, and no otherwise,
is Christ truly present with the Signs, to the believing hearts of the
Communicants. So Paul 1 Corinthians. 10. 16. The Cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? This Communion is
double: First, of the Believers, with Christ by faith; Secondly, of the
faithful among themselves, through love. Both these are mystical. Again, if
the fleshly body be in the Sacrament; then is it eaten and torn with the
teeth. Augustine. Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? believe, and thou
have eaten. Again, August. Christ, according to his majesty, providence, and
grace, is present with us to the end of the world: but according to his assumed
flesh, he is not always with us. Acts 1. 11. This Jesus which is taken up
from you into Heaven, shall so come, even as ye have seen him go into
Heaven. Matthew. 26. 11. The poor ye shall have always, but me shall ye not
have always. Revelation 1. 7. Behold, he comes in the Clouds, and all eyes
shall see him, even they that have pierced him. Moreover, it ouerturneth an
Article of our faith, which says, He sits at the right hand of his Father,
etc. Cirill says, He is absent in Body, and present in Virtue, that has his
dimensions. Papists allege against this doctrine, John 6. 55. My flesh is
meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: Ergo (say they) Christ's body must
be eaten with the mouth. The very Capernaites counted this absurd. See Christ's
answer verse. 62. 63. See also the answer of this place before; and in the
title of the Supper. Besides, this Chapter must be understood of a spiritual
eating of Christ by faith, whether in the Sacrament, or without. Again, here
is proved both kinds: If of the Sacrament. Augustine upon this place says;
This is to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, to abide in Christ, and to
have him abiding in us. This may be done without a Sacrament: Ergo, not
necessary to be understood of a Sacrament. That it must be understood
spiritually, Christ teaches in verse. 35. He that comes to me, shall not
hunger, and he that believes in me, shall never thirst. To eat then, and to
drink Christ, is to believe in him; and verse 63. he says, The words which I
speak, are spirit and life, that is spiritually to be understood. Bernard.
What is it to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, but to communicate with his
Passion, and to imitate that conversation which he used in the flesh? The
other places alleged by them, may receive answer from these, because I will
not be troubled with them (in this age, and weakness,) and are alleged by
them, of some through ignorance, of other maliciously striving against the
stream of their own knowledge. To this Ergo, as to the other, I affirm our
Doctrine to be more ancient then theirs; as from Christ, the Apostles, and
Scriptures, and of a better foundation. No question was hereof for the space
of 1060. years, until Nicholas the second.

Transubstantiation.
By this the Papists mean a changing of the substance of Bread and Wine, into
the Body and Blood of Christ: so as after the words of consecration, there
remains no Bread, but the very Body and Blood of Christ, borne of the Virgin
Mary, and who shall say to the contrary, let him be accursed: Counsel of
Trent. 1550. attempted before 1212, but opposed.

Popish Reasons.
Matthew 17. Christ transfigured his Body upon the Mount: Ergo he is able to
exhibit his Body under the forms of Bread and Wine. Ans. The question is not
so much of his power, as of his will. Psalm. 135. 6. Whatsoever the Lord would,
that did he in heaven and earth.

The second place, Job. 2. 7. He turned water into Wine: then we need not doubt
how he turned the Bread into his Body. Answer. In turning Water into Wine, he
left it to the Judgment of our senses, etc. But Popish Recusants do not feel
the raw flesh of Christ's Body, though they teach, they tear it with their
teeth: and to feed upon accidents, is no nourishment. Again,
Transubstantiation ouerturneth the very Supper of our Lord: for in every
Sacrament, there must be a Sign. Again, it takes away the nourishment of the
Soul unto eternal life; for in Transubstantiation there remains only the
fleshly body of Christ. Council of Constance. As the flesh of our Lord was
united, by the Spirit, to the divine nature: so the Bread of the Eucharist, the
image of his flesh, being sanctified by the coming of the Holy Ghost, is
become the divine Body. Again, they hold the Bread consecrated, though not
spent at once, but reserved and kept in boxes, pipes, and other vessels of the
Church, for days, weeks, and months, to be carried to the sick, or other
uses, are still the very Body and Blood of Christ. Counsel of Trent. Sess. 13.
cap. 47. Then, though it should stincke, or grow full of worms, or dogs or
Mice eat it, yet it is his Body. Thus Christ's Body must be subject to these
inconveniences. Also it is bound again as in his grave, or worse pinched,
against the nature of a fleshly body. There was no public Law for this
device, until the Counsel of Latterane, under Pope Innocent the third, Anno
Christi 1215. Whereupon, in this, as in the rest, we conclude with the
Scriptures, and Fathers; that the mystical signs after Consecration loose not
their proper nature. Theodoret. Gelasius Bishop of Rome, with others. So as our
doctrine is more ancient, as from Christ, his Apostles and Scriptures. See the
fruits of Transubstantiation in the History of Gregory the seventh, who cast
the Host into the fire, because it would give no answer.

Against Images.
Papists make a great difference between an Image and an Idol: (...), say
they, is the true similitude of a thing; but (...), in Latin, Similacrum; does
represent that which it is not: as were the Idols of Venus and Minerua,
women-gods, mere devised things of the heathen. Images, say they, we have, but
no Idols. Bellar. cap. 5. Their proofs 1 Cor. 10. 19. An Idol is nothing,
that is, represents nothing, such were the heathen Idols. But the place is
not so to be understood: for so he says of the things that are offered unto
them, which were not made to represent any thing; neither were it needful to
shun Idol sacrifice, or to abhor the Image, but that they are abused, and
turned to the service of Idols, as it follows there, verse 20. Therefore it
is not said to be nothing, or offensive being but wood, or stone, or such like,
but because it is abused to Idolatry. Again, all the pictures of the Heathen
were not Idols in this sense, because they represented nothing; For Jupiter,
Mars, Apollo, Hercules, whose Images they had, were men sometime living.
Moreover, they have Images representing nothing; as of Angels, of God the
Father, and of the Holy Ghost, which have no shape, or likeness. Deuter. 4.
15. 16. Exodus 33. 20. Micha. 5. 13. where Idols and Images are alike
condemned. So have they also imagined Saints, as Saint George, and Saint
Christopher: for there were never any such. And the Pope himself commanded
them to be put out of the Decretalls. See Pope Marcellus 2. Paul 2. and
therefore they have Idols by their own interpretation, as well as the
Heathen: but indeed there is no such difference in the Greek names, which are
indifferently taken in Scripture, Romans 1. 23. Paul calls the Gentiles,
Idols, Images. They turned the glory of the immortal God into the Image of a
corruptible man, birds, beasts, etc. The word there is (...): Again, Revel. 9.
20. speaks of them that continued to worship Devils, and Idols of gold and
silver, etc. it must needs be meant of Papists. We deny not Images for civil
uses, Luke 20. 24. or such as God has commanded to be used, but to be used in
the worship of God, or in Temples, we utterly deny, Exodus 20. 4. Thou shall
make to thy self no graven Image, nor the likeness etc. If they say, as
before, of any false gods, they have their answer before; and the Roman
Catechism, on the second Commandment, says it must be understood of the true
Iehoua, and it forbids us to resemble God, either in his nature, property, or
works, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. Exodus 40. 18. To whom will ye liken God? or what
similitude will ye set up unto him? Psalm. 97. 7. Confounded be all they that
worship graven Images: worship him all ye gods. Tertul. de Idolis cap. 3.
says, That every form or representation, is to be termed an Idol. And Isiod.
etenim libr. 8. says, that the heathen used the names of Image and Idol,
indifferently, in one, and the same signification, Acts 7. 41. Stephen called
the golden Calfe an Idol. Hier. says that Idols are Images of dead men.
Lactantius, li. 2. cap. 19. says, Where Images are for Religion, there is no
Religion. Epiphanius says, It is against the authority of the Scriptures, to
see the Image of Christ, or of any Saint hanging in the Church. Epist. ad
Iohannem Ierusalom. And further he says, in the seventh Counsel of
Constantinople: Be mindful (beloved children) not to bring Images into the
Church, etc. nor let them be suffered in common houses; for it is not meet a
Christian should be occupied by the eyes, but by the meditation of the mind.
To conclude this point, 1 John 5. verse 21. Babes, keep your selves from
Images. Papists object, they do not worship the Image; then do they not obey
the Popes Decrees: for in the second Counsel of Nice, it was decreed, That the
Image of God should be worshipped with the same honor, that God himself was
worshipped, 787. years after Christ. Rhemes Testament in the Annotations upon
the Acts, cha. 17. verse 29. do allow the Image of God to be pictured like an
old man, with gray hairs, in their Churches; against Scriptures, and Fathers.
But in the fourth Counsel of Constantinople the 7. general, before the Nicene
thirty nine years, under Constantine the fifth Emperor, it was decreed: If any
man from henceforth, shall dare to make him an Image, to worship it in the
Church, or set it up in his house, or keep it secretly; if he be of the
Clergy, let him be deposed; if a Lay man, accursed be he, Anno 748. So as,
do they worship the Image, or God, in, or before the Image, they are condemned
by Scripture, Antiquity, Counsels and Fathers, whatsoever reasons they have to
the contrary, as idle, and to no purpose. For Counsels, where at one was 330
Bishops, etc. Kings, Emperors, with the advice of their Bishops, and learned
men, have condemned Images; though the latter Popes, with the former, to
maintain their pomp, and keep the people occupied, have taken from them Gods
Book, and have set them up these, as Babes to play withal, and to keep them
in perpetual blindness.

Worshipping of Saints, and Prayers to them.
The Papists teach, That Saints departed, are with great profit and piety
called upon, and prayed unto; and that it is not only lawful, but godly so to
do. Rhemists 1. Tim. 2. Sect. 4. Bellarm. cap. 19. De Sanctorum beati. But
they say they pray to them as Intercessours only: neither do they make them
immediate Intercessours, but through Christ; concluding their prayers, Per
Christum Dominum nostrum. Bellarmin. Answer. This is not true; for you desire
not them only to pray for you, but to have mercy on you. As, O blessed Mary,
have mercy upon us, preserve thy servants, etc. Gabriel Beet, one of your own,
is not ashamed to write, That God has divided his Kingdom, reserving Justice
to himself, has left mercy to the virgin Marie; and a blasphemous Hymn: By
the right of a Mother, Command the Redeemer. Epiphanius says, Let Mary be had
in honor, but let the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be adored: Let no man
adore Mary, etc. Haeres. 79. Again, it is false that they always conclude
their prayers, Per Christum Dominum nostrum: For, in that blasphemous prayer of
Thomas, they pray: Thou by the blood of Thomas, which he for us did spend,
Make us (O Christ) to climb where Thomas did ascend.


Here they ask eternal life, by the blood of Thomas: So some of the company
have abused the Psalms, and the Lords Prayer, by placing our Lady, and other
Saints in the room of God.

Papists places, Exodus 32. 13. Moses prayer. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, thy servants. Moses (say they) hops to have his prayer heard by their
merits. Bellarmine. Answer. Moses rehearses only the Covenant made to them,
and their seed, as it follows there; Moses therefore pleads not their
merits, but Gods promise to them. Again (say they) the Saints on earth desire
one another prayers, Romans 15. 30. Ephesians 6. 18. Colossians 4. 3. Ergo:
much more may we desire the prayers of the Saints departed. Bellarmine.
Answer. To pray one for another, has a Commandment, the Lords prayer. Our
Father, etc. and in other places of Scripture: It is a duty of charity: But to
request the Prayers of Saints departed, has no warrant. Again, we pray one
for another here, because we know one another necessities. Prayer is to be
made to God only, (and to no creature besides) as a principal part of his
worship, Esaias 42. 8. My glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to
graven images. Romans 10. 14. How shall they call upon him on whom they have
not believed? but we must believe only in God; Ergo: no prayer to be made, but
to him. The Rhemists say they believe in our Lady: Ergo, they may pray to her.
Answer. Cursed are they that put any confidence in man, etc. Jeremy 17. 5.
Again, Hebr. 4. 16. we are willed to go with boldness to the Throne of
grace; that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in the time of
need: Ergo, no need of Saints invocation. Augustine says: He for whom no man
prays, but himself entreats for all; he is the only Mediator: Ergo
Saints are not to be prayed unto, lib. 2. contra Permin. cap. 8. Nicen Counsel
2. artic. 2. Tharasius President of the Counsel says; We do plainly
testify that we repose and refer our faith, and trust only in God: Ergo, in
no Saints or Angels. That the Saints pray for us, they allege these places, 2
Pet. 1. 15. I will endeavor therefore always, that ye also may be able to have
remembrance of these things after my departure: where he promises, says the
Rhemists, and Bellarmine cap. 18. to be careful, and to pray for them after
his departure. This the Apostle performs, in writing this Epistle, that they
may remember the things that he taught them, when he was gone from them, not
to pray unto him after he was dead, or he to pray for them: For in verse 13.
he says, I think it meet, so long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you
up, by putting you in remembrance: Ergo, not after his dissolution. Again,
they allege the Revelation 5. 8. The four and twenty Elders are said to have
golden vialls full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints, Rhemists:
Ergo, The Saints pray for us. Answer. This teaches us not that Saints pray for
us, and therefore we must pray to them: But this is an action of the whole
Church of God Triumphant, and Militant, which do offer up their prayers, and
thanks giuings of sweet odor unto Christ, out of the sanctified vialls of
their holy hearts, prophesied by Malachy 3. verses 3. 4. See Irenaeus lib. 4.
cap. 33. and 34. Again, Tertull. lib. 4. contra Marcianum. Psalm. 141. 2. Let
my prayers be directed in thy sight, as the incense, and the lifting up of my
hands, as the evening Sacrifice. See 1 Peter 2. 9. speaking to the people,
says, You are a royal Priesthood, etc. The Saints in heaven pray not for any
man in particular, Esaias 63. 16. The Church says to God, Doubtless thou art
our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. Now if
Abraham, nor Israel, so great Patriarchs, then not Mary, Peter, Paul, etc.
Augustine out of the words of Esaias above, says, If so great Patriarchs were
ignorant what became of the people which were borne of their loins, how is it
like that other dead can be present, to understand, and to be helping to men's
affairs? Psalm 73. verse 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is
none on earth, etc. Again, If the souls of the dead were present at the
affairs of the living, my devout Mother would never a night be from me, who
followed me in her life, etc. Again, Tractat. John 22. This says thy
Savior. Thou have no whither to go but to me: Thou have no way to go but by
me. Again, 1 John 21. If any man sin, etc. Upon these words he says. He
said not, Ye have; but being such an Apostle, said, We have. Chrysostom de
defectu Euangel. says, Thou have no need of Patrons, to go to God, that thou
should search out others: But though thou be alone, and want a patron, and
by thy self; Pray unto God, and thou shall obtain thy desire. Thus we
conclude our religion in this point, to be more ancient, and true then theirs;
as grounded upon Christ, the Apostles, and Scriptures.

Purgatory.
Papists affirm, that there is a certain infernal place in the earth called
Purgatory, in the which, as in a prisonhouse, the souls which were not fully
purged in this life, are there cleansed and purged by fire, before they can be
received into heaven. Bellarm. De Purgator. Rhemists, Matthew. 12. Sect 9. The
proofs Zachar. 9. 11. Thou have loosened thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein
was no water. Psalm. 66. 12. We went through fire and water, etc. These, and
such like places are alleged. For the place of Zachary, the Jesuit has
alleged it already; for Lymbus patrum, and now he makes it serve for
Purgatory. But Purgatory and Lymbus patrum, are diverse, and contrary things.
For Lymbus patrum was only for those (as they say) that lived before Christ,
but Purgatory began since. Lymbus was void of pain, and punishment, as they
confess; so is not Purgatory. So as the place cannot signify both. But they
wrest Scripture at pleasure. Indeed the place intends no such thing: but it
sets forth the afflictions, and miseries of this life. For so Augustine De
Ciuitate Dei, cap. 35. By the pit without water, he understands the dry and
barren dungeon of humane misery, where there is no spring of Justice, but the
puddle and mire of iniquity, that is, the Prophet speaks of the deliverance
of the people from their cruel and unjust bondage. Again, out of the Psalm
86. 13. Thou have delivered my soul from the lowest grave. What else (says
he) is the lowest pit or grave, but the lowest degree of misery? etc. 1 Corinthians. 3. 13. is their maine place for Purgatory. The fire shall try every
man's work. If any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, but he shall save
himself: yet as it were through fire. Bellarmine, by Fire understands the
flames of Purgatory; by wood, stubble, straw, he understands sins, which
must be purged by fire. Answer. By the precious matter is not understood the
works of Charity, but the preaching of sound doctrine, by straw, and other
combustible matter, is meant the affectation of eloquence, and corrupt teaching
of the truth: yet holding the foundation: Not venial sins, as they affirm;
and this Bellarmine also grants. Secondly, Fire in this place is taken
allegorically; that is, by way of resemblance, as the rest of the words:
neither can it be taken of their Purgatory, because it tries the works
only, not the persons, as well the best matter as the base. But all shall not
pass through Purgatory, by their own confession: and therefore they shift it
off with a double sense, verse 13. the fire they take for Gods sentence: in the
verse 15. for the flames of Purgatory. As if in Allegories the same words and
place should admit a double sense. The day shall declare it: Bellarmine says,
The day of Christ's coming; Rhemists understand it, the particular day of every
man's death: so well they agree together. But the meaning is apparent, that the
day, that is, the time shall declare it: for God has appointed a time, to
examine every man's doctrine by fire; which is nothing else, but the Judgment
of God, by the fire of his word: whereby every man in the day of his calling
and conversion shall know whether he has preached aright, or no.

We acknowledge no such place as Purgatory; as a third place, but Heaven, or
Hell, according to the Scriptures. Our purgation is in this life, afflictions,
and faith in the blood of Christ, 1 John 1. 7. Christ's blood purges us from
all our sins. Hebr. 9. 14. It purges our consciences from dead works. We
acknowledge but two sorts of men, Ecclesiast. 12. 14. good, or bad, He that
believes, shall be saved; he that believes not, shall be damned. Mark 10.
16. Luke 16. 26. John 3. 30. Augustine consents with us, saying; There is no
middle or third place: but he must needs be with the Devil, that is not with
Christ, Lib. 1. cap. De Pecc. remiss. Again, the third place besides heaven,
and hell, we are utterly ignorant of: nay, we find not in Scripture that
there is any. Item, 2 Corint. 5. 10. Apocal. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that
die in the Lord, they rest from their labors: Ergo, no Purgatory. August.
Homil. 50. Tom. 10. After this life there remaynes no compunction, no
satisfaction. Again, August. Enchirid. cap. 115. Here is all remission of
sins. Here be tentations that move us to sin: Lastly, here is the evil
from which we desire to be delivered: but there is none of all these. Again,
we are not here without sin, but we shall go hence without sin: Ergo,
no need of Purgatory. De verbis Apostoli Sermon. 3. Cirill. libr. 3. upon Esaias
says: They which are once dead, can add nothing to the things which they have
done, but shall remain as they were left, and wait for the time of the last
Judgment. Chrysostom. ad populum Antiochenum, Homil. 22. says: After the end
of this life, there is no occasion of merits. Hebrews 1. 3. Christ has purged
our sins, by himself. Counsel Aquisgrane, lib. 1. cap. 1. speaks of the
punishments, two in this life, one in the life to come, most grievous. Of the
two here the Apostle speaks: If we would judge our selves, we should not
be, etc. The first is the punishment wherein every sinner takes revenge of
himself: The second, but when we are judged of God, we are chastised, etc.
This is the punishment which God in mercy does lay upon sinners in this world.
The third is most fearful and terrible; not in this world, but in the next.
Depart from me, etc. Ergo, no Purgatory. The Papists can never agree of the
place, nor continuance of time, how long? And thus we still conclude, that
their doctrine is Antichristian, condemned by Scripture, and all antiquity,
and Fathers.

Merits.
By Merits we understand any thing, or work, whereby Gods favor, and life
eternal, from the dignity of the work binding God, etc. Merits are twofold:
one of the person, another of the work. Of the person dying after Baptism: Of
the work, by the condignitie, yea more, Supererrogation. I omit their idle and
blasphemous speeches, and proofs, and come to the Answer. We renounce all
personal merits of any mere man: therefore of Infants that cannot work; also
of works done by them: Only we acknowledge Christ's works to merit, which
are made ours by imputation. But Papists will be saved by their own works.
See Exodus chap. 20. 8. I will show mercy to them that love me, and keep my
commandments: If these must have mercy, who can plead merits? Romans 6. 23.
The wages of sin is death, but eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus
Christ. Ephesians. 2. 8. 10. By grace ye are saved through faith, not of your
selves: it is the gift of God, etc. Romans 8. 18. The sufferings of this life
are not worthy, etc. Titus 3. 5. We are saved, not by works which we wrought,
but according to his mercy, etc. Merit has no place where mercy is required.
See Fathers. Bernard. Those which we call Merits, are the way to the Kingdom,
not the cause of reigning. Augustine, All my hope is in the death of my Lord:
His death is my merit, my merit is the passion of my Lord. Manuel, chapter two
and twenty. Again: He crowns thee, because he crowns his own gifts, not
thy merits. Psalm 120. Again, Lord, thou will quicken me, in thy Justice, not
in mine; not because I have deserved it, but because thou have had compassion,
Ps. 142. See more in the title of Justification. Thus I cease to follow them in
their idle discourses: concluding our Doctrine to be more ancient, as from
Christ, the Apostles, Scriptures, and Fathers.

They object places of Scripture for reward. Answer. Reward is twofold, either
of merit, or of mercy. Life everlasting is not of merit, but of mercy.
Secondly, they object merits by covenant, Do this, and thou shall live. Solut.
No man can do this: Ergo: a legal Covenant condemns all men. Again, there
is an Evangelical covenant, this promise is made, not to the work, but to the
person, to his faith, laying hold on Christ, Believe, and thou shall be saved,
Mark 16. 16. Acts 8. 37. and 16. 31.

Now to conclude this point for Doctrine, as before of the lives of the Popes.
I will use the Argument our Savior Christ used against the Scribes and
Pharisees, who saying they had Abraham to their father, John 8. 39. answered;
If ye were the children of Abraham, ye would do the deeds of Abraham: So say
I, if the Popes be Peter's successors, concerning Doctrine, they would show it,
in teaching Doctrine agreeable to Scriptures, etc. But this they do not. For
Peter taught Justification by faith in Christ alone, as the rest of the
Apostles; and Christ himself, and have left the same written in Scriptures,
for our instruction and imitation. See title of Justification.

Again, Peter, Christ, and the Apostles, and Scriptures, teach only two
Sacraments of the new testament: But they teach seven; contrary to Christ,
Peter, and the Apostles. See title of Sacraments the number. Moreover, Christ
instituted Baptism: the outward sign whereof is only Water; and the form to
baptize, In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Peter, the
Apostles, and Evangelists rested in this: and left the same written in
Scripture: but the Pope and Papists, use a number of idle ceremonies, contrary
to Peter's practice, the Apostles, and Scriptures. See title of Baptism.

Again, for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: In the Supper, Christ used in
the Institution thereof bread and wine, as outward signs of his body, and his
precious blood, shed in remembrance: but these will use but one outward sign,
bread alone. Again, they will have Christ bodily present in the Sacrament, and
will utterly abolish the signs, by Transubstantiation, a toy of their own
devising, so as no bread shall remain, contrary to common sense, against
Christ, Peter, and Stripture. See Real presence, Supper, and
Transubstantiation; and so they utterly destroy the Sacrament.

Again, we teach, no Images to be used in Gods service, either public or
private, according to the second Commandment, Scripture, and Churches
practice, four hundred years after Christ, and ever contradicted since: but
they justify Image-seruice, as Laymens books, and the service of God,
directly contrary to Scriptures. See title of Images. We teach, that God only
is to be worshipped; neither Saints, nor Angels, and that God is robbed of his
honor, by how much is given unto them, etc. according to Peter, the Apostles,
and Scripture. They directly teach the contrary, as derogatory to the office of
Christ. See title of Worship of Saints. We teach according to Scripture: No
Purgatory, nor Purgation for sin, but the blood of Christ in this life,
according to Peter, the Apostles, and Scriptures. But they teach a Purgatory,
to purge sins after death. See title of Purgatory. We teach, that neither
person nor work, can merit, but the immaculate person of Christ, God and Man;
and his innocent works, without sin. They contrary teach: Merit of person,
and works, amongst sinful men. See title of Merits. To omit many other Popish
points of erroneous doctrine, we conclude as before: That the Pope is no way
Peter's successor; but an Heretic, and plain Antichrist, foretold by the
Apostle, 2 Thessal. 2. 4. Which sits as God in the Temple of God, boasting
himself, that he is God.

Arguments to prove the Pope Antichrist.
And first, their silly reasons to the contrary.

The late Counsel of Lateran 1517. commanded all Preachers, they should not
meddle, nor dare once to speak of the coming of Antichrist: which argues a
guilty Conscience.

Now observe their Arguments to prove the Pope, not to be Anti christ.
1. Argument: Anti christ is but one man, but the Popes have been many: Ergo.
2. Antichrist shall reign but 3. years, and a half: but the Popes have
reigned many hundreds of years: Ergo, not Antichrist. 3. Antichrist shall be
known by name, but the Pope has sundry names: Ergo, not Antichrist. 4. He
must come of the stock of the Jews; but never was any Jew Pope: Ergo, etc. 5.
His Seat must be at Jerusalem: but the Popes Seat is at Rome: Ergo, not
Antichrist. 6. He shall manifestly deny Christ, so does not the Pope (say
they:) Ergo, etc. 7. He shall do strange miracles, bring fire from heaven,
cause Images to speak: so does not: Ergo. 8. He shall wage great battle, and
conqu^ all the world: these agree not with the Pope: Ergo, the Pope is not
Antichrist. See the answer of these in D. Willet Synopsis. fol. 273. in
quarto.
Now, to prove the Pope to be Antichrist, we need look for no further
proof, then the Scripture: he being so lively described there, which we trust
shall appear evident to all men. Note well the places.
1. DAn. 11. which contains a Prophecy of the kingdoms which should be enemies
unto the Church of God; verse 3. of Greece; verse 5. of Aegipt; verse 28. of
Syria; verse 36. of the Romans, under Antiochus, Epiphanes, by whom the Pope is
figured, it is said; He shall do what he will. This is most true of the Pope,
his will must stand for reason. Distinct. 96. cap. Satis. If the Pope shall
draw infinite souls to hell, no man is to say unto him; Sir, why do you so? In
like manner, where he took the Cup from the Laity, in receiving the Lords
Supper; it is heresy to speak against it, non obstante, that is, though Christ
did institute it so: Again, the Pope may not be judged, for he is called, Our
Lord God the Pope Look Decrees 96. They say, God, and the Pope have all one
Consistory: therefore the Pope may do what he will, verse 37. It is said, He
shall not care for the God of his Fathers: No more does the Pope; for he has
invented, and erected a new breaden god, which his fathers never knew. Nor, for
the desires of women, for he has prohibited lawful marriage; and permits
adultery, and Sodometry. Nor, care for any God, for he shall magnify himself
above all: So does the Pope: Ergo, Antichrist.

2 Argument: 2 Thessal. 2. 4. Paul's description in every point is verified in
the Pope: He shall exalt himself above God: and every thing, etc. So the Pope
has challenged the full authority of Christ (as before) and exalts himself
above Emperors, and Kings, which are called Gods upon earth: yea, the Pope
has calculated the difference between him and them, saying, the Pope is 47.
degrees above the Emperor; as the Sun is 47. degrees bigger then the Moon.
Innocent the third in his Decretals. Moreover, He shall sit in the Temple, that
is, in the Church, and has the Keys (as he boasts) of heaven, and hell,
verse 9. Antichrist shall come with lying signs. So does the Pope, etc. verse
11. God shall send strong illusions: Never so strong as in Popery; as the
father persecuteth the son: and e contra: Husbands their Wives, Masters their
Servants; and e contra; verse 3. Antichrist is called the man of Sin, and a
wicked man. Where shall we find more wickedness then in the Popes? Some
Coniurers, Siluester the second; some in league with the Devil, Alexander the
sixth; whooremongers, incestuous, Sodomites, blasphemers: Ergo, Antichrists.
See before, the Conclusion of the Popes lives. fol. 78.

3. Argument: Revel. 8. 10. He is a Star fallen from Heaven. So the Pope is
departed from the ancient faith of Rome, to superstition, and idolatry, he has
the keys of the bottomless pit. Who but the Pope gives the Crosse-keyes? who
(says he) may carry down to hell with him Chariots laden with souls? cap.
Si Papa. Distinct. 42. verse. 3. Locusts arising out of the bottomless pit:
that is, innumerable swarms of begging Friars, Jesuits: Ergo, Antichrist.

4. Argument: Revel. 17. 5. The seat of Antichrist is described, in her
forehead a name written, a Mystery, Great Babylon, that is, Rome, the
Commander (at that time) of all the world. And after the Emperors declining,
the Pope, which commands Emperors and Kings, verse 3. The seven heads are
seven mountains, so is Rome built upon seven mountains, etc. Ergo, the Pope
Antichrist.

5. Argument: 1 John 2. 22. Who is a lier, the same is Antichrist, that denies
the Father and the Son. Who but the Pope that exalts himself against all
that is called God: dispensing against the law of Nature: against the precepts
of the old and new Testament. Vide Willet. fol. 282.

6. Argument: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 24. An Adversary, etc. The Pope is an adversary in
doctrine, living and teaching clean contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and
living clean contrary to Christ, and his Apostles. See before, for life, and
doctrine.

7. Argument: Reuelat. 17. 1. Antichrist is called the Great Whore. So, Anno
Christi 853. There was a right whore elected Pope, called John the eight; but
it fell out to be Ioane, big with child. See the Story before. fol. 16. She
sat two years and six months; though some left her out of the Catalogue for
shame, as Marian* Scotus writes.

8. Argument: Revel. 13. 11. This place plainly describes Antichrist: which
succeeded the Roman Emperor, as vile, verse 12. and as powerful.

See the Fathers.
BErnard says, The beast in the Apocalypse, unto whom is given a mouth, to
speak blasphemies, occupies Peter's Chair. Epist. 125.

Ioachim Abbas says, Antichrist was lately borne at Rome: upon the Revel.
lib. 10. part. 5.

The Bishops in the Counsel of Rainspurge says thus: Hildebrand the Pope,
under the color of Religion, laid the foundation of Antichrist.

Gregory the first, and the best of all the Bishops of Rome, that followed,
says: I do confidently affirm, that whosoever does call himself Universal
Bishop, or desire so to be called, is the forerunner of Antichrist in his
pride. Anno Christi 591.

Bernard upon the words of Christ, Matthew. 10. 42. The Lords of the Nations
reign, etc. but it shall not be so among you: says to Pope Eugenius; It is
plain that here dominion is forbidden the Apostles. Go to then, dare, and ye
will, to take upon you ruling an Apostleship: or in your Apostleship rule, or
dominion. If you will have both alike, you shall loose both: Otherwise you must
not think your self exempt from the number of them, of whom the Lord
complayneth thus. They have reigned, but not of me; they have been, but I have
not known them. De consideratione ad Eugenium. lib. 2.

Chrysostom upon 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4. 6. Hom. 4. As long as the Empire shall be had
in awe, no man shall straightly submit himself to Antichrist: but after the
Empire shall be dissolved, Antichrist shall invade the state of the Empire: it
standing void, he shall labor to pull unto himself the Empire both of man,
and God. Who sees not at this day the Empire dissolved, and the Pope even
Antichrist to dominiere over Emperors and Kings?

Hilarie ad Auxentium. Hierome ad Algasiam, question. 11. and Oecumenius upon 2
Thessal. 2. will not admit that Antichrist should sit at Jerusalem, but in the
Church of God.

For the most part, all Princes and Bishops in Germany, and Italy, have
published and called Gregory the seventh, and John the two and twentieth
Antichrist. Auentinus. Anal. lib. 5. and 7.

See the sentence of Pope Adrian the fourth, fol. 17. against the Popes. See
Clement the seventh, fol. 27. where the Popes call one another Antichrist.
Let them be judged from their own mouths.

Thus having (through Gods mercy) brought this business to an end, further
then I ever intended it. And seeing it pleased not God to give it that effect,
whereunto I labored, in the particular, yet it may please him so to bless and
prosper it, as it shall not return in vain unto him; which has seen my
desire, my labor, and study (in mine old age) for them that are not yet
called. Unto whom I most humbly commend my Labor, and them to be blessed of
him. Exhorting all the true Successors of Peter, I mean the Pastors of
Congregations: to have a care of their lives and Doctrine, that so laboring
together faithfully, to gather into one, the Sheep that are scattered abroad,
into the fold of JESUS CHRIST, when the great Shep-heard shall appear, we
may give up an account with joy, and not with grief, saying; These are those
(LORD) which thou have given me. To whom be ascribed of us, all glory, praise,
power, and thanksgiving, for ever and ever:

Amen.
FINIS.

