FVRTHER OBSERVATIONS OF THE ENGLISH SPANISH PILGRIM, CONCERNING SPAIN, Being
a second part of his former Book, and containing these particulars:

The description of a famous Monastery, or House of the King of Spaines, called
the Escuriall, not the like in the Christian World:

A brief relation of certain Daemonicall stratagems of the Spanish
Inquisition exercised on diverse English men of note of late times, and now
living in England.

A relation of the founding of a Military Order in Rome, to wit, of the
immaculate Conception of our Lady, the blessed Virgin.

Composed by James Wadsworth, Gentleman, lately converted into his true Mothers
bosom, the Church of England, and heretofore Pentioner to the King of Spain.

LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at S. Austens gate at the sign of the pide Bull. 1630.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE AND HIGHLY HONORABLE, HENRY, Earl of Holland, Lord
Kensington, High Constable of the Castle of Windsor, Captain of his Majesty's
Guard, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council, and Chancellor of the University of Cambridge:
The Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Warwick: The truly Noble, the Lord
Mountioy, Earl of Newport, three most happy Brethren, James Wadsworth wishes
daily increase of Honor and eternal felicity:
And to the Right Honorable, Earl of Barkesheire; and the truly Noble, Lord
Barclay, and the Religious and Virtuous Knight, Sir Henry Pherres, and their
religious Ladies.
WHen your Lordship was in Spain in personal attendance on his Majesty,
where you drew all eyes after you, as you did all wishes here. When it could
never be more truly said, Angli Angelis similes: then were many of these
things acted, many occasions offered me of returning to my true Religion, and
native Country. I should have thought my self much happy to have sailed by
the same VVinde with your Honors ship: but fortune would not breathe her
assisting assent upon me. Their cunning suspicions and observations of me,
crossed my designs, as my first Book may happly reveal, which I humbly
petition to your Honor to accept. So I humbly take my leave, kissing your
Lordships hands, even those which have raised me up to the preferment of this
Title, to be

Your Honors most humble servant in all bounden respective service to be
commanded, James Wadsworth.

To his friend Mr. James Wadsworth and his Book.
Go happy offspring of a pregnant brain,
Sins Commetary, a perspectiue for Spain,
Through which her maskt delusions apeare
Naked, as if they had bin practiced here*
If any Jesuit damn the Authors quill,
That writes against her from whom he learnt his skill,
Or wonder how that City odious proves,
Which bred him, and his Fathers memory loves:
Know this that Asa was not plagued, cause he
Deprived his mother for idolatry.
Good Parents patterns are, if bad forbear
To imitate, and make their faults thy fear.
Should I relate the dangers he endured
After his soul a liberty procured;
I should but wrong his Book by making those
Which read such horrid lines afraid of's prose.
When the I Will of Ree, and Martins lucklesse Fort,
Our trouble and their triumphs did report*
Him Callis dungeon kept, as if his fate
Should pay the rash invasion of a State.
Yet not their catchpole Popery, nor all
Their Macheuils could work his funeral:
That hand which first converted him has brought,
Him safe, and their discovered atheism wrought.
T. M. of C. C.

Of his friend M. James Wadsworth and his Book.
MAn's borne to Grief; without their mothers groan
None are brought forth; none live without their own:
We need no proofs; but stand amazd to see
In one man's sorrows short Epitome*
Well his unhappy travails witness may,
That true Religion has a thorny way,
He was on Sea by the winds billows shaken,
By thieves was robbed, and by the Pyrate taken;
He was endungeond by the Jesuit,
That hopt with him to keep his faults from light:
But he was now freed, the Papists naked shows,
Well fitted to receive the scourges blows,
They with their disciplines have rac'd his skin,
And he is become the Trumpet of their sin;
Yet wrongs not charity, since it is his care
To shame the bad, and bid the good beware.
Now may he sleep not fearing Thunders noise,
And make post miseries sweeten future joys.
I. G.

Mr. M. V. to the Author.
SVppose thee a new Traveler, again
Lanching into the dangers of the maine,
What would thy lot of entertainemen be?
Once more the French his Wine would offer thee.
A Rope for Cables, somewhat for a Maste
With other tacklings, and to make more haste
Thy ship should with the Air of cursings go,
And this the swelling Spaniard should blow
The Jesuit should for a Present bring
A Knife with which he lately killed a King,
Or if perhaps it were some meaner sport,
(An Earl) the Jesuit would praise him for it,
But to apply all this: my friend you see
What entertain the world would tender thee,
Yet thou have learned that it is a noble Fate
To gain thy Countries love through all their hate.
M. V. of C. C. C.

I. D. to the Author of this Book.
THat we thy virtues may the better prize,
Thy name thy deeds do anagrammatize.
To wade even through the Roman sea, to be
Amongst the rocks and shelues of papistrie,
To lie in the bosom, yet not to adore
The image of the Antichristian whore;
Is of such worth, that none would think the same,
Were not thy deeds, as worthy as thy name.
I. D. Col. G. and C.

To his Friend the Author.
I That once feared the Circe's cup of Rhemes,
But now do drink Thalia's clearest streams:
Vieuing thy Shipwrack't danger thou have past,
To Neptune, a votiue Table, owe to cast.
Where an Apelles Art may seem the more,
If that it paint the Babalonish whore.
Whose coat became thy cloak for each deceit,
That so the whore might have her Pander strait:
Her Rags, thy Veluets were; her triple Crown,
Thy Beauer; Princes with a pinching frown
TO out baffle, or from their Kingdoms depose:
If, by them, the Catholic cause did lose.
Her Siren tones would make thee soon awake:
If not: a clap of Thunder would thee shake.
The Holy Cross to bear, was no labor,
And cross thy self, to cross thy Savior.
Such was thy hungry zeal the old Saints bones
TO adore, thou made no bones often carved stones
Would turn thy bead-deuotion into gold;
Which to a made-god (wise man like) thou told.
Thou knew never cake could make its baker
Yet often the Priests saw cake their maker,
Which did unseal thy eyes clearly to see
All their Religion was but trumperie.
They had told thee of a Purgatory:
In Spain thou found'st it thy Book's the Story.
Saint Omers, was thy limbus Puerorum,
Callis Dungeon, thy limbus Patrum.
If one should ask where Hell on earth should be
Thou think in Spain, or Room, he may it see,
What Jesuits are I know thou know full well;
They were the cause that others did thee sell.
Such Locusts, our Land to eat up still strive,
May our Kings Northwinde to Romes sea them drive.
For, I dare boldly say, it is Englands doom,
That they should live with us, who swear for Room.
We have their heads, but Serpentine, to bite
Rome, has their hearts, and their allegiance quite
A Climactericke year hanged Barlow hanged, draw'd, and quartered at Lancaster
Anno 1623.
one of late,
Who swear for Pope against our King and State,
His dissect parts might teach them to epsy
Those parts that lived against should by us die.
He many from received Truth seduced,
Who to frequent our Church affore time used.
It Was just then, to hang the body of him,
Who to hang men's souls great merit would it deem.
Now may his holiness him canonize
As good as Becket for Treasons, and lies.
He with his associates often went
To a wench, which was to confession bent:
It Was known she was a whore, then well she might
Make her confession to a Jesuit.
They kept their Si non cast, tamen caute.
Rule and might then show their skill,
Live chaste, thou can not keep a close whore still.
Such hellish firebrands Papists did incense
Against See the life and death of Mistress Brettergh (...) by Mr. Harrison,
Preacher of Hyton in Lancashire.
one, who lived the Truths defense,
Whose precious life because they could not waste,
The dumb cattle their cruelty must taste.
And since they could not take off that one head,
These tales must all off: where a man might read
Their rubric cruelty on th't earth, and hear
Those dumb beasts bespeake vengeance in Gods ear.
I sp^ake all this for to congratulate
Thy ransomed glory, and most happy fate.
G^^s (...)
^oote alone escaped out of their snare,
Thy body also, and thy soul most rare.
Which soaring up toward God is fixed above
Nor Pope nor Spainiard can it move.
Ulysses valor thou do far excel,
The towering Son of Thetis fame do quell,
They had their Homers to relate their fame:
Thou need'st them not: thy works, can write thy name.
Iliads of evil could them outweare
Brave Spirit! a world of evils thou did bear:
Nor, bear alone, but break them through, and shows
The Trophies of thy glory from thy foes
To be a true Convert thou art spoken
English, Spanish, Pilgrim, is thy token.
T. H. A. B. C. C. C.

To his friend M. James Wadsworth, concerning his book.
Go stately forward in thy Spanish pace,
And boldly stamp defiance in the face
Of Romes proud Harlot, let her know she must
Lie prostrate now to scorn, not to her lust.
She that can make fair statues speak, may look
On her own image, speaking in thy Book
Reproach unto her self, that all may see
Her vices and her sins Anatomy.
It Is happy, the beguiled Fathers son
So wisely should delude delusion.
And in such mists of error should descry
And tract the footesteps of an Heresy:
Which leaving now at length, perchance it shall
Be found a Comet, and presage a fall
To Romes vpholders, whose chief strength does lie
In iugling and in false Divinity.
But though they stand, thy Book I take no less
Than writings to intaile thee, happiness.
I. N. C. C. C.

To his experienced good friend Mr. James Wadsworth upon his Book.
THy Booke's a Pilgrim, and 't had need be so
If 't means to own thee for its Master; who
From Parents, Country, and Religion too;
Nere stuck to fly, thy Native faith to show:
But 't may be styled a Diamond, whose rays
Affords us light to view Romes mask't assays;
Nor that unworthily, for it cost a prize
Nere purchased by the coin, but miseries:
The Galleys, and the Inquisition
Of which thou have, of which thou mighst made one,
Are now become thy storys: May thou live
Till mercy of the times occasion give,
For our oppugnd religion to fight
With some Immaculate-new-ordered Knight:
But though thou dy'st, yet Stories.
these shall ever live,
And prove thy fames most true preservative;
And in despite of envy shall become,
So many mottoes grau'd upon thy Tomb.
R. G. C. C. C.

To his good Friend the Author.
Spain prisoner took thy soul, thy body France;
This lived in Dungeon, that in Ignorance:
But England soul and body would have free,
Scorning contention, and foul heresy.
Spain was thy Hell, and France thy Purgatory,
England's thy Heaven on earth: aboue's thy Glory.
Thou sins Anatomist can by thy fate
With skill the scarlet whore euiscerate?
Her subtle discipline, her sorcerie,
Her baits of honor thou do here discrie.
Thus having made her whoredom to appear,
To boast of honesty she well may fear.
G. B.

To his friend Mr. Wadsworth the Pilgrim.
FOrward, brave Pilgrim, let thy traveling brain
Give birth to more Mineruaes; though to Spain
Imposture pawned thy Parents yet is that state
Checked by discovery of thy reaching pate.
The speaking Cross did steal thy Fathers heart,
Thou speaking Cross to his designs do thwart
Delusions credit, and impostures guile
Beguilts its posture painting in thy style.
Did Callis dungeon thee obscurely keep?
We know that truth often times lies in the deep;
Did the dark dungeon thee bestride with night?
Romes proiects and thy clearenesse came to light;
Darkness displayed, and night being thrust away
Thou cleared, we must confess the have won the day.
Man's life's a Pilgrimage, cease not to travel
From shore to Sea, from Sea to sand, to gravel
The antagonists of truth: we know by common-sence,
Travels the high way to experience.
E. R. Mag. Coll. Cant.

To the modest and courteous Gentleman the Author of the English Spanish
Trauailer.
COuld my weak judgment upon trust be took
Or could I add a luster to thy book,
Beyond its native glory, I would then
Strive to exceed my self and my own pen.
But nothing can be added to your worth,
Only my wonderment to set it forth.
And silence name best shows that: least what I write
Should like your glorious fame seem infinite.
To my worthy friend Mr. James Wadsworth.
ALthough you have discovered nobly well
The Jesuits and sons of Machiauell:
Yet on this Book which does their Arts descry,
They practice yet a greater Policy.
For Sir I dare not think but that you know
Who are the Merchants that engrost it so
Spies for S. Omers, and the Doway Crew,
And such as fear what good thy book may do,
Intelligencers, Mumblers of the Mass
Disguised and skinned in Satin (as the Ass
Was in the Lions hide) but their long ears
Hang out too far. Yet where their craft appears
Or where they are discovered openly
Such books as those by the whole sale they buy,
And hide them from our view: And this was one
Of many reasons caused the impression:
To be renewd: That he his book repaires
Comes not from his ambition but theirs.
A. B. of C. C. C.

GEntle Reader, I entreat thee before thou read over this Book, to mend with
thy Pen these few faults that alter the sense, being committed in the Authors
absence.

Page 1. lin. 1. for Segoria, r. Segovia. p. 18. l. 5. r. Cheney Roe. p. 20. l.
22. r. he. p. 23. l. 20. r. Venetia. p. 24. l. 9. r. Nunca sino ala conquista
de Spana. l. 19. r. Print. p. 26. l. 20. r. Wildford Castle.

FVRTHER OBSERVATIONS OF THE ENGLISH SPANISH PILGRIM, CONCERNING SPAIN: BEING
A SECOND PART OF HIS FORMER Book, etc.
IN the Country of Segoria, upon the Carpetan borders, stands a village
heretofore of small note, but now famous, for the stately monastery called
Scorialis, or commonly the Escuriall, from the dross (as some guess) which in
old time came of the iron about those parts: The former buildings of that
village were (till of late) very mean and homely, more for the profit then
pleasure of the poor husbandman: The soil about it is barren and stony,
affording very hard passage for carts and carriages; whereupon there is but
little provision of corn and wine, but good store of cattle, by reason of the
good feeding and sweet temper of the air, whereas the more inland parts of
the Country are somewhat scorched with overmuch heat, this blows many
cool blasts from the snowy neighboring mountains; whence flows good store of
water enriching the ground with grass, and beautifying the fields with a
continual greenness. Beyond this village westward about a mile, at the foot
of an high hill in an enclosed valley, seven leagues from Madrid, stands that
stately pile dedicated to the honor of St. Laurence, being the labor of four
and twenty years, a building of incredible cost and magnificence, and such, as
no former age could parallel; So that it may justly be accounted one of the
greatest wonders of this latter world. Besides the charges of rich vestments,
massy vessels of gold and silver, and other precious furniture, it stood the
King of Spain (according to his book of accounts) in one thousand two hundred
Sesterces, which makes about three millions of money, or (according to others)
nine millions of pounds. The whole fabrik is built in a square, except on that
side toward the Kings Palace and on the backside of the Church, looking
toward Madrid, which seems to resemble a cradle or gridiron upon which St.
Laurence was broyled: Every side but this extending two hundred and twenty
paces: Some account the whole length of it (from North to South) no less then
seven hundred and twenty feet, and from East to West (according to the common
measure) five hundred and seventy. Each corner of the building is guarded with a
fair tower made more for neatness then strength, and beautified (from the
bottom to the top) with many fair windows. The whole fabric may be divided
in three parts: On the South side stands the monastery of Monks of St. Hierome,
which takes up almost one half of it. Toward the Northside stands the College
for younger nouices of the same order, (...)
and foreign children, chosen and maintained by the King at a common table
among themselves. Somewhat Eastward stands the Kings own Palace, being his
Mansion house in the summer time.

Before you come to this stately edifice, you may first observe on the outside
lying before it, an open walk, beginning from the westside of the Monastery,
and thence compassing all the Northside, being two hundred foot broad on the
West part between the Monastery, and the partition, and one hundred and forty
foot broad on the North, all beautified with a fair pauement of small square
stones. In the midst according to the length of the building, on that side
where the adjoining mountain ouer-lookes it: A fair great gate opens it self
between eight huge pillars on both sides of it, one above another, upon which
are four other lesser pillars, and in the midst of the front stands a curious
statue of S. Laurence. This great gate opens to the Church, the Monastery, and
the College. On both sides of it are other lesser gates. That on the right
hand affordes a passage to the chops of mechanical arts for the use of the
College. That on the left opens a way to the lodgings of the younger Students
or Nouices.

On the same side also is a lesser gate, through which you may pass into the
Kings Palace. In a fair front, over the entrance to the Church, stand upon
their pillars and bases, the statues of six Kings of Israel, each of them
eighteen foot high, whose heads and hands are of white Marble, the rest of a
courser stone. Let us enter now into the interior parts of this goodly
Fabric; and first when you are up the stairs which lead to the chief
entrance of the Church, a large open walk offers it self unto your view,
separating the Monastery from the College. In this walk are broad steps all
along, which lead to the entrance of the Church, and thence to another open
Plain, and so to a narrow Alley, through which those of the Monastery on the
one side, and those of the College on the other, may pass to the Church, and
from thence into the lower station of the Quire. Now the place where this Quire
stands, is foure-square, having three great Alleyes, or Isles, or Cloisters in
the square, which are accounted for the Nauis, or body of the Church. Adjoining
to this place of the lowermost Quire, is an open Court on both sides, from
which the lower Quire it self, and two Chapels situated toward those two
Courts, receive their light. Above this lower Quire stands the Church it self,
with its proper Quire also; which Church (besides the upper and lower stations
of the Quire, and the great Chapel) is fouresquare of it self, and is
sustained by four pillars, and other necessary props, and it has three
collateral Alleys or Cloisters, after the manner of the former. In this Church
are two pair of fair Organs, having each of them two and thirty registers or
keys. This Church also has no less then six and thirty Altars, and a
stately door, by which they go into a large vault at the time of Supplications
and divine Orisons; This Church is higher then the inferior Quire by thirty
foot, and the Quire of that is so much higher then the Church. The pauement of
the Church, as likewise of the upper and lower Quire, is checquered with white
and black Marble. In the roof of the Quire are expressed by the Painter the
Sun, Moon and Stars, with all the host of Heaven in most glorious manner,
and on the walls the portraitures of diverse and sundry virtues, and some
histories of S. Laurence and S. Hierome. The seats are all made of precious
wood of diverse kinds and colors in Corinthian work. On the Southside of the
Church is a fair Porch, arched and beautified with diverse pictures. In this
Porch is a clear Fountain, built about with Jasper and Marble, having seven
cocks and cisternes, where the Monks use to wash their hands, when they go to
celebrate their divine Service. The pauement also of this Porch is checquered
with white and black Marble.

The Vestry is next, a stately place, all arched and paued as the former. The
chests, and presses, and other places where they keep their holy Vests, and
ornaments of the Altars, are all made of precious wood, the walls covered with
historical pictures. From this Vestry they ascend by many steps unto the high
Altar. The place where this Altar stands is fouresquare, and paued with Iaspar
of diverse colors. In the same place are certain Oratories, built for great
Princes to hear Mass, which Oratories are distinguished into four little
Chapels, and adorned both on the walls and pauement with checkered Iaspar.
This place where the Altar stands, is ten foot higher then the Church, and they
go down from hence to the Church by certain steps before the great Chapel
all of Iaspar. Through this holy place (as they call it) they go into the
Reliquary, where are kept diverse precious relics of the Saints (forsooth) and
shut up in their cofers or boxes. The like Reliquary is on the Southside also,
full of many rare monuments.

On the one side of the high Altar is a little house, wherein is distributed
the holy Eucharist, a place of great holiness and devotion surely, On the
walls of this house are curiously painted four histories out of the old
Testament, shadowing out this holy Sacrament; In the roof is portrayde the
Rainebow in the clouds with many Cherubins and Seraphins about it.

Between this house and the high Altar stands the Sacristia, within which is
the Custodia of the holy Eucharist (as they call it) This place is built upon
eight pillars of Iaspar of a yellowish color, with some veins or streakes of
white; This Iaspar is so hard and excellent that it cannot be polished but with
Adamant. The bars and chapiters wrought with flowers, are all made of gilded
metal; On the bases which hang over the wreathes stand eight statues of the
Apostles, the other four stand in other hollow places thereabout. Those twelve
statues are cut and engraven with admirable Art, and are gilded by fire. The
pauement of this Sacristia is laid with diverse kinds of Iaspar, and wrought in
gilded metal with Mesaique work. The two leave doors of this holy place, are
made of the best rock crystal included in gilded metal, and are so
transparent, that the inner Sacristia or Custodia wherein the holy Eucharist is
kept, may easily be discerned. This piece by those that have seen it, and all
other rare pieces in the world, is thought to be the most exquisite and
admirable. The maine contriuer of this curious fabric was that famous
Arcitect Iacobus de Frizzo, who spent seven whole years in cutting and
polishing those Iaspers.

Now are we come to the high Altar it self, a work no less noble and
artificial, built all of fine Jasper and marble, whereon are placed many
crosses, candlestickes and other precious ornaments. This Altar is beautified
with many curious pictures and four high places for the said pictures, whereof
some are higher then other. In the lowest, between two painted tables, is the
place where the Custodia stands. On each side of it are two statues,
representing the four Doctors of the Church, Hierome, Augustine, Gregory, and
Ambrose. This Custodia is of pure Jasper, and adorned with flowers engraven in
Jasper of diverse colors, upon which as upon their Bases stand all the other
statues and columns of green and yeallowish Jasper, with their feet and
chapiters of gilded metal. The square tablets upon the chapiters, as also
the wreathes, and borders, and globes, are made of a more refined and party
colored Jasper. What shall I say more? The whole piece is composed of the
richest Jasper of several colors, with metals cast and gilded.

Next to the pictures of the second high place or hollow, are two other statues
on each side, representing the four Evangelists. After the same order on the
third high place are placed on each side, two other statues, one of S. James
the Apostle of Spain, the other of S. Andrew the tutelary Saint of the house
of Burgundy. On the uppermost high place are the images of S. Peter and S.
Paul. The innermost Sacristia or Custodia (as they call it) wherein the holy
Sacrament or body of Christ (as they say) is preserved, is made wih the
greatest artifice that could be divised. It has four pillars of the purest
Jasper, whose bases and chapiters are of pure wrought gold, and so are the
tablets, and borders, and wreathes, and flowers, all about the Custodia. Here
and there also are placed many shining Emralds. The feet of those pillars are
of the same stone, engraued, and inlaid with gold in diverse places. Three
little square pilasters which sustain the feet of the other pillars, are of
silver and gilt, the groundwork or foundation of the whole is composed of the
same stone, interlaced with gilded metal. The tablets and squares of the
pillars or pyramids, are of the same materials with the pillars, the
champhering whereof is all of wrought gold. The priamids are made of the
richest Jasper of a dusky color. The little spears or bals on the top, are of
fine wrought gold. The hinges and borders of the two leave doors, are silver,
and gilt. The doors themselves are of rock Crystal. That side of it toward
the Church has a large square window of the same. The two other sides are
adorned with vari-coloured Jasper, and inlayd with pure gold. With the very
same materials and artifice is the inside beautified. In the midst of the roof
hangs a precious Topaze, wherein is laid up the consecrated body of Christ (as
they believe) enclosed in a box of precious Arhate.

We have seen the Church, now follows a description of the Monastery if
self. In the great walk before the common entrance into the Church, there is
a gate opening a passage into the common Porch of this Monastery; passing
through this porch, you come to a tower where the bells hang, together with a
curious clock showing both the natural and planetary hours; This tower is
erected from the very groundwork of the Church toward the Monastery, and is
answered by another right opposite, there is a way also from this porch of the
Monastery to a fair parlour, for the resort of those that would have
conference with the Monks. Next to this, is a most stately and magnificent
stairecase with a roof and covering answerable. Next these stairs adioynes a
Chapel, where their mass was celebrated while the Church was building, here
is also a closet where the Records and writings of the Monastery are carefully
preserved. Through the same great porch you pass into the Court of the
Monastery, thence to the vault, and so to another Court where under ground, is
kept all the raine-water, which gathers together in that place. Betwixt these
two, a fair arch is erected, together with a closet of excellent workmanship,
where many necessary implements are laid up.

From this porch also, there is a passage to the porch of the refectory,
whereto is adjoined a closet, or wardrobe, where their vestments are kept,
which closet and porch also, be vaulted and arched with a great deal of art
and couriositie. This porch is eight square, having eight windows, by which
all the galleries adjoining receive their light. In the midst of that porch
is a pleasant fountain, whose conduits and aqueducts are of Jasper. The
refectory or dining room of the Monks, is a most magnificent piece. Next to
the chamber of the Keeper of the robes, is a way to another chamber, for the
entertainment of strangers: next this the Kitchen, with the porch of it,
wherein beside many other commodities, are diverse fountains of hot and cold
water. To the refectory is joined the Cloister of the Hospital wherein are two
great cisternes. The Hospital it self is joined to this Cloister, whose
dining room reaches to the Kitchen Porch. Beside these foresaid places, there
are three other houses, wherein are made and conserved all those things, which
pertain to the distillation of waters. That Walk which leads from the Covent
to the Hospital, is for them that are recovered from their diseases, to
exercise themselves therein.

From that great Porch aforesaid, is another passage to the vault, where daily
orizons are said. Here are pourtrayd the Histories of the new Testament, from
the Annunacition of the blessed Virgin to the second coming of Christ. In the
midst of this fouresquare Vault, or Cloister, is a pleasant Garden,
distinguished into diverse beds and knots most curiously. In the midst of it, is
a pretty fabric of eight corners, representing the form of a Church, built
of a black stone, and adorned on the inside with diverse coloured-Iasper. In
four of the corners stand four great Giants, vomiting water into four marble
cisternes. In the midst of this Arbor lies the principal path of the Garden.
Now from the said Vault you pass to the Chapter House, and an other house like
it. These two rooms, together with their Porch, have their roofes set forth
with most exquisite pictures, and their pauement checquered with white and
black Marble; round about them are seats for the Monks, and each has his
sumptuous Altar. The way to the Monks Cells, is from the great Porch also,
wherein by winding stairs you ascend to the Priors upper Cells, and other
chambers and cocklofts beside, all covered with Lead. The Priors lower
habitation is an excellent building, all vaulted and archt, exhibiting diverse
Histories of holy Scripture, which are included in artificial Crowns and
studds wrought with flowers, the pauement also is checquered with white and
black Marble. The Priors upper Cell is built toward the North West, on both
sides of which are the Cells of the other Monks. The Chamber, or Dormitory
where the Nouices lodge, ioynes to the Monks Cells. The Monks beds are all in
a row over the Wardrobe and Refectory.

We come now to the Library, which is seated above the chief entrance to the
Monastery. It is one hundred fourscore and five foot long, and two and thirty
foot broad, in whose arched roof are the representations of diverse Arts and
Histories; to which place is adjoined another room for the use of the Library.
The Library it self is distinguished into three partitions. In the first and
principal are painted and delineated all the Arts and faculties; and at the
foot of every ones picture, all the books of that faculty, marshalled in
seemly order, all gilt, and of the same binding. Here is to be seen a great
parchment book, wherein are exactly expressed in their proper colors, all
kind of living creatures which are known to be in the world.

The other partition contains nothing but ancient Manuscripts of Divinity, in
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, with the pictures of their several Authors set
before them. Likewise the third room is furnished only with Manuscripts of
diverse faculties and languages, the Authors whereof are in like manner
expressed to the life.

Let us come in the next place to describe the College, and the Kings Palace.
These two take up the North part of the building. Their Porch or entrance, is
an open Gallery which lies before the Church, right over against the great
Porch of the Monastery. To this Porch is joined another, by which the Youth
which apply themselves to learning, pass daily into a little room to hear
Mattens and Vespers. This place is shut up with three brazen grates. In the
great Court separating the College from the Monastery, is a common passage to
the Schools, where are taught all Arts, but especially Law, Physic, and
Divinity.

This place has its peculiar Courts, and Cloisters, and Galleries, to one of
which adioynes the Refectory of the College with its Porch. Near the Porch
stands the Kitchen, between its proper Court, and the Court of the common
School, to which is joined the Childrens School, and their Refectory. On the
Northside through a narrow gate and entry, is a passage to the Kings Palace. In
the Porch or entrance, are three Mansions, or Offices with their Courts, built
partly for those which ouersee the purueiance of corn and victuals, and partly
for the use of the Kitchen. These houses are joined together for the service of
diverse tables.

By the same Porch is a way to a fair room, where the Nobles of the Kings
bedchamber, the Captain of the Guard, with others of Noble rank and quality
dine and sup daily. This way also you may pass to the Galleries, and other
offices belonging to diet and workmanship. Those Galleries round about contain
other chambers both above, and below. On the same side is another Portall, by
which they pass from the Palace to the lower Quire, Church, College, and
Monastery. Near this gate is a walk where the Kings Watch, and other officers
use to meet. Toward the Eastside are lodgings for Ambassadors, which reach to
the great Porch, and run out as far as the Palace. In the same Court are
other houses for the Kings own use, and from hence by a Gallery through a
stately Portall you enter into the Kings own lodgings, built behind the
Chapel, where you meet with an open Court, with Porches and Cloisters. On the
West side next the high Altar is another Gate, whereby the King passes to the
Monastery, the College, and other offices of the Court. The Kings Porch looks
toward the Northside of the Church. Hereupon the Church wall is curiously
painted the famous battle of Higuervela, wherein King John the second
overthrew the Moors and Saracens of Granado. Which picture represents the
story most exactly, and to the life, and shows both the order and manner of
their fight, with the several habits and weapons both of Horse and Foot which
were then in use. This picture was drawn from the first copy, which was made
at the time of the battle in a fair linen cloth above one hundred and thirty
foot long, and found since by chance in the Tower of Segouia, which History
the Kings Majesty caused to be painted again upon that wall for a perpetual
remembrance of so noble a victory. This piece is well worth the sight.

In the last place we come unto the Garden, lying toward the East and Southpart
of the building. It reaches one hundred in breadth, and is distinguished into
many pretty knots and beds, set with all kind of herbs and flowers, and watered
with many pleasant Springs and Fountains. This Garden is much higher then the
Orchard adjoining, and you ascend from hence thither by a walk of many
stairs, set with trees on both sides.

There are accounted to be above forty Fountains of pure water within the
walls of the Monastery.

There are so many Closets and Keys belonging to this Monastery, that there is
a special Officer appointed to be Master of the Keys, which Keys are kept in
a Closet by themselves, and are esteemed to exceed some thousands.

The third part of this famous Monastery of Saint Laurence, is possessed by
300. Monks of the Order of Saint Hierome, whose yearly Revenues amount to
above 35000. Spanish Ducats, and the rest goes to the King and his family.

To conclude, it is furnished with so many Halles, Parlors, Dining-roomes,
Chambers, Closets, Offices, Lodgings, and other necessary Rooms, that it may
well suffice four Kings at once to keep their Courts in. There are certain
credible reports of men of credit and understanding, that some years after
that King Philip the second had begun this great work, he coming thither with
the Earl of Lemos, and having showed him the plot, and disclosed his purpose
in the finishing of so great a work, which would amount to an incredible
charge: he demanded the Earl to tell him freely what he thought of the Work.
The Earl stoutly, and with a noble spirit, answered the King, saying; Your
Majesty, as you are the greatest Monarch of Christendom, so are you reputed
the wisest among Kings: now considering the great charge that your Majesty is
at in your wars in Italy, in France, and the Low Countries, with the Great
Turk, and elsewhere: together with your ordinary and extraordinary expenses,
and the likelihood of wars with the Queen of England. All these things
considered; it would be a blemish to your wisdom in the World, If your
Majesty should go forward with this Building: and the charges will make you
sink before it be finished.

The King replied notwithstanding all his wars and other charges, He would go
on with this; and hoped by the grace of God to see it finished, to take
pleasure and comfort in it in his life, the which he did, and enjoyed it
seeuen years, and that after his death it should be a Receptacle for his
bones, and likewise for the Kings that should succeed him; to be for a Court in
their lives, and for their Funeral after their deaths.

Likewise it is crediblely reported, that when the work was finished, and the
Officers brought the Book of accounts, the total of the Charges was twenty
seven Millions of Ducats; which amounts in our money to Nine Millions of
Pounds. The King (hearing the Total) said, I have taken great care many
years and troubled my Head much heretofore to have that finished. I will now
trouble my head no longer with the Charges wherefore he commanded the Book of
accounts to be cast into the fire.

A BRIEF RELATION OF CERTAIN DEMONICALL STRATAGEMS OF THE SPANISH
Inquisition, exercised on diverse English Gentlemen of late times, now living in
England in the year, 1620.
IN the Court of Madrid was apprehended a worthy and discreet Gentlemen, then,
and as yet fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, Master Henry Roe, who went
over with the Lord Ashton, as his servant in his embassage to Spain. Who
(desirous of the spanish tongue as also to view the university of Sallamanca)
departed with leave from the Ambassador, to reside for some space there. But
not long after, being importuned by Master Charles Maynard brother to my Lord
Maynard, and Master Edward Filmer son to Sir Edward Filmer then, at Madrid to
survey other parts of Spain as Granado, Cordonath and Sciuill. For the
effecting of which teadious journey (some 300. english miles) returned some
insupportable brass money by a Jesuit brother then to the governor of Madrid,
to receive it of him at his arrival there. Thus departing from Sallamanca,
came to Madrid to my Lord Ambassadors house, and some 3. weeks after his
coming went at the day appointed to the Governors house to receive his money,
and because he was not well experienced in the brass coin; took with him a
servant to on Master Prinn, an English Merchant. Now there stood ready at the
Governors house a familiar of the Spanish Inquisition, who saluted Master Roe
very courteously, and asked him if he were not the Gentleman that was to
receive such a sum of money of his Master; and said that his Master commanded
him to attend his coming, and that the money was ready some half a dozen
houses off, If he pleased to take pains to go thither. Master Roe little
fearing any treachery went with this fellow, who by his apparel seemed Hombre
de bien. They come quickly to a fair house; where the familiar carries M. Roe
into an upper room, where were some sixteen todos vestidos de negro con capas
Iespadas. There was only one in a gown, who seemed to be the chief amongst
them; and the Master of the house, he very kindly salutes Master Roe, asked him
if he were not such a Gentleman that should receive such money, and where he
lay. Master Roe all this while fearing nothing, pluckes out his bills of
Exchange to r^ceiue his money, and tells him that he lay in the English
Ambassadors house: he asks him again and again of this last point; Master
Roe still answered him as before. Whereupon he for the present leaves Master
Roe, and consults (aside in the same room) with some of his fellows, and
comes again to Master Roe, and tells him that he must have patience, and that
he was taken Prisoner by the spanish Inquisition. A second (with a great deal
of complementall gravity) took his sword. A third picked his pockets, emptying
him of all his money and papers. A fourth brings a smith unto him, to fetter
his legs with weighty Iuyues. A fifth was inquisitiue to know if he had any
riding clothes to travel in: who told him he had at the Ambassadors house,
which made them shake their heads in token of fear to fetch them thence. Here
they detained him from two of the Clock in the afternoon, till eleven (or
thereabouts) at night: which time they set him sidewayes (by reason of his
fettered legs) on a Mule: attended by a guard of some forty in number, who
brought him safe out of the town on his journey; and then the greater part of
them returned to Madrid. But the first place I rested in was called, Torede
Ladronis, in English, the Tower of Thieves (where the Captain of the Guard
comforted him, but withal in delusion, told him that he should be eased of
his fetters the next day) and from thence they continued their journey to
Vallidolid, where on the way they met with a flemmish Gentleman riding to
Madrid, one acquainted with Master Roe; who perceiving him in this plight,
spoke to him; but the Guard perhibited Master Roe to have any conference with
him only thus much he spoke in English to him, that he desired him to
inform the Ambassador how and in what manner he met him, so they posted him
to Vallidolid, where they brought him to the inquisition house, where he was
more fully examined of the Segnior inquisitors of the occasion of his
apprehension, for what cause he was brought thither; laying nothing to his
charge, neither indeed could they, enioining him to acknowledge the reason
whereof himself was ignorant; they bid him examine his conscience, to guess
or think what it was might bring him thither, protesting that they were
impartial and upright Judges, the protectors and rulers as free from
corruption, as prone to equity; thus with much Gravity was he diverse times
examined: For his lodging it was somewhat homely, his diet bare, his restraint
close to the denial of the sight of any one, but made more miserable by the
company of two other prisoners with him, who were sometimes examined by the
inquisitors, what they thought their fellow was in for, what his discourse was
among them: which Master Roe requited, when the inquisitors demanded him what
they discoursed of, and for what reason he thought them there detained: who
told them he could not tell. Not long after they enquired of him, If he would
have an Interpreter of the English Colleges to come unto him to Interpret his
intentions, and to confer with with him in matters of Religion, which he
seriously denied, auerring he had rather commit his life into the hands of
Strangers, even such as they were, then into the hands of English Jesuits, or
Fugitives, who knew them more maliciously addicted to their own Country, then
any Foreign person whatsoever; not unlike the runagate Turks, who cannot
brook their own Nation, by reason they object unto them their own shame: and
the reason of this his detestation of their conference was in that he suspected
one Father Foster an English Jesuit, to have been the contriuer of his
imprisonment, in that he had discoursed with that Jesuit in the Ambassadors
house, in matters of Religion. But fearing his violent detention by the
inquisition, I will discover the discovery of it; as also what became of the
Merchants Servant. The flemish Gentleman who met him on his Journey, informed
my Lord Ashton in what manner he had seen Master Roe; upon the which the
Ambassador went to the Inquisitor General to know the reason of his
imprisonment; who carried himself as one ignorant of the cause or person, but
being solicited and importuned, at last confessed he was sent to Inquisition to
Vallidolid for some heinous matters concerning points of Religion: The
Inquisitor General understanding that the Ambassador knew of Master Roes
detention; now caused the Merchants Servant to be set at liberty, who all this
while was kept close in the same house where Master Roe was apprehended, lest
that he might disclose the conueiance of this Gentleman. Of these unlawful
devises, the Ambassador informed his Sovereign King James of pious memory; who
forthwith writ Letters to his Majesty of Spain, the subject whereof was for
his delivery; Trinity College in Cambridge preferred an humble petition to the
King, in testimony of his modest deportment, and upright conversation amongst
them; and partly for this reason, in that certain of the Spanish crew and
faction had suggested to his Majesty, that he was a turbulent factious
Puritan, and therefore rightly punished by God in this imprisonment: thus
diswading (as much as in them lay) the King to write any Letters in his
behalf. These petitions were delivered to his Majesty, by the Noble Earl of
Holland, besides his Mother, Brothers, Kindred, more particularly Sir Thomas
Roe, and Sir Henry Mildra were daily petitioners to his Majesty. My Lord
Ashton, was since suitor to his Majesty of Spain, to grant King James suite,
Henry Wotton then Ambassador importuned the Ambassador for Venenan at Madrid
by letters of the same subject alleging his detention might example to
surprise and withhold any secretary of any Ambassador whosoever. The Lord of
Bristoll with a passionate zeal above all the rest daily solicited in the
behalf of his delivery, the continual redeemer of his distressed country
men, if at any time they stood in need of him; which feruencie of his
proceeded not from any private interest, but his inbred affection to his
nation, still profering to be a prop and pillar in the common good of his
country, then to advance his particular estate: but to return to my
inquisition; Master Roe could not have his liberty, till Padre Maestro, came
over into Spain, and solicited the business, and then he was soon released,
as yet ignorant by any information of theirs of the reason of his detention;
this Gentleman being demanded of his Ferriman as he passed the River Eron,
travailing out of Spain into France; when he intended to return, answered in
the phrase of an English Spirit, Nunce sino a luco^quostu doespana. Not long
after was imprisoned one Master Scott, a Yorkshire Gentleman apprehended at
Madrid and sent to the inquisition of Toledo (as it is coniectured) in that he
had disputed with an Irish dominican Friar, Father Thomas in matters of
Religion; where his lodging and diet was very hard according to his own
relation to his Majesty King James, but through the intercession of the Lord
of Bristoll was delivered. Master Pryma an English Merchant succeeded him in
imprisonment at Toledo, upon no other true occasion but because he endeavored a
Monopoly of English Merchandise to the impouerishment of other Spanish
Merchants, released also by the Lord of Bristoll, but banished the Country. At
Civil they clapped up one Master Victorine Cheuerill freed by the importunity
of the same Lord: But their happiness was the match with Spain was then
proceeding and the Lord of Bristoll that Noble Personage Ambassador of Spain,
for otherwise they might have shared in the miseries of these that follow, as
Master Gurganey a true and learned Protestant who died under the Spanish
inquisition and a Scottish Gentleman, A. who was rackt in in the Inquisition
house at Malaga, to the distortion of each particular joint now a cripple in
Charter house, and Master Mosley of Rome who has been detained in that
Inquisition house these ten years and like to expire there. And others, as for
example, Master H. brother to the Earl of L. who having viewed the greater
parts of Europe, France, Spain, Italy, Constantinople, Greece, returning to
Italy, and so for England, was there apprehended after this manner. The
Governor of the first Town he was to pass through, had a great desire to a
Grecian horse of his which he brought from thence; which he intended to
present to his brother the L. in so much he requested it of him, but the
Gentleman not so foolishly courteous as to depart from him; by his denial so
incensed the Governor, that his revenge laid him close in the Inquisition; for
the effecting of which, he subornd his man by bribery to confess his Masters
Religion, of which he being once assured, he made his man a cloak for his
knavery ensuing. For hereupon he sent him to Rome prisoner as an heretic and
spy; in the mean time kept his horse, while the poor Gentleman all his
journey had his legs chained together under the horse his belly, and every
night had no other lodging, but a room under some steaming privy; at which
inquisition house they kept him for five years until they had workt him at
last to receive their own religion and then released him. But notwithstanding
as yet ielous of him kept two years longer at the English College at Rome, to
try if he were well grounded in his Catholic Religion; at which time they
dismissed him, and restored his horse unto him who is now in England a strong
Catholic; another example of their popish tyranny Father Barnes a Benedictine
friar late Chapline to the Prince of Portugal at Paris, who writing a book
against the Popes supremacy, and the allegiance that Subjects unto their
Sovereigns. And making for England to prime it was the night before his
intended voyage upon some notice given unto the Jesuits surprised at the
Prince his house by a warrant from the chief secretary of state, which they
procured by corruption and by an Act contrary to the Laws of France and all
Nations; hurried to Cambray in the Archdutches her Dominions, where he was put
into the Castle, against the day of his trial: from thence conveyed to Milford
Castle, and afterward to Rome to the Inquisition house, it being impossible
for any man to know, whether he, or any that are once there, be alive or dead.
The Prince of Portugal informed the Court of Parliament of France of this act,
who wondering at the insolency of the fact, demanded him of the Infanta and the
Pope, but to no effect; a plot exercised very lately in the year 1627.
Spalatta, that turn coat of Religion, puffed more with ambition then corpulency,
being promised by Gundomar a Cardinals Cap at his arrival at Rome, and in
short succession and progress of time a tripple Crown; who instansed in Pope
Marcellinus, who offering sacrifices to the Heathen gods, was deposed; yet on
his recantation was again elected, cherished the Bishop not to fear, but he
might come to the like dignities upon the like submission, especially in that
his fault to revolt from the Vicar of God was not quite so erroneous, as to
deny God and his Savior. Upon these and the like gulling persuasions, having
his pardon sent him into England, went to Rome with two Monks his Chaplains
to fetch his Cap, where waiting for it the space of a tweluemoneth, to the
expense of the incredible mass of money and plate he conveyed out of England,
but missing of it, turned Protestant again, or at least pretended one,
whetting his tongue and pen against his Holiness, upon which reason he was
apprehended by the Inquisition, and put into their Den, where not long after
he was poisoned, which made him swell twice as big as he was before. A fit
death for such a one; his body was taken from the house of death, and burnt in
the fire for an heretic, which being consumed, the ashes thereof were
scattered in the air, as unworthy that his atoms should defile their Land. At
which sight his Chaplens being present, loath to taste of the like sauce, fled
to Gundomar to Madrid, claiming his promise concerning their protection, which
for a while he performed, allowing them for his credit eight Rialls a day: but
this lasted not long, for soon after the Benedictines were never seen. The
Statesman, Gundomar, was requited in the like sort, notwithstanding the
manifold* faithful services he had done for the Church of Rome, as his
solicitations against Sir Water Raleigh, his Catechizing of Spalata, his
caetera, for by way of gratitude, he had, as it is reported, given him a
Spanish fig; or else, though ever a merry man, yet at last died for very
grief. To conclude with an example of tyranny more unnatural then cruel, one
Philip the second, upon suspicion that his only son and heir (by his second
wife) was an heretic, or had too familiar conference with the Protestant
Princes, cast him into the Inquisition house, and being sentenced by the
Inquisitors to die, the sentence was confirmed by the bloody fathers hand and
seal, having no other liberty allowed him, then to choose either strangling,
or bleeding to death by the cutting of his veins; which last he chose, saying
not long before his expiring, O unhappy son, but more unhappy father: this
was effected privately. Thus if the Princes themselves have undergone the
torture of an Inquisition, nay, death it self, we may assure our selves, that
no foreign subject shall be delivered from these Devils and that Hell, if once
taken, until the hour of his utmost breath.

A RELATION OF THE FOVNDING OF A MILITARY ORDER in Rome, to wit, of the
immaculate conception of our Lady, the blessed Virgin, by his Holiness the
Pope our Lord URBAN the eighth.
A Copy of two Letters written from Rome to two Prebends of the Cathedral
Church at Seuill.
Most Holy MARY our Lady conceived without Original sin.
WHat I writ you by the last Post of our expectation, it has pleased God has
now taken good effect, though it can scarce be believed, what opposition there
has been to hinder the Foundation of this Military Religion, to be styled
with the glorious title of Immaculate conception of our Lady. The Duke of
Neuers the second of (...).
January, 1614. made his solemn vow, and his Holiness gave and confirmed unto
him his habillement of his Order, which hereupon many of those Nobles and
Gentlemen, who had formerly worn it for devotion and respect to him, now wear
it for Religion. This Order may be as well qualified and approved of, as any of
the three in Spain, Santiago, Alcantara, and Calatraua. The Constitutions and
Statutes of the same are now framing by our Lord Urban the eight, and being
finished, must first be presented unto the view in congregation of eight Lords
Cardinals, who are appointed to contriue the affairs of this Religious
Military Order, and reduce them to those of the Order of Saint Francis. There
are here present three Generals, or Prouincials of theirs, and it has been
thought fit that assemblies should be held at our Convent, where the Duke and
the said Generals, with another also of Capuchins has been Brother to the
Pope, and for this respect the Duke desired it: and afterward it was thought by
a more indifferent part to have the meeting at our Convent. The Statutes and
Constitutions are now upon framing, to be presented to the Cardinals at their
meeting, and so accordingly to be confirmed by the Pope. And all this seems
to be a league which God has ordained, and made against the enemies of the
holy Catholic faith. It will prove the most universal Millitary order of
Religion, that has ever been known in the World: It swears Feallty and
obedience to the holy Apostolical Sea of Rome, the exaltation and advancement
of the holy Cause, the extirpation of Heresies, and all of them take oaths of
obedience to their several Princes in all that befits royal Subjects to do:
And that they will always endeavor to keep peace and unity amongst Christian
Princes. After this, the Pope upon the eight and twentieth day of the said
Saint Agnes, seconded, and new confirmed the Robes, and Habillements of the
order of the Duke, the Oath, and form^ thereof was ministered by the Friar
Father Toro in this manner: Obedience to the Pope and Master, that shall be of
the Christian warfare of the immaculate conception of our Lady. The Title is
this, Militia Christiana immaculatae conceptionis Sanctissimae Virginis Mariae.
That is, the Christian warfare of the immaculate conception of our most blessed
or holy Lady. Their purpose also is, that the Nobles wear this Habit of the
Order, according as those Countries which have the other Military Orders. But
that the Staple of the Religion it self beplanted in some Island or place of
strength, which they think to gain by landing in some Enemies Country: For
they are well provided with Ammunition and Arms, and good tall shiping for the
purpose. The Institutors or Founders of this Religion are three Catholic
Princes: First the Count Altar, a great man in Germany, and very rich in
Estate; The Duke of Mantua, a great Potentate in Italy. In France the Duke of
Neuers, as they say, Lord of two hundred thousand Ducats yearly Rent, who
has seen the first moouer of this Divine Machine, and in eight years that
he has employed to compass it, has spent above four hundred thousand
Ducats. Of late years he has spent exceedingly in furnishing out
Ambassadors to most Christian Princes, upon whose good liking and approbation
he has his foundation. And he showed Father Toro and me a letter from our
deceased King Philip the third. A notable matter of toil and trouble, as being
Gods Instrument for effecting so great a work; his Divine Majesty work all
for the best, the same preserve you also. I do assure you for these fifteen
days space, we have scarce had leisure for food or sleep, for visiting of
Great men and Cardinals, drawing of Petitions, and opposing all
Contradictions. God save all, and preserve you also.

Rome the eight of February, 1624. Don Mateo Vazques de Lecca.

The Copy of the second Letter.
THe Knights of this Military Order have for Badge a blew satin Cross, shaped
much like the Cross of Alcantara, though somewhat brother, the midst of it is
embroydered with golden rays, and for the Cross on the top of it is placed
our Lady, set out like the Woman in the Apocalypse, Amicta sole, clad with the
Sun, and crowned with twelve Stars, and trampling on the Moon in a blew
Mantle, and about it a Saint Francis his girdle, holding an Infant in her
arms, with a Scepter in the right hand, and this is entitled, The Christian
Warfare, Protectresse of the immaculate Conception of the Virgin our Lady. All
Nations come into this Order, and all the World will in time. The Duke of
Neuers shall be Master of it, who has bestowed on the Religion (besides what
it was formerly endowed with) thirty thousand Ducats of yearly reuenew,
besides eight Galeons, or tall ships of his, which as at this time have served
the most Christian King of France before Rochell. And the Catholic King of
Spain our Lord Philip the 4. whom God long prosper, by the joint consent and
good liking of his Holiness, and all Christian Princes, is Protector of the
Order. The Title of it is, Milita Christiana immaculat^s conceptionis Virginis
Mariae* and it is also dedicated for the chasing of Rouers and Pirates by Sea,
as also for defense of Frontires against Turks and Moors, and is subordinate
in all things to the Holy Apostolical See, and our Blessed Father Pope Vrbane
the eighth has confirmed it, and will assist with his Galleys to the
celestial enterprise, and conquest of Jerusalem, which he has long aimed at,
and all Rome is much cheared and delighted with it. The Order was first set on
foot in Germany, in the year 1614. at what time we newly began to defend, and
preach this immaculate and sovereign mystery, without knowing of either of us,
thanks be to God Almighty for the same. Let me only tell you, that if we had
gone from Civil to Rome, and spent the eight years which we have done there,
for no more the^ the effecting of this business, it were a Journey and time
well employed. For you are to know, that although this holy Image, with the
sacred ornaments, were all of the Conception, and of no other mystery, yet they
there demanded no more, then that this Military Religion should be established
by the title of Christian Warfare, in protection of our Lady, without further
addition. And about the time of confirmation the Archdeacon Don-Matheo, and I
knew this, for all others were confident that it was of the Conception, with
the aforesaid Arms and Ornaments, and we turmoyled up and down, and spoke
with the Duke of Neuers, who acknowledged what we put to him (as being a most
courteous Gentleman, and used us with all Nobleness, telling us indeed, that
he had not observed so much, but that now at last he remembered, that at the
first meeting, which was at Vienna in Germany, upon the erecting of this Order,
it fell out to be upon the eighth day of December, which was also the day of
the Conceptition, and that now he called it perfectly to mind. This business
has once more begun to be in Treaty, and we have all gone thorow-stitch so
well, that the Military Order of the holy Conception is confirmed under that
Title, and by all the Votes, and Suffrages of great Lords and Cardinals, and
also of our Lord the Pope his Holiness. I hope in God we shall send a Bull by
the next Post, that may afford much comfort to that populous and pious City
of Civil, and all Christendom besides. Let men oppose it, and do all they
can or please, yet God Almighty will do as he best pleases; he has made all
things both in Heaven and Earth according to his good pleasure. His Divine
Majesty, as he is able, and to my desire, have you in his protection. Salute
from me all our Friends in the Lord.

The Slave of the most blessed Virgin, Doctor Bernardo de Toro.
Rome Febr. as in the former Letter. 1624.
FINIS.

