A manifest detection of the most vile and detestable use of Diceplay, and
other practices like the same, a Myrrour very necessary for all young Gentilmen
and others suddenly enabled by worldly abu^dace, to look in. Newly set forth for
their behoufe.



Democritus.

Si ie ris vous estes plus folz que ne ries de me veoir rire
De vous et de voz acts sout plus que mon rire plut dire
Tant ilya a vous redire et aulx plus sages de vous tous.
Qui est pleine fol quine rit de vous.
Fortune vient a point.

GEntle Reader, when you shall read this book, devised as a mean too show
and set forth such naughtye practices as has vene, and be peradventure yet
used in houses of Deceplaye, think it not too be written in dispraise of
offense of the honest, but. for. that under coler and clo^e of friend ship
many young Gentilemen be drawn to their undoing. And to the intent that such
as have not yet fe^de of that sower sweet or hungrye bayte, (wherewyth they at
length unawares be choke^,) shall l^rue, not only to avoid the danger thereof
by knowing their mischeuous and most subtle practice, in gettinge a pray too
spoil the same: But shalll also by mean thereof see (as it were in a glass,)
the miserable ends that a sort of handsome Gentilmen has by this crafty and
subtle de^yse come ^oo, imputynge, (for want of knowledge,) their cause of
misery too ill fortune. Thus having in few words showed the effect of that
which the book shall declare with some more circumstance, I bid you fare well.

The names of Dyce.
A Bale of barde sink deuxis A bale of flat synke deu^is A bale of flat
six eacis A bale of barde sire ^acis A bale of barde cater trees A bale of
flat cater trees A bale of fullans of the best making A bale of light grauiers
A bale of Langretes contrary to the vantage A bale of Gordes with as many high
men as low men for passage A bale of deinies A bale of long dyce for even and
odd A bale of drystelles A bale of ^t contrarnes.
Interloquutars
R. and. M.
R. speaks. Happily as I romyd me in the church of Paul's now. xx. days a
goo, lookynge for certain my companions, that hither might have stalled a
meting, there walked up and down by me in the body of the Church a gentilman,
fair dressed in Silks, gold, and Jewels, with iii. or iiii. servant in
gaye lyueryes, all brodered with sundry colors atte^ding upon him I advised
him well as one that plesed me much, for his proper personage and more for the
wearing of his gere, and he agein at each check made in our walking cast
earnest lokes upon me, not such as by his holowe frowninges, and percyng aspect
might pretend any malice or disoayne: but rather should sygnyfye by his
cherefull countenannce that he noted in me somthinge that lyked him well, and
could be content to take some occasion, to embrace mine acquaintance.

Anon whiles I devised with my self what means I might make too understand
his behauor, and what sort he was of for man's nature (as ye know) is in those
things curious, specially in such as profess courting, he humbled him self
far beneth my expectation. and began to speak first after this manner. Sir it
seems to me that we have both one errand hither for I have marked you well
now more then half an hour, stalking up and down alone without any co^pani
sometime with such heavy and vnchearful countenance as if ye had some hammers
workinge in your head, and that breach of company had moved your patience, and
I for my part, what face soever I set on the matter, am not all in quiet: for
had all promises been kept, I should or this hour have seen a good piece of
money told here upon the Font. And as many indentures obligations and other
writings sealed as cost me twyse. xl. s. for the drawing and cu^sayle, but as
to me: let the^ that be a cold blow y^ coals, for I am already on y sure side
and if I miss of my hold this way, I doubt not to pynche them as nere by an
other shyfte, though in deed I must confess, y^ unkindness and breach of
promys is so much against my nature y^ nothing can offend me more. And you on
ye other side, if your grief and tarrying be the same that I take it, ye
cannot do better, then to make little of the matter, for ye seem to be a man
y^ wadeth not so unadvisedly in y^ deep but that always ye be sure of an
anchor hold: and therefore let us by mine advise forget such idell grefes and
whiles noone tide draws on, talk of other matters yt may quicke^ our sprits
to make a merry dinner. Perchance this occasion may confirm a ioiful
acquaintau^ce between us. Sir (quod I) as touching y^ cause of my long abiding
here, it is not very great, neither is it tied to any such thrifte as ye
speak of, but lack of company will sone lead a man into a brown studdy. Well
then (quod he) if your head be fraught with no heuyer burden it is an easy matter
to lighten your ^ode, for a little greef is sone forgotten. But I pray you sir,
long ye not to the court, me thinks I have seen you er now and cannot call it
home where it should be.


M. A good workman by saint Mary: now do I easly foresee without any
instruction further whereto this matter te^deth: but yet tell what further talk
had ye.


R. I told him I was yet but a raw Courtier, as one ye came from schole not
many months before, and was now become servant to my Lord Chaunceler of Eng
land, partly to see experience of things, the better to govern my self here
after, and chiefly too have a staff to lean unto to defend mine own. And he
again commendid me much therein, declaring, how diuarse notable persons, rashely
by ignorance misguiding themselves, were sodeyn ly shaken a sunder, and fallen
on y^ rocks of extreme penury. And how some other even goodly wits
circumspectly working in all their doings, have by want of such a leaning
stock, bin overthrown with tirans power. For which cause ( quoth he) like as I
cannot but praise your wary working in this your first courting: so for my
Lord your masters sake, you shall not lack the best that I may do for you.
For albeit y^ I am much beholding to all the Lords of the counsel (as who^
they stick not at al times to take to their board, and use sometime for a
companion at play) yet is he my singular good Lord above all the rest, and if I
shall confess the truth, a great part of my living has risen by his friendly
preferment, and though I say it my self, I am to old a courtier, and have
seen to much to bear nothing away, and in case our acquayntaunce hold, and by
daily company gather deep root: I shall now and then show you a lesson worth
the learning, and to thend hereafter each of us may be the bolder of the
other, I pray you (if ye be not otherwise be spoken) take a capo^ with me at
dinner. Though your fare be but homely, and skante, yet a cup of good wine I
^a^ promis you, and al other lackes shall be supplied with a friendly welcome. I
thank you sir ( quoth I) ye offer me more gentleness then I can deserve, but sins I
have tarried all this while, I will abide the last hour, too prove how well
my companyons will hold their appointment, and for that cause I will forbear
too trouble you till an other time, nay not so (quod he) yet had I rather
spend xx. ^. then that my Lord your Master should know but that the worst
grome of his stable is as dear to me as any kinsman I have, and therefore lay
ail excusis aside, and shape your self to keep me company for one dinner,
while your man and mine shall walk here together till. xii. of the clock, and
if your friends happen too come hither he shall bring them home to us. I love
too see Gentle men swarm, and cleave toogyther like Burs.


M. How then, went ye home too gether?


R. What else, wonlde ye have me forsake so gentle a friend, and so necessary
acquayntaunce.


M. Go to, say on. Lo how gentle lambs are led to the slaughter man's fold,
how sone rechylesse youth falls in suare o^ crafty dealinge,


R. sone after we came home to his house: the table was fair spread with Dyaper
clothes, the Cupborde garnyshed with much goodly plate, and last of all came
forth the gentle woman his wife clothed in Silks and embrodred works, the
attire of her head brodred with gold and Pearl, a Carkenet about her neck
agreeable thereto, with a flower of Diamondes pendente thereat, and many fair
ringes on her finger. Besse ( quoth. he) bid this gentleman welcome, and with that
she courteously kyssed me and after moved communication of my* name, my
natural country, what time my father dyed, and whether I were Married yet or
not, always powdring our talk with such pretye deuyses, that I saw not a
woman in all my life, whose fashions and entertainment I liked better.

The good man in the mean season had bin in the Kitchen, and suddenly
retournyng and breakyng our talk, somewhat sharply blamed his wife that the
dinner was no further forward, and whiles she withdrew her from us, by like to
put all things in a good readiness, come on ( quoth he) you shall go see my house
the while, it is not like your large country houses, ^oumes ye wot in London
be straight, but yet the furnyture of them is costly enough, and victayles be
here at such high pryses, that much money is soon consumed, specially with
the^ that maintain an ydell household, nevertheless assure your self, that no
man is welcommer than you to such cheer as ye find. And consequently bringing
me through diverse well trimmed chambers, ye worst of them appareled with
verdures, some with rich cloth of Arras, all with beds, Chayres, and Cusshins
of Silk, and Gold, of sundry colors sutably wroght. Lo here quod he a poor
man's lodging, which if ye think it may do you any pleasure (for y^ Innes of
London be the worst of England) take your choice and heartily welcome, reserving
but one for my Lord my voyfes Cousin, whom I dare not disapoint least happily
he should lowre and make the house to hot for us. I gave him thanks as meet it
was I should, neither yet refusing his gentil offer, for in deed mine own
lodging is somewhat lothesome, and pestered with com pany: nor yet embracing it,
because hitherto I had not by any means, deserved so great a pleasure.

So down we came again into the parlour, and found there diverse gentilmen,
all strangers to me, and what should I say more, but to dinner we went.


M. Let me here the^ what matters were moved at dinner time, and how ye passed
the after none, till the company brake up, and sundred themselves.


R, That can I readily tell you, I have not yet forgotten it sins, don it was
so late, as touching our fare, though pertrych, and quayle, were no daintyes,
and wives of sundry grapes flowed abunbantly, yet spare I to speak thereof,
because ye have demanded a contrary question. So soon as we had well viteled
our selves, I wot not how, but easily it came to pas that we talked of ne was,
na mely of Bullin, how hardly it was won, what policy then was practiced too
get it, and what case the Soldiers had in the se^dge of it, in so much that
the least progress the King makes into the inlend parts of the Realm,
dislodgeth mo of his train, and leaves them too their own provision, with
less relefe of vyttels, then had the worst, vnwaged auenturer there.

From this the goodman lead us to talk of home pleasures, enlarginge the
beaulties of peace, and London pastimes, and made so ^oly a discourse thereof y^
to my judgment he seemed skillful in all things. My thinks ( quoth he) such
simple fare as this taken in peace, without fear and danger of gonshot, is
better then a princes puruciance in war, where each morsel he eats shall
bring with it a present fear of sodein mischaunce or vyolent hostility: and
though that in the open cam^e none might have more familiar access to the
nobility then here at home, yet for my part (I thank God) I have no cause to
complain, either because of their gentleness, no vssher kepes the door between me
and them when I come to visit the^, or y^ y^ greatest princes refuse not
sometimes to hallow my pore table and house with their person. Which (be it,
spoken without bost or imbraiding) does sometime cost me. xx. li a day. I am sure
that some of this company do remember what a brave company of Lords supt with
me the last term, and I think how ye have hard, how some of them gat an. C.
^i. or. ii. by their coming, with this and that like talk consumed was our
dinner, and after the table was removed, in came one of the wayters with a
fair silver boule full of Dyce and Cards, now masters (quod the goodman) who
is so disposed, fall to: here is my. xx. li. win it and wear it. Then each man
chose his game, some kept the good man company at the hasard, some matched
themselves at a new game called Primero.


M. And what did you the while?


R. They egged me to have made one at Dice, and told me it was a shame for
agentleman not to keep gentlemen company for his xx. or xl. crowns
nevertheless because I alleged ygnorance, the gentilwoman said I should not
sit ydel all the rest being occupied, and so we ii. fell to saunt five games a
Crown.


M. And how spedde you in the end?


R. In good faith, I passed not for the loss of. xx. or xl. s, for
acquayntance, and so much I think it cost me, and then I left of, marie the
Diceplayers stacke well by it and made very fresh play, saving one or two that
were clean shriuen, and had no more money to lose. In the end when I should
take my leave to depart, I could not by any means be suffered so to break
company, unless I would deliver the gentilwoman a Ring, for a gage of my
return to supper, and so I did, and to tell you al in few words, I have haunted
none other since I got that acquaintance, my meat and drink and lodging is
every way so dilicate, that I make no have to change it.


M. And what pay you, nothing for it? have ye not an ordinary charge for your
meals?


R. None at all, but this device we have, that every Player at the first hand
he draws, pays a Crown to the box, by way of a releef toward the house
charges.


M. Ye may fare well of that price at the stark staring stews.


R. In good faith and me thinks it an easy burden, for him yt will put his xl.
l. in adventure to pay the tribute of a crown* and fare well for it, whose
chance is to lose a. C. crowns or. ii. would never have spared one to make a
new stock with al. And whose hap is to wine, were a ve ry churl to be a
nigarde of so little,


M. Is every man a player there or do some go scotfre:


R. Who so lists not to put much in hazard plaieth at mumchau^ce for his
crowme with some one or other. So some goes free and some be at double
chardge, for always we have res pecte that the house be releued, and it
stands so much the more with good reason, because that besides the great
charges of vittels, and great attendance of the servants, and great spoil of
napery and household stuff the good man also loses his. xx. or. xl li. to keep
us company.


M. And what do you the whiles* I am sure ye be not yet so cunuinge as too
keep such workmen company.


R. And why not I pray you is it so hard a thing to tell. xx. or to remember.
ii. or. iii. channces: but yet in deed I play litell my self, unless it be at
the Cards, otherwise I am the goodmans half ^or the most part, and join both
our luckes to^ither.


M How spe^ ye there for the most part?


R. Not alwa^s so well as I wuld wish I will be plain with you as with my
friend, it has cost me. xl. ^. within this seuyght. But I vouchsafe my l^sse
the better, I had such fair play for it, and who would not hazard. xx. pound
among such quiet company, where no man gyues a soul word, at one good
hand, a man may chance as I have often seen to make his forty pound a
hundred. And I have seen again a man begin to play with v. c. mark lands
and once yet er the year went about would have old land if he had had it.


M. Perchance so to.


R. But his lock was too badde, the like falls scarcely once in a hundred
years


M. That is but one doctors opinion. I see it beetyde every day, though not in
this so lardge a proporcion and because I se you so raw in these things, that
ye accounte that for most unfeigned frendshippe where most deceit is meant, and
being already given to play, may in few days come further behind then al your
travail of your latter years can over take again. I can neither for bear
thee for the zeal I bear unto you, or the hatred I bear too the occupacion
too make you understand some parts of the sleyghtes and falshoddes that are
commonly pracised at Dice and Cards. Opening and ouerturning the things, not
so that I would learn you to put the same in use, but o^e^ their wic ked
snares.


R. I thank you for your gentyl offer, I would be glad to know the worst,
least happily I should fall in such craftye company, but youder at my lodginge
comes none but men of woors^pe, some mounted upon mules fair trayped, some
upon fine hackeneyes with foot clothes, all such as I dare say would not
practyse a point of legyerdymeyne for an hundred pound.


M. Well, as to that, there lay a straw till anon, that the matter led us to
speak more of it. And in the mean season, let this be sufficient. That so
sone as ye begone your decbaration of the first acquayntaunce in Poules, I
felt before hand the hooks were laid too pycke your purse with all.


R. Wyste I that, I would from henceforth stand in dout of mine own hands, the
matter has such appearaunce of honesty.


M Well harken to me a while. There is no man I am sure that has experyence of
the world, and by reading of hystories conferreth our time to the dais of our
elders, but will easily grant that as time has grown and gathered increase
by running, so wit first planted in a feaw, has in time taken so many
roots, that in every corner ye may find new branches budding and issewinge
from the same. For proof whereof to speak of one thing among many that at this
time may serve our purpose. Although the greek and latin histories be full of
notable examples of good princes, that utterly exiled Dicinge, out of their
seygn ories and cuntries, or at the least held the^ as infamed persons. yet
find I not that in those our forefathers days, any the like slyght and crafty
deceit was practiced in play, as now is common in every corner. Yea and he
namely Hodge setter whose surname witnesses what opinion men had of him,
though xl. years agone was thought pereles in crafty play, and had as they say
neither mate nor fellow, yet now toward his death was so far behind some
younger men in that knowledge, that I my self have known mo then. x^ that
could make him a fool: and cannot suffer him to hame the naue of a workman in
that faculty.

And it is not yet. xx. years agone sins all that sought their living that way,
as then were few in number, scarcely so many as were able too maintain a good
^ray so were they much of Hodge setters estate, the next door too a beggar,
now such is the misery of our time, or such is the licentious outrage of idel
misgouerned persons, that of only dycerse a man might have half an army, the
greatest number so gayly be seen, and so full of money that they bash not to
infinuat the^ selves intoo the company of the hiest, and look for a good hour
to creep into a ge^tlemans room of the pryuie chamber.

And here of you may right well assure your self that if their cost were not
exceeding great, it were not possible by the on ly help thereof, to lead so
sumptuous a life as they do always, shynynge like blasynge stars in their
apparel.

By night, tauerning with Trumpetes, by day spoiling Gentlemen of their
inheritance, and to speak all at once, like as all good and lyberall scyences
had a rude beginning, and by the industrye of good men, beeinge augmented by
little and by litell at last grew to a just perfection: so this detestable
privy robery from a few and deceytful rules is in few years grown to the body
of an art, and has his perculiar terms, and thereof as great a multitude
applied to it, as has Gramer or Lodgicke, or any other of the approved
sciensis, neither let this seem strange unto you* because the thing is not
commonly known, for this faculty has one condition of iugling, that if the
sleght be once discovered marde is all the market. The first precepte thereof
is to be as secret in working, as he that keeps a man company from London too
Maydenhead. and makes good chere by y^ way, to the end in the thycket to turn
his prick upward, and cast a weauers knot on both his thumbs behind him, and
they to thentent yt ever in all companyes they may talk familierly in all
apperance and yet so covertly in deed, that their purpose may not be espied:
They call their worthy art by a new found name, calling them selves Chetors,
and the di^e chet^rs, borowing the term from among our lawers, with whom all
such casuals as fall unto the Lord at the holding his lets, as waifs, straies
and such like be called chetes, and are accustomably said to be escheted to
the lords use.


R. Trow ye the^ that they have any affinity with our men of Law


M. Never with those that he honest, mary with such as be ambydexters and use
to play on both the hands they have a great League, so have they also with all
kind of People, that from a good order of civility, are fallen and resolved
as it were from the hardness of virtuous living: to the delycasy and soft
nesse of vncareful ydelnesse, and gainful deceyte.

For gain and ^ase be the only pricks that they shote at. But what right or
honest means they might acquire it, that part never comes in question among
them.

And hereof it rises that like as law When y^ term is trewly considered,
signifies an ordinance of good men, established ^or the common wealth, to
repress all vic^us living: so these Chetors turned y^ cat in y^ pan, giving to
diverse vile patching shyftes, an honest, and godly titell, calling it by the
name of a law. ^ycause by a multitude of hateful rules a multitude of dregs
and draffe, as it were all good lerning, govern and rule their ydel bodies, to
the destruction of the good laboring people. And this is the cause that dyu^se
crafty sleyghts devised only for guyle, hold up the name of a Law, ordained ye
wot to maintain plain dealing. Thus give they their own con uer auce the
name of cheting law, so do they other terms, as sacking law: high law,
Fygging law, and such like.


R. what mean ye herby, have ^e spoken brod English all this while, and now
begin to choke me with mysteries, and queiut terms?


M No not for that but always ye must consider, y^ a carpe^ter has many terms
familier enough to his pretensis that other folk understand, not at al, and so
have the chetors not without great need (for a falsehod once detected) can
never compass the desired effect: neither is it possible to make you grope ye
bottom of their art, onles I acquaint you with some of their terms.
Therefore note this at the first: that S^ckynge Law signifies horedome, High
law, robbery. Figginge law, pick purse craft.


R. But what is this to the purpose, or what hane chetors a do with hores or
thieves.


M. As much as with their very entere friend, yt hold all of one corporation.
For the first and origynall ground of Chetinge is, a cou^terfea^e cou^tenau^ce
in all things: a studdy to seem to be, and not to be in deed. And because no
great dysceyte can be wrought but where special trust goes before, therefore
the chetor when he pitcheth his hay to purchase his profit en^orceth all his
wits to win credit and opinion of honesty, and vprightnes. Who has a great
outward show of sim plicity the^ ye pick purse: or what woman will seem so
seruent in love as will the co^ mon h^rlot: so as I told you before the
foundation of all those sorts of people is nothing else but mere simulation,
and b^g in hand. And like as they spring all from one rote, so tend, they al to
one end, idely to live by rape, and rauin, devouring the fruit of othermens
labors, all the ods be twene the^ be in ye mean actions, y^ lead toward the
end and final purpose


R. I am almost weary of my trade already to hear y^ out gay gainsters are so
strongly allied with thieves, and pickpurses But I pray you proceed and let me
hear what sundry shyftes of disceyt they have to meet all well together at y^
close?


M. That is more then I promised you at the beginning, and more then I intended
to perform at this time, for every of the^ keeps as great scoles in their own
faculty, as y^ chetors do. And if I should make an open discourse of every
wrynkel they have to cover and work disceit with all, I should speak of mo
sundry queint conueiances, then be rocks in Milfourd haven, to defend the
ships from the boisterus rage of weather. But I will first go forward with that
I have in hand, and by y^ way as occasion shall serve, so touch the rest yt ye
may see their workmanship, as it were a far of, more then half a kenning.
The chetor for the most part never receives his scholar to whom he will
discover the secrets of his art, but such one as before he had from some wealth
and plenty of things, made so bare, and brought to such misery, that he will
re^use no labor* nor lean no stone unturned, to pick up a penny underneath. And
this he does not, but upon a great skyll. For like as it is an old Proverb and
a true, that he must n^edes go, whom the Dyuell dryueth, so is there not
such a Dyuell to force a man to an extreme refuge, as is necessity and want,
specially where it has proceeded of abundance.

Therefore the chetor using necessity for and great part of persuasion, when he
has sucked this nedy companion so dry that there remains no hope too press
any drop of further gain from him, takes some occasion to show him a glinse
of his faculty, and if happily he find him egle eyed, and diligent to mark,
auone shapith him in such a fashion, as that he will raise a new gain by him,
and with all somewhat releue his urgent poverty. Then walking aside intoo some
solitary place he makes the first way to his purpose after this or the like
manner. I am sure it is not yet out of your remembrance how late it is since
ye first fell into my company, how great loss ye had at play before we
entered in any acquaintance, and how little profit redounded unto me, sins ye
first haunted my house, neither can ye forget on the other side, how friendly I
have enterteyned you in every condition making my house, my Servants, my
Horses, mine apparel, and other things whatsoever I had, rather common to us
both the^ private to my self. And now I perceive that of a youthful want ones
and as it were a childish oversight, ye have so de^ly brought your self
(unawares to me) so far under the hatches, and are shaken with lavish dispense
yt ye cannot find the way to rise agein, and bear any sail among men as
heretofore you have done, Which thing whiles I deeply consider with my self, I
can not but lament much your negligence, and more the harm that is like to
ensu upon it: For first your friends beeinge as I have hard many in number,
and all of worship, shall conceive such inward greef of your unthriftiness, that
not one will vouchsafe a gentle plaster to quench the malice of this
srettinge corosie, that penury has applied. And I again because my hap was
to have you in my house, and too gain a little of other men's leauings, shall be
counted the cause of your undoing, and slaundred ^or taking a few feathers out
of ye nest when other had stolen the birds alredi, for which causes, and
specially to help you to maintain your self like a ge^tleman as hitherto of
your self ye have bin able. I can be content to put you in a good way so as
treading the step^s yt I shall appoint you, neither shall ye need to run to
your friends for succor, and al men shall be glad to use you for a companion. But
wi^ I y^ I should find you crafting with me in any point and void of y^ fidelity,
and secretnes (some spar ks whereof I have noted in your nature) assure your
self, y^ I would never make you privy to ye matter, but give you over to your
own provision, perchance to end your life we infamy and wretchedness. The young
man y^ lately flowed in plenty and plea sures, and now was pinched to ye quick
with lack of al things, humbled himself anon to be wholly at his deuocio^, and
gave him a thousand thanks for his great kyndnes. The^ forth goes y^ chetor,
and further says: though your experience in the world be not so great as mine,
yet am I sure ye see yt no man is able to live an honest man, onles he have some
privy way to help himself with al, more then the world is witness of. Think you y^
noble men could do as they do if in this hard world they should maintain so
great a port only upon their rent? Think you y^ laweiers could be such
purchassers if their pleas were short, and al their judgments, justice, and
conscience. Suppose ye y^ offices would be so derely bought, and y^ biers so
sone enriched if they counted not pillage an honest point of purchase Could
marchau^ts with out lies false making their wares, and selling them by a crooked
light to deceive ye chapma^ in the thread or color grow so sone rich, and to a
barons possessions, and make al their posterity ge^tlem^n? What will ye more who
so has not some ankerward way to help himself, but follows h^ nos^ (as they
say alwais straight forward) may well hold up ye head for a year or ii. but y^
iii. he must needs sink and gather ye wind into beggars haven. Therefore mine
advise shall be y^ ^e beat al your wits, and spare not to break your brains
alwais, to save and help one Your acquaintance I know is great, amongs your
country men, such as be rich and full of money, nevertheless more sim ple then
that they know what good may be done in play, and better it is that each man of
the^, smart a little, then you to live in lack. Therefore seek them out besely at
their lodginges: but alwais bear them in hand that ye met the^ by chance,
then will it not be hard to call them hither to take part of a supper, and
having them once within the house doors dout ye not but they shall have a blow
at one pastime or other, that shall lighten their pursis homeward, my self will
lend you money to keep the^ company, and nevertheless make you partaker of ye
gain, and to ye end ye shall not be ignorant by what means I will compass the
matter, come on go we unto my closet, and I shall give you a lesson worth y^
lernyng, The^ brings he forth a great box with dice, and first teaches him to
know a (...).


R. a gods name what stuf is it* I have often hard men talk of false dice, but
I never yet heard so dainty a name given them.


M so much the sooner may ye be deceued, but suffer me a while and break not my
talk, and I shall paint you ano^ a pro per kind of pouling, ^o here says the
chetor to this young Nouisse, a well favored die that seems good and square:
yet is the forhed longer on the cater and tray, then any other way, and
therefore holds the name of a la^gret, such be also called bard cater tres,
because commonly the longer end will of his own sway draw downwards, and turn
up to the eye sice sink, deuis or ace, the principal use of them is at Noue^
quinque. So long as a paier of bard quater tres be walking on the board so long
can ye cast neither v. nor. ix. onles it be by a great mischance that the rough
nes of the board, or some other stay, force them to stay and run against their
kind. For without quater trey, ye wot that, vnor. x. can never fall.


R. By this reason he that has the first dice is like always to strip, and
rob all the table about?


M. True it is, were there not another help, and for y^ purpose an od man is at
hand, called a flat cater tree, and none other nu^bre. The granting that tree or
quater be always one upon the one die, if there is no chance upon the other
die but may serve to make v, or ix. ^ so cast forth and lose all, therefore
(says y^ master) mark well your flat and learn to know him surely when he
runs on y^ board, the whiles he is abroad, ye for bear to cast at much, and
keeping these rule to avoid suspection, because I am known for a plaier, ye
shall see me bring al ye gain into your hands


R. But what shift have they to bring the flat in and out:


M. A ioly fine shifte yt properly is called foysting, and it is nothing else
but a slight to carry ease ly within the hand, as often as the foister list. So
y^ when either he or his partener shall cast ye dice, the flat comes not abrod,
til he have made a great hand, and won as much as him list. Otherwise the flat
is ever on onles at few times y^ of purpose he suffer the s^ly souls to cast
in a hand or it. to give them courage too continue there play and live in hope
of winning.


R* This gere seems very strau^g unto me, and it sinketh not yet into my
brain, how a man might carry so many dice in one hand and chop them and change
them so often and y^ thing not espied:


M. so iugglers co^ueia^ce seems to exceed the compass o^ reason til ye know
the feat. But what is it that labor overcomes not? And true it is, to ^oyst
finely, and redily, and we the same hand to tell money, to and fro is a thing
hardly learned, and asks a bold sprite, and long experience though it be one
of y^ first be learned. But to return to the purpose, if happily this young
scholar have not so ready and so skilful an eye, to deser^e the flat at every
time that he is foysted in (for use makes mastery, as well in this as in other
things) then partly too help this ignorance withal, and partly too teach
the young Cock to crow, all after the chetors kind, the old col^ instructs
the young in the terms of his art after this manner. Y^ know that this
outrageous swering and quarelling that some use in play, gives occasion to
many to forbear, that else would adventure much money at it, for this we have a
devise among us yt rather we relent and give place to a wrong, then we would
cause the play, by strife to cause any company to break, neither have we any
oaths in use but lightly these: of honesty, of truth, by salt, Martine, which
when we use them affirmatively, we mean always directly the contrary. As for
example, it happily I say unto you when the dice comes to your hands of hone
sty cast at all, my meaning is that ye shall cast at the board or else at very
little. If when a thing is offered in gage I swear by saint Martine I think it
fine gold, then mean I the contrary, that it is but copper. And like as it is
a gentle and old proverb, Let losers have their words: so by the way take
forth this lesson, ever ^o show gentleness to y^ silly foles, and crepe ^f ye
can into their very bosoms. For har der it is to hold them when ye have the^,
the^ for the first time to take the^ up. For this young wits be so light, and
so wavering, y^ it requires great travel, to make the^ alwais dau^ce after one
pipe. But too follow y^ we have in hand be they young be they old, that fauleth
into our laps, and be ignorant of our art, we call them all by the name of a
cousin, as men that we make as much of, as if they were of our kin in deed
the gretest wisdom of our faculty rests in this point, dy^yg ently to forsee
to make the cousin sweat, y^ is to have a will to keep play, and company, and al
ways to beware that we cause him not smoke, least that having any feel or
savor of gyle intendid against him, he slyppe the collor as it were a hound,
and shake us of for ever. And whenever ye take up a cousin, be suer as nere as
ye can to know a forehand what store of byt he has in his buy, that is what
money he has in his purse, and whether it be in great cogs or in small, that
is gold or silver, and at what game he will sonest stoop that we may feed him
with his own humor and have coules ready for him. For thousands therbee, that
wilnot play a grote at nouen and yet will lose a hundred pound at ye hasard, and
he y^ will not stoop a dodkin at y^ dice, per chance at cards will spend Gods
cope, therefore they must be provided for every way. Generally your fine chets
though they be good, made both in y^ kings be^ch and in y^ marshalsea, yet Bird
in Holburn is the finest workman, acquaint your self with him, and let him make
you a ba^e or ii. of squarters of sundry sisis, some less, some more, to throw
into y^ first play, til ye per ceiue what your company is. Then have in a
redines to be roisted in when time shall be, your fine chetes of all sorts, be
sure to have in store of such as these be. A bale of bard sink deusis and flat
si^k deusis, a bale of bard ^i. easis, and flat vi. easis: a bale of bard
quater tres, and flat quater tres. The advantage whereof is al on y^ one side,
and consists in the forging. Provide also a bale or. ii. of Fullans for they
have great use at the hasard, and though they be square outward. Yet being
within at the corner with lead, or other po^dorus matter stopped, minister as
great an advantage as any of the rest. ye must also be furnished with high me^,
and low me^ for a mu^cha^ce, and for passage. Yea and a long die for even and
od, is good to strike a small stroke with all for a crown or ii. or the price of
a diner As for Gords and bristle dice be now to gross a pracise to be put in
use, light grauiers there be, demies, co^traryes and of all sorts, forged
clean against the apparaunt vantage. Which have special, and sundry uses. But
it is enough at this time to put you in a remembrance what toles ye must
prepare too make you a workman. Hereafter at more leisure* I shall in structe
you of the several uses of them al, and in the mean season take with you also
this lesson, that* when fine squariers only be stirring, there rests a great
help in cogging, that is when the undermost die stands dead by the weighty
fall of his fellow, so that if v^. be my chance, and x. yours, grant that
upon the die I cogge and keep always an ace, deuce, or tray, I may perhaps sone
cast vi. but never x. and there be diverse kinds of cogging, but of all other
the spanish cogge bears the bell, and seldom rayseth any smoke. Gramercy says
the scholar, and now thinks he himself so ripely instructed, that though he
be not yet able to begyle others, yet he supposes himself sufficiently armed
against al falshod that might be wrought to bring him to an afterdeale, and
little sees he the while how many other ends remain, how many points there be
in slipper^ chetors science, that he shall not yet be skillful enough to tagge
in their kind, perchance in iiii. or. v. years practice.


R. Why have they any deper reaches to lift a man out of his saddel, and rid
him of his money, then ye have opened already?


M. Alas this is but a warning, and as it were the shaking of a rod to a young
boy, too fear him from places of peril. All that I have told you yet or that
I have minded to tell you, greeth not too the purpose, too make you skillful in
chetors occupacion. For as sone would I teach you the next way to Tyburn, as to
learn you the practice of it: only my mening is to make you see as far into
it, as should a cobbler into a tanners faculty, to know whether his lether be
well lyquored, and well and workmanly dressed or not. And like as I would not wish
a cobbler a currier, lest two sundry occupatio^s running to gither into one,
might perhaps make a leawd London medley in our shoes, the one using falshod in
working, the other facing and lying in uttering. *So seek I to avoid, that ye
should no ^oth be a courtier (in whom a little honest moderate play is
tolerable) and withal a Chetor, that with all honesty has made an
vndefensable dormant ^efyance. For even this new nurtured nou^s (not withstan
ding he is received into the College of these dubble dealers, and is become
so good a scoller that he knows redily his flats and barris, and has bin
snapper with y^ old cole. at. ii. or. iii. deep stroks, yea and though he have
learned to verse, and lay in ^he reason well fauoredly to make the cousin
stoop, all the cogges in his buy) yet if he once wex slow in seeking out
cosins, and be proud of his new thrift, and so good ly a passage to recover his
old losses, the knappe of the case, the goodman of the house, calls secretly
unto him the third person for the most part a man that might be warden of his
company, and talks with him after this manner. Here is a young man in my
house, if ye know him, that has been one of the swetest cosins alive, so long
as he was able to make a grote, now at the last I wot not how he came by
it, but he has gotten some knoledge and talks of a great deal more then he
can in deed. Mary a langret he knows metely well and yt is al his skill. I
made much of him all this month because he has great acquaintance of men of
the country, and specially the clothe men of the west parts, and at the
beginning wuld every day fill the case with ioly fat cosins, and albeit he had
no knowledge too work any feate him self, yet did I use him alwais honestly,
and gave him his whole snappe, too the end he should be painful and dilygent
too take the cosyns up, and bring them to the blow. Now waxen is he so proud
of his gain because he has gotten ^ new chain fyet new, apparel, and some
store of by te, that I can not get him once out of the door, to go about any
thing. Take some pains your self (says he) and bring some of your own Cosins
home or else iet al alone for me. Thus if ye see that nothing marres him, but
that he is to fat, and might we make him once lean again as he was within this
month, the^ should we see the hungry horson trudge.

There should not be sturring a cousin in any quarter but he wuld wind him
straight. Therefore come you in anon like a strau^ ger and he shall see him
take you up rou^dly. If ye lack contraries to crossebite him with all, I
shall ^end you a pair of the same sise that his chetes be.


R. Is there no more fydelity among them can they not be content one false
knave to be true to his fellow, though they conspire to rob al other men?


M. Nothing less did not I warn you in the beginning that the end of the
sci^ce is mere disceyt, and would ye have themselves against their kind, to
work contrary to their profession. Nay they be ever so like themselves, that
when all other deceytes fail, look which of them in play gett^s any store of
money into his hands, he will every foot as he draws a hand, be fygging more
or les and rather then fail crame it and hyde it in his hose, to make his
gain greatest. Then when they fall to the diuysion of the gayn, and the money
that ye cousin has lost is not forth coming, nor will be confessed among the^,
it is a world to here what rule they make, and how the one imbradeth ye other
with disshonesty, as if there were some honesty to be found among the^. What
should I the^ speak of swearing and staring were they always as liberal of
(...), as they be of oaths, I had rather ^ring a b^gger to have y^ reward of a
cheter, the^ to y^ best alms knights room y^ y^ king gives at Wyndser. But
these storms never fall but in secret counsels wtin themselves and then
peradventure ye sironger part will strip ye weaker out of his clothes rather
then he should flock away with y^ stuff, and make the^ lou^s to labor for his
luker.


R. Then is it but folly to recover my lossis in yo^der company, and if there can
not be one faithful couple found in the hole band how might I hope yt am but a
stranger to win an unfeigned friend among them


M. As for in that case never spek more of the matter, and be as sure as ye are
of your Creade, yt all the fre^dly entertaineme^t ye have at your lodging is for
no other end but for to persuade you to play, and bring you to loss, nether
was it any better the^ falshod in fellowship when the goodman got yo^u to be
half, and seemed unwilling ly to lose both your moneys.


R By these means other must I utterly for bear to hasard any thing a ye
dice, or live in dout and suspectio^ of my friend, whensoever I fall to play.


M. No question thereof, for ye contagion of chetinge is uowe so vniuesall ye
they swarm in every quarter, and therefore ye cannot be in safty from deceit,
onles ye shun y^ company of hasarders, as a man wuld fly a scorpio^.


R. The^ am I sufficiently lessoned for the purpose, but because at the first
our talk matched Dice and cards toogether like a couple of friends that draw
both in a yoke, I pra^ you is there as much craft at cards as ye have rehearsed
at the dice?


M. Altoogether, I wuld not give a point to choose, they have such a sleyght in
sortinge, and shufflinge of the Cards, that play at what game ye will al is
lost before hand. If. ii. be confederated to begyle the third, the thing is
compassed with the more ease, then i^ one be but aloue, yet ar there many wais
to deceive. Primero now as it has most use in court, so is there most disceyt
in it, some play upon the prick, some pinch the cards privily with their
nayls, some turn up the corners, some mark them with fine spots of ink One fine
trick brought in a spaniard, a finer the^ this inne^ted an Italian, and wan
much money with it by our doctors, and yet at the last they were both ouerreched
by new sleyghtes devised here at home. At trump, saint, and such other like,
cutting at y^ neck is a great van tage, so is cutting by a bum card (finely)
under and over, stealing the stock of the decarded cards if there broad laws
be forced aforehand. At decoy, they draw easily. xx. hands together, and play
al upon assurance when to win or lose. Other helps I have hard of besides, as
to set y^ cousin upon ye bench with a great looking glass behind him on the
wall, wherein the chetor might alwais see what cards were in his hand. Sometimes
they work by signs made by some of the lokers on. Wherefore me thynkes this
among the rest proceeded of a fine in^encion. A gamster after he had bin
oftentunes bitten among y^ chetors, and after much loss, grew very suspicious
in his play, that he could not suffer any of the sitters by to be privy to his
game: for this the chetors devised a new shift. A woman should sit sowing
besides him, and by the shift or slow drawing her needell, give a token to the
chetor what was the cosins game, so that a few examples in sted of infinite that
might be rehearsed, this one universal conclusion may be gathered, that give
you to play, and yield your self to loss.


R. I feel well that if a man happen to put his money in hasarde, the ods is
great that he shall rise a loser, but many men are so continent of their hands
that nothing can cause them to put ought in adventure: and some again
unskillful, y^ lack of running forces them to forbear.


M. I grant you well both. But nevertheless I never yet saw man so hard to be
vanqu^shed but they would make him stoop, at one law or other.

And for that purpose their first travel is after y^ they have taken up y^
cousin and made him somewhat sweat, to seek by all means they can to understand
his nature, and whereunto he is inclined. If they find y^ he takes pleasure in
ye company of femals, then seek they to strike him at ye sacking law. And take
this alwais for a maxim y^ all the bauds in a country be of y^ chetors familiar
acquaintance. Therefore it shall not be hard at al times to prouid for this
amorus knight, a lewed lecherous lady, to keep him loving company. The^ fall
they to banketing, to minstrels, masking, and much is the cost that the sily
cousin shall be at in Jewels, apparel and otherwise: he shall not ones get a
grant to have scarsly a lick at this dainty ladiys lappes. And ever among she
lays in this reason. For her sake to put his xx. or. xl. crowsau in adventure
ye wot not (says she) what may be a woman's luck. If he refuse it, lord how
unkindly she takes the matter and cannot be reco^siled with less then a gown or
a k^rtyl of sylk, which commonly is a reward unto her by knap of the case, and
ye cut throtes his complites, to whom the matter is put in daying. Ye and the
more is if happily they perceive y^ he esteemed not brou^id ware, but is enamored
with virginity, they have a fine cast wtin an hours warning, too make John
sylu^rpin as good a maid, as if she had ne^uer come at stews nor openid to
any man her quiver. The mystery thereof ye s^all understand by this my tale
which I my self saw put in experience. A young roisterly gentylman desyring a
maiden make to content his wanton lust, resorted to a baude, and promised her
good wages to provide him a maid against y^ next day he declared unto her y^
he took more pleasure in virginity, then beuty, but if both came together y^
pleasure was much the more thankful, and her reward should be ye better. This
mother baud undertook to serve his turn according to his desire, and having at
home a well painted, manerly harlot as good a maid as fletchers mare that bare
three great foles, went in the morning to the Apothecaries for half a pynt of
sweet water y^ commonly is called Surfulyng water, or Clynkerdeuice, and on the
way homeward turned into a noble man's house to visit his coke, an old
acquaintance of hirs: uneath had she set her ^ete within the kitchen, and set
down her glass the more hansomely to warm her before the rau^ge, but anon
the Coke had taken her in his arms, and whiles they wrastled more for manners
sake of y^ light, then for any sqemishe besines, had she been behind ye door.
Down fell ye glass and spilt was ye water, out alas quod ye woman quiet your
self quoth y^ coke, let us go into ye buttry to brekefast, and I will by ye a
new glass, and pay for ye filling. Away they went out of the kitchen, and the
boy that turned a couple of spits deliting with the savor of the water, let
first one spite stand and after another always with one hand taking up the water
as it dropped from y^ board by him, and washed his eyes, his mouth, and all his
face withal. Sone after y^ this likor was with the heat of ye ^ier dried, and
soked up in the boys face, down came the coke again into ye kitchen, and
finding the breast of the capon all burnt, for lack of turning, caught up a
great basting stycke to beat the turnspytte, and happly casting a sower look
upon him, espied the boys mouth and eyes drawn so together and closid that
nether had he left an eye to look wtall, and scarsly might ye turn your
little finger in his mouth. The cook abashed with the soden chance, ^anne
about the house half out of his wit, and cried ye kitche^ boy is taken, he ca^
nether se nor speak, and so the pore boy with his starched face co^tinewed more
then half an hour a woderyng stock to all the house, till a man of
experience, bad bath his face with hot fat be^ broth, whereby forth with he was
resto red to as wide a mouth, and as open eyes as he had before*


R. A good miracle and soon wrought. If maids be so easy to make no meruel it
is we have such store in London. But forth I pray you with your purpose, when
whoredom has no place what other shifts have they to raise there thrifte upon*


M. a. C. mo then I can rehearse, but most comenly one of these that follow. If
it be winter season when masking is most in vs^, then missing of their chept
helps, they spare not for cost of the derer. Therefore first do they hyer in one
place or other, a suit of right maskinge aparel, and after inuites diverse
gestes to a supper all such as be there of estimacion to give the^ credit by
their acquaintance or such as they think, will be liberal to hazard some
thing in a mumchance: by which means they assure themselves at y^ least to
have the supper schot free. Perchance to win. xx. li. about. And how soever
the common people esteem the thing I am clean out of dout y^ the more half of
your gay maskes in London ar groundid upon such cheting crafts, and tend on ly
y^ pouling, and robbing of the kings subjects. An other ioyly shift and for
the subtyle inuenc^o^ and finenes of wit excedeth far all the rest, is the
barnardes law.

Which to be exactly practiced asks iiii. persons at the least, each of them
to play a long several part by him self. The first is ye taker up, of a
skilful man in all things, who has by long trauill cunnid with out ye book a.
C. reso^s to insimate him self into a ma^s acquayntaunce. Talk of matters in
law, and he has plenty of casis at his fingers ends y^ he has seen tried and
rewlid in every of the kings courts. Speak of grasyng and husbandry no man
knows mo shires then he, no man knows better where to raise a gayn: and how
the abusis and ouerture of pricis might be redressed. Finally enter into what
discorse of things they li^t, were it into a browm man's faculty, he knows
what gain they have for old boots and shoes, and whence their gain comes,
yea and it shall escape him hard, but that ere your talk break of he will be your
cuntry man at least, and peradventure either of kin, or aly, or some soul
si^ unto you, if your reach surmou^t not his too far. In case he bring to pass
that ye be glad of his acquaintance, and content with his company, played is the
cheef of his part, and he gives place to the principal player the barnard,
nevertheless he lightly has in his company a man of more worship the^
himself, y^ has the countenance of a possessioner of land and he is called the
verser. And though it be a very hard thing to be a perfect taker up, and as it
were a man universally practiced in all accidents of a man's life, yet does the
Barnard go so far beyond him in cunning, as does the suns somer brightness
exceed the glimmering light of the winter sterres. This bodies most common
practice is, to come stu^bling into your company, like some rich farmor of the
cuntry, a stranger to you al, that had bin at some market town there abouts,
bying and selling, and there tipled so much Malmsy, that he had never a ready
word in his mouth, and is so careless for his money that out he throws an
hundredth or. ii. of old angels upon the bordes end, and standing some what a
loofe calls for a pot of ale and says: masters I am some what bold with
you, I pray you be not agreuid that I drink my drink by you: and minister
such idel dro^ken talk, that the verset who cou^terfeatith the ge^ tilman
comes stoutly, and sittes at your elbowe, praing you to call him near, too
laugh at his folly, between the^. ii. y^ matter shall be so workma^ly co^ueied
and so sinely arguid, y^ out co^ith a pair of old cards whereat y^ barnarde
teaches y^ verser a new game, y^ he supposes cost him. ii. potts of ale for
y^ lerning not past a^ hour, or. ii. before. The first wager is drink, the
next. ii. pence, or a grote, and lastli to make y^ tale short they use y^
matter so y^ he that has. lxxx. years of his back, and never played for a
grote in his life, cannot refuse to be the verseres half, and co^seque^tly at
one cutting of the Cards to louse all they play for, be it an. C. li. and if
perhap pes when the money is lost, the cousin begins to smoke and swear that
the dronken knave shall not get his money so the^ stands the rubber at the
door, and draws his swerd, and picketh a quarrel to his own shadow: if he
lack an osteler, or a tapester, or some other to fall out with al. That whiles
the street and company ga there to the fray, as the manner is, the barnard
steals away with all the stuff, and pickes him to one blind tavern or other,
such as before is appointed among the^, and there abidith the coming of his
companions to make an equal portion of the gain, and whensoever these shifts
may not take place, the^ led they y^ cousin to y^ gase of an interlude, or the
bear baytyng at paris garden, or some other place of thro^g where by fine
fingered Fegge boy, a grounded disciple of James Elis, picked shall be his
purse, and his money lost in a moment, or else they run to the last refuge of
all, and by a knot of lusty companions of the h^gh law, not only shake the harm
less body out of all his clothes, but bind him, or bob him to bote, that less
had bin his harm to have stouped low at the first, and so to have stopped their
greedy mouths, then to save himself so long, and in the end to be fleesed as
bare as a new shorn sheep, and perchance so far from his friends, that he
shall be forced to trip on his ten to^s homeward for lack of a hackney to ride
on, and beg for his charges by the way.


R. Now speak ye indeed of a ready way to thrift but it has an ill favored
success many times.


M. I wot what you mean, you think they come home by Tiburne, or S. Thomas of
Watrings, and so they do in deed, but nothing ^o sone as a man would suppose,
they be but pety figgers, and vnlessoned laddes that have such ready passage to
y^ gallows. The old thieves go through with their vsies well. xx. or xxx. years
together and be seldom taken, or tainted, specially y^ fig bodies, y^ have a
goodly corporacio^ for the relefe. Their craft of all others requires most
slyght, and has a meruelus plenty of terms and strange language, and therefore
no man can attain to be a workma^ thereat, til he have had a good time of
scoling, and by that means they do not only know each other well, but they be
subject to an order, such as the elders shall prescribe. No man so sturdy to
practice his feate but in the place appointed, nor for any cause once to put his
foot in an others walk. Some. ii. or. iii. has Paul's church in charge, other
has west minister h^ule in term time. Diverse chepesyde with the flesh and fish
shambles, some ye borough and (...), some the court, and part follow marketts
and fayres in the country with pedlers footepackes, and generally to all places
of assemb^y. Some of them are certainly pointed as it were by their wardens to
keep y^ hau^t with commission but a short while, and too enterchaunge their
places as order shall be made to avoid suspicion. By occasion whereof when soever
any stroke is workemanly stricken though it were at new castle the rest of y^
Fygge boys that keapes residente in London, come forth with pronosticate by
whom the worthi feate was wrought, and one great provision they have: that is
a soueren salve at all times of need a tresurer they choose in some blind corner.
a trusty secret friend. That whensoever there comes any Iuels plate, or such
gear to their share, the present sale thereof might chance to discover the
matter, the same else committed in^o his hands in pledge as it were of money
lent, and he takes a byll of sale in default of repayment as if all things
were done by good faith, and plain dealing. So that whenever he shall seek
to make money of this gages, at the end of ii. or iii. months, if any
question arise how he came by them he shows anon a fair byll of sale for
his discharge, from John a knock or John a style, a man that never was, ne uer
shall be found. And such theft by this occasion is ever manerly covered.

An other help they have that of every purse that is clenly conveyed, a ratable
portion is dewly delivered into the tresu rers hands. to the use that when
soever by some misaduenture any of them happen to be taken, and laid in prison,
this com mon stock may serve to satisfy the party grieved and to make friends
to save them from hanging. Now have ye a calendar as it were to put you in
remembrance of the che^e points and practices of cheting, enough I suppose to
serve for a warning that ye withdraw your self from yonder costly company,
wherein if my experience may serve to give you occasion to eschew such evils, I
shall be glad of this our happy metyng.


R. Yes doubt ye not thereof but that this talk has wrought already such
effects in me that though I live a. c. ^eres. I shall not lightly fall into
the chetors snares ^ut because ye spoke of the principal points, whereby I
conceive that yet some small sparks remain untouched, I pray you put me out
of doubt thereof, and then on gods name ye shall gladly depart, with as many
thanks as if ye had disbursed a large sum of money for redemption of my land,
and saved it from selling. For had not forewarnyng come, the merchant and I
must with in few days have coped together, as did my bedfelow but now the
last weke, whose lossis I pytie so much the more, as that now I understand by
what chetory it was won.


M. The feat of losyng is easily learned, and as I told you in ye beginning y^
the chetors beat and besy their brayues, only about fraud and subtyltie, so
can it not be chosen but give them selves over al to that purpose, and must
every day forge out one new point of knauety or other, to deceive the simple
wtall: as of late I knew a young gentliman so wary in his doings y^ neither by
dice or cards nor by damsels of daliaunce, nor of the wais before rehearsed,
could be made stope one penny out of his purse. For this the chetor consulted
with the leawd lady in this case devised. That she should dally with the
gentleman, and playing with his cheine should find the mean to ^epe it a
while, till they might fyg a ly^ke or i^, to make a like by. Done it w^ anon,
and within few days after another made of copper equal in length to that. At
the gentleman's next returning to the house, the Damoselles dallied so long with
the chain, sometime putting it about her neck, and sometimes about his, that
in the end she foysted the copper chain in the othe^s place, and thereby robbed
him of better then xl ^. This and the like shifts I forbere to remember. Sooner
because the deceit rests not in any slyght practyse at dice, and cards,
nevertheless because chetors were the first inuentors as well of this as of all
other falshod in fellowship that now daily is put in use at all manner of games,
as when one man lost not many years agon an C. li. land ^t shooting, by
occasion that some that shot with him on his side, were boty fellows against
him, another was ryd of ^i. C. li. at the tennis in a weke, by the ^raud of his
stopper. Me think they cannot be better rewarded then sent home to the place
they came fro.

And since chetors were the first autors thereof, let them al^o bear the blame.
And having disclosed unto you as briefefly as I can the principal practices of
the chetors crafty faculty, and other workmen of their alliance, I will bid
you farewell, for this time.


Imprinted at London, in Paul's church yard at the sign of the Lamb, by
Abraham Uele.


