THE CONTRITION OF A PROTESTANT PREACHER, CONVERTED TO BE A CATHOLIQVE
SCHOLAR. CONTAINING Certain Meditations upon the Fourth Penitential Psalm,
Miserere. Composed by James Waddesworth, Bachlour of Divinity in the University
of Cambridge, and late Parson of Cotton, and of Great-Thorneham in the County
of Suffolk. Who went into Spain with the Kings Majesty's first
Embassadour-Legier, as his Chaplayne: Where by the great Goodness of Almighty
God, he was fully converted to the Catholic Faith.

Haec mutatio dexterae Excelsi.

Psalm. 76. Imprinted with License, at S. OMERS, by CHARLES BOSCARD, at the
sign of the Name of JESUS. Anno M. DC. XV.

TO THE HONORABLE AND MOST RELIGIOUS KNIGHT SIR WILLIAM STANLEY, One of the
Masters of his Catholic Maiestyes Army, and of his Counsel of War in the
Low Countries etc. All Health and Happynes present, and in Eternity.
HONORABLE SIR,
IF I be accused of indiscretion for publishing this Treatise, which may seem
needles: yet I hope to be accounted either happy or prudent in finding so
worthy a Patron to so simple an Orphan, which I destinated unto your HONOR,
when you were lately here in this Court of SPAIN, from whence I now send it
to follow his good fortunes under the protection and acceptance which then it
pleased you to promise him. Also it comes unto your HONOR in a double duty,
acknowledging both those Titles, for which commonly all Authors do seek
Patrons unto their Books: to wit, either for the manifest excellent Dignities
of the Protectors, whose favor is sufficient to give them courage against
malice* or else for certain private Duties and Respects wherein the writer is
obliged unto his Patron to show some thankfullnes.

In both these Rightes I do heerin send nothing but your own just Due, and my
humble Duty; entreating you by acceptance to give life and comfort both to
this Book, and to the Author, who relyeth on your accustomed favors, and
among diverse others does bear himself bold upon your former Curtesyes. And
surely he were extremely fearful whosoever should show himself a Coward
under the assurance and protection of so Honorable, so Noble, so Valorous, so
Ancient, so Religious, and so Expert a Comma^der, as Sir William Stanley, whose
name has present renown in all Christendom, and his memory will be famous to
all posterity. All his virtues are so bright that I know no malice which dare
bark against them: or if any slaunderers do reproache him, yet for him that
saying of A. Gellius may be a sufficient defense: Numquam vir bonus verius
laudatur, quam cum a malis vituperatur. A good man is never more truly praised,
then when by evil men he is reproached; for indeed such men's words are no
slanders, and it is an evident sign of virtue to be maligned by the vicious.

In Religion he is a Catholic, as his Ancestors have been: and herein so
zealous, strict, and devout, that some do well resemble him to the good
Centurion (whose servant our Savior healed) for his Humility, Faith,
Obedience, and Government. Others do accounte him another Cornelius, for his
feruorous Prayers, many Almes-deedes, and continual Hospitality. And besides
all these, I do esteem him a second Joseph of Arimathia, principally for his
notable Devotion unto the most holy Sacrament of the Altar, which is the same
Body of our Savior Christ taken down from the Cross, embalmed and buried in
the new sepulcher of our garden, when with a clean, new, sweet conscience we
receive the blessed Communion, applying to our souls thereby the merits of our
Saviors Passion, and embalming his most precious body with the odours of our
good works performed in his grace.

Neither is he unlike the same Joseph in Honorable Authority, or in Nobility of
birth, being regarded for both of the^ as a principal man, not only among his
own Nation, but even among Strangers. As for the one, I call to witness the
Ancyent and Present Noble Earls of Derby, of which renowned Family he is a
true Stanley, an Honor to his Name, and the glory of his House. Next for the
other, I appeal unto the testimonies of Spaniardes, French, Dutch, Italians,
Germans, Scottish, Irish; and even to the Hollanders his Enemies, who have
often seen or heard for certain the undoubted trial of his Prowess: in so
much that all sorts do no less acknowledge him Honorable for his Deserts,
then for his Dignityes, as a man worthy of high place in Command and Counsel.
Noble in his Nature, besides his birth: Valourous in the Field, or at a Fort:
in defending like a strong Shield, and like a sharp Sword in assaulting; and so
in both like Fabius and Marcellus conjoined, whereof the one was called the
Buckler and the other the Sword of the Romans, against Hanibal.

And furthermore in all these so happy, that he has lived to be Old and
Ancyent in years, having passed many perils; and so blessed of Allmighty God,
whom he has served with such Devotion, that he never yet took any foil, or
suffered disgrace whersoeuer he had any Command: and Time was, when if his
Counsel had been followed, the Enemy had been more fully defeated, or utterly
ruyned.

Wherefore lastly I may conclude, that he is an Expert Warrior, because he is
so Ancyent in his art, and so happy in his success, wherein although fortune
many times for our sins do fail the Valiant; yet never did any atcheiue a
lucky enterprise who was not also Prudent. And so I affirm his Merits and his
Memory to be so notable, and so durable, that as of Cato it was said, He shall
need no Statua, nor any Graue-stone, wherein to continue or engraue his
Heroycall Name; but rather if he should want any such Monument or other
reward, as of the same Cato, so of him it will better be said. Why has
Memorable Stanley so little, when others have so much? For it is a more
glorious fame to have had excellent great merits with a small monument; then
to have exceeding rich Tropheys for some poor deserts.

And these things, HONORABLE SIR, I have spoken in a third person of you,
rather then unto you; as in your absence, not before your face: because I know
you love not to hear your own praises, how True, Just, or Due soever they be:
and yet because they are your Due, Just, and True Ensigns of Honor, according
to the custom of most Epistles Dedicatory, I am bound to display them in the
forefront of this Books array: for the encouragement of freindes, for the
terror of foes, because the Honorable Virtues of the Patron are the comfort and
safegarde of the Suppliant.

Wherefore I humbly beseech you to have patience for these intentes to endure
the rude rehearsal of your praises, wherso you may take these deformed
lineamentes, rather for a mortification then any commendation, by viewing your
glorious colors blotted by my pen, which otherwise are sufficient to frame a
most comely picture by the hand of skill. But I entreat you to pardon my
plain boldness; to accept my willing service; to intertayn these paper leaves
into your Patronage; to favor them your self; to further them with others;
and if by them any good redound to any souls, my desire is that God may have
the glory, and you the thanks, and that I may sometime be remembered in your
devout prayers: assuring your Honor (as I am bound) never to omit you in my
poor supplications. And so I beseech our Lord Jesus to keep you, and all
yours, for his own precious merits, and by the intercession of our blessed
Lady, and of all holy Saints, and in particular of S. Valentine Priest and
Martyr, on whose festival day I wrote this,

from Valliadolide the 14. of February. 1612. Your Honors bounden Servant in
our Lord JESUS. James Waddesworth.

THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR TO HIS FAVORABLE READER: AND TO ALL HIS LOVING
FRIENDS IN NORFOLK, SVFFOLKE, LONDON, NORWICH, CAMBRIDGE, OR ELSEWHERE SOEVER.
COURTEOUS Reader, or friends of good affection, whether you shall vouchsafe
to read any of this Treatise for good will unto the Author, or for other
expectation of the matter, I do most heartily desire, that laying aside all
curiosity, you will read it with the same intention with which it was written,
viz: to bewail sin; to forsake error; to seek pardon; and to give thanks
to Allmighty God for his grace offered or obtained through our lord JESUS.

2. And to these intentes, I have chosen first to exercise my pen in some
points of devotion, before I should be challenged with any disputes of
controversy: neither could I find in my opinion, for my self, and for all
those former purposes, any fitter Theme then the seven penitential Psalms,
which do affoarde most plentiful matter whereupon to frame such meditations.
For as S. Gregory says of the Psalter, Proleg. in 7. Psalm. Poenitent.
that it is a trianguler musical instrument of ten stringes, whereupon the
Harper strikes in the lower narrow End, from whence it yeildeth his melodious
sound in the upper part which is broader: So all Psalms in general, and in
especial the penitential Psalms, do first cause our trianguled hearts to
be contracted and stricken at the root with sorrow and contri^io^ for sin
against the ten commandementes; and afterward to be dilated broader and
enlarged upward in the sweet sound of comfort to our selves, and of praise to
Almighty God, for our pardon, and for his mercy: according whereunto, every one
of these seven Psalms has his beginning full of lamentation, but toward
his end it is enlarged with praise of consolation.

3. I desired to write upon all the 7. Penitentialls, and to publish them all
at once: but having been hitherto only able to finish the first 4. of them,
partly for want of firm health, partly by occasion of more necessary busynes,
and furthermore perceuing the volume would be greater then I supposed, and
last of all because I am now called away to another kind of treatise:
therefore I thought it good in the mean while to publish what I had finished
upon the psalm Miserere: as one desirous first to wash away the pollution of
my particular sin, before I would come to handle the pure mysteryes of our
Catholic doctrine.

4. And so our worthy Countryman Cardinal Poole used to say, that one cause of
so much heresy in these latter times was in too busy disputing about our faith,
before we took any care to reform our life: wherefore he wished all them who
were ready to read S. Paul's Epistles, to begin first to read, and to
practice their latter chapters, which are ever morally teaching virtues before
they enter into disputes about their former Chapters, which for the most part
are doctrinall about matters of knowledge: for it is unlike they will be freed
from perverse errors, who do continue their lives in obstinate vices: such men
may talk of opinions in religion; but seldom shall you see any fruits of
their religion, more then opinion and table-talke.

5. Some desire to know only because they would be able to talk or discourse:
and this is vanity. Some delight in knowing how to discourse or talk, because
they desire to be known: and this is vain glory. Some labor to know much,
because knowledge has delighte, not intending thereby any other fruit of their
labor: and this is curiosity. Only their knowledge savors of christian piety
whose intention is thereby to serve God, and to profit men, first saving their
own souls, and next to help others according to their ability.

6. And surely, as our knowledge wants wisdom when we direct others to
everlasting happynes, suffering our selves to be lead unto eternal misery, for
especially in regard of our souls, is it hoc est sapere, sibi sapere, this is
wisdom, to be wise for our selves; so yet never was any thus wise in his
knowledge, who first did not learn humility with his wisdom: For as
naturally knowledge does puff up in pride, so spiritually we must endeavor to
keep it under and in good order by humility. Or indeed it is but humane
wisdom, and knowledge of things without us which makes us swell in our
opinion of knowledge; whereas if we would by the light of divine wisdom view
the defectes and faults of our own inward bosom and look upward with
reverence to the high Majesty of God himself, then would our wisdom be
profitable to our selves as well as to others; and then will our knowledge
increase our humility.

7. Wherefore S. Thomas of Aquine speaking of Humility, says, 2.2. q. 161.
it is a virtue which makes a man willing to submit himself unto God for
God, and unto man for the same God; and that this humility is founded upon the
knowledge of God, and of our selves, viz: of our nothing, and his infinite
incomprehensibility; of our baseness and his majesty; of our poverty and his
Riches; of our weakness and his omnipotency; of our ignorance and his wisdom.
And therefore an humble man does renounce himself acknowledging his own
faults and imperfections, and with reverent confidence trusts in our Lords
Goodness. And thus if we empty our own vessels of windy pride and putrifyed
sin, doubtless our Lord will fill them as the widows vessel with his oil of
grace; for if Achab was pardoned who was but feignedly humbled, 3. Reg. 27.
Luc. 7.
how much shall we have forgiveness with S. Mary Magdalen, if with sincere
humility we lie weeping and prostrate at our Saviors feet?

8. Such must be our humility: and then will our knowledge be practical as
well as speculatiue, and benefiting our selves as much as others; whereas
between speculation and practice there is as much difference as between
studying the nature of gold, and possessing the substance of gold. It is true,
both are good; yet should they not be separated; no more then our
understanding from our will. For practical knowledge does move and order the
will: but speculation only does inform the understanding. S. Tho. 2.2. q. 45.
art. 5.
And therefore was Ananias to teach S. Paul by practical instructions even
after he had seen a great light in the way; for still he remained blind in
respect of Ananias practical experience. For speculatiue knowledge alone is
but as the light of the moon which shyneth feebly; but this knowledge made
practical is glorious as the sun, which has both heat and brightness; by
heat to give us motion, and with his brightness to show us light how to walk,
and to lead a good christian life: and unto both these together, we may refer
that of David, Psalm. 96.
Lux orta est iusto, and rectis cord laetitia, a light is arisen unto the
just, and unto the right in heart ioyfullnes; for speculation gives light,
and practice causes joyfullnes, whereof we must make one conjunction, both to
be just in speculatiue brightness of light, and to be right in heart by
practical heat of ioyfullnes. In lib. soliloq. cap. 31.


9. And further more: this practical knowledge must be exercised in our
selves* for want of which practice S. Augustine complained thus: I have
wandered, O God, seeking thee without, who were within. And so do all men
wander out of themselves, when every one particulerly does not consider his
own inward estate of soul what and who he is? by whom created? and to what
end? for want of which serious considerations not marking our sins nor our
misery, we seek not our remedy: but as S. Gregory said, like foolish
travelers passing through a short pleasing meddowe, we do so much fasten our
eyes upon some fair seeming flowers, that we fall into some ditch, or take
some wrong way leading to destruction.

10. For as the cause of all the prodigal childs misery came by departing out
of his Fathers house (and then out of himself) into a far country; so his
remedy began, as the gospel says, In se autem reuersus, when he returned
into himself, and to the knowledge of his miserable estate, and of his vile
courses; wherefore meditating on the End whereto he was like to come by sin, he
said, Ego autem hic fame pereo: reuertar in domum patris mei: here I do perish
by famine: I will return into the house of my Father. And so must we all
reflecte upon our selves, learning to know who God is? and what we are?
pondering the abomination of our sins passed, the dread and fear of our
conscience present, and the horrible terror of judgment and punishment to
come. O thus let us often imitate David saying, Meditatus sum nocte cum cord
meo, exercitabar, and scopebam spiritum meum. I have meditated in the night
with mine own heart, I was exercised, and I did sweep my spirit. O thus let
us sweep and cleanse our souls by meditation and practical knowledge of our
own hearts! in examining our religion; trying our faith; and heedfull looking
to our works! then shall we see our Errors and our faults; then will we choose
a better course for our salvation; then shall we exercise our selves in deeds
of penance, in Acts of contrition; in sincere confessions; in due
satisfactions; and in diverse kinds of voluntary and devout mortifications.

11. O that we would consider how we are corrupted in all our parts. 1. In our
flesh and body. 2. In our Animal part and l^fe. 3. In our spiritual part
and reason. In our corporal parts and outward senses. In our inward senses
and appetites irascible, concupiscible, imagination, and self will. In our
reasonable understanding, memory, and free will. In all these we have rendered
our selves as slaves into the Devils bondage, whiles we suffer sin to reign
and have dominion in us, so that our understanding is obscured, our will is
depraved, and our memory is blotted with much evil: we have our irascible
power full of impatience and anger, and the concupiscible inflamed with brutish
affections and carnal delights; our Imagination is turmoyled with worldly
desires and vain suspicions; our selfewill is crookened and hardened by
obstinacy: all the parts and outward senses of our bodies are become the
members and instruments of sin: and so we pass from vice to vice, and every
day we entangle our selves in new iniquityes, and in more chains, by which the
Devil leads us along to his eternal prison of torments, whiles we yield our
selves to commit or to continue any mortal sin, without contrition and
true care of amendment.

12. It is true: we are not able by our selves alone to get out of the Devils
slavery, to forsake sin, nor to alter and amend entirely the course of our
lives: for having once yielded and lived in the custom and subjection of sin
and Satan, we have need of Allmighty Gods help and grace to deliver us; first
preventing and stirring us up to have a good will, S. Tho. 1.2. q. 109. a. 6.
and 7. Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 5.
and afterward also working with our will to bring our conversion and
repentance unto a full work: for every good desire which we have, does proceed
from Gods grace offered: and although our will be free to admit or refuse the
accomplishment of those good desires, as neither compelled unto them by
outward violence, nor necessitated by inward qualitye, neither as a stone
naturally and necessarily falling downward, nor forced upward violently, but
differing herein from senseles and brutish creatures; and freely consenting or
dissenting to all good motions; yet as allmighty God does first inspire them,
so further without his grace we are no way able to effect them; for in
religious spiritual good things without him we can do nothing.

13. But on the other side we have greater and assured comfortes: First because
our Lord does offer grace unto all men at one time or other by giving the^
good desires of a better life; by which he would have all men to be saved. If
they ever refuse these good morio^s, then are they justly forsaken and left in
a reprobate sense. If we do at any time admit these good desires, and so do
but as much as lies in our power, then most infallibly our Lord does give us
further grace and means whereby to come to the knowledge of his truth. Of the
first preventing inspirations, Gods wisdom says, Behold I stand at the door
and knock: if we open not, but keep him out it is our fault: if on our parts
we yield him entrance, then alltogeather with the Father and the Son they
will come unto us by operating grace effecting our full resolution; and by
further grace still cooperating they will dwell with us in practice and
continuance of a virtuous holy life, till the accomplishment of our salvation,
if we of our selves do never drive him from us again, by committing some
mortal sin.

14. Our second comfort is, that as if we let him into us when he knocks by
preventing grace admonishing our hearts; so by his operating and following
grace, when we are resolved, if we do but knock by prayer at his door of
mercy, he does ever most undoubtedly receive us into favor. O most gracious
God full of mercy who does call unto us by grace, that we should call unto him
for mercy? can any creature wish for greater clemency then to have forgiveness
for the asking? And is he not worthy to perish in his wickedness, who will
neither admit good desires, nor be moved unto hearty prayers? O what will move
us, if consideration of eternal perdition cannot stir us? Or if we do not
pray for mercy, because we do not consider our misery? Again, and again, I
beseech you to examine your Religion, to try your faith, and to take an
impartial view of your whole life, that seeing your danger, you may seek for
favor; for as in the Spanish Proverb it is truly said of our corporal eyes,
Quienbien vee, bien llora: He that sees clearly, weeps easily; so in the eye
sight of our soul, he that clearly beholdes his faults, will more easily
shed tears for his pardon.

15. Let us examine our selves by the 10. Commandments of God, by the 5.
Precepts of his Church: by the 7. works of mercy corporal, and 7.
spiritual: by the 7. deadly sins: or by some, or by all of these, according
to our abilitye, particular obligations, or other degrees, which do bind us
often not to omit that which is Good, and do forbid us never to commit that
which is ill. Let us consider by what means our Lord has sought to bring us
to the knowledge of his truth, and to become members of his Catholic Church;
infusing good illuminations into our understanding, or good desires into our
will, inuiting us to virtue or truth, dissuading us from vice or error, either
by good examples, by virtuous books, by holy preistes, or by our friends, yea
sometime by our enemies whom we hate, or by them whom we do persecute; for
either all, or some of these shall be witnesses against us, if we rejecte their
means, or do wilfully loose the time of favor. Or if we do admit these
good beginninges, yet we must proceed with care and cherfullnes to employ our
time meritoriously, andto reap benefit by the exercise of our Religion, by
the sacraments of the Catholic Church, and by all the Goodness of God
directed to his greater glory and our salvation, either in his gifts of grace,
art, or nature; whether it be in divine contemplation, or in lawful Action;
spiritual meditating of his divine mysteryes, or using of his creatures
orderly for his service, and for our necessitye. O admirable happynes of
religious or discreet holy men, who do thus order their lives! O lamentable
wilfullnes of obstinate or proud people, who do refuse to save their souls! O
detestable vnthankefullnes of wicked or careless creatures, who do neglecte or
abuse so many helps! The tractable, diligent, and humble servant shall be
exalted unto eternal glory, when the perverse, careless, and high-minded
Despiser shall be thrown down into everlasting torment.

16. And therefore to avoid the one, and obtain the other, let us betake our
selves to penitent Prayer; with humility on our parts, considering our
uncertain faith, and our certain faults; and yet in regard of our most
gracious God, with comfort and confidence, respecting his great mercy and
infinite kindness; to hope and trust in him as a pitiful loving Father, and
yet to be humble and reverent toward him, as a King of high Majesty: For so
our Savior taught us to prepare our thoughts to the petitions of his prayer,
by saying for an introduction, Our father which art in heaven: that because he
is Our father, therefore we should be assured to find favor; and yet not to be
presumptuous, or heedles, because he sittes on a high throne of justice in
heaven.

17. Thus let us pray with David in repeating or perusing this psalm of
Miserere, not alone, because the exercise of prayer is both meritorious as a
good work, and also impetratorious as a devout petition: but furthermore
because it is an Act of Gods worship expressly commanded in those words,
Petite and accipietis, Matthew. 7. 2.2. q. 83. ar. 2. ad 2.
quaerite etc: Ask and you shall receive: Seek and you shall find: knock and
it shall be opened unto you. Which words S. Thomas and other Doctors do
affirm to have the nature of Precepts, binding us to pray, and annexeth
promises assuring us to prevail; for we shall receive, find, and have it
opened; if we ask in heart and thought; seek with our mouth and words; and
knock with our hands and works: either by all these, or at least by the
first, when we cannot perform the rest.

18. Or if Prayer were not absolutely commanded, yet our necessityes and
danger do require it, as S. Gregory said, The evils which do here oppress
us, do compel us to fly unto God: as the prodigal son feeling famine, he
desired to satisfye his hunger, Et nemo illi dabat, and no body gave him where
withal; For nothing in this world can affoarde us full content. Therefore in
se reuersus returning into himself, and into his wits, out of which we may
say he had been wandering, until now he considered his misery, then He returned
to his father, humbly confessing his folly, and entreating pity. And lastly he
flyeh to this submission of prayer, as to his chief refuge, Dicam Patri, I
will say unto my Father, I will make my moan unto him: he is my Father, and
therefore I will declare my want and supplication unto him: Quid enim nisi vota
supersunt? For a sinful wretch has no better means left, then by prayer to
begin his conversion, and to beg his reconciliation, according to that of
Job: P^lli meae consumptis carnibus adhaesit os meum, Job. 19.
and d^relicta sunt tantummodo labia circa dentes meos. My bones clea^ed unto
my skin the flesh being consumed, and only were my lips remaining round about
my teeth. As if when all the body is consumed, in pain, weakness, wretchedness,
and deformitye, yet whiles our lips are able to utter our greifes, we have
hope of ease; so whiles our soul continues in the body, howsoever deformed by
sin, yet we have possibility, by opening our lips in prayer and confession,
to obtain mercy and absolution. But whereas many differ these unto the
last, by negligence, or presumption; so by the just judgment of God, many are
cut off without these. Wherefore with David in another psalm, let us pray unto
our Lord, whiles we have opportunity, Psalm. 31.
But in the floudde of many waters they shall not come nigh him: For he that is
drowned unawares cannot speak, and therefore cannot be heard: but taking
opportunity, although like Job we have nothing left beside our lips; or
though like Ezechias we be as young swallows in the foul black sooty
chimneys and filthy nestes of our sins, 4. Reg. ^0.
as amiddes our own dunge; yet Sicut pullus hirundinis, sic clamabo, like the
young swallowe, so I will cry: though I be not able to help my self no more
then a young swallowe, new come out of the shell; though I be vnfethered, naked
of Good works; though I am blind in right knowledge: nay, because I am so
blind and naked like a young swallowe, I will cry amiddes mine own dunge, in
the black, fiery, foul, sooty chimney of sin, therefore I will cry and
pray, because I would feign see; because I would be fed; and have my nakedness
covered; and because I would be freed from all this filthynes.

19. Therefore our Savior said, oportet semper orare, Luc. 18. S. The. 2.2. q.
83. art. 4.
we must always pray, and S. Paul exhorts that we should be praying without
intermission; though not Actually in outward prayers like the fond Euchetae
omitting all other duties, yet habitually by inward devout readynes to make our
petitions so often as we are bound, or have leisure and just occasion: always
answerable to our daily necessityes; and to our continual warfare, which
hourly we have with our affections, passions, concupiscences, vain
cogitations, and other occasions; in all which according as they never cease,
so we should not intermit to resist or avoid them, and instantly call to God
for help against them; if not by reciting some general petition, or other
short sentence always ready in our memory against such occurrences: yet at
least by some inward sighe, or knocking of our breast, with our desire lifted
up in our secret thoughts immediately unto God himself, Moral: l. 2. c. 6.
or mediatly by some Saint to cry unto him for his succor; as Moses cried
though he spoke not; for S. Gregory said, Verba animae desideria sunt, clamor
magnum desiderium est: our desires be the words of our soul, and our cry a
great desire.

20. And last of all, it is surely a wonderful comfort herein which S.
Chrysostom notes; that there is scarce any loss or misery in all the world
which can be repaired by prayer, sorrow, and repentance, except the loss of
God, Ad pop. Antioc.
and the misery of sin, which though they be above all other domages
incomparably the greatest, yet is their redress much the easyer: for the loss
of life, or goods consumed, or of honor impeached; the misery of pain,
sickness, and of many other extremityes, cannot be recovered by sighing or
lamenting, though our sorrow be never so great. But if with sincere contrition
of our heart we be greiued for our sins, because for them we have lost the
love of God; and if we pray humbly for their remission, with purpose to
confess them as well as we can; and do intend never again wilfully to commit
them; undoubtedly this purpose and sorrowful conversion on earth, shall obtain
most certain and joyful reconciliation in heaven: for our Lord JESUS has said
unto his Preistes (and he is most true of all his words) Whose sins on earth
you remitte, in heaven they shall be remitted; why then should we not seek to
disburden our heavy consciences unto some Ghostly Father, that we may through
his Authority (granted by our Savior) so receive his heavenly Absolution, his
ghostly comfort, and his spiritual direction; in all these submitting our
selves unto our Confessor, not as to a Man, but as to the Deputy of our Lord
JESUS, and to the Pastor of our souls: and then in all true amendment,
endeavoring as we can, to perform our penance or other satisfaction. Believe
me, o Sinners (amongst whom I have been a Ringleader) by experience I say,
believe me, it is a most comfortable and wonderful experience; For your selves
shall presently feel comfort in your souls; and with continuance of time
others also will perceive amendment in your lives.

21. To conclude therefore, as in general I would persuade you to practice the
examination of your consciences, and the exercise of devout prayer, directing
us all unto Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction; so I do commend as helps
for these purposes, a serious account how we spend our lives; an indifferent
observation why and upon what occasions these newfound sclanderous opinions
did banish the Catholic religion of our Ancestors, wherein full many a
hundred years together they served God so devoutly, and so heartily loved
their neighbors; and for the same purpose I entreat a view and a detestation
of our former sins; and auoydance of their occasions; an endeavor to
practice their contrary virtues; sometime by reading of good books; sometime
by devout meditations or prayers; sometime by alms deeds, or fasting,
abstinence, or other bodily chastisement; sometime by humbling our thoughts;
always by mortifying our passions, and unlawful affections; and always being
careful to keep the commandments of God our Father, and of our Mother the
Church. And to bring these good purposes and cogitations into our minds the
oftener, and to move and imprint them the better, it is good for us sometime
to give an edge, and to whet on each other, by virtuous or spiritual talk and
conference; not contending in disputes, but by modest teaching, or by freindly
encouragements, and above all by frequenting the most holy sacrifice and
sacrament of our dear Saviors most precious Body and Blood: by often calling
to memory some examples of his life; and more in particular his bitter passages
unto death; both for our meditation, and for our imitation; so to give good
example one unto another, whiles all are laboring to follow Christ our chief
Master. And to this end it is also good to revive our devotion by reading or
hearing of Saints lives; or by the reverent beholding of their devout Images
or painted stories, especially of the passion of our sweet Savior JESUS; by
marking his sufferinges, to be moved for our own sins: and so by viewing
the memory of other Saints, to be stirred up to follow their virtues, as they
were followers of Christ: for we may learn, and are moved by our eye sometime
as much or more then by our ear; and in these things which are so good, and
wherein we are so dull, verily even common sense does teach us, that it is
profitable and needful to stir up our memory and devotion by any sense; and
by how much the more, by so much the better.

22. And yet further unto them that be sufficiently able, I commend the reading
and meditation of David's Psalter, which holy Church uses so much in all her
divine Offices; and particulerly of the seven Penitential Psalms; and
according to the practice of Catholics, especially of this psalm Miserere:
as admonished thereby, and informed to call and cry unto God for mercy and
pardon; to confess and acknowledge our faults and iniquityes; to desire their
purging, washing, and clensing: to lament our sins original and actual: to
pray for clean hearts, right spirits, escaping of anger, and continuance of
grace: to purpose amendmen^ being forgiven: to direct others by our experience
and example; to humble our selves for our own offenses: to be joyful and
thankful toward allmighty God for our particular favors, and to desire that
he may be served, praised, and honored in our public Churches, and at his
holy Altars. Amen.

Thy Wellwiller in Christ Jesus, James Waddesworth.

AN ACT OF CONTRITION.
O My Lord Jesus Christ very God and Man, my Creator and Redeemer, thou being
whom thou art, and for that I love thee above all things, it greiueth me from
the bottom of my heart, that I have offended thy divine Majesty. And I firmly
purpose never to sin any more; and to fly all occasions of offending thee.
And to confess and fulfill the penance which shall be enjoined me for the same.
And for love of thee, I do freely pardon all my enemies. And do offer my life,
words, and works in satisfaction for my sins. Wherefore I most humbly
entreat thee, trusting in thy infinite goodness and mercy, that by the merits
of thy most precious blood and passion, thou would pardon me, and give me
grace to amend my life, and to persevere therein until death. Amen.

A PRAYER OF THE AUTHOR TO OUR BLESSED LADY.
O Most pious Virgin Mary, Mother of God: I desire th^e by the great love thou
bear to thy dear Son my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: That thou would
vouchsafe to obtain for me true sorrow for my sins, a perfect keeping of all
my Senses, an humble Resignatio^ of my self, and the exercise all those
virtues wherewith thou did so highly please thy divine Son. I also most
humbly request thee to direct my ways in those paths which may be most
agreeable to the will of thy Son, and profitable for the salvation of my
Soul. Amen, sweet Jesus.

THE FIFTITH PSALM* WHICH IS THE FOVRTH PENITENTIAL.
The title In finem. Psalmus David, cum venit ad eum Nathan propheta, quando
intrauit ad Bersabee.

Unto the end. A Psalm of David, When the Prophet Nathan came unto him, after
he had entered unto Bersabee.


MEDITATION I.
OF THE OCCASION, AND NVMBER OF this Psalm, by David's example to beware of
lust. Section. 1.
THE history and occasion of this Psalm, is related at large in the book of
the Kings, the sum whereof is rehearsed by the Prophet Nathan in a Parable
and complaint unto David, saying.

1. In this city, o David, there dwelte two neighbors; a poor man, and a rich:
2. Reg. 11. and 12.
the rich man had flocks of sheep and goats; the poor man had only one
sheep which he dearly loved. There came strangers to the rich man's house; for
whose entertaynme^t he makes no provision out of his own flocks, but takes
away the poor man's only sheep: what punishment o king is due to such an
iniurye? David answers in just anger: this man deserves to dye. The prophet
replies; thou art this man, o David, who having many, yet tookest away the wife
of Vrias, to give content to thy strange lust: and haste suffered him to be
slain for closer hyding of thy fault. The king convinced, acknowledges his
offense: and as then presently he cried peccaui, so afterward to continue and
stir up more contrition, he endites this Psalm Miserere.

2. Some interpreters have observed that this psalm is (according to the latin
account) the fiftyth in number, S. Bona^. Innocen. 3. Leuit. 25.
which in Moses law was the number of the Iubiley year, when inheritances
returned to the heirs: slaves were made free: pawnes were released: and a
solemn feast of joy was publicly celebrated; and so the hebrew word Iobel
signifies, a beginning: as indeed he that repeates this psalm in true
repentance, as he must begin a new life, so he shall be freed from the slavery of
sin and Satan; restored to the birth-righte of the kingdom of heaven;
receive again the grace and virtues which he had forfeyted; and after his
sorrow and fear, he shall in the great feast of a good conscience be much
comforted with a perpetual Iubiley.

3. And as the Jews in the 50. day after their departure out of Egipte
received the law; and the Apostles received the holy ghost in the day of
Pentec^ste, which is 50. days after the resurrection; E^od. 19
so if by the law we acknowledge our faults, by the gifts of the holy
spirit we shall receive comfortes, and to such our Lord says by the prophet I
will restore unto you the years which were devoured by the locuste, the
caterpiller, the ruste, and the cankerworme. Verefying it also in this psalm
of Iubiley, which penitently pronounced will recompense all the hurtes of our
soul, I^el. 2.
bitten and eaten by those 4. passions of the mind, joy, sorrow, hope, and
fear, as with caterpiller, cankerworme, S. Ier. ibid
locuste, and ruste. Or the caterpiller is devouring gluttony: lust is a
cankerworme creeping on his belly: the locuste having bad wings and no feet,
is pride which will stand on no ground, and yet cannot well fly in the air,
but down the wind of flaterye: and may not covetousness be termed ruste, which
fasteneth upon metalls, and freteth it self with superfluous care? Though
these gnawe the conscience, and consumme the soul, yet if we be so happy as to
come to the Iubiley of this 50. psalm, said and used in sincere contrition, we
shall have restored unto us all the years and loss of time, devoured by such
ruste, locuste, cankerwormes, and caterpillars. And therefore the Church does
principally use this psalm, both because of those restoratiue excellencyes,
Juno 3. incog.
as also for the memorable example and peculier penitence of the Author, and
for the general aptnes of the words and matter, well befitting any sort of
sinner.

4. Some propound this example of David, as a block whereat to stumble, which
should be their staff whereby to arise. It is true indeed, he lamenteth in
this psalm 3. or. 4. notorious sins. Gloss. ord.
1. his injurious and needles theft, which Nathan objected. 2. his adultery
with Bersabee, which his idle pleasure occasioned. 3. his several subtiltyes,
Hugo Cardinae.
wherewith he sought to cover his guiltynes. 4. his unkind slaughter of Vrias,
who was so innocent. But as S. Augustine says, Let not the fall of the greater
be the delighte of the lesser, rather let the fall of the greater be the fear
of the lesser: they who have not yet fallen, S. Aug. in hunc psalm.
let them hear this, to the end they may arise. As for his soul who
aduentureth to commit such things as these, because David so offended, he is
much more wicked, and sins more abominably then David: he sinned of
concupiscence, and thou of malice. Let us rather, imitate his holiness, not
follow his wickedness: should we fall with him, O my soul, and not rise with
him; should we love that in David which he hated in himself? Do thou look
upon the book of God to embolden thy self to sin against God? Do thou
note one error in an excellent picture, and learn to paynte that blemish
rather then all his other comely portraiture? will thou learn sophistry, to
forsake logique? will thou read Index expurgatorius, to profess all the
doubts and falsehoods which it mentions to be amended, and not to be
mainteyned? then feed as well upon the garbage of fowls, and upon the gall of
beasts, and cast away their carcasses.

5. David after a full dinner and an easy sleep, fittes idle in his prospecte,
and takes delighte to feed his eye with gazing about: there his ranging idle
looks were as a quick spy to mark a beautiful woman: his heart streighte
desired to enjoy what he saw; and his will procured to obtain what he
affected. While Saul persecuted him, and he lurked in caves, he neither minded
such matters, nor admitted such occasions; but now he becomes remiss and
wanton in the prosperity of his kingdom: now he is at leisure to espy
Bersabee a far off (so quick-sighted is concupisc^nce:) the woman was far
from him, but lust was near him (so soon does prosperity breed wanton
blood:) also he rose but newly from his deynty meal and his lazy vndermeale:
and as S. Ierom said; A Full belly does easily froathe unto lust; so
especially if you add unnecessary sleep unto intemperat diet, it makes a
double pair of bellows to kindle the fire of incontinence: the one is the
flynte stone; and the other is the steel; and both together strike out sparks
of carnal desires, which yet may be extinguished, if you add not a ranging
eye as the tynder; unwary curious looks will suddenly betraye our unsettled
heart; for if by this gazing view, so stayed a man as David lost himself, we
have much more need like Job to make a covenant with our eyes, not to look
upon a woman. Wherefore let us be no gazers at doors, windows, or galleryes; no
gapers in the streets, no gadders up and down markets, in fayres no
giggelets, no puritan rolling eyes in churches, nor use a wanton look in any
place, least as from a basiliske we receive poison by the eye, which will
infecte the heart.

6. David by looking on Bersabee in her bathe, was more inflamed by the beauty
of the woman, then he was cooled by the water of the founteyn: and they that
pretend only to observe the diuersityes of features, and the excellencyes of
complexions, shall sooner be drawn to fleshly imaginations, then to
philosophical or spiritual considerations. The poets faygne Acteon turned into
a stagge, and hunted to death by his own hounds, Ovid me^. lib. 3.
because he presumed to look upon chaste Diana bathing herself in a clear
founteyn; for even chaste beauty curiously viewed, stirs up many passions of
bawling lust; which like so many dogs will never cease to chase to death,
even their own master who feeds them. Spartianus related how one coming out
of a dangerous bathe, and hard by seeing a number of painted tables hanged on
the wall of a temple after the Roman custom, and supposing they had been all
in memory of their perils escaped in that bathe, he said, I wonder there be
no more tables, for he deemed that every man was bound to have offered a table,
who bathing there had escaped such a danger; so in truth, whosoever uses to
gaze on women or to converse with them and is not entangled, surely he is
obliged to hang up a table of a memorable escape. And therefore as in all
sins, so perticulerly in this our english proverb has good place, he that
will no evil do, must avoyde all things which long thertoo: Let us beware of
all amourous words, wanton looks, light gestures, lascivious behauior,
immodest attire, and above all fly familiar opportunity and occasion; for as
occasion (we say) makes a thief, so it often makes a harlotte. And S. Bernard
affirmed, that to live among women familiarly, and no way to be defiled by
women, is a miracle above the power of men: it is more easy to raise the dead,
then in continual occasions, so to mortifye the living: If thou can not do
the lesser, how dare thou hazard the greater? especially seeing among all
sins, this is perticulerly called, the sin of Frayltye, to note herein our
greatest weakness. And should we in this weak frayltye, trust unto our
yiedling strength?

OF VVITTY AND PLAIN REPREHENSIONS: and the Authors lamentation of his form
life. Sect. 2.
David repented not, till Nathan came: and Nathan reproved David, though a
king: yet not at first by publishing his fault, nor by reproching him
contumeliously, but with courage and prudence reproouing him discretely. Let
kings, and all men suffer Gods preistes and preachers to reprehend them: for
vsualie their Courtyers, or frindes either soothe, or say nothing of their
faults, which seldom are amended, until they be rebuked by their enemies, or
by some such zealous men; who as they must be without flatery, Council. Lateran.
or fear, so must they admonish with discretion, and with care. It is ars
artium, regimen animarum: it is an art of much skill, to rule souls well: and
it is true, God alone can rule the heart, yet he appoyntes Nathan to use means
by an honest deceyte. cap. 27. Luc. 20 Math. 21. and 22. Plutar.
As our Savior catched the scribes and phariseys in their own answers, so
Nathan here did wind in David by his own sentence; like many men who use
speeches against others, which are rebounded upon themselves: as Catulus
reprehending Philippus, he alluding to Catulus name (which signifies a whelpe)
asked him why he barked; but Catulus answered aptely; because I see a thief.

2. And a dronken Caluiniste minister with a foul red nose, bragging against a
Catholic, that our Savior had given him the keys of heaven, as much as to
S. Peter, or to the Pope: surely I doubt it, said the Catholic; rather by
your nose, I do suppose, you have in your custody, the keys of the buttry.
Thus often times arrogant men are confounded in their own words. And so like
wise some malicious persecutors of Catholics have been entangled in their
own spiteful diligence: as he who being told that in such a chamber was a
Priest: called the constables and officers to break open the doors and to
enter with haste, where they found his own daughter in bed with a brother of
the Puritanes. Also Judges many times condemn small faults in others that
stand at the bar, and will not observe much injustice and great crimes in
themselves, in their followers, and in some that sit on the benche: even as
David here would have him dye that took the lamb; but he marked not his own
crime, who had defiled a matrone, and slain a man. As a certain Pirate
answered Alexander: that is called in a king, honorable and lawful victory,
which is condemned in me for unlawful and base piracy. With such partiality we
easily abhor wickedness in others; and yet by such our own censures (if we
amend not) allmighty God will make us condemn our selves by our own mouths,
according to that of our blessed Lady: He has dispersed the proud, in the
mind of his own heart: and so doubtless he will judge many offenders by the
sentence of their own words. O holy David teach us by thy example to fear
prosperity, to beware of ease and pleasure, to restrain our eyes, to curb our
thoughts, and to avoyde all bad occasions: in all our censures first to judge
our selves, or being admonished by others, humbly to confess our faults.

3. O my soul, let us desire David to pray for us, as in this psalm he does
for himself: for if we have not so great, yet we have more sins then he had;
nay, paraduenture none of his, compared to ours, be so bad. O how wicked is the
heart of man, and unsearchable! I^re^. 17. 1. Joan. 3.
who shall know it? even thou o lord, who art greater then our heart;
searching our entralls and proving our reins: to thee we refer this judgment:
and fearing our selves to be far the worse, we humbly and sincerely crave more
penitence and more pity. O IESV give me strength in satisfaction to bear what
thou will impose, and then impose coorrectio^ what our will: O sweet Savior,
thou know how absolutely herein I do resign my will: O continue me this
grace; and teach me more in true penance, still to beg for more mercy I have
dishonored thee, and scandalized men, for I was a public preacher of the
protestants false Doctrine, wherein peradventure by my means some have been
seduced, many hardened, and others offended: I have profaned thy sacred
churches sometime dedicated to thy catholic service; and for mine own body
and soul, which should have been thy spiritual temples, o how have they been
polluted? by errors which I supposed to be truths, by presumption of knowledge
when I was in ignorance, by some vices which I reputed virtues, and by many
faults which I neglected.

4. If to affirm this (as I do penitently) be my shame; let it be O God (as I
desire) thy glory. If the world, and the devils, and mine own conscience do
accuse me, O Father of mercy, I confess all whereof any of these can justly
impeache me: and also whatsoever else thou do know more in me then I have
confessed or can call to mind, in transgressions against thy divine majesty,
in offenses against my neighbors, and in many sins against my self. O
wretched and vile sinner that I am! what should such a sinner do? whither
shall I go: should I despair? No: for that one sin were greater then all
these. What though my sins have been many and bad according to my religion;
and my profession worse, whereby (like the prodigal son) I was a Swynehearde,
a protestante minister, feeding my self and others with the husks of heresy,
Et non satiabar, in which I could never taste of true comfort, nor obtain
peace unto my conscience; therefore with him, I will Arise, and go, to my
heavenly Father; I am resolved, To arise from sin and Sectaryes, To go unto
God our Father, by means of the Catholic church our mother, and with this
perpetual purpose I do say unto him: Father I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, I am not worthy to be called thy son; make me as one of thy
hired servants.

5. Amongst Protestants, and against malice, I might well plead civil honesty
and moral integrity, wherein I lived among them without reprehension: but in
comparison of thy Catholic servants and Saints, O God, and before thy
heavenly purest eyes, I dare not present my former best innocence: here I
renounce any plea of passed integrity: I disclayme my wonted profession: I
lament and detest my errors and my sins. Thou know, O lord, I have
acknowledged them unto my Ghostly Father in confession: I beseech thee to
confirm his absolution; and as I do entreat, so I do trust, that thou
will unbind in heaven, what he has unbound on earth: O forgive them for
Jesus sake; and so keep me ever hereafter in thy love and grace, that I may
rather choose miseryes, disgraces* reproaches, torments, and ten thousand
deaths, then at my time to return to the like sins and errors, or to my
former estate. And thou, o blessed Virgin, the mother of our only Savior; and
all the Angels and Saints of heaven, O pray for me, that during my life I
may say this psalm with David in true contrition; And so through our Lord
Jesus obteyning, mercy, at last I may with him, and all you be admitted into
glory.

MEDIT. II.
Miserere mei Deus secundum magnam misericordiam tuam: Et secundum multitudinem
miserationum tuarum dele iniquitatem meam. Amplius laua me ab iniquitate mea:
and a peccato meo munda me.

Have mercy on me O God, according to thy great mercy: and according to the
multitude of thy miserations blotte out mine iniquity. Wash me yet more from
my iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin.


A SHORT DIVISION AND EXPLIcation of all these words. Sect. 1.
S. Ambrose, says: David sinned, which Kings are wont; but he performed
penance, he wept, Apolog. David. c. 4.
he mourned which Kings are not wont; he confessed his fault, he craved
pardon; pr^strate on the ground he bewailed his wretchedness, he fasted, he
prayed, he has published for ever a testimony of his confession: private men
are ashamed to do this; a King is not ashamed to confess etc: O come my
soul: let not David thus condemn us, nor S. Ambrose thus accuse us: rather
because we have overtaken, and ouergone David in sinning, Dyonisi. Charthus.
let us be stayed by S. Ambrose to follow such a king in repenting. Let us
consider our own misery, and our Lords mercy: not mercy without misery least
we presume; nor misery without mercy, least we despair* Many think not how
wretched they are by sin in their hearts, and therefore they sighe not with
miserere in their mouths: but we are readyer to talk or think of our
worthynes, the^ of our sinfulnes: especially we will sooner compare our selves
with other men in wisdom, in knowledge, in authority, riches, or such like,
with the proud pharisy; then with the humble publican acknowledge our
ignorance, our faults and our infirmityes: but what avail such comparisons?
we shall be judged by that which we are in our selves, not by what we seem to
be in respect of others: a dwarf is not a gyante, though he stand on the
top of a steeple or on a mounteyn; a stately tower is not a low Cottage,
Seneca.
though it be placed in the bottom of a valley: consider, o my soul, what
thou art in the vale of misery, not what thou may seem on a mount of
vanity: Psalm 41.
let one depthe call upon another; out of the depthe of our sinful misery, o
God, we call upon the depthe of profounde mercy.

2. A deep wound must have a large tente; and abondance of soars must have
many playsters: o grant us great mercy for our deep wounds, and multitude
of miserations for our innumerable botches: let them seek for smaller mercy,
whose faults proceed of meaner ignorance; S. Aug.
but my sins, o lord, have need of a strong warrior to redeem me, and of a
skillful physician to heal me. All sinners descend from Jerusalem to Ierico,
from the highest virtues to the basest vices; they fall among thieves, devils,
tentations, and delights: I also among these was dangerously wounded in
natural facultyes, Luc 10. S. Greg. Beda venerab.
and spoiled generally of spiritual graces: o gracious Samaritan miserere take
pity on me, and pass not by me unregarded. O let the greatness of thy mercy
heal my natural wounds, and by the multitude of thy miserations repair my
spiritual losses: come nere me, come to me, o compassionate Samaritan; power
in wine of compunction to cleanse my filthynes and make me feel my misery;
power in oil of absolution, to heal my soarenes by thy mercy: o great
physician, here show the efficacy of thy general medicin which is great mercy,
and declare the variety of thy manifold skill in multitude of miserations.
Thou art miserator and misericors pitiful in great mercy, and merciful in
multitude of pity; in great mercy having the inward bowels of compassion; and
in multitude of pity showing the outward actions and fruits of commiseration.
I cry with that distressed man in the gospel: if thou will, thou can make
me whole: thou canste by the greatness of thy mercy, thou will for the
multitude of thy miserations. Have mercy on me, O God, Psalm. 110
according to thy great mercy and according to thy miserations blotte out my
iniquity; wash me yet more from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

3. Miserere. Show mercy on me by blotting out the iniquity of my heart:
miserere, by washing away the wickedness of my lips: miserere, Inno^ent 3.
by cleansing all the sins of my hands. By desire of blotting, of washing,
of clensing, I acknowledge my sins to be ugly and ill favored to the eye; to
be filthy in the touch; and to be loathsome to the smell: o cleanse this
lothsomenes; wash this filthynes; and blotte out this vglynes. Beside these;
my sins are great in quantity, many in number, and diverse in kind: o
therefore let my great sins find great mercy, let my many sins have
multitude of miserations, and being of sundry sorts, I have need to be
severally washed from my iniquity, and cleansed from my sin; from iniquity of
commission, and from sins of omission.

THE MISERABLE EFFECTS OF SIN are declared, according to the Scholmen* and
some short petitions for mercy are made against their misery. Sect. 2.
1. THe misery of sin in general is lamentable, therefore let us all cry
miserere; but my sins in particular are abominable, wherefore I must say
miserere mei, Hugo Cardinal:
have mercy on me. He must be allmighty who can be able to help our general
and lamentable misery; and to succor me from my abominable sins, he must be
one most merrcifull: but who is so mighty in power? and so merciful in favor?
except it be only thou O Lord, who art the Creator of the world, and the
Redeemer of mankind; wherefore unto thee, I direct my prayer: have mercy upon
me, O God.

2. All sin is a separation of the soul from God: S. Tho. 3. q. 87. a 1. and
Quodlib. 4. q. 11. a. 22.
as therefore the soul being separated from our body, we are corporally dead,
so when by sin we are separated from God, then we are dead in soul. Mortal
sin consistes in auersion from God, and does separate us totally: venial
sin does also separate, though but in part, yet by remissenes it loseneth
the feruor of our affection. In mortal sin, we are dead therefore miserere
have mercy on a dead man: in venial sin we are as in a sound or a sick
fleepe, therefore miserere have mercy on a weak faynte man. In mortal sin,
we receive a wound which does kill us, therefore miserere as on a man mortally
wounded: in venial sin we receive a wound which does blemish us, S. Tho. i^.
therefore miserere as on a man with many spots deformed yea, so diverse are
the spots of venial sins, that though by Gods grace we can ever avoyde
any one, or all at someteine, yet not ever at all times all venial faults;
and of this kind it is said, the just man offends seven times a day, naming
a certain number for an uncertain, because more or less in many things we
offend all: and therefore in our penance for them, Possumus vitare singula, sed
no^ omnia.
we must purpose in general to diminishe them all, and to absteyne as much as
we can from every one in particular, though we cannot from all in universal;
and in our prayers against them, we have need to say miserere, o be merciful
to theses frailtyes and blemishes of our life, that in the merits and blood of
our Lord Jesus, we may have all spots at our death washed of our faces, and
all tears wiped from our eyes.

3. Whersoeuer there is misery, there is need of mercy: 1.2. q. 85. art. 1.
art. 2.
but there is misery in all sin, 1. by Corruption of nature, 2. by Deformity
of the soul, 3. by Guiltynes of punishment. In nature we had 1. the essence or
substance of our Being, 2. An Inclination to virtue. and 3. the gift of
original iuctice. Our substance indeed and our Being is not corrupted nor
diminished; but our virtuous disposition, is by sin diminished; and we have
quite lost our Original justice. And though all our Virtuous inclination be
not so quite rooted out, but that there remain in us certyen seeds of
morality, yet according to our custom and practice of sin, more or less we
do lay and cast so many impedimentes as great stones upon this root, that
though it retain his nature hidden in the ground yet (as ouerburdened with
sin) his sprowtes are so suppressed; that seldom and hardely it can bring
forth true fruit of virtue, until through Gods grace we remove these
hindrances. 1.2. q. 86. a. 1. and 2.
The deformity of the soul is caused by the blottes and spots of sin; and
as spots are blemishes of some comelynes, so in the soul there is a double
beauty blemished by sin. One is the clearenes of natural reason; another is,
the brightness of supernatural light of wisdom and grace; but ever by sin we
do blemish either one or both of these: which spotte as the shadow of a body
keeps off the light; and as several bodies give several shadows; so
several blottes proceed of several sins: and as long as any body of sin
is between us and these lights, so long we shall be followed with these
shadows and spots, until we be illuminated by the brightenes of Gods mercy
and grace: for though the action of sin cease, whereby we did separate our
selves from Gods light, yet the blemish does remain which makes the shadow.
And as he who is departed into darkness, from a brighte place, is not presently
in light again, so soon as he cease to go, but he must come back, or else
remain in the dark; so before we can return to the light which we lost, it
is not enoughe to cease from sin, and so stand still; but we must have in our
Will a contrary motion to that which before we had; to come into the light of
grace, to proceed in the pathe of goodness. And these are our miserable
deformityes.

4. The misery of our guiltynes unto punishment must needs follow, where the
fault is gone before: 1.2. q. 872 a. 1. and
for as when nature finds his contrary, it labors to suppress it, so because
sin is opposite to order, it should not be suffered. Wherefore our will being
subject to three orderly governors, when it transgresses against any of them,
it may be punished by them. It is first subject to our own reason: secondly
to humane government: and thirdly to the order of Gods authority: and
accordingly when we offend against these orders of our reason, of humane, or of
divine laws, we are to be punished by the remorse and biting of our own
conscience; by man's penaltyes; and by our Lords chastisements; yea, such is
the misery of sin, that one sin is the punishment of another; and many
times of it self; though not directly by it self, yet by accident indirectly:
first because when by former sin we cast from us Gods grace given or offered,
he then leaves us to our own corrupt weakness, and to Satan, and the
worlds forcible tentations, whose continual batteryes whiles without grace we
cannot resist, Romans 1.
we do afterward justly fall captives unto many sins, who by some former
fault did rejecte his grace so unkindly. 2. there are some sins, which are
punishments both offormer faults and of themselves, not only in their effects
(as prodigality has for his followers, want, and robberye) but also in their
very actions some are a pain unto themselves; either inwardely; as envy and
anger do vex their own masters; or outwardly; when men do pass much
labor, peril, or cost, to effect some sins. As Plutarche says, men
adjudged to be crucified, or to other torments, were forced first to bear
their own crosses, or such other instruments of their own execution; so
sinners by sin it self do here begin their own pain and damnation; Sap. 5.
and so they confessed, who the wiseman says were in hell, lassati sumus in
via iniquitatis: we were tired and wearyed in our way of iniquity.

5. Wherefore among so many miseryes should we not often cry miserere: have
mercy, in respect of sins punishing themselves, and one another; by outward
toil, danger and loss, by inward fear, remorse, and vexation* by depriving
us of Gods grace and leaving us to our own concupiscence: miserere for we are
guilty and out of order, against God, against men, and against our own
conscience: miserere to bring back our Will e^ring in darkness; to clear our
Understanding shadowed with blemishes; to repair our gifts of grace decayed
by frailtyes: miserere have mercy, by reviving the seeds of virtue; and
remoouing the hindrances and customs of Vice: miserere restoring us to
justice, which we lost and forfeyted; inclyning and increasing us in holiness
which we forsook and diminished: and finally miserere preserving us in
substance of soul and body, from sufferance of pain, unto fruition of glory;
for in all these, viz: by corruption of nature, by deformity of soul, and by
guyltines of punishment, we are all miserable: therefore in all these, o blessed
Jesus, miserere, have mercy.

OTHER WRETCHED EFFECTS OF sin are declared, out of the Scriptures, and
Doctors, by which we are warned from them. Sect. 3. Prouer. 14. Contra Faustum
lib. 22. c. 27.

D. Stapleton. manual. peccatorum orat. 1. psalm. 72. Esaias. 59. Sapien. 14. and
psalm. 5. Prouer. 15.

S. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in math. Psalm. 31 Genesis 2. Psalm. 10. Psalm. 31. Psalm. 108.
Eccle. 21. Joan. 8. Prouer. ^. 2. pet. 3.



Solomon says that sin makes people to be miserable: and S. Augustine
defyneth sin to be Deeds, words, or desires, which be against the eternal
law of God; which are made mortal sin when we add unto any of these a full
consent of our will with auersion or forsaking of God. Consider then, o my
soul, in what estate thou art, when thou abydest in sin: If in our lord be
all happynes, and to be in favor with him be our felicity, o how great
wretchedness is it to for^ake his love and to fall into his hate! But Esaias said,
our sins divide between him and us; and both Solomon and David affirm, that
he hates all who work iniquity; wherefore. S. Chrysostom said: I judge it to
be harder and more intolerable then a thousand hell fyres to be hated of
Christ, and to hear him say, I know you not; it were better to endure a
thousand thumderboltes, then to see his face of mildenes to be turned from us,
or enraged against us: for the eye which uses to be favorable, when it
becomes fierce, is most terrible.

2. Alas, o lord, we have forsaken thy infinite goodness and we have lost thy
inestimable favor; wherefore to free us from thy hate, and restore us to thy
happynes, miserere have mercy. Have mercy not only for the good which by sin
we do loose, but also in respect of the evil which for it we do suffer;
because many are the whippes of a sinner, for sin the earth was cursed to
bring forth thorns, the woman cursed to bear children in pain, and man was
cursed to eat his bread with labor. Upon sinners our lord rayneth snares,
fire, brimstone, and the spirits of tempestet are in the portion of his cup;
his very prayers are turned into sin, and his table is a snare, unto him; all
wickedness is as a sharp two edged sword.

3. But if we be neither moved with love of goodness, nor with fear of wrath,
I know not whither we be more miserable, who must suffer the punishment, or
blockish who will not see to avoid the fault; yet let us consider the nature
of sin, which is contrary to our nature we were created, and do desire to
enjoy liberty; but sin makes us slaves, and the wiseman says. Every sinner
is bound in the fetters of his own sins. We naturally abhor hell, the
devil, and death; but sin caused the very angels offending to be thrown
down from heaven, Homil. 28 in epist ad Roman. In exposit. in epist ad Romans S.
Chrysostom. in sermon. de eleemosyna.

Sapiens. 16.

T^bie 12 Eccles. 30 Homil. in psalm. 33. S. August lib. 8. Confess. cap. 5. and
medi^. c. 4


and to be reserved in the chains of hell: S. Augustine says, that every
sinner selles his ^oule to the devil taking for his price the sweetness of some
temporal delighte: nay S. Chrysostom calls every sinner a certain willing
devil, and a self-willed madness. And as for death, which we so much fear, the
scripture says, that they which commit sin do kill their own souls: we
know it were horrible, to murder our Father, but to murder thy self it is
more damnable: wherefore as the wiseman said, take mercy on thine own soul
pleasing God, which then we do, when penitently we say unto him miserere, have
mercy.

4. What should I say of sin tormenting the conscience, offending the
communion of Saints; among men it is a discredit; among Christians it causes
excommunication and S. Basil does write, that as smoke drives bees from their
hiues, and loath some smells drive pigeons from their houses, so from the
custody of our persons, ^l savoring sins drive away our holy Angels* And is
not every inordinate mind a penalty to it self (as S. Augustine avouches?)
for covetousness gripes, pride swells, envy consumes, concupiscence inflames,
luxury stingeth, gluttony stinketh, dronkennes besotteth, sclander scratcheth,
ambition vndermyneth it self, iniuryes get hatred, discord teareth, anger
burns, light heads are never quiet, idleness is wearisome, lazynes combreth,
hipocrysie deceives his own heart, and flatterye gives himself the lie in
his own throat. O miserable sins which make men so wretched, which seldom
come alone without seven worse devils following them, which make our present
prayers (not purposing amendment) to be rejected; which cause all our good
deeds paste, not to be regarded; which are so hardly cured, because they are
not so easily (as we think) repented. In time therefore, o lord; with the first
word of this psalm, against all these for-me^tioned miseryes, we humbly and
heartily, cry miserere, have mercy.

OF THE NAME AND NATVRE OF GOD: who he his: what we are: and how unspeakably
we are beholding unto his great goodness. Sect. 4.
1. O God, who can not be deceived, for thou art wisdom; nor corrupted,
for thou art justice; nor overcome, for thou art allmighty; nor escaped, for
thou art every where present. O God, who by thy omnipotence as thou art able
to punish the careless with terror, Hugo Cardinal. Innocent. 3. Dominica 10.
post. Pen.
so thou art able to cure the sorrowful with favor* O God whose property is to
have mercy, in whom there is no difference between thy mercy and thy essence,
and as the Church prays, who do manifest thy omnipotency in pity above
all, and in showing mercy, Miserere mei Deus, O God show toward me, thy
omnipotent mercy. O God whose name is short, but thy majesty is great; not
like men who have an ell of great names, and not an inche of good nature, or a
vain preface of Titles longer then the whole book of their true virtues: But
thy excellent goodness is vespeakable, O God, and we name thee to signifye whom
we mean in our shallowe capacity, not to express what thou art in thy
infinite majesty. Wherefore though I be miserable, yet thou art powerful and
pitiful to releive me, for thou art God; and, though I be wicked, yet thou
as God art infinitely gracious, and abundantly merciful to forgive me.

2. Miserere mei, have mercy on me; not have mercy on David, as in another
psalm O Lord remember David: Psalm 131. S. Bonaue^
nor dare I say, have mercy on thy seruante; for I have broken thy
commandments: nor have mercy on the king; for as my name and person is now
odious; so to mention my dignity were to aggrauate my offense. O foul sin
which makes me ashamed of mine own name: Hugo Cardinal.
yet I will point to my wretched substance, though I dare not declare my
guilty person; for the respect of the party does often much increase the
offense. Have mercy on me: I acknowledge my fault, I deny it not with Cayn,
I cast it not upon another as Eve, I excuse it not as Saul, nor with Judas, do
I confess and yet despair; but as I condemn my self for my sins, so I
trust in thy goodness for thy mercy: miserere mei: have mercy on me: On me,
who joined and coupled so many sins in one fardell about fullfilling my
desire and pleasure: On me, who consented to the motions of lust, Innocent 3.
Pet. Vega
who corrupted messengers to further it, who abused another man's wife to
fulfill it, who devised practices to conceal it, and would have had my
bastard misbegotten, to be reputed as another man's heir legitimate. On me,
who added murder to adultery; who repayed iniuryes for requital of service. On
me, who thus wronged a man altogether innocent, and with him procured diverse
others to be slain who were also harmeles: On me, who caused him by fraud
to carry letters like Bellerophon contriuing the manner of his own death: On
me, who received the tydinges of his murder with gladness, and presently with
delighte married his widow: On me, who long lay sleeping in these sins
without remorse, and if I had not been rebuked by thy prophet, paraduenture of
my self I had never repented: On me, whom thou did deliver from the
malice of Saul, and yet I my self wroughte mischeife against Vrias: On me,
who was advanced from a shepherd to a king, yet toward me Nabal was not so
unthankful, as by this offense I have been against thee ungrateful. Finally
thou werte wont to power thy spiritte of prophecy on me, in which I used to
sing psalms unto thee; but behold I have expelled thy spirit, which was my
trusty comforter, and I have enterteyned the spirit of lust, a treacherous
stranger: I have changed the joy of the spirit into the delighte of the
flesh: I have forsaken my psalms and prayers of devotion: I have left my
good-workes and careful exercise of religion: O have mercy On me, who began
with much feruor to sequester all my thoughts from the world like a religious
man; but since I have given place to some coldenes of desires, and been content
to pass along like another worldly man. On me therefore, O God, miserere mei,
have mercy on me.

3. According to thy great mercy, and according to the multitude of thy
miserations. Cassiodorus. Genebrardus.
Thou O God did so love the world that thou gave thy only son being
God equal to thy self to take our flesh and to taste of our misery, for the
redemption of us men. O great mercy! O multitude of miserations! we of our
selves are thy desperate enemies, yet as S. Peter said. 1. Petr. 1*
According to thy great mercy thou haste regenerated us unto the hope through
Christ of an inheritance incorruptible. In thee therefore O blessed Jesus is
contained this great mercy; by thee we receive this multitude of miserations:
It were not so much for a man to abase himself to become a toade, as it was
for thee, being God, to become man: this was great mercy; but it was a
multitude of miserations to endure our miseryes, to suffer torments, and to
undergo death for distressed enemies: herein says S. Paul, God does commend
his charity unto us, seeing when we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us. Romans 5.


4. It is mercy to give us food, and raiment: it is more mercy to continue us
life: it was yet more to create us, being nothing: and it was greater mercy to
affoarde us the use of all his creatures both in necessity, for which we owe
him thanks, and in delighte, which requires praise. Before we were, we
merited nothing; 1. tim. 4.
but if now God still show mercy, after we have showed our selves unthankful
to such a Lord, is not this great mercy? to give his soon to redeem a
rebellious servant; nay to redeem his enemy out of bondage, is it not a
multitude of miserations? To see water run down the hill it is no marueill;
nor being powered on even plain ground, to see it run on every side every way;
but it were a wonder to see a river run up a monteyn. So, to give reward unto
deserte it is our Lords natural justice: to bestow benefits on them who
have neither done good nor hurt, it is his euerflowing goodness: but to do so
well unto us, who have demerited so ill against him, what can I call it but his
miraculous great mercy; nay, that is not enoughe; it has in it an infinite
multitude of miserations. It was admirable humility for God to become man: it
was patience without a pattern, being man, to suffer so much of men for men:
but to perform all this for men, who worse then beasts, were become his
revolted enemies, this was great mercy, in this was multitude of miserations.

5. It is mercy to forgive our offenses: they are miserations to releive our
necessityes. both great and with multitudes, in all kind of continued and
discreet quantityes: unmeasurable mercyes; because so great: and innumerable
miserations, because so many. And not alone, severally, a magnitude of great
mercy, and a multitude of many miserations, but also intermi^te, great
multitudes of many mercyes, and many magnitudes of great miserations.

SUNDRY EXCELLENT OBSERVATIONS of S. Bernarde, applied to this meditation of
our Lords great mercyes, and multitude of miserations. Sect. 4.
Sermon. de triplici ^nisericor. and 4. miserat. and Sermon. de sept. misericor.
and caru^ fragmentis.
Saint Bernard in several places describes the greatness and multitude of these
mercies and miserations. As there be sins, so there be mercies, some small,
some great, and some in a mean between both. The first mercy expects a
sinner, not punishhing presently: the second gives a penitent heart, which
freeth us from smaller sins paste, and by our daily compunction delivers us
from present venial trangressions. But thirdly, for great crimes paste we have
need of great contrition, and against mortal sins which may follow, we
have need of great caution: these are hard matters; wherefore this third
great mercy is necessary for all great sinners, to lament faults passed, and
to prevent followable offenses.

2. The multitude of his miserations are: 1. sometimes in bitterness of any sort
of grief; which withdraws our mind from our usual delights of ordinary
sin. 2. sometimes, by removing the occasions of our wonted sins. 3. sometime
by giving us grace of resistance, that though we be tempted, yet we withstand
our motions and overcome our affections. Pet. Riba* de ^eyra in eius vita.
4. sometimes, not so much taking away the outward occasions, as altogether
healing our inward affection; and herin consisted the absolute perfection of
our blessed Lady and S. Ihon Baptiste, preserved from all sin; and in one
particular, S. Thomas of Aquine had his loins so girded by an Angel, that
there never after came into his desire any fleshly thought: and so sometimes
some other have one or other affection so mortifyed, by means of Gods
especial grace, that not only they do not follow them, no nor so much as any
wit feel them.

3. O blessed IESV in the goodness of thy great mercy thou haste preserved me
from many sins, into which of my self I would have fallen: o continue the
multitude of thy miserations, sending any grief of heart which may hold me
from any delighte of sin. O take away occasions of sins; give me power to
resist tentations; or so heal my affections, that neither in evil they do
molest me, nor in good become weary; either drive away my buffeter, or give me
thy sufficient grace to be a conqueror. O gracious God, in thy great mercy thou
did a long time expect my repentance: o continue the multitude of thy
miserations; in thy long sufferance to permit me time and grace of
satisfaction and amendment. O holy Jesus in thy great mercy thou did touch
my heart with some sorrow for my great sin; O continue the multitude of thy
miserations against all my faults, to show me their lothsomnes as soars; to
make me some what feel their smarte, as wounds; and both to desire and to
obtain hope that they shall be cured.

4. O sweet Jesus in thy great mercy thou have given me strength to arise from
sin and error; to come unto thy truth and Catholic Church, and hitherto
to continue in thy service, quia fecit magna qui potens est: thou have done
great things for me who art mighty, and abounding in great mercy: o continue
the multitude of thy miserations against the multitude of mine enimyes which
daily seek my downfall and destruction. 1. against mine own flesh, from whom
I can neither fly, nor put him to flyghte; neither may I kill this foe, but
rather norishe him to live, though not to reign nor to rule in me. 2. against
this alluring world, flattering with pleasures, entising with honors, and
deceiving with riches. Our flesh is an enemy within us: the world is an
enemy round about us: these two are to many: but alas, I see a vehement wind
blustering from the north: o lord help me in thy multitude of miserations, or
I shall perish in the great danger of this storm: behold, it is Satan, the
hammer of the world, a serpent more subtle then all beasts, a dragon more
cruel and insatiable then any monster; he is an enemy whom we cannot easily
discern, how then shall we certainly avoyde him? his arrows are shot
closely, and his snares hid secrettly, how shall we escape them? sometime he
assaltes openly with violence, sometime privily with frauds, always cruelly
with malice: of our selves we are not able to resist him, much less to
overcome; but thanks be to God who gives us victory, through Christ our
lord, faciens potentiam in brachio suo, strenghthening us with power in his
arm.

5. O bountiful God, in thy great mercy thou have enabled us to perform good
works which may merit heaven: o continue the multitude of thy miserations,
enduing me with grace, still to abhor the wickedness of my sin which is
paste, to despise the present vanity of this world, and earnestly to desire
the futu^e happynes of heaven: O comfortable Jesus in thy great mercy thou haste
quieted my heart with a good hope of eternal life; o continue the multitude of
thy miserations, that neither the scarsity of my own merits, nor the
unworthiness of my self, nor the estimation of heavens inestimable value, may
cast me down from the heighte of my hope; because it is humbly and firmly
rooted in the charity of thy adoption, in the verity of thy promise, and in the
ability of thy performance. I know in whom I have believed; and I am sure,
that in his exceeding great charity there shall be no defecte, and as he did
promise it in his great mercy, so in the multitude of his miserations he will
perform it. O God, we have need of thy great mercy to supply the defectes of
our great necessityes; and we desire the multitude of thy miserations for our
defense against the multitudes of our mighty enemies; and therefore I will ever
repeat this effectual prayer. Have mercy on me O God, according to thy great
mercy, and according to the multitude of thy miserations.

WHAT MERCY IS, AND OF THE EFfects. Also how sins are blotted out by
multitudes. Sect. 5.
^eciuit. Dei. l. 9.
1. MErcy in latin is called misericordia, which according to S. Augustine is a
compassion in our heart of another creatures misery; and so it is,
misericordia, quasi miserans Cor. Sometime it is a foolish womanish pity, and
then it is only a passion in the sensitive part; but being grounded on reason,
it is a virtue in the will in which last sort it is in God; S. Tho. 2.2. q.
^0. a. 2.3.4.
but no way as a passion. And it is in him as in a Superior to an inferior;
either as munificence to releive our wantes; or as clemency to forgive our
faults: not as among men by affection feeling our freindes misery, as if it
were our own, for how can any misery touch him who is all happy? having all
which he wills, and wills nothing which is evil. Nor can he have any
feeling of our misery by occasion of fear, as old men, and wise men, who
consider the dangers and incertainties of all euentes: nor as timorous and
feeble minded people, who doubt in pusillanimity least upon any occasion they
should fall into like misery: no such mercy is in our Lord, upon any of these
considerations; for he is neither subject to humane affection, nor to fear,
nor any way in hazard of changeable infelicity.

2. And among men though charity be the greatest of all virtues, because it
unites and ioynes us as inferiors to God our best and highest Superior; yet in
God who is above all creatures, upon which he powers out all the godnes they
have, and receives nothing from any other to himself, in him mercy is the
greatest of all virtues; and to him therefore the Church says it is proper,
more then to any; and herein his omnipotency most to be manifested. In orat. in
ter psalm. gradual. pro defunct.
For though the virtues and attributes of God be in himself equal, yet in
their effects and operations toward his creatures, one may appear more or
less then another: and so here S. Augustine says, that mercy and miserations
be all one: and S. Bernarde calls miserations, the daughters of mercy; which
are diverse in sundry streams, and yet all one water of the same founteyn, as
in a garden-water pot, the water within is all one in substance with those
many spinning streams yssuing out of those several holes.

3. Aristotle said, that no place of the world is altogether empty, either of
air, or some what else; Non datur vacuu^ Psalm. 32.
yet he could not tell whereof it was full, so well as David, who said All the
world is full of the mercy of our Lord. Another philosopher being asked what
was greatest of all? answered Locus, place is greatest: for place which
conteyneth all, is greater then those things which are contained: but David
would have said, it is our Lords mercy, which is above all his works: and so
all places gives place as inferior to his mercy, and takes place within it, as
lesser then his mercy. In heaven his mercy shynes in glory: on earth he
raynes mercy both on the just and unjust: his mercy is in purgatory where
sowles are purifyed and prepared for heaven: yea, even in hell there is some
part of his mercy; for as he rewards his Angels and Saints, much above
their merits, so punishes the devils, and the damned, both less then their
demerites, and not so much as he is able.

4. These are thy mercyes, O God, which none can deny: but we humbly desire
releife and pardon according to thy great mercy, and to blotte out our iniquity
in the multitude of thy miserations: thy justice, o lord, reaches unto the
heighte of mounteynes; thy truth unto the clouds; thy great mercy to the
heavens; and the multitude of thy miserations is above all thy works. O let us
taste of these mercyes, sent down from thee to us, and derived by us to
others, that we may learn to be merciful as thou art merciful. And so in
thy day of justice and judgment, if we have been merciful we shall obtain
mercy; when it shall not be so much recounted that Abel was murdered for his
good sacrifice; that Noah took care to save the old world; Chrysol. in sermon.
judicij.
that Abraham was faithful: that Moses delivered the law; that Elias went up
to heaven in a charyot; that S. Peter was crucified with his head downward;
that S. Paul was beheaded; that S. Laurence was broyled; or S. Edmonde our
English king a martyr shot full of arrows; as it shall be there demanded
what works of mercy every one has performed; especially in feeding the
hungry, clothing the naked, or visiting the sick and imprisoned. O teach us to
be merciful in such small matters, that we may find great mercy, at thy hands,
and in every one of thy fingers multitude of miserations. Great mercy, o God,
because thou art great, and it fittes thee not to give little: great mercy,
because our necessityes have need of great supplies: our offenses are great;
Hugo Cardinal.
and our punishments deserve to be great; therefore what can we ask less then
great mercy?

5. And according to the multitude of thy miserations blotte out my iniquity: O
thou who do forgive very often, even seauenty times seven times: we are many
offenders, and are guilty of exceeding many sins, in many things offending
all, and every day, and many times a day; o show the multitude of thy
miserations, Theophil. Innocent. 3. Esaias. 43. Ierem. 17.
upon such multitudes of offenses, of times, and of persons; pardoning so many
sinners, for so many crimes, and so many times repeated. O blotte them out, as
thou have said by the Prophet Esaias, that thou art he who blotteth out our
iniquityes for thine own sake. And Jeremy says, our sins are graven in a
hard Adamante stone with an iron pen: who can blotte out such a record? even
thou only, o mighty redeemer, who by thy hands nailed to the cross were
blotting out all handewrytinges against us: Colos. 2. Psalm. 68.
O raze and blotte out, we entreat thee, all the sins and accusations which
Satan writes against us: O blotte them out, not to be read; and scrape them out
as, blottes, not to be seen; for otherwise they will blotte our names out of
the book of the living. Del^, put out, or take away from thy sight, or vewe,
all spots from our soul, all memory from thy book, all biting worms from
our conscience, all sinful appetites from our affections, and all unlawful
consent from our desires. O blotte out all malice, or frailty, from our will;
and out of our understanding all error and blindness. In the virtue of thy
precious blood; and by the sacrament of extreme Vnctio^ we beseech thee, blotte
out at our death all the sinful delights of our eyes, all the follyes of
our ears, all vanities of our smelling, all the iniquityes of our tongue, all
the voluptuousnes of our touch, or of our taste, all unsearchable or secret
sin of our hearts, all the idleness or wickedness of our hands, all the
forwardnes of our feet to commit evil, and all the slackenes or crookednes
of our ways unto good. O Jesus help us by wyping out our blottes now to
clea^se our souls, and ever by great mercy to forgive our sins.

OF THE GREAT CARE WE MVST USE to purge all sin: and that we our selves must
do herin some diligence, not standing idle to leave all unto Christ. Sect. 6.
1. WAsh me yet more from mine iniquity! and cleanse me from my sin. O lord
I have so much offended, that me thinks I cannot well enoughe express my
guiltynes, nor enoughe beg remedy, nor can I tell, when I have enoughe
repented. Amplius laua me, wash me yet more, both from the filthynes, and also
the stinkingnes of all wickedness: Inn^ce^. 3.
wash me, from iniquity which is filthy; and cleanse me from sin which
stinketh: from sin against God, and from iniquity either against my neighbor
or against my self, yet more, both from the heynousnes of that which is paste,
that I be perfectly cured; and least I should fall again, from the
dangerousnes of that which may come. Let not the prophet complain against me,
saying, O how vile art thou become iterating thy ways! Ierem. 1.
all sin in my soul is like loathsome stinking durte on my innermost or
fairest garment, or like deadly poison in my usual drinking cup: It is not
enoughe with one water to take away the most or the worste, Petrus Vega.
but rynse, and rub, and wash the cup again and again, with nettles,
with salt, with ashes* water after water; let us be sure there be neither
savor nor danger of poison left behind. It is true that in our contrition
and Gods absolution, all the guilte of all sin is totally forgiven, yet our
healed conscience which was wounded; as a burnte child is afraid of any fire:
as having weak stomachs, if we spy the least remaynder of our former
filthynes, or taste the smallest savor of our wonted poison; O let us cry
(not for distruste, but for better security) amplius laua me, wash me yet more.

2. Also, when we do bewail any greater crime, let us withal wash the
spotres of any lesser faults: yet more, even our smallest offenses, which
being many amounte unto much: S. Greg.
yet more, not only from all the guilte and eternal punishment, but also from
purgatory or any pain temporal, yet more, both inwardly from sinful
thoughts as well as outwardly from bad words or deeds, yet more then others,
for I have offended more then others, yet more, not only by these cerimoniall
figures, and external signs, but also by the true precious blood of our
perfect redeemer.

3. I have sinned against God, against men, against my self, and against other
creatures; therefore o lord, Hugo Cardinal.
miserere, dele, laua, munda; have mercy on faults against thee, blotte out
accusatio^s of men, wash away the spots of mine own soul, and cleanse my
abuses and corruptions of thy creatures, O was he my soul, which thou did
make pure in my creation; O cleanse my body, which thou did sanctifye by
thy incarnation; O blotte out my faults against the law which condemns;
have mercy according to thy grace given by the gospel which acquitteth. And
all these, yet more, as very filthy clothes must be boiled and bucked in sharp
lee, washed, rubbed, wringed, beaten, shaken, and bleached: for as Seneca said,
they who are accustomed to sin non tant^m inquinati, sed infecti sunt, they
are not only defiled but infected, which is more hardly cleansed. Epist. 85.


4. There is 1. a washing of Baptism. 2. of repentance. 3. of martyrdom: of
the first, Zachar. 13.
Zachary prophesied, there shall be a founte eyn open to the house of David, and
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for the washing of a sinner: sin this water
of Baptism I have been abhominably polluted, O wash me yet more, in the second
water of repentance, which is Naamans Jordan, interpreted a descending, or a
river of judgment, signifying our humility or judgment of our selves. 3. reg.
5.
Or if it be thy blessed will, O God, wash me in the third water, yet more by
martyrdom, that I may be somewhat like those in the Apocalypse who washed their
ctoles in the blood of the lamb.

5. And though we do somewhat toward these purifications, yet more must be
done by our lord Jesus: Apoc. 7.
the beginning, proceeding, and finihing, must be his grace working and our
will consenting: our obedient diligence must be answerable to his ca^ling and
guiding inspirations: the inward spi^ite and grace is his, the outward labor
must be ours Over and besides all which we can do, yet more, he must wash us;
other wise as Jeremy said, If thou wash thee with Niter, and multiply unto thy
self the herb Borith yet thou art d^filed in thy iniquity before me: the
Septuagint call it the herb Toan which S. Jerome says is the Fullers herb,
and the Chaldey paraphraste interpretes it Soape: so that though we wash with
water; yet more our lord must cleanse us with his soape. All our own Niter and
Borith, our penances voluntary, or our vnuoluntary afflictions, are to small
purpose of themselves alone, yet more o lord give them virtue and accept them
in the merits and passion of our Savior, without whom all our actions are
nothing worth unto salvation.

6. And yet we may not be idle christians, laying all upon the shoulders of
Christ; for though he be able yet he will not bear all: such be all carnal
libertines, Caluinistes, and such others, who will no fasting days; no
whipping of themselves; no hair clothes; no hard beds; no pilgrimages; no
stricte exercise of religion; no corporal penances, whiles they be in health,
though they be able to endure them without hurt (for in case of apparent or
very probable damage to our necessary health, they are rather forbidden then
imposed) But these without sickness or other cause will neither fast, nor
absteyne from flesh, no not in lent, nor scarce upon Good fridaye; they will
perform no stricte obedience to the public orders and decrees of the
Church, but when and how it please themselves: and this they call their
christian liberty: wherein not withstanding Christ practiced the contrary: in
all things he obeyed the law, though he were not bound: these are bound, and
yet will not obey. He himself has commanded that whosoever obeys not the
church should be accounted as a heathen: and did he himself live in any such
liberty? his whole life was rather full of bodily labor and want, in fasting,
watching, and prayers, in many greifes, torments, and much unrest. O holy Jesus
we must come after thee in some such sort, if we will come unto thee as we
ought: we trust not in our bodily works alone without thee* but we work
them in thy love after thy example: to suffer with thee, that we may be
glorified with thee. We confess, and rejoice, because thy merits are alone
all sufficient; but we know that thou will not have us partakers of those
merits by such liberty, but by obedient labor. Is the disciple more at liberty
then the master? he wroughte for us till he sweat drops of water and blood;
shall we stand idle or at liberty to do nothing but beleuee? yes, we will
believe; for that is our foundation: and yet more we will work, and be
obedient to his church in every religious action. For of the^ he has said, he
that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me.

WE MVST DAILY PROCEED IN ZEAL against all sin: and in particular against
the sensualities of the flesh. Sect. 7.
1. MAny men when they are sick and grow near to their death, do begin to
eat greedily: so should a good christian more hunger for righteousness when
his death is more near, and in his spiritual hunger and devotion pray and
desire Amplius, yet more. Or as he that has been sick, and begins to amend,
if he be perfectly cured, he will be exceeding hungry: otherwise, it is a sign
that all bad humors are not expelled or digested. So if we wax negligent in
our reasonable penances or spiritual exercises, we have cause to fear that
all sin is not well purged, or mortifyed: wherefore in any such queazynes, or
lazynes, let us return to say with David Amplius, yet more: O lord, let me
hunger after justice yet more; for my last hour now approaches nearer then
when first I did believe; and al^so that I may redeem the time and so recover
strength, Amplius laua me, Purge me yet more.

2. In particular this fault of the flesh, against which David prays is
pec^liarly called a fire, and filthynes: and therefore above all other vices it
is most proper a^ai^st this to pray for more water. Yet more water of
contrition against this filthy sin, to wash it more and more water of
mortification against this burning sin, to quench it more. Yet more, o
lord, enable us in our bodies to extinguish these coals, and yet more in our
hearts to purify this filthe: for if w^ do but think of it with delighte, we
begin to burn; and if we do consent to such a thought, yet it is so filthy
that we are ashamed to publish or to speak it, vnlese we be past shame.
Achilles being washed over all his body, except only the plants of his feet,
could not be wounded whersoeuer he had been washed; and yet at last (he
kneeling) a poisoned arrowe was shot into his foot, and so killed. So not
only the principal parts of our body, but amplius laua me, yet more, lord,
wash even the soales of our feet, as well as our head, our hands, our eyes,
our ears, all our senses, and all our facultyes of soul and body: for if we
leave any part unwashed, there the devil will watch to have us wounded.
Especially let us beware of this poisoned arrowe of lust; which is purposely
called uncleanness, because there is no filthynes of sin like the lothesomnes
of lust, which cleanes to such a carnal soul, as the pox to the bones; and
he that has been once so filthy, will hardly cease to be still more filthy.
Wherefore on the contrary, if we become once clean Amplius laua me, let us be
yet more clean: and as the swanne, after those actions, will not eat till he
get into the water to bathe him, Pli. l. 8. cap. 16.
nor the lioness return to her companion until she be all washed, after
copulation with the parde: so much more haste and care should we have to b^
cleansed from this filthy vice; and not be content with a l^ttle wa^er, but
ever labou^ and pray to be washed yet more.

MEDITATION III.
Quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco, and peccatum meum contra me est semper.
Tibi soli peccaui, and malum coram te feci, vt iustificeris in sermonibus tuis,
and vincas cum iudicaris.

For I know mine own iniquity, and my sin is always against me. Unto thee
alone I have sinned, and have committed evil before thee, that thou may be
justified in thy words, and may overcome when thou art judged.


HOW WE MVST MARK, ABHOR, and beware sin, as a treacherous and a dangerous
enemy. Sect. 1.
1. IF the black More look upon himself, he cannot choose but say that he is
black: and if we look upon our own souls, will not our conscience convince
us that we are lothesome? unless as the Mores do painte their Angels foul and
black like themselves, and the devils fair and white like christians; so we
will peruerte the true opinion of virtue calling it vice, and falsely esteem
foul vice to be fair virtue. Or if we do confess sin to be sin, yet it
is not enoughe to acknowledge our sin to be foul and filthy; but also we
must mark how he stands against us like an enemy: as David here says he
knows him; and observes that he always stands against him.

2. Ego cognosco, I know my sin. And sin is known by sundry otkens. 1. as
a whore, either by an impudent face: or by her wanton eyes: or by fylching and
covetous hands: or by affected flattring speech, Cassiod. Hugo Cardinal P^ou.
5. and 6. and 7. and Eccle. 26.
for some one or other of these marks Solomon has set down whereby to know a
bad woman. And such is all sin, which enters either with flattring promises
of pleasure, profit, or honor: or else with a bold forhead passes all shame:
or neglecting all things else does chiefly seek delights: or despising other
men does most advance his own propertyes: and does never fail to rob or
beg from thy soul some jewel or other ornament of grace; yea, to steal thy
soul it self from God, and all goodnee. 2. Or sin is known like a monstar,
which maruells not at it self, whiles all others stand wondering at his
deformity. 3. or it is known like a two hand sword by his sharp edges and
long blade: for all mortal sin does ever separate by Gods excommunication,
which kills a far of with a long reach, and deuides a sunder entire bodies,
and cuttes off whole lymnes at one bloue, 4. And last of all, if sin be not
discovered by any of these, yet fley from him as from the face of a serpent
whose stinge has once put us to a long time of great pain* Number. 13.
and if a man were freed from such pain and danger, were it not good to take
mark and care how to know his like, least again we should suffer the like?
and therefore it were convenient to set up his perfect figure in the place of
our usual abode, over against our eye, for an remembrance of our passed
torments, and for a warming of our future peril.

3. Thus, O my soul, let us always place the remembrance of sin, before us,
or against us, In the day let us think of him, and dream of him in the
night, as always against us, that so me may know him to beware of him and
ever to keep him from us. Eccle. 21. S. Aug. Theod.
Thus if we know sin, our lord will not know him, and if we set him
against us, to move our selves to voluntary penance, our lord will spare us
from greater vengeance: for as unto a Physician if we would be cured, we offer
him his hyre; so unto God, says S. Augustine, we must offer him sacrifice of
some satisfaction, S. Aug.
if by our Lord Jesus we will obtain full remission, we call upon God, but
consider, says S. Augustine, that we call upon one who is just, and who hates
all sin: call upon his mercy, but not to neglecte his justice. His mercy
pardons an offender eternally, but his justice will temporally punish the
offense: and therefore as we beseech him to remitte the guilte, because we know
and acknowledge it; so because we do voluntarily set some temporal punishment
against us, therefore o lord do not thou also punish us temporally.

4. And if we do thus, we shall have his justice satisfied, and double mercy
obtained: one mercy changes eternal pain into temporal; and again
temporal punishment, of many years paraduenture and much smarte, is changed
by his second mercy into some short and easy penance justly imposed, or
voluntarity assumed: or into some devout Iubiley, or other religious
indulgence; which are all grounded on the merits of our Savior; but that
these may be applied, we proforme our diligence to know our iniquity in the
contrition of our heart, and to have, our sin always against us, in some
mortification of our body.

5. They must be always over against us or before us: not behind our backs:
for when our sins be as forgotten at our backs, then they have advantage to
murder us suddenly, or to make us yield fearfully: but if we turn face upon
them or put them before us, we do so much sooner destroy them, or put them to
flighte. Sometime, O lord, S. Bonauen. Psalm. 37. Genesis 4 Psalm. 18. Psalm. 128.
Psalm. 21. Psalm. 48. Psalm. 70. and 81. Job. 16. Psalm. 21. and 87.
sin is above us in power and multitudes, as else where David says, my
sins are gone over my head. 2. sometime they are under us by repentance and
mortification, as it is said to Cayn, his appetite should be under him. 3.
sometime they are hidden within us by hipocrisye, wherefore we pray to be
cleansed from our hidden sins. 4. sometime they are before us, to be
chastized; as in this text. 5. sometime they are neglected behind us, and then
as in another psalm it is said, they raise large buyldinges upon our backs.
6. sometime they are at our right hand, when we sin mortally with a high
hand, and then David especially desires to have his soul delivered out of the
hand of a dog, and in another place, out of the hand of hell. 7. sometime
they are at our left hand when we sin of infirmity; and so also he diverse
times prays to be freed from the hand of a sinner. 8. so^time sin is round
about us to accuse or to affrighte us, so Job said that he was compassed about
with spears; and David complaynes that they come about him as bulls of Basan,
and as many water flouddes. O blessed Jesus succor us in the midst of these
flouddes: defend us against these spears: o free us from sin of all hands;
on the right hand, or the left, deadly or venial break down their heavy
boystrous building on our backs, whiles we forget or neglecte them: o draw
out into our view the secret or hypocritical s^nnes of our heart: and if they
have by custom or by number got over our heads in tyranicall dominion, o
bring them down under our feet by thy grace of contrite mortification: or
howsoever in any sort they do practice against us, let us beware their danger
by keeping them always before us.

THAT EVERY ONE MVST ACKNOVVLEDGE his own faults, and laying his hand upon
his own heart, rather accuse himself, then censure any other. Sect. 2.
1. ANd observe that we must be careful to know and to keep in our fight,
as David here says, iniquitatem ^ea^, and pecca^u^ me^m, my iniquity, and
sin which is mine: not other men's faults. As David first gave sharp
sentence against the rich man, which had taken the poor man's only sheep, not
imagining he spoke against himself: for in another man's person we consider the
offense more duly in his own nature, not so much dazeled with affection and
partiality, as when it concerns our selves: whereas it were a safer course, in
seeing other men's badnes, to judge or fear our selves worse; and in our own
goodness, to esteem other men better. Thus, let us set against our view those
which be our own sins, that as Nathan enforced David to use his own tongue
for the knife wherewith to lance and open his own soar, so we may by viewing
our own sins, not so much look to take out a moate of our brothers eye, as
to remedy the beam which we have in our own. Like wise physitia^s first
have a care to cure our selves; for as the wise man said, the foot of a fool
does easily enter into the house of his neighbor: and a fool stands prying
by the window into the house, Eccles. 21
but a man prudent will stand at the door without. O how few such prudent m^n!
we are allmoste all prying fools, marking others, and not observing our
selves. Like some soldyers who being an hundred of their own nation, and but
ten strangers, if any fault or loss happen, they say presently it was the
strangers defaulte, not one of us were to blame; but if any excellent exployte
be performed, where there were a thousand strangers and scarce one hundred of
them yet there they alone did most, all the strangers did nothing so much: So
in matters of vice and virtue, we will diminishe others due praise to extol
our selves, at least secretly in our own opinion: or in the midst of
offenses we will scarce acknowledge one fault to be altogether our own: or
if we do; it shall be but in some small matter, or some general fashion* yea,
sometime saying in general that we are sinners to seem thereby so much more
holy; wherein as pride of humility or humble pride is most dangerous, so this
seeming sanctity by a feyned self accusation, is most odious.

2. Of S. Ihon Baptiste, twice it is said, that he confessed and denied not,
when the phariseys would needs have pressed him to say of himself that he was
the Messiah: he confessed himself unworthy that estimation, and denied not to
Christ his due honor. But we contrarily d^tracte from others, and attribute to
our selves; whereas we should not deny worthynes to others, and confess
unworthiness in our selves. Either to be silent of our good deeds; or at least
never to speak of them for our own praise, but only to glorifye God or to
edifye our neighbor by them* evermore to hear of our own faults and
imperfections patiently, acknowledge them (where just occasion is) unfeignedly,
or in serious humility to think of them with grief, as always set against us
with our mark upon their foreheades that as soon as we see them, we may
sorowfully (and willingly, though secretly) acknowledge that pride is mine,
that dullnes in devotion is mine, such covetousness is mine, such vaynglory is
mine, such pelting anger is mine, such frivolous contention is mine, such
paltry lies are mine, such waspish impatience is mine, such is my distraction
in prayer, my lazines or sleepynes is such, my property it is to deal
timorously or not heartily, my selfeloue it is to esteem too well of my self;
too much delighte in meat and drink is mine, to many carnal thoughts are
mine; mine are idle imaginations and foolish conceiptes, my fault it is to lay
blame on others and excuse mine; all the good, o lord, which I have, or do,
it is thine; and mine are innumerable and unsearchable evils.

3. Goodness is thine, by identity, by creation, by communication, or by
complete action; but is mine only by participation, either infused, or applied,
or exercised. S. Bonaue^
Also by private mystery. S. Ihons Baptism was called his: by peculiar
promise, o lord, thou art called the God of Abraham, and so likweise art our
God: justice is only thine, as the giver, yet as receivers it is likewise ours:
grace is thine as the owner, and ours as the farmers: the heavens and all
creatures are thine as the Author, and ours as possessors: Only of evil and
sin, every one may justly say, it is mine, as possessor and author; it is
mine as farmer and owner; it is mine as receiver and giver; it is mine by open
bargayne, and by secret conueyance it is mine: it is mine by practice; by
application; by conjunction; by participation; by infection; by defection; by
custom; by counsel; command; consent; provoking; praising; by not
discovering; not hindering; not punishing; or by not reprehending when I might
and ought* By all, or by some of these titles and propertyes every one must
know his own fault and set the^ against himself saying: it is mine.

4. In a common assembly of a city, said Socrates, Stobaeus in sermon. 21.
if the crier should will all the merchantes to stand up; so they would, and
no other: if all the goldesmithes, all the mercers, grocers, drapers, ta^ners,
taylers, etc. were severally required to stand a part, every trade by it
self, they would do it orderly: but if the cozening unconscionable sellers
should be commanded by the Mayor himself to come stand by him: no man would
stir: yet contrarily if the basest sergeant should in the Mayors name will
all the honest just dealing men to remove all to one side: it is like that
all would go apace, and thruste hard, not to stand nere the midst, least he
should be thought to remain nere the dishonest side. Thus men are not so
unwilling to show their trades, how mean soever, as to acknowledge their
faults, how small soever: because all men would seem innocent or just, no man
will talk with David of my iniquity and my sin. But as in worldly matters,
we gladly talk of my ancestors, my lands, my Lordships, my houses, my
tenantes, my dignityes, my credit, my authority, or of any thing whereof we can
vante, all that is mine: so also in spiritual things, or matters perteyning
to the mind and understanding, we are willing to speak of anything whereof we
may somewhat glory, either openly with a full mouth, or with half a mouth
nicely; or at least in thought secretly call it mine, as my devotion, my
fasting, my losses, or constancy for religion; my knowledge, my discretion,
etc. of these, or other such like, we do willingly talk, sometime to the end
we may insinuate how, or which of them is mine; yea sometime we do them because
afterward we may boast, such a good deed was mine; like the gleade or kyte
which mountes upward to heaven, but always his eye is looking downewarde to
the earth, where to espy some carry on or garbage on the ground; and so we
do often seem to fly upward to heaven in our intentions, whiles we fix our
eye much more upon the action to call it mine, In fine; thus any good, we do
readily call it mine, though it be as Batillus challenged Virgillis verses for
his own; but we disclayme all evil, though it be like him who talking much,
yet denied stoutly that he had any tongue.

IT IS NECESSARY TO REMEMber harms of sin, thereby learning to amend and take
heed. Sect. 3.
1. THis is our corrupt inclination to deny our faults and to boaste of our
worthynes: nevertheless, o my soul, be thou careful to know my iniquity, and
be diligent to have my sin always against me. that so it may moderate thy
mirthe, and diminish thy delights in thy meditations often to think of it
with inward grief, in time of tribulation to suffer chastizement for it with
outward sorrow: always to keep it in thine eye, to humble thee; or to warn
the^, let him ever pluck thee by the sleeue. Genesis 20.
As Abimelech having taken Sara, and being warned in a vision not to touch
her, for she was ^brahams wife; he set her free, and giving her a 1000. pieces
of silver to buy vayles for herself and her women to cover their faces, Vega.
he says, remember whithersoeuer thou go that thou werte taken, as if he
meante; being fair and going with thy face open, men are more easily entangled
in thy beauty, wherefore buy vayles to cover thine eyes, and remember thou werte
taken and brought in danger of sin, by this fault of open showing thy face:
So likewise with us, by what occasion soever we have been taken or put in
hazard of any sin, let us remember, and set our former occasions and faults
always against us, that we may against another time beware to be taken by any
such like occasion in any such sin.

Moral.
2. Thus S. Gregory uses a strange petition; but in this sense a very good
speech; prosit mihi Domine quod peccaui (according to our english phrase after
our meat) much good may it do me, o Lord, that I have sinned: as if he
should say out of the evil which I have committed by my fault, let me draw
good by thy mercy: let it make me more humble and gentle toward others, less
trusting to my self, and most dutiful toward thee, both to praise thy mercy
which pardons me, and to desire thy grace to uphold me. Nevertheless, these
seem strange speeches, to be against me, In ps. 37*
and yet to do me good: as also that speech of Origin seems strange, who
calls David, a very good sinner: a sinner, and yet very good: to do us good,
and yet to be against us, how can this be? surely in this point we must
imitate our lords goodness, who draws good out of evil, and causes the most
wicked men and vilest devils to serve his purpose for good: so we must make
mithridate or tr^acl^ against poyso^, even of most poisonous vipers: the more
we have been sinners, by consideration thereof to move our selves to be so much
more good: such a one is a good sinner, and such a good sinner was the good
thief on the cross, whom we therefore call the good thief, and many ancyent
Fathers call him Sanctum latronem, holy thief, not holy because he had been
a wicked thief, but because he be^ame so zealous a penitent. Such good sinners
were Zacheus. S Mary Magdalen. S. Matthew* S. Peter. S. Paul* S. Augustine. P^^.
Rib^deneyra flos SS.
S. Mary of Egipte S. Anastase the Necromancer, and diverse others, and such a
good sinner was David in this place, who therefore set his sin always
against himself, to the end it might do him much good: and so may we, by
considering often the greatness of our sin, and how they have been much evil.

3. And as Agesilaus (being resolved to pass with an army through his
neighbors cuntry) sent not to ask leave for passage, Plutar. in vit.
but only to demand how they would have him to pass? whither with his pike
trayled along? or set on end? that is, whither peceably? or by force? for pass
he would and must. So our sins must be set against us, either to condemn
us being not amended, or being repented to admonish us: since therefore we must
pass their pikes, is it not better to make our selves free from unavoidable
adversaries? then to add rancor to cruel hostility. And as an old ship
which lies wracked on some shelfe, remaynes for a sea mark, that no more
should follow her in that course: so the danger, horror, and misery, of our
passed sins set against us, or before us, may preserve us from followig
sins which will offer themselves unto us: Thus let our sins be against us,
to reprehend us for the fault, or before us, to remember us of the punishment.

DIVERSE INTERPRETATIONS OF THESE words, Tibi soli: unto thee alone etc. Sect.
4.
1. ANd the more to make us abhor our sins, let us recounte the^ with all
the lewd and lothsom circum^tances, as Da^id adds* Innoce^. 3.
To thee only have I sinned and committed evil before thee. I am king, or a
person of dignity: thou art God of greatest majesty: for such a person to
offend against such a God, is a heinous crime: the higher my seat, the greater
my fault: the more glorious thy presence, the fowler my offense. I have sinned
before thee: not of ignorance, for I know my iniquity: nor of negligence, for
my sin is always against me: but against my waking conscience, even before
thee. Though not of malice and despite, determinately against thee; yet by
vnreuerent neglecte wittingly and willingly, even before thee. Would a man
abuse another, whiles he knows the Judge looks upon him? But who would
before his face offend the Judge himself? yet such are we in all our sins.

2. We sin, o lord, before thee, Hugo Cardinal.
who as a wise judge know and see all our enormi^yes, and art never
deceived. We sin unto thee, as a just judge who haste auctority to punish our
wickedness, nor will be corrupted, but art ever justified in thy words. And
we sin unto thee alone as a most powerful Judge, above whom only there is
no appeal, from whom only there is no escape; and against whom only there is
no resistance for thou do overcome when thou art judged.

2. We are said to offend unto a man under whose power and auctority we are
subject to be punished, Glossae, Incognitus.
though our offense be not so against him that we injury him. And he that
robs a traueler, committes evil against him from whom he takes his money;
and yet is not properly said to sin unto him, but unto the Judge under whose
power he is to receive his punishment. So that we may sin unto a man and not
against h^^: and also against a man but not unto him. And so Judges must
consider offenses as done unto the law, or unto them for public justice,
Titelma.
not as done against them according to their particular respects and private
affections. Neither may private men who receive iniuryes done against them,
therefore become their own Judges to revenge, for it perteynes not unto them.

3. Tibi soli: unto thee alone. Some hebrew writers think that the murder of
Vrias, and the adultery of Bersabee were unknown among men, Genebrar. Rabbi
Kimbi. Rabbi Joseph. Rabbi Saadias.
and therefore he says as of secret sins, unto thee alone I have offended.
Others suppose that Vrias being now dead, he means that he can make
satisfaction to no other alive (as he desired) but to thee alone. And one does
expound it thus: to thee alone I cry peccaui, lamenting my guiltynes, of whom
alone I look for miserere acquitting punishment: For though we go to the
priest as thy officer, yet by him we come unto thee alone as the Author.

4. We have sinned unto thee, o lord, as our Judge who must chastize us. Unto
thee alone who only art without all fault, and therefore without any check
may severely proceed against us. Hugo Cardinal. Job. 25.
All men are culpable of somewhat unto thee, though they seem vprighte unto
men: wherefore thou alone may pronounce a stricte sentence: And seeing the envy
of Satan, and the malice of the Jews can find nothing in thee; therefore thou
alone at every sinner may cast the first stone. It is true, o lord, we have
by our sins iniuryed many men, S. Aug.
and scandalized more, yet unto thee alone we have sinned as unto a punisher
and a Judge who has in himself no fault to be amended: For it is proper unto
thee alone, to be justified in all thy words, and ever to overcome when thou
art judged.

WHEN WE COMMIT SIN BEFORE our Lord: and that he sees not as man sees.
Sect. 5.
ET malum coram te feci. I have committed evil before thee. Even in thy
presence: for thou know and see all. I have sinned unto thee through
disobedience: and before thee by impudence. Is it not a greater fault against
the king, which is done in his palace, or in his presence, then in his
absence, or in a village? And they whose busynesses and their lives are most in
or about churches, in monasteryes, or religious places, whose chief furniture
of household are Breuiaryes, Beads, disciplines, sackclothes, or books of
devotion; they whose principal studyes or intentions are directed to Divinity;
and also all men when they receive spiritual inspirations of God; or
whosoever pretend to serve God in any fraternity somewat more then others; are
not all these nearher to our lords presence more then others? and therefore
more bound then others to walk ever as in his presence, and not to commit
evil before him.

^eb. 1.
2. The very devil accounted it a greiuous sin which is committed in any
special sort before our lord; and so he said of Job, that if he were
afflicted in body he would blaspheme God to his face. And therefore the laws
of men do prohibit the benefit of Sanctuary unto them who have committed
their fault in the very church. So our lord complained in Ezekiel of the
abominations which the house of Israel commits. Here. Namely in his temple
before him. And so sins the preacher in the pulpe^, Ez^k. 8.
when he speaks out of malice or for vaynglory: so sins the priest at the
altar, when he is irreuerent in his action, or careless in his devotion: so
sins his Helper at mass, when he is negligent: so sin his Hearers, when
they are not sufficiently attent, but either indecent in gesture, prattling in
words, or in bad or vain thoughts witingly wandering: when we ru^ne over our
hours, or our, beads or our prayers, with more needeles speed, then any good
heed, o how do we sin before him.

3. All such sinners are like Cayn, who although he remained in the presence
of God, yet (as S. Ambrose notes) the text says of him that he went out from
the face of our lord, not only by loosing his favor as having committed
murder, Genesis 3. Apol. David 1. cap. 14.
but especially because having committed this evil before him, yet he
sottishly supposed to be hid from him. Worse are all such then the heathen
grecians, who called God, Theos, because he beholds all things: and as they
said in a proverb, Against evil he has a revenging eye. And worse then the
superstitious Egiptians, Ciril. Alexan. l. 9. contra Iul.
who (as S. Cyril writes) did signify the Allseeing providence of almighty
God by the hieroglifique of a scepter having a fair eye on his top: noting
that as his scepter commands all, so his eye beholds all. O therefore let us
take heed how we commit evil before him, for we can neither avoid the eye
of his knowledge, nor escape the rod of is aucthority. Especially when we go
about any part of his religious service, let us seriously suppose we come more
particulerly into his presence: then let us consider him present, as one of
greatest majesty: and then let us consider him present, as one of the Best
goodness* on the other side then let us acknowledge our selves before him, as
exceeding unworthy creatures: and also then let us acknowledge our selves
before him as marvelous wicked and malicious enemies: that so we may reuerenc^
and fear his majesty as Greatest; and with hope and love, pray unto his
Goodness as Best: especially humbling and confounding our selves before him, as
wonderful lewd enemies, and unworthy base creatures.

4. Yet herein let us take comfort, o my soul, as well as fear, for as he is
the Greatest to be feared; so he is the Best, to be loved: And as he sees all*
so he sees not, Luc. 9.
as man sees: his gifts of nature are admirable; but any one gift of his
grace (as S. Thomas says) is of more value then all his gifts of nature in
the whole world: therefore we will do reverence before thy majesty; and before
thy Goodness we will sing praises, o lord: thou see not as man sees: neither
imperfectly to be deceived, taking good for evil; nor partially to be
corrupted by favor or affection: thine eye is not cruel in malice, but
merciful even in justice: if we seek to hide our faults, thou see and
do punish: if we humble our selves, as David here* before thee, then thou
beholdest us with pity.

5. If we sin before men: many will say; why does not fire come down from
heaven to chastize such wickedness: But as Calicratidas having a prisoner whom
his enemies hated and a great sum of money desidered to be delivered unto
them, to the end they might torment and kill him as they desidered, though
Calicratidas wanted money to pay his army, yet he would not sell his captive to
their malice: whereupon says Cleander (who was a Capteyn of his counsel)
surely if I were Calicratidas I would sell this prisoner for this money: the
other wittily replied. In sooth so would I, if I were Cleand: insinuating the
difference between a base covetous mind, and a noble generous spirit. In the
same manner because our lord is not of ignoble disposition like Cleander, but
much more heroycall then Calicratidas, therefore with a munificent kingly mind
he suffers our faults, and rewards us with benefits, when men would have
delivered us to the devil: he grants pardon to much evil committed before
him, where men would take sharp vengeance for one word of reproach, though
spoken behind their backs. And in this sense Job pleads unto his pitiful
eye, saying: Are thine eyes of fleth? or d^ost thou see as a man sees? Job. 10.
that thou should seek my iniquity, and search out my sin. so let us
say: o lord, we hope well to find favor in thy face, for thine eyes are not
unmerciful, nor do they exaggerate our faults, as men being offended:
rather, though it do aggrauate my sin, to have been committed before thee,
yet this does comfort my soul, because I do know thee a most heroycall
lord and a gracious God* full of pity, not like malicious men reuengefull in
cruelty.

OF DIVERSE WAYS BY WHICH OUR lord is justified; and may be said to overcome
when he is judged. Sect. 6.
1. VT iustificeris in sermonibus tuis and vincas cum iudicaris. That thou
may be iustfyed in thy words, and may overcome when thou art judged. They
that desire any benefit of kings use to allege their passed merits, or
future ability in his service: but of thee, Genebra.
O God, I ask mercy without merit, only for mercy sake. I suffer misery: I
abhor my iniquity: I see and confess my sins therefore have mercy. I have
principally-offended thee; and thou have promised pardon, and passed thy word
to forgive every penitent: therefore have mercy, that so thou maict be justified
in thy words, and if any would doubt of the truth of these promises, that
also thou may overcome such when thou art judged in their mistrustfull
discourses.

Dyonis. Carthus.
2. If directly thou shalt avouch that I and all men are sinners, absolutely
thou shalt overcome in this plea: all me^ who dare trauerse their enditeme^t,
shall be found liars, and thou shalt be justified. Or thus: my sin may be an
occasion of thy greater bounty and justification, not causally, but
consequently; thy justification reckoned for an effect; Titelma.
not my sin accounted for a cause: so here is placed this conjunction, vt,
that, which is also used by our Savior in the same sense, saying, sit down
in the last place that he coming who invited thee, Luc. 14.
may say friend sit up higher: where he means not to teach feigned humility,
to sit lowest to the end to be adua^ced, for such counterfeit humility were
indeed worse then ordinary pride: but our Savior foretells that so it will
follow and succeed, that if we be sincerely humble, we shall certainly be
exalted: not to be so intended by us, but it will be so ordained of God. And
so. S. Basil. Theodo. Romans 3.
S. Paul alleges these words, concluding that our wickedness does more
manifest and commend the justice of God. And so we may say: I have sinned, o
lord before thee, and unto thee; and by how much more my sins are greater,
by so much the more thou haste occasion to magnify thy mercy in my pardon, to
testifye to all the world the truth of thy promises, and against any
mistrustfull or murmuring censurer, to prove thy self an undoubted and a
gracious Judge.

Innoce^. 3. psalm. 131.
3. O lord thou haste sworn unto thy seruante David, that of the fruit of his
loins. thou would set the Messiah on his throne although I have sinned
greiuously, because I have heartily repented, yet let it appear that thou have
forgiven my sins, and will still accomplish thy former promises; that so in
respect of doubtefull weakelinges thou may be justified in the assurance of
thy word; and may overcome all misdeeming enemies, in their envious
imaginations; who otherwise will judge me as a reprobate, or blaspheme thee as
a promise breaker.

4. Or else we may construe it thus: o lord thou haste threatened temporal and
public punishment against me: some paraduenture knowing me to be great in thy
favor, Iacobus Sadoletus in hunc psalm.
and yet ignorante of my great sins, if they should see me so afflicted, and
not know how I have offended, it may be they would wonder, or murmr, or
take some other scandal, wherefore be it known to all the world that I have
sinned, and having demerited all those punishments which shall come upon me,
let it appear that I am faulty, and thou art just; both justified in thy
words, accomplishing what thou haste threatened, and also may overcome in
proof, that thou haste threatened and punished me duly, if any should judge
or censure thee rashly: Thus* o my soul let us humble our selves for our
sins, and give glory to God in his justice: thus said S* Augustine. A penitent
must not only fear our lord as a Judge, but also love him for being justice.
And thus, if we be truly contrite (which is a sorrow because we have offended
God whom we do love above all) then will we in this sorrow of love, neither
refuse our punishment, nor excuse our faults, nor complain of our lords
severity: rather with David here, we will publish our sins, and be jealous of
Gods honor* least any should think that he uses against us too much rigor:
this is to love our lord with all our heart and all our soul, to prefer his
love before our own affections, and to neglect our own reputacion for
advancement of his name: by this we shall heal in our selves the enormityes of
our sins, and make some small recompense unto God (as much as we can) for all
those iniuryes.

5. If we give any disgrace or reproach to our neighbor, or lift up our hand,
or a weapon, as if we would strike a magistrate, though we do not hereby
hurt their persons really; yet in respect of their dignity and credit we are
said by these to offer iniuryes: so say deuines; Deus non leditur in externis
bonis: To God himself all our sins can do no harm, and yet by every least
sin we commit an indignity against his majesty: for we on our parts do
diminish his honor; either neglecting, or rejecting his aucthority, whenever
we trangresse what soever he has commanded. Wherefore though we do not harm
his person, yet for his diminished honor, we are bound to our possible and best
restitution. But what better restitution* and for us, what more possible
recompense! then plainly to accuse our selves as most worthy of his punishment,
and clearly to iustifye him in all his procedinges. For to yield him these
duties, Job inquired, saying: I have sinned: what shall I do unto thee? O
keeper of men. In my sins, o lord, I behold two enormityes: the wounds
which they have given me; and the dishonor they have done unto thee: o let us
be more careful to repair thy honor, then to cure our own pain; first,
what shall I do unto thee? and so next I will have care of my self: for if
our lord be once satisfied, I am sure we shall presenly be discharged. O let
our repentance (by help of thy grace, and contrition) come once to his
perfection; for such penitence is complete: but until this, although it may
be very good, yet it is imperfecte; this is an heroycall act of contrition,
more to desire the exaltation of Gods honor, then the release of our
punishments: and when in zeal of his honor we confess and confound our selves
sincerely, with sorrow of our heart roots, or with willing shame of our faces,
acknowledging or otherwise chastizing our offenses; then is our gracious lord
much more inclined to pardon all our guilte, then we can be ready so to
confess our fault.

6. O come let us say with David, and say it like David, with an entire heart:
we have sinned, O God, to thee alone, who art above all. And we have committed
evil before thee; whose majesty is greatest; whose Goodness is infinite; and
whose presence is most holy. We do confess to have deserved all these
punishments which it shall please thee to lay upon us, that thou may be
justified in thy words, if any should suppose our offenses smaller then our
chastizements. And so that thou may overcome when thou art judged, if any
should deem thy corrections greater then our faults.

MEDITATION. IIII.
Ecce enim in iniquitatibus conceptus sum: and in peccatis concepit me matter
mea.

For behold I was conceived in iniquityes: and in sins my mother conceived
me.


A PARAPHASTICALL EXPOSITION OF the former words. Sect. 1.
1. O Lord, I began to request thy great mercy, and therefore I proceed to
recounte my manifold misery: for from a good nature the bare sight of misery
craves bountiful effects of pity. Have pity therefore (o most bountiful and
gracious God of all good nature) have pity on a wretch who has been miserable
from his very inance* and who even in his cradle was wrapte in the bands of
wretchedness and woe.

2. Mine actual sins are as thorns and thistles; but their root is in my
original corruption: o root out this root, as well as cut of those
branches* And as when there falls much rain, the plenty of water floudes
caryeth away abundance of filthe; therefore whiles the multitude of thy mercyes
are flowing, I desire thee to wash me yet more from all my offenses: Behold
also my original sin, which as the secret filthe of my hidden sluttish
corners, I do now bring forth to be cast into these water floudes of great
mercy; that all may be made clean whiles there is water for all. And since I
am lamenting the faults of my life, why should I not bewail the guiltynes of
my birthe? one grief calls another to memory; and so whiles I consider how
vile I am in my self, I cannot but remembrer how base I came from my parents:
for original sin is a portion of mine inheritance, which as it must justly
serve to humble my pride, and bewail my wretchedness; so may it therefore also
please thee, o lord, to pardon my actual faults, considering my natural
weakness:

3. For in such a sort, the same speech in a different sense may be an
accusation and an excusation, Eutropius
a praise and disprayse: as Caius Laelius being reproched as one degnerate and
unworthy of his noble ancestors, replied to the reuyler being a base person;
But thou art neither unworthy nor degnerate from thy ignominious predecessors:
So we must all confess our corrupt Pedigree from Adam; and also these words
here which do serve further to accuse our selves of sin, may likewise be
alleged to move pity, because in some sort it proceeds from our natural
infirmity. Is it any marueil if he sometime sink under water, who always in
his swimming has a great bag of garbage or some other heavy filthe by his
own fault, ever tied or cleaving to his body? It is true, o lord, thy grace
and other helps are more then sufficient to hold us up if we will fasten and
keep on our hold: but seeing we have such a loathsome burden of original
corruption continually drawing us downewarde, as we ought to be humble and
ashamed because it is loathsome, so because it is a burden, if it do not
diminishe the fault, yet it does entreat pardon.

4. Ecce in iniquitatibus conceptus sum: O lord I am so very a wretch, that I
am unclean and polluted in sin even from my mothers womb: yet herein, o
lord, have mercy upon me because it was bred and borne with me. I confess thy
sufficient means proffered to deliver me from this thraldom; yet spare me, I
beseech thee* for being borne with much sinful frailty, I have too much
inclined to my natural weakness: my desires and lusts of nature have often
carried my consent from thy motions and inspirations of grace. O give me yet
grace to overcome theses desires: and since they proceed of my corrupt
nature, o let me find the more help to conquer them, and the more mercy to
pardon them.

DAVID IN THE FORMER VERSE Accuses not his parents; nor is the Act of
marriage of it self any sin. Sect. 2.
1. David here does not accuse his Father Iesse, as if he had begotten him in
adultery (for it is certain he was lawfully borne) much less in that respect
therefore excuse his own fault with Bersabee, Innocent. 3.
as if it were natural for Bastardes to become Adultere^s. Nor does he mean
any Actual sin, which his parents might paraduenture have committed in his
generation: for their actual sin does neither infecte, nor perteyneth to the
child.

2. But as there is a Conception of humane seed in the action of carnal
copulation; so there is a Conception of humane nature in the substance of that
which is engendered: In the first, as in their own action, the parents many
times do offend: yet not in that, but in the second do we contracte and
participate our original corruption, as being of the substance of humane
nature, which is derived unto us by our parents from Adam.

3. In the first, even married couples may offend through inordinate lust:
though paraduenture by the Privileges (which are called the Goods) of
matrimony, that may be but venial in them, which in others is criminal: And
yet their lust and other circunstances may be so disordenate, that in their
copulations they also do commit sometimes even mortal faults: for a man
may offend and be unchaste with his own wife, as well as become drunk with
his own wine.

4. Not that the Act of matrimony is of it self evil and sinful: S. Tho.
3. par. q. 4 9. a. 4.5.6. Nauar. Man. in. 6. praecept cap. 16. number. 3. and number.
32. etc.
But as it is sin to eat or drink imtemperately; or to eat, when, or what
we are forbidden: so married couples do offend in the use of matrimony, being
immoderate in excess, or in times, or places prohibited; or in the manner
immodest, or unnatural.

5. Otherwise matrimony being an office of nature, and a Sacrament of the
church, the due accomplishment thereof is not a sin: for as it is natural,
it intends prolem to have children: and it keeps fidem observing the
faithful title and promise given of each to others body: Beside which, among
Catholic Christians this Sacrament gives grace; and betokens the love and
union between Christ and his church.

6. And these three; proles; fides; and Sacramentum* Progeny: fidelity: and the
Sacrament are called Bona matrimonij, the Goods or benefits of matrimony. To
the first is referred not only the generation, but also the good education of
children. The second, is not meante to be theological faith, but virtuous
fidelity, as it is a part of Justice, in observing true love and loyalty, and
in yiedling mutual duties and assistance each to other: and so for performance
of all these perteyning both to progeny and fidelity is required usual
cohabitatio^, except when some urgent or greater cause do necessarily enforce
any absence. The third, which is the sacrament (if the parties hinder it not by
indisposition) gives grace of union, when the contracte is lawfully made by
express words of the present, or by apparent signs of consent; by which
grace their minds are extraordinarily knit and united in honest and discrete
love. And as our Savior Christ's love to his church is inseparable, so the
sacramentality of marriage grounded hereupon, causes this bond of marriage Among
Christians to be so indivisible, that though in some cases they may be
separated from bed and boarde, or from cohabitation; yet the marriage at the
first, or afterward having been once lawful, they can never be so
disioyned, that either part may mary again whiles the other does live.

7. These three foresaid Goods or benefits of matrimony, do cause the
copulation of man and wife, Vide S. Tho. vbi supra.
not only not to be sin, but to be a good action of virtue; when it proceeds
either from intention of progeny, or has purpose yiedling mutual fidelity;
yea, it is an action of sanctity or holiness when it respects the
sacramentality, depending on the great mystery of holy love between Christ and
his church.

8. Wherefore no Catholics ever termed lawful marriage duly used, to be
uncleanness, Cardinal. Bellarm. de matrimo. Sac. lib. 1. c. 5. Lib. 1.
pollution, and carnal filthynes (as Calvin and others do sclander us herein,
as they use to do also almost in all other points) but they either reprehend
unlawful marriages; or true marriages unlawfully used. Or as S. Jerome writes
against Iouinian, the carnal act between married Couples may in some sense be
called uncleanness (as it is said in the Apocalipse. These are they who were not
polluted with women* for they are virgins) either in comparison of pure
virginity: for though in the act of marriage it is possible they may keep one
perfection of chastity, yet they do herein ever loose the higher perfection of
undefiled virginity; and so married parties may be called co^paratiuely defiled
with women. Or else their carnal delighte in copulation may be called fleshly
pollution; either as caused of the remnants of our carnal concupiscence, and
of that same natural rebellious disobedience of our flesh against our reason;
or because for the most part by many married people it is often used
excessiuely, or disornately, neither referred to progeny, fidelity, nor to any
other honest end without some of which intentions it is sin, at least
venial: and so, why may it not sometime be called or named according as it is
most commonly practiced? not expressing or so strictely naming the lawful use,
but so insinuating the unlawful and usual abuse. For we know, that the
moderate and ordinate use is so far from being sin, that S. Paul commands
married couples to yield each to other mutual benevolence: Dyonis. Carchus. ^.
cor. 7.
and all Catholic Doctors so account it a work meritorious, as an act of
virtue, and of religion; orderly, as holy, religious, virtuous, and
meritorious. And so speaks S. Augustine thereof when it is intended 1. as an
Act of justice, or 2. of obedience, or 3. of charity; directed either first
to procreation of children to be brought up in the service of God; or secondly
to the performance of promised fidelity for avoiding fornication; S. Aug.
contra Julian. 1.4. cap. 5.
or thirdly for rendering each to other mutual love and duty. And when their
modest delights (how intensiue soever in nature) are directed to all or to any
of the forementioned purposes, as they are virtuous and cannot be condemned; so
on the contrary, when they are sought for lust, and without any of the former
respects, then (how feeble soever nature be) they cannot be excused.

9. This I have said, to show that neither David complayneth of any actual
sin committed by his parents in his generation, Ruffinus. S. Aug.
nor that the lawful orderly use of matrimony has of it self any sin. Not
if it had; the particular faults of our parents could not be ascribed to their
children.

WHY OUR MOTHER IS MENTIONED TO BE Accessory to our original sin, rather
then our Father: whereas indeed it comes more from Adam then from either. Sect.
3.
1. Next let us consider, why he rather mentions his mother in this case of
original sin; and not his father: especially seeing all our Deuines affirm;
that although Eua had sinned, yet if Adam had remained innocent, original
sin should not have been derived unto their posterity. Because, they say,
Adam alone as a public person and general father of all mankind, did
represent the persons of all his successors; and for them as well as for
himself did receive original justice, by the loss whereof he brought us all
(as being parts of him as our natural head) into this detriment of original
sin. Wherefore, in the same respect also, though Cayn or any other sinner
had first sinned, Adam being still vprighte, yet their sin should only have
deformed themselves, and not have perteyned to us: because we are comprehended
in none as our general father save only in Adam.

2. Further it is alleged in favor of the woman, that she concurreth but
passiuely unto generation, as only giving the material part of conceptione,
not inducing the active form, which proceeds from the man, who therefore by
philosophers and physicians is accounted the principal party and cheifer
cause of generation. And yet here about original sin the mother is named
only and not the father, because at the time of our quickening (when first in
deed we do contracte original sin) then we are in her womb, then she
keeps and norisheth us, and not the father: and so she is said to conceive us
in sin, not mentioning the father.

3. And though Eua could not be Author of original sin to all her
posterity, as is before said; yet our next parents, both man and woman, being
always the instruments and successiue conueyors of original sin by
descendence from Adam (I say our parents and ancestors are conueyors and
instruments, not causes or Authors', for only Adam is so to be accounted) And
seeing the mother is the material instrumente and conduyte, which is more
evident to our sense then the formal, the^fore is she also named rather then
the father.

4. Also I said, that in deed and really we do only contracte original
sin at the time when we are quickened and receive life in our mothers womb:
for though at the instante of the very first conception, those informed and
mixed seeds may be said improperly in debito to have an obligacion to be
afterward subject to original sin, when it comes to be a living humane
creature; yet properly and truly in effecto the child is not infected with
original sin, until it come to have the soul infused and united to the
body; which is not till the quickening: and having no soul it is not a
perfect humane creature; but only little more then a mass of flesh, which
without soul cannot be said to be really capable of any sin.

5. Wherefore at that time being in the mothers womb, and also having been
there norished until that time, and so maynteyned afterward until the
Birthe, the mother is rather named then the father: And so here the hebrew
word Hama does signifye, to give heat, which natural hea^e of the mothers
womb cherishing the infant, Pagnin. Genebra.
some read it thus; S. Aug. S. Hierom.
with sins my mother gave me heat; and S. Augustine reads it, In sins my
mother norished me: and S. Jerome: In sins my mother brought me forth.

4. And also as S. Thomas distinguishes two birthes: Nasci in vtero, and
nasci ex vtero: to be borne in the womb, when the soul is infused, and we
become rea^onable creatures. And to be borne out of the womb when we first
come into this light. So there is a twofolde conception (as has been said)
first of humane seed, which is at the very first generation: and secondly a
conception of humane nature, when at the quickening we receive our soul. This
second conception, and the first Birthe in vtero, are all one: and because then
properly we are first in deed capable of original sin, therefore we may be
so said, either to be borne of our mother in original sin, viz: in the first
birthe: or to be conceived of her in original sin viz: in the second
conception. But at any of these Birthes, or conceptions, we are rather said to
be conceived or borne of our mother, then of our father; because to conceive or
bear children, they are terms and propertyes perteyning to our mothers, and
cannot be said or aptely affirmed of our fathers.

WHAT ORIGINAL SIN IS, AND how it is derived unto us: also how it is
accounted a guilty fault in children.
1. NOw let us see what Original sin is; in his own nature; and what effect
it has in us. In his own nature Original sin is a privation or want of
Original justice which justice God have unto Adam, and he ought to have
preserved in our nature. In us; the effect of original sin, is a corrupt
disposition and deformity of our nature, proceeding from the loss of
original justice, by want whereof there arises in us that same fuel of
sin and concupiscence, derived unto us from the public disobedience of
Adam, by ordinary humane generation. It is a corrupt disposition; as is
sickness. It is a deformity; for all sin spotteth and blemisheth. Vide
Alexand. de Hales. p. 2. q. 105. memb. 2. a 3: etc.
It perteynes more to our nature, then to our person; for it is alike common to
all. The formal cause is the privative loss of original justice. Adams
public fault, as being our general Father, was the efficient cause. And the
isntrumental is, humane generation which is ordinary; not with privilege, as
was the conception of our Blessed lady; nor extraordinary miraculous, as the
incarnacion of our Savior.

2. This corrupt disposition of our nature (according to Hugo de sancto
Victore and some others) we contracte from our birthe By ignorance in our
mind: and By concupiscence in our flesh. Not denying but there is
concupiscence also in the mind: which blinds our understanding, Vide
magist. sent. lib. 2. did. 30. and Scolast. ib
which concupiscence of the mind is most chiefly a sin: and that
concupiscence which is in our flesh, is both a sin, and punishment. For so
deuines say that Original sin is in us both a fault and a punishment: his
fault consistes, in the loss of original justice, and by want of that
justice in the deformity of our nature: his penalty consistes in that
concupiscence or fomes peccati; which follows that former loss, and is an
harbenger of succeding actual sin, which fomes is in Infantes
concupiscibilitie, and in them of riper age is called concupiscence

3. Next let us see, How this original corruption is our own son, and
derived unto us from Adam without fault of our other ancestors or parents
generation. In respect of which difficultyes. Epist. 29. ad S. Hier
S. Augustine advises them who cannot comprehend it, as being secret; yet not
to reprehend it as unjust: rather let such content themselves to know and use
the remedi^, then to repyne or cavil because they understand not how they came
into this misery. As one falling into a Well (where was so much water as served
to save him from bruysing to death, and yet not so much as suffized to styfle
him from speech) being found and asked with wonder, how he came to fall into
such a place? he answered. I pray seek means how to help me out; and stand
not marueiling how I fell in. Nevertheless among learned deuines, even this
difficulty is unfolded against Pelagius, Faber, Erasmus, Zuinglius, and the
Anabaptists.

4. First S. Paul says. Sicut per vnum hominem: as by one man sin entered
into the world, and by sin death* and afterward. In whom all have sinned.
and again. Romans ^.
By the disobedience of one man, many are made sinners. Therefore it appears,
that children being subject to death, are subject to this sin. But infantes
have no actual sin: therefore he must needs mean sin original And this
he says comes, by one man. and by Adam* in whom all are. By him; as our
general father: in whose public disobedience we are all partakers; as the
children of a Traitor are taynted: and the body of a town corporate; are
subject to the acts of their head governors.

5. And so to that objection, How can it be sin in infants who never had use
of will to give consent? It is answered. That original sin is on our behalf
i^ some sort voluntary in Adam, in whose Will and person, S. Aug. lib. de
nupt^^s cap. ^8. Et lib. retract* 1. cap. 13. and 15.

Lib. de peccat* merit. c. 7 Exech. 18 S. Hierom in cap 18, exech. S. Aug. i^
psalm. 108* and lib. contra Adim^nt. ^. 7.

S. Chrysostom. in Genesis ho^. 29. and in math. ^^. 75.

S. Greg. moral. lib 15. c. 22. S. Tho. 1.2. q. 87. a. ^


all our persons and wills were included: for he was our Head; a public
person representing all mankind; our first root whereof all the branches must
savor; and our General father in whom we are all so comprised that what he
did, it was also our deed. As among men, the fathers fact often redoundeth
to the benifite or prejudice of his son: and as unto laws are not requisite
the expeesse consent of every man in the cuntry, but only of those parliament
men, who as public persons do represent all the common wealth: But with
God, none are punished absolutely for others faults; but every one for his
own. And therefore the Council of Trent has defined of original sin, that
it is cuiusque proprium: in which respect every infant is punished therein
for his own fault, whose punishment as it brings no sensible pain, because
it has exilem rationem voluntarij, only a consent included in the public
will of Adam; yet it wants the blessed fruition of glory, propter latissimum
foeditatem mali, because it is so general a deformity or spotte of our
corrupt nature spread over all our powers of body and soul: with which
blemishes no creature may appear in the glorious presence of allmighty God,
before whom there can remain nothing unclean.

6. Infantes then being subject to this punishment for original sin, it must
needs be properly their own sin, and not for their fathers fault. For as
Ezechiel says. The soul which sins shall dye: the son shall not bear
the iniquity of his father: nor shall the father bear the iniquity of the
son. Nor is that contrary hereunto which is in the first commandment;
Visiting the sins of the fathers on the children unto the third and fourth
generation in them that hate me: for the ancient and present writers do
generally understand this visitation, to be when the children do imitate, or
participate, the sins of their predecessors: and so visitare, is visum
iterare: to visit, is to come and see the same sins. Or admit it be to
visit 1. to chastize and punish: yet he threatens it only to the 3. and 4.
generation, in them which hate him: meaning, if these generations do hate him,
as their fathers did: for a generation which should love God, shall not be
punished for their faults, who before did hate him. At least, not in eternal
punishments. Wherefore eternal loss of glory being an eternal punishment laid
upon Infantes dying in original sin, doubtless they undergo it for their
own, and not for any parents fault.

7. And though I granted, that sometime temporally in this world God punished
the children in regard of the parents offenses, so far forth as the damage
of the children may be a grief, or a penalty to the parents: yet I verily
think ( saluo semper meliori judicio; praesertim s^nctae matris Ecclesiae)
that even such their temporal punishment are not alone for their parents
faults, but that the children themselves have also deserved the same. And
then, both at once, the parents are punished by the calamityes of their
children (as being parts of themselves) and the children likewise suffer such
temporal punishments justly for their own original guyltynes, or offenses
actual.

ORIGINAL SIN COMES FROM Adam alone as Principal: and how bad parents have
good children etc. Sect. 4.
1. Wherefore I say, Original sin and his punishments are derived only from
Adam, as principal; unto us as Accessaryes; with whom as our General head,
all mankind makes but one body. And no Infantes are herein punished for their
other mediate or imediate next parents offenses. For S. Paul says. By one man
sin entered into the world, Romans 5. ^o^cil. Mi ^euit. cap. 2. Can. 2.
which the Mileuitan Council says is original sin, contracted by
generation from Adam.

2. And therefore diverse Ancient Fathers wrote against those Heretics; who
would conclude that the Act of marriage was of it self evil, because the
children begotten were borne in original sin, which they suppose falsely to
be derived from the copulation of the parents, as the next causes, as well of
the Accidental sin, as of the real substance of the infantes: whereas in
truth (distinguishing between the one and the other) they should have
referred the cause of that sin unto Adam alone; as does. S Paul, saying By
one man, and should have ascribed only the substance of the soul, and body, to
God, and the parents. For suppose the Parents be odious Adulterers, or do
sin much in other circumstances of generation; yet as allmighty God does
concur and cooperate to the natural work of conception; creating and
ininfusing souls even in children unlawfully begotten, where he forbiddes and
abhorres the moral dishonesty: So likewise the parents do participate in the
natural propagation, S. Hieron. lib. 3. Apol. contra Ruffin.
without communicating this original corruption. Even as stolen corn being
sown in forbidden ground, does nevertheless grow as other corn does, by the
help of God and nature of the earth: and yet herein, neither does our lord
consent to the theft; nor is it a bad action to sow corn, but to steal it*
or to sow it contrary to commandment where he should not.

3. And though the infant that is borne, offend not actually: nor the parents
who beget the body; S. Aug. lib. de Nupt. Idem. lib. 2. de peccat. merit. cap.
25.26. etc.
nor our lord who creates the soul: yet we are borne polluted with original
sin; not as the proper effect of marriage or generation; but as an ordinary
accident usually following the conception of our humane nature, in respect we
are the posterity and members of Adam our head, By whom only sin entered upon
all mankind. And herehence is the reason: why parents justified and in state
of grace, do nevertheless beget children subject to sin and original
corruption, as much as others; not so much because generation is an act of our
carnal man, and justification is an effect in our spiritual man (for the
wholeman is justified) but especially because we and every creature generamus
nobis similes: in specie, magis quam in indiuiduo: we do procreate our
offspring each creature like himself, rather like in special kind of nature,
then in particular propertyes of person; as of men to proceed mankind etc. For
as the progeny was never like the parent in every personal respect; so when
they are a like in many such particulers, yet it is rather accidentally
contingent, then essentially necessary: And so we see foolish or lame parents
have sound or discreet children; and contratiwise. As then parents do not
necessarily communicate to children their personal propertyes (no not of
nature, much less of grace) so to be in state of grace a justified man, is a
personal property: and therefore mo more marvel to have children unregenerate
borne of just parents; then to see a child borne uncircumcised of a
circumcised lew: or to see a cleansed wheat corn, bring forth an ear of
wheat, which again has fazells and chafe.

HOW ORIGINAL SIN IS DERIVED from Adam by means of our parents and yet we
have not our souls from them, ex traduce. Sect. 5.
1. ANd allthoughe Original sin be a corruption of our nature, rather then
an personal fault, yet it is not any part of our nature, as proceeding from
nature positiuely, but only a privation or defecte following nature, and
proceeding from Adams freewill; and infecting our will as parts and branches of
Adam* Wherefore it is properly a sin, because it had consent of will thereunto;
which we cannot say of other natural defectes, as to be borne deaf, dumb,
blind, lame, or disfigured; because these are no way referred to any consent
of will.

Also infantes neither have thoughts, words, nor deeds, against the
eternal law of God: and yet they have this original sin, which is not
contained in that description for that description is understood of actual
sin only: But original sin consistes not in any action, for it is only a
gultines, a spotte, or blemish; no^ any actual transgression.

2. As for that Argument of the Pelagians, which so much pressed S. Augustine,
about the traduction of our soul, it is thus propounded, and answered. Sin,
say they has his seat in the soul, not in the flesh: But the soul is
created, and not derived from Adam, nor our parents; therefore neither is this
original sin derived from the one, or from the other by generation, but
follows by imitation.

First it is answered in general, that it cannot be by imitation, because
neither can children imitate their parents so soon as they are borne; and yet
even then most agree they are guilty of original sin. Nor is this sin any
action; and therefore no imitation; for to imitate, is to do somewhat; but it
is called sin original not actual; and is accounted a guilte of our nature,
not a fact of our person. Alexand. de Hales 2. part. q. 105. memb 4.

S. Bonaue^t in sent. l. 2. d. 31. in principal. q. 1.




3. Next, about the proposition. As all deuines agree that the soul is the
seat of sin; so yet if the soul may herin be depraved by the flesh, as some
think, then may original sin be transfused into the soul by generation of
the body. These men say the flesh must needs be the means of co^ueying this
sin unto the soul as unto his seat: for if the soul should be created
alone, and not be joined to the body, it should in that case be free from this
infection. And it seems just, that as Adams flesh was first corrupted by his
soul which first admitted sin; so now the soul should be first corrupted
by the flesh still deriuing sin: and so original sin, is both a corruption
of penality subiecting us to all misery: and a corruption of viciosity
inclyning us to all sin* 1. by rebellion against the spirit, 2. by drawing
the soul downward. 3. because the soul of it self is not able to govern
all our appetites without divine grace.

4. Thus therefore, say they, that the flesh does deprave the soul, being
united unto it, as a wound in the body makes the soul grieve; but if you
cut the flesh wanting life, it feels no pain: So the flesh has not sin
in it self as in his seat, no more then wine has in it self dronkennes, and
yet makes others drunk: and so the body is able to infecte, and to work upon
the soul. 1. not by predominance, as one eleme^t or mixte body upon another.
2* nor by influence, as the heavens upon these inferior bodies. 3. nor by
divine power, as the fire upon dammed spirits but. 4. by Sympathy of united
correspondence, as in a phrensy, or lunacy, such a distemper or quality of the
body makes the mind to be mad or foolish. And so the corrupt distemper of
our flesh does disorder our soul whit sinfullnes: which sinful diste^per is
not actually but dispositiuely in the seed of the parent, or flesh of the
infant: nor is it in the flesh until it come to be joined to the soul, which
is only the full and final seat of sin.

5. And note that all this may be true, in respect of that radical
concupiscence, which is as it were the positive material part of original
sin: S. Ansel. deconcep. virginal. cap. 7. and 10.
but the formal true nature of original sin consisting priuatiuely in the
wa^te of original justice; this privation is not caused nor conveyed unto the
soul by the flesh* Nor by that carnal lust, which more or less, is in the
natural generation of all men. For if by supernatural privilege any parents
should engendre without all lust, yet the child should be infected with
original sin: or if lust were the cause thereof, ^hen according to the
excess of lust in the parents, Scotus in lib. 2. sent. d. 31.
should original sin be more or less in the children. Wherefore though. S.
Augustine do often say, that it is not generation, but lust which does derive
this sin, he only intendes to show, that the sole act of generation is not
the only cause of original sin; for even in paradise there should have been
the act of generation, Lib. de peccat. m^ritis. Lib. de nupt. and concupisc.
Lib. 5. co^tra Iulia^^m. c. 3.
and yet therein should have been no sin. But by lust may be meante the
propagation of our corrupt nature, of which corruption, lust is a certain
sign and effect: wherefore when he says original sin is derived by lust,
he means, that this corrupt propagation of our nature (whereof lust is a
sign) is the means to derive original sin.

6. And so when. S. Augustine says of the body and the soul, that the one is
corrupted in the other as in an Unclean vessel, either it may be true by way
of moral comparison in regard of that concupiscence radical (as is before
said) which, in some is the material positive part of original sin, and
having his material seat in the flesh, by this dispositiuely the soul may be
infected in the body. Or it must be vnderstoo^ of the complete conjunction of
the soul with the flesh which is seminally derived from Adam; at which time of
their conjoined union we first become perfect humane creatures; and so then
(and not before) we are corrupted, when the soul and body are conjoined: for
then first, are we perfect humane creatures capable of sin: and then are we
first complete sons and members of Adam. And so then is original sin
contracted, and the soul seems as is were to be polluted in the body, as in
an unclean vessel: not that any actual infection of sin was in the flesh
before the soul was infused, which corruption should straight redounde out of
the nature of the flesh into the soul so soon as ever it was infused; nor
when the soul was created a part by it self in the body (for in the body it
is created) that then al^^ighty God* created it with original sin cleaving
to it. I say that neither of these can be: for the body alone, or soul alone,
is not a complete perfect man, nor so capable of sin; and therefore till they
be joined they are not Adams posterity, nor so infected with original sin,
which (for better memory sake, and understanding) again I say, is then first
fastened on us, so soon as we become perfect humane creatures derived from
Adam, and so are considered as parts and progeny of him, by whom alone
original sin is entered upon all mankind.

7. And so lastly, it is answered to the Pelagians assumption, and inference*
Vidz: The soul is not derived from Adam; nor therefore original sin which is
in the soul. That original sin in the soul, is not considered to belong
thereunto; whither we falsely suppose the soul to be traduced from Adam, or
whither we believe it truly to be created of God; but only in respect that the
soul being joined to the body, then makes a complete creature, who is a part
or member of Adam, and so only capable and subject to this original sin.
Also furthermore consider: that to the end that sin should be derived from
Adam, it is not necessary that the soul also be derived from him: but it is
enoughe if the complete reasonable creature (whereof the soul is a part) be in
descent a member of Adam. And observe: that generation is not finished in the
production of the form or soul alone, nor of the matter or body alone, but in
the complete conjunction and union of both together: wherefore he may be said to
be the next cause of generation, who is the next cause of this conjunction* But
our parents do so dispose and affoarde the material part, which is the
seed or body, that the soul which is the form, must in order of nature
necessarily follow and come to be conjoined thereunto: in which sense, a man is
said to beget a man, and so though he be not Author of the soul, yet he is
called father of the whole creature, because he is in nature the next cause of
this union and conjunction of the soul with the body. Thus therefore I
conclude, that we derive original sin from Adam only, as being our generarll
father alone; for though our other ancestors and parents be the isntrumental
causes or as conduytes the con^eyors hereof; yet only Adam is the chief cause
and founteyne, from whom we do derive this original corruption: but not from
him, nor them, as Authors of our souls: save only from him as the root, and
by our parents as the branches, all we do participate of this bitter fruit.

OUR SAVIOVR; AND OUR B. LADY WERE exempted from Original sin. Sect 6.
1. Nevertheless, from this general rule are ex^epted our Savior Christ and
his holy mother. Cardinal Sarna. in conciliat. S. Tho. and Scoti. lib. 3.
controuers. 3.
Unto our L. Jesus original sin did neither perteyne in facto nor in debito.
Unto the blessed Virgin in debito as du^, but not in deed in facto. Unto all
us it belongs, both in deed, and as our due. As the undefiled virgin was a
member and a daughther of Adam, seminally deriu^d, so was Original sin due to
her nature as a part of him* And besides, there is a conception of seed to
frame the body, when the child is first of all engendered; and a conception of
of complete nature, when the soul coming to that body, it is so first
quickened. from the first engendring till the perfect quickening, original
sin is in preparatiue possibility due to that body which is in framing,
because it descendes semi^ally from Adam: But it cannot take possession in
fact until the soul be joined, and the whole creature perfectly quickened:
for where there is no soul, there can be no sin.

2. In the first conception, Original sin was due to our blessed lady,
according to natural possibility: But in the very instant of the second
conception, and before the complete union of the soul, by supernatural grace
it was kept from my possession in fact, and she was extraordinarily prevented
and preserved in all clear purity. Some few others have bin cleared and
purifyed from original sin after their perfect quickening, and before their
birthe: But our blessed lady before both: so that she was no sooner a living
creature, but she was of God the father a sanctified daughter; for so it
behooued to have an immaculate mother of God the son: and of God the holy
ghost a perfect pure undefiled spouse.

3. This is the most pious and probable opinion: though it be not decreed as a
point of faith: Sixtus 4. and Pius. 5 in Constit.
no may the contrary be called heretically false. Neither can I see, what
inconvenience can follow of this pious opinion: that as our L. Jesus alone was
free from all possibility and possession of original sin; so our holy virgin
was free from all possession, but not from all possibility thereof. He was so,
in the very nature of his generation, because conceived by the holy ghost. She,
only by miraculous virtue of grace, altering the course of nature. She was
indebted by nature to be a child of wrath: but an especial privilege of
grace paid that debte, and prevented her attachment.

Psalm. 8^. Comment. ibidem.
4. And so nevertheless she had need, and was indeed redeemed of her son,
both from that debte which she owed, and also from all those sins and evils
wherinto without this privilege she should have fallen. So when David said.
Thou have taken out my soul from the lowest hell. Saint Augustine interprets
those words, not as if David's soul ever had been in the lowest hell: but he
was so freed that he should never come thither. And it is more for the
physician to prevent a sickness, whereto I am certainly subject, then to heal
me afterward when I have been sick. And so our Savior redeemed his mother
from sin which naturally she should have contracted: and may be esteemed a
more worthy redemption, then if by sin she had been once polluted. And yet
she suffered bodily death, and some other humane miseryes, rather as perteyning
to her abouesaid debte or nature which she inherited from Adam, then any way
belonging to any sin in herself. Or else: though grace had prevented and
destroyed all sin in her soul; yet it had not extinguished, nor was
convenient to destroy the ordinary natural qualityes of her body: first,
because enduring those, she merited so much more in heaven: secondly, that it
might^ appear to the world she was a true humane creature, of whose pure
flesh our Savior took our true humane nature.

5. If Original sin had polluted and possessed her, she had been during that
time abominable unto God for such sin, Petrus Ribaden^yra flos Sanct.
and in bondage thereunto, and so by it unto Satan. But was it meet that at any
time she should be said to be odious to our lord? or that the devil or sin
should have her subject in their captivity? or defiled in pollution? who was
to be the mother of God himself* Secondly, if it were in our pouer, would we
not choose to be borne of the most virtuous and unspotted parents that we
could? And was it not in the power of God thus to prepare and preserve his
mother from original sin? and if it were in his power, doubteles he had will
to do it: because out of question he carried extraordinary love unto her; for
though primarily she merited not to be his mother, but of his sole mercy he
did choose her and not another; yet having made this election, he may be said
afterward by his own law (of honoring parents) bound in dutiful love to give
her all the honor and merit possible whereof a pure creature might he capable.
Wherefore S. Bonauenture concludes, that in deed our lord could have made for
us amore comely and beautiful world, In speculo cap. 8.
but it is probable he could not make for himself a more excellent mother.
Thirdly, it was inconvenient in regard of himself that any blemish of
original sin should defile her soul* for the honor or dishonor of the
parent redoundeth to the child: and so it had been a diminution of his own
honor, to have been the son of an impure mother.

6. Fourthly, S. Ihon Baptist was sanctified in his mothers womb, at the very
voice of her who had our Savior in her womb: and is not she herself more
worthy of a greater privilege in the same kind? vidz: the mother of God sooner
then the messenger. Fifthly, S. Andrew the Apostle auowched, and after him
Theodoret, Abdias in eius vita. lib. 4. Theod. in Cant. lib. 3.
that she excelled the cherubim and Seraphim in purity: But how was this, if
she had original sin? or how is she above the Angels in dignity and glory,
if she were inferior in purity and grace? or is it meet that any mere
creature should be more excellent, or above the mother of God?

7. Sixthly, S. Augustine says he would ever have her excepted, when he treated
of sin. And as he judged it absurd to suppose that her flesh was eaten of
worms, or corrupted in rottennes, which had norished and given substance to
the manhood of Christ: and therefore he auowed and believed her boody to be
assumpted into heaven immediately after her death, according to her story and
the tradition of the church. So, me thinks it is more inconvenient we should
yield him to be borne of flesh which at my time had been subject to sin: for
sin is much more base then the worms; and pollution of soul, is far worse
then any corruption of body. Seauenthly, I am sure if it were in the hands of
any good Christian to grante her this pre-eminence, he would not deteyne it:
why then should he deny to believe it in his heart, when it is permitted and
commended as a probable and most pious opinion, and when he would give it her
if he were able. Eighthly, Lib. 1. cap 9. and lib. 6 cap. 49. Cardinal. Barren.
in Annotat. martyrol. December. 8. Council. Basil. ses. 36. and Tride^^ ses. 5.

Sixtus 4. Alexander 6.

Leo. 10. Pius. 5.


this pure conception of our blessed Lady has been manifested by diverse
revelations to S. Brigitte, which are amongst those that be approved. And to
Elpinus a Reverend English Abbot: the verity thereof confirmed by S. Anselmus
Archbish. of Canterbury: and after his sole^nization in England of the Feast of
her pure conception, it was first permitted and since received in all
Catholic cuntryes. Thus does the Catholic church honor her. And this has
been permitted by several Coun^ells. And rests commended by sundry Popes.
Wherefore let us confess, that as the first Adam was made of earth before it
was cursed with thorns or weeds: so our Lord Jesus the second Adam took
flesh of her flesh which was blessed and never cursed with any nettles of
concupiscence, or thorns of original sin.

8. O holy Virgin more pure then the heavens! They are most clear: and yet
but a general habitation for Saints there to see God. Thou werte a special
tabernacle both to enterteyne God himself; and to affoarde him part of thy
substance. O how could that be at any time unclean, where he dwelled! how
could that be ever touched with sin, which he assumed! The diligent Bees will
not harbor in an unclean hiue, but does annoynte them with sweet moystures,
before they make their honey. The cleanly Ermyne will rather be killed by the
Huntesmen, then to save his life enter into any place which is filthy. Much
less will the pure wisdom of God dwell in a body subject to sin: as said
wise Solomon: wherefore he also says in the Canticles, Sap. 1. Cant. 1.
and many Doctors apply it to our blessed Lady. Thou art all fair, O my
lo, and in thee there is no spotte. And therefore with the Catholic Church,
let us say, in her service: O holy and immaculate virginity, I know not with
what praises to extolle thee; because whom the heavens could not conteyne,
thou did maynteyne in thy bosom. Blessed art thou among women; and
blessed be the fruit of thy womb: Because whom the heavens could not
conteyne, thou did maynteyne in thy bosom. O happy and sacred Virgin Mary!
O most worthy of all honor: pray for the laity: entreat for the clergy: make
request for all devout womankinde: O let all sorts find thy certain succor,
whosoever do celebrat thy sacred Conception.

8. O founteyn sealed up for the water oflife: let thy intercession help to
quench in us all coals of concupiscence. O Garden of paradise well guarded to
keep the tree of life: let thy prayers preserve us from too much liberty of
our senses, and all loosenes of life. O brightest glass of Crystal, without
any spotte: obtain for us all clearenes of heart and body, freed from all
foul thoughts, or other fleshly pollution.

9. O swetest rose of the valley; fairest Lily of the mounteyn; o precious
balm of Gilead; and comely Cypres of Sion: thy wonderful beauty of face, and
rare comelynes of person, were ever accompanied with such modesty of
countenance, and sobriety of behauior; and besides so blessed with an
extraordinary grace; that thy beauty never allured but abashed; thy comelynes
did not entise but amaze; nor could any harbor an unchaste thought, whiles he
beheld thy Virgins eye. O let thy gracious eyes of chastity so look down
upon us in favor, and for us so look up to thy Son in prayer, that we may
be always virtuously sober in our actions; religiously civil in our speeches;
in our very thoughts pure; and chaste in all our conversation. All which we
earnestly entreat, for the all sufficient merits and mercyes of our Savior
thy Son; and by the immaculate purity of thy conception.

THE MOST GRACIOUS AND Wonderful remedies of our original sin. Sect. 7.
1. THus was our blessed Lady prevented with grace. But how shall we be made
clean, who are conceived by such unclean seed? except only as Job answered:
By thee alone, o Lord: whose grace, says S. Paul, does superabounde our
sin. For sin came by man: but grace is of more power, as proceeding from
God. Sin did not take away from us all good: nor bring upon us all evil. But
grace does deliver us from all the evil wherinto we might fall; and is
sufficient to give us all the good we can desire. Adams sin brought a curse
only to his descendentes, and to the earth: But by the merits of Christ all
creatures (except the devils who hate him) either have or may have part of
his blessing. For by him not only all mankind is redeemed: but the good Angels
are confirmed in their grace: and even these senceles creatures shall be renewed
in their nature.

2. And in the salvation of our soul, there is more force in Gods grace, then
in man's sin: for it is easy, and we are prone to fall, or to dye in sin:
but we are lumpish heavy, and it is exceeding hard to be raised up to life of
grace. wherefore grace is the stronger, and the more worthy: and therefore we are
the more indebted, considering how weak we are, and how unworthy. And it is
marvelous to consider the proportion between our sinful misery, and our
gracious remedy: As against original sin is appointed Baptism, to
regenerate us in grace, from that wherein we were generated by nature: that as
infantes are defiled by means of Adams corruption* without their own fact,
so they are washed by means of Christ's redemption without their own help.
Children are spotted before they be aware of it; and they are cleansed before
they know of it. In their conception, unwitting; and in their baptism,
ignorante. We are raised by others, before we have reason to ask help, as by
others we were cast down, before we had sense of our fall. Or if some be of
years of discretion before they be baptized, as infidels converted: or if
christians after Baptism become sinners, and come again to repentance* in the
first sort the grace of baptism takes away all sin original and actual,
and all punishment eternal and temporal* in both sorts, there is first a
justification without foregoing merits, quae fit in homin^ which of God alone
is effected in man; and then a second justification, quam facit homo in which
man does his part, and has following good works. In which second justice it
is reason we follow Gods grace to perform some satisfaction and to obteynes
merits, as we had run after our concupiscence to incur guiltynes and
suffer punishments.

3. All our merits and all our good are derived from God: but our first
justice in our first conversion does so come from him alone, that we are not so
much guilty by Adam of original sin without our own fault, as Christ alone
does iustifye us from all sin without our own merit. O greatness! O goodness
of grace! more powerful, and more abundant then sin. O sweet JESUS, who
do in wisdom so answer justice with mercy, that neither do we want any
favor, nor is the law unsatisfied in all rigor, and every point balanced
with convenient counterpeyse. Sinners in Adam: just in Ch^iste. In our selves
actually and really wicked: through Christ truly and inherently just. We
were inthralled by our sinful lives: he redeemed us by his holy death. By his
passion and sufferinges he satisfied for our punishments: and our good works
have merit by the virtue of his actions.

4. But to insi^te especially in his comparison with Adam. His cross stood
upon Adams grave, there beginning life, where death began. By a tree we
perished: S. Hieron^
and we were ransomed on a tree. He repaired his church his beloved spouse, by
the water and blood which issued out of his side dying: as Eua the wife of Adam
was taken out of his side sleeping: and by that water he cleanses our spots
of sin, and by that blood he purchased to us the beauty of grace. By occasion
of a woman came a general curse: and a greater blessing by means of a woman:
wherefore Adam called the first Eua. and we salute the second quite turning the
same letters into Aue. The first man Adam lost all by ambitions pride; because
being but a man, he aspired to be as God: and the second man JESUS restored all
by obedient humility; who being in deed God, yet descended to become a man.

ALL THE GVILTE OF ORIGINAL SIN is quite forgiven in Baptism: and the first
motions of concupiscence are not sin, until we delighte or consent unto
them. Sect. 8.
1. ANd although our Savior in Baptism have cleared us from all Guilte of
original sin; yet not during this life from all temporal punishment thereof:
S. Amb.
as not from Death, hunger, sickness, nor from all ignorance* or motions of
concupiscence. And although he has freed us from all punishment destroying
our soul; yet not from all punishment which may increase our merit: as they
say, sustulit omnem paenam destruentem, non omnem paenam promonentem, and so he
has left in us these infirmityes of our motions in concupiscence of hunger,
sickness, and death, to be as skarres and marks of our soar* and wounds which
are healed* 1. to the intent, that seeing, and remembering our hurt, and our
help, Alexand. de Hales. part. 4. q. 8. de Sac. Bapt. art. 2.
we should remain thankful, and not forgetful. 2. to humble us by
consideration of these infirmityes, who else would be proud. 3. to exercise us
in diligence of mortification, and in vigilance of prayers, lest we should be
negligent and careless. 4. to affoard us occasion of more merit, and so to
crown us with more glory.

2. Or we may lay that he has freede us from all effects and personal
punishmetns of original sin, which so perteyned to our persons that they
would condemn our particular souls* but not from all natural defectes which
necessarily belong to our general nature, whereby we remain in the estate of
all mankind: for as a wise phisicyan he has sufficiently cured every man's
particular soul, not quite changing his general nature, abundantly providing,
and in better sort, for our corrupt nature to be helped and preserved by
grace, rather then to extinguish this nature, and to create another. For he
will save the same which had offended: which is greater mercy to us, and more
power and wisdom in himself. And is it not more to preserve a vessel of
glass, then of iron?

3. I said he has left us subject to the motions of concupiscence; which are
not properly sin; Council. Trident. Sess. 5. Ephesians. 5. Colos. 1. Joan. 3. 1.
Pet. 2.
but only the remnantes and effects of original sin, and inclinations alone
to actual sin. For Baptism does altogether so abolish original sin,
that nothing thereof remains in us which has still the true nature of sin.
Otherwise how are we cleansed by his washing? as S. Paul says. And has
reconciled us to exhibit us immaculate. And to be renati, borne again by
water and the holy ghost, thereby to be as free from original sin quasi modo
geniti, even as newborn infantes are clean from actual sin.

4. And in circumcision the foreskin was not imputatiuely but really cut away.
In Jordan Naamans leprosy was quite taken away. And S. Gregory says That he
who auouche^h that sins are not altogether released in Baptism, Lib. 9.
epist. 39. 1. Cor. 15. Romans 6. Colos. 2. Enchirid. cap. 52.
let him say that the Egiptians were not indeed truly drowned in the red sea.
And S. Paul proves* that as in Adam all dye, so in Christ all shall be
revived. viz: truly: verily: really: not so alone esteemed or reputed. And that
we are buried together with Christ by Baptism in his death. S. Augustine
infers expressly That as in him was fulfilled a true death, so in us a true
remission of sins: and as in him a true resurrection, so in us a true
justification. But the death of Christ and resurrection were true every way:
not true in regard of somewhat, and in another respect false: Therefore also
the remission of sins is a true death of sin: not in respect of the Guilte
only, but in regard of all things which have respect of sin.

5. Not taken away in the Guilte alone (as heretics avouch) and remaining in
the Act: Vide Bell. Tom. 2. lib. 1. de Baptis. c. ^3.
for how can the Act of sin be separated from the Guilte in this
concupiscence? Nay they themselves must needs confess it has still some
Guilte, whiles they say it is still true sin: for how can true sin remain
without some Guilte? Or if we be free only from the dominion; not free from all
blemish or consideration of true sin (though it be said this blemish is not
imputed unto us) yet if there remain true sin, then are we not in deed
free; but in opinion. And if that blemish or spotte remaining, be true sin:
then according to their own doctrine, it is a true mortal sin, for they
admit none venial: But to remain in true mortal sin; and yet not to be
in favor of God is impossible for the same person to be in state of grace and
of salvation, and in mortal sin, and so in state of damnation; all at the
same instante; is as possible, as to join light and darkness, Christ and
Beliall.

6. But Protestants finding in our weak natures after Baptism certain motions
of concupiscence unto sin, they deceive themselves, supposing these to be in
deed sin. Some of ignorance, because they distinguish not between the
prouenes, or inclinations of concupiscence; and between the Act of
concupiscence, for the first is most especially perteyning to original sin;
though after baptism it is no sin, but only the effect of original sin.
And the second which is an Actual motion unto sin, perteynes rather to
Actual sin then to original: to which if there be added consent or full
delighte, then it is a complete actual sin, otherwise no sin. These men
therefore are deceived in accompting that original sin, which perteyneth to
actual. But some others do account the very first pronenes or
concupiscibility, without any act or consent, to be of it se^fe sin, because
it seems the root of sin. Wherein they do manifestly admit that defecte
and ignominy of the virtue of our lords grace in Baptism, which S^ Augustine
was so careful not to admit, viz: that in baptism original sin only is
razed of, not utterly rooted out.

7. And in this point: whether the first motions of our concupiscence be
sin? Calvin himself is driven to confess the Ancyent Doctors to be against
him. His words are these. Neither is it needful to labor in serching what
the Ancyent do think herein, Instit lib. 3. cap. ^.10.
when therabout one Augustine may suffice, who faithfully and with great
diligence has collected all their judgments, and a little after, he adds.
Yet between him and us there is this difference. That he in deed dare not call
the m^lady of concupiscence a sin: but being content to decipher it by the
name of Infirmity; he teaches it then finally to become sin, when either
action or consent is added thereunto. Which is the same, and no other, then that
which S. James said. Concupiscence when it has conceived brings forth
sinn^; and sin, when it is complete, brings death. Upon which words S.
Gregory, and our venerable Countryman Bid, makes three daughters or effects
of concupiscence. Cap. 1.
1. suggestion: when any unlawful thought does sodeinly present it self to
our mind; whereunto if we do not consent, but resist, it does not bring
forth sin, but a crown of life. 2. Delectation: when we do not perfectly
resist the first motion or suggestion, but in a mixte sort we are somewhat
delighted therein, although not with a full, but with an imperfect consent:
then has sin conceived venially; not mortally. But in the 3. if we proceed
to a deliberate full consent, although it be only in thought, yet then is it
a complete sin, either venial, or mortal, according as the matter of sin
(whereunto we have consented) is venial or mortalll. As it is a mortal deadly
sin, to see a woman and with full consent of thought deliberately to lust
after her: this is a complete sin bringing forth death, though it never
come to action, because as our Savior says, he has already committed
adultery in his heart: and as he has fully in thought consented, and either
purpo^ed or deliberately desired to put his thought in execution; so if he had
means he would in deed practice it in Action.

8. As for those Textes in the 6. and 7. chapters to the Romans, though
concupiscence be there diverse times called sin. Either he means
concupiscence actual which has some delighte or consent. Or else if he
understand the first motions which are the remnantes of original sin; yet he
calls them sin improperly; and so these are termed sin, because they are
following effects and remnantes of original sin. Not that either of these
after baptism are in themselves sin, 2. cor. 5. Et S. Ambros. in hunc locum.

Romans 7. Lib. 1. co^tra duas epist, cap. 10.


except we do consent unto them. In like sort S. Paul was, soulde under
sin: where S. Chrysostom says, he speaks in the person of wicked men, not
absolutely of himself. Or as S. Augustine interprets him against the
Pelagians: He was soulde, under the sin of Adam; but now, is redeemed
through Christ our lord. And so he complayneth of some remnantes of that
bondage: that he had still the sens^ of concupiscence; but did not consent: and
therefore adds: what he did; that he did not approve it, viz: not allow of
those motions which he did fee^e. And so: he performed the evil, which he
hated: vbi facere se dixit etc. where he said He performed: not by the
affection of consent, and fullfilling action, but in the very motion of
concupiscence: calling that a Deed, which was but an unwilling motion of a
thought. And s^ the law, non concupisces: binds against actual desires
with consent: not against the first motions remaining as effects of original
corruption: and so concupiscere, est, post concuspiscentias ire: and those
first motions are fomes peccati, the fuel of sin and without consent, Rem.
8.
no way indeed sin, no more then wood is fi^e, until it be k^nled. And so
(...) 1. the wisdom or sensuality of the flesh, is enemy to God: by which
sensuality he also means actual sin, and not original. And so generally
for the most part when any Ancyent Doctor calls concupiscence indefini^^^^,
sin, they speak of actual concupiscence with consent. Or do so term the
effects of original sin after baptism, not because they are absolutely,
sin but because they are remnants of sin, and do allure unto sin.

9. If it be said, that all is sin which agrees not to the law of God, or
is (...) It is true; taking sin in a general sense for vi^ium a defect: as
there be vitia naturae, vel artis, defectes of nature, or of art: viz: to be
blind, lame etc* and such an (...) or sin, we may call our natural
concu^iscence; which of it self without con^ent is no more sin, speaking
properly and strictly, then to be hungry or thirsty against our will. Or no
more then dreams of murder, and unchaste imaginations of men asleep, whereof
they gave no faulty occasion being awake. And though such dreams do not
agree e^actly with the law of God, yet who will strictly and properly call
them sins? They agree not with the law in their substance materially: but
formally in their intention, they are not against the law. As a woman ravi^hed
or forced against her will, without any consent; the Action materially agrees
not with the law exactly: and yet therein who can account her guilty of sin?

10. Finally we cannot say the first motions of concupiscence are sin,
because we ought to abhor them, and because God does hate them: for all is
not sin which deserves to be hated. Because evil of punishment may be hated
as well as evil of Gui^te: and whatsoever allureth to sin may be hated,
though it self be not sin. And so we abhor the first mot^ons of
concupiscence, as occasions, not indeed as sins. And allmighty God hates
all evil, Sap. 1. S. Aug. lib. 5. in Iul. c. 7. ^ib. Con^es. 10 cap. 28.
even of punishment, and so he detesteth Death, and is said not to have made
death; not as the first Author: sed vt peccati vl^or: but as the just punishe^
of sin by death, He hates all evil, of punishment, or of guilte; in
respect of the evil it self, not in respect of the occasion of good which
he draws out of the evil. And so of our worldly aflictions, says S.
Augustine. Who would suffer miseryes or difficultyes? Thou do command us o
lord to endure them, not to love them, none do love what they suffer; though
to suffer they do love: for though he joy in suffering; yet he had rather he
had nothing to suffer. In like sort we may not desire concupiscence: not
because it is sin except we consent; but because it induces to sin, and is
troblesome, greiuous etc. neither ought the judgment of God to displease us;
who would have it to remain for an Agony, and exercise of virtue; and told
his Apostle. My Grace is sufficient unto thee: for his strenghte is perfited in
our weakness.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE FORMER DEclarations about Original sin; with some
short admonitions to mortify his force. Sect. 9.
1. THus I have said somewhat of sundry questions about Originalle sin,
wherein if I be tedious to some; yet to others I know it will seem to short. I
confess it is a matter more lamentable, then disputable for all: wherefore in
our meditation upon this corruption, let us mourn with David. That in
iniquityes we were conceived, and our mothers brought us forth in sins.

2. For though Baptism do cleanse us; yet some sorrowful remembrance thereof
is good to humb^e us. Baptism takes away, omnem labem all the guilte, Innoce^.
3.
all the spots and nature of sin paste; non omnem somitem, not a^l the
fuel and inclination unto sin to come. Wherefore come, o my soul, in our
present conforte let us praise our Redeemer* who had purifyed and washed all
the uncleanness of our Birthe: and in our following diligence, by the help of
his grace, let us be careful to mortefy and keep under all corruptions of our
life. O my soul be thou watchefull over my body: I will not say kill my flesh,
because it is a part of my self, and I may not hate it: yet remember it was a
means in our conception, by which the purity was stained. I say when thou
werte infused, it did blemish that luster and integrity which now thou
should have, if thou werte not in his corrupt prison; though it defiled
not the cleannes and purity of thy nature which thou first had by creation,
and which we may recover, and better by the grace of Christ, if we keep our
flesh in due mortification. Let us make gaynes by our loss, and win more
reward by our pains. O blessed be our Redeemer Jesus, who has given us this
possibility. Let us resist and suppress the motions of our concupiscence,
that we may advance and increase the vigor of our spirit. Nay, o my soul,
thou art bound to do no less: for if in Adam, his soul had not first
consented to her own fond affections and desires, the body had been yet still
in obedience: therefore as the rebellion of the flesh was first occasioned on
thy part (so to pay for this fault) the disquietnes of continual
concupiscences must be endured by thy mourning patience, and overcome by thy
mortifying diligence.

3. Be thou watchful over thy discerning reason, least ignorance make
falsehood truth: be heedfull to thy irascible courage, least impatience drive a
way that which is good: and be careful about thy concupiscible choice, least
sensuality follow that which is bad. Whereas contrarily, our concupiscibility
should only embrace good: our irascibility should only hate bad: and our reason
should only be fixed on truth. But, alas, we are witty and apt for errors,
therefore labor to be discrete: we are headdy and subject to passions, therefore
endeavor to be moderate: we are headlong and prone to pleasures, therefore
strive to be temperate.

4. O my soul, these are our frailtyes: our reason dim: our passions strong:
and sottishnes in our desires: neither is it marueil; for we are conceived in
sins: and conceived in iniquityes. In our carnal generation, the use of
reason is suspended; the heat of lust is enflamed, and pleasure is sought in
uncleanness. O (...) better remedies, then in the merits and examples of our
Redeemer? Let us vs^ (...), and prayer, to enlighten our dimmed knowledge: let
us use patience (...) to humble and to quench our strong enflamed affections:
let us use mortificat^^^ (...) abstinence to restreyne and refreyne our sottish
vncle^^ ^leasures. O sweet (...) us these graces: o most pure immaculate and
blessed (...) Mary pray for us: o most feruorous penitent, Saint Marie
Magdalen, be thou (...) Advocate: that our regeneration may be more perfect,
then our generation was (...): that whatsoever poor integrity we have, it may
he continued: and how great (...) our uncleanness has been, that with contrite
tears it may be washsd. O we co^^esse our base birthe, conceived in sin, to
remember us to be humble: and because w^ were conceived in iniquities, we do
entreat compassion on our natural frailtyes; for thou art most graciously
pitiful.

MEDITATION. V.
Ecce enim veritatem dilexisti, incerta and oculta sapientiae tuae manifestasti
mihi.

For behold thou have loved truth: and thou have manifested unto me the
doubtful and secret things of thy wisdom.


DIVERSE DEVOVTE INTERPRETATlONS of these words. And an humble thanksgiving
of the Author for his undeserved conversion. Sect. 1.
THere is a threefolde Truth. 1. of life, against hypocrisy: in which they
are faulty who are clad in the wolle of sheep, whiles they dissemble the
malice of wolves. Hugo Cardinal. Math. 7. Thren. 3. Proverb. 20.
2. in Truth of doctrine, against heresy, which sercheth out false and
foolish devices. 3. In Truth of justice, against partial accepting of
persons; which is an abomination unto God. O founteyn and author of Truth,
deliver my soul from all these lies, of partiality, of heresy, and of
hypocrisy* let my life be true in devotion of hearty actions, rather then in
any ostentation of words, or seming labor of lips: let my doctrine be true,
guided by thy holy spirit and in every title submitted to thy Catholic
church, rather then in trusting to mine own wit, or relying on any others
private conceyte: let my vprighte dealing be true, respecting others as I would
be used my self; neither bending for fear, nor leaning for affection: for
behold, o lord, it is evident in all things, thou love truth.

2. Wherefore in my particular Cases of conscience; in my private sins, and
other doubts what should I do? some men are ignorant, some men are negligent,
some excuse all, and some do much extenuate their faults: but I know my
iniquities, against ignorance; I have my sin always against me, and I will
set my self always against sin, without negligence: I may not defend my
fault, but I do accuse my self to have sinned above all unto thee, and
before thee to have committed evil. Nor would I extenuate, but aggrauate my
offenses, fearing least they be worse then I suppose: for I know thou shall be
be justified in thy words and will overcome when thou art judged. Behold
therefore I spare not to discover eue^ my natural infirmityes, I was conceived
in iniquityes. And all this playnnes I use in confession with sincerity: for
thou love truth.

3. Also thou love truth, not alone in confession, but as well in
satisfaction: for so thou give prerogative to mercy that yet thou would
keep truth; S. Aug.
thou do pardon him that confesses yet if he punish himself: So is
observed, both mercy and truth; mercy, because the man is freed; truth,
because the sin is punished. O blessed S. Augustine, it appears thou werte a
Catholic penitent; sometime punishing thy body; not a carnal protestante ever
pampering thy flesh: thou do require some sharp satisfaction, after an
entire confession; but these will not undergo the blushing of confession, much
less endure the rigor of satisfaction: they are content with the liberty of
their gospel and an easy faith, and therefore they refuse the necessity of
satisfaction and all hard truth. But though our Lords truth have hard
sayings, yet we must repent O let us not abhor these truths, which to flesh
and blood do breed hatred, for thou o lord, love truth.

4. Thy prophet Nathan promised my sins should be translated from me; Titelma.
wherefore I have great hope of pardon; and do rely on all thy promises for
thou love truth, and doubtless will perform. I also have some comfort in
this respect; because though I committed a foul fault in matter of vice,
Geneb.
yet in points of faith I have not swarued from that Truth which thou do
love. I have cast thy grace, and love, out of my will; but yet in my
understanding, I have retained thy truth: It is naught, and too bad, to have
one door barred against thee, as a vicious Israelite; but it is wor^e like a
heathen or an hetetique to shut thee out with a doble bar, or with two
gates, vidz: neither to believe right, nor to live well.

5. Or peradventure, though the wicked Believer be somewhat easier to be
conuerte^, yet remaining obstinate he is in danger to be worse punished.
Wherefore Euthymius supposes David to say thus: In my former words lamenting
my natural frailty, I might seem to extenuate my fault: o no: I revoke any
excuse: rather, Euthi^.
o lord, I accuse my self according to truth. I was great in thy favor, or as
thy Sec^etary thou did manifest unto me the secret and doubtful things of
thy wisdom. O how many hidden prophecyes have thou revealed to me, which I
have published to others? but the more I consider these favors, the greater I
acknowledge my offenses: more abominable is the treason of a Secretary, then
any falsehood of an enemy.

6. Thus I do deeply and sincerely in all truth accuse my self: yet I cannot
tell whether herin it were presumption for me to entreat thy reconciliation
and mercy, because I was once thy inward friend and favorite. To remember
passed iniuryes does provoke a malicious mind to revenge: and contrarily, why
should it not move thy merciful nature to pity him sooner whom thou did
once love, I will plead earnestly, yet with humility: I will acknowledge my
faults to be so much more detestable, because being once so gracious in thy
secret and especial love, I was so graceles as to deserve thy just and open
hate. Among men great love is often changed into great hate, as the best wine
into the sharpest vinegar: but thou o lord see not as men see, neither so
variable to be soon changed, nor so inflexible to be hardly reconciled. As it
increases my fault to have abused such gracious favor; so the remembrance of
this favor lost by my fault, does so much more afflicte my heart: as my sin
is greater, so my loss is greater, my pain is greater; and my sorrow is
great^r: O let these entreat by the greatness of thy love, that having been a
secret friend of thy privy chamber, thou would not leave me as a base sclaue
to the despite of the public world: I hope thy honor will not permit it;
and that thy great favor will not be so much diminished.

7. Thus may they pray, who have fallen from especial favors, that from their
deep fall they may be raised: and they who are admitted into secret grace,
ought also to pray, that from so dangerous a fall they may be preserved. And
in particular, thou (o my soul) must acknowledge thy self unworthy of those
graces which thou haste received; which if they be small in comparison of those
which our lord can give, or others do receive, yet are they many and great,
and more then any way thou did deserve. Or how can the sun send much
light or plenty of beams into a house which has but small windows? O my
soul, if thou desire more light, set open all thy windows. O holy spirit of
truth^ and secret wisdom, shine yet more into my heart, to show me all
necessary truth which thou do love, and still to manifest unto me the
secret and doubtful things of thy wisdom.

8. O let me see and consider how great mercyes I have received, that I may be
tha^kfull: how I did merit nothing, or rather how much I did demerite that I
may be humble: and how unprofitably I do use them; that I may be ashamed. I
fled from catholic truth which thou love, and yet thou did so love me,
that thou did make me love thy catholic truth which I declined: now I
love this truth, which has given me knowledge of thee; and how am I bound to
love thee, who did bring me to this knowledge of truth? O what sweet
secrets be in this love? they are doubtful to such as never tasted them,
because secret: and to such they are secret, because they love not thee, who
do manifest the secrets of they wisdom to none but such as do embrace the
truth which thou do love. This is thy wisdom, not to cast spiritual
pearls before ea^thly swyne; nor to hide thy heauenty treasures from weak
sucklinges, or simple hearted souls.

9. But how shall I praise thy goodness* o lord, and in particular to my self:
In the gospel it is said, thou would not suffer devils to enter into swyne
but with me thou haste cast devils out of a swyne. Do I debase my self to
say so? Behold o lord, thou love truth. I know no swyne so filthy and so
degenerate from his kind, as I was, being a Protestante, from they truth: If,
S. Mary Magdalene had seven devils of vices; how many had I of heresies; Unto
her many sins were forgiven, because she loved much? O lord I have loved but
a little, and how many sins have thou forgiven me? thy wisdom has revealed
my doubts, and manifested unto me thy secrets; I fondly doubted where was no
cause of doubt; but I am resolved by thy wisdom: I was compassed with light,
and yet I did not discern light, because I wanted hearty love unto thy
catholic truth. For I first loved not thee: but thou did prevent me
with thy love, prosecute me with thy grace, and so finally did imparte unto
me, the secrets of thy wisdom, which are the mysteryes of thy catholic faith
which now I do believe: thou haste not dealte thus with every sinner, nor unto
thousands better then my self have thou manifested as unto me, the secret and
doubtful things of thy wisdom.

10. O infinite, incomprehensible bounty! what did thy majesty behold in my
baseness? nothing verily but thine own love, wherewith thou had disposed and
prepared my heart to be vnpartiallie desirous of truth: this desire, and this
love, thou did first give me, and afterward by these thou did draw me
nearer unto thee O sweet Jesus who do neither accept nor reward any thing
which thy self haste not first given: thou haste given me love of truth, and
manifested unto me the doubtful and secret things of thy wisdom: I do
enterteyne them as pledges and earnest pence of m^ hope and election: o let me
so keep and ever reteyne them, that I may never be ashamed nor confounded in
them. Let them be means of thy better service, and no way occasions of my
greater condemnacion: I have tasted of thy love: I am acquaynted with thy
secrets: I am partaker of thy mysteryes: let me rather dye then fail or be
faynte-harted; and sooner torn in pieces then become ungrateful. I was most
unworthy to receive them; and seeing of mere mercy thou have bestowed these
talentes upon me, I desire to retain them with much thankefullnes, and
through thy grace with some gaynes of merit. O blessed Savior accept what
thou haste given: O holy virgin, and all the Angels and Saints of heaven give
continual thanks and praise unto our lord God for me. who am not able to
think much less to declare, how I owe my self.

MEDITAT^ON. VI.
Asperges me Domine hysopo, and mundabor: lauabis me, and super niuem
dealbabor. Auditui meo dabis gaudium and laetitiam: and exultabunt ossa
humiliata.

Thou shalt sprinkle me with hysope, o lord, and I shall be cleansed: thou
shalt wash me, and I shall be made white above snow. Unto my hearing thou
will give joy and gladness: and my humbled bones shall rejoice.


THE USE OF CEREMONIES DECLARED by a picture: and the propertyes of hysope,
whereunto they maybe alluded. Sect. 1.
1. THe priests of Moses law do purifye by sprinkling of blood with hysope:
Exodus 12. and 22. Number. 19. and Leuit. 24.
and so they cleansed in a type or figure. 1. such as must eat the paschall
lamb. 2. such as were defiled by touching the dead. 3 such as were infected
with leprosy. 4. or those who being penitent did offer sacrifice for their
sins. O Lord, as one who have need of all these, I look not so much to the
outward Ceremonies, as I hope to be partaker of thy inward grace by the blood
of that paschal lamb, who is also a sacrifice for the pollution and sin of
all the world.

2. In this actual sprinkling of hysope and clensing application of our
Saviors merits, and of his death and passion, we do live, we do bleeue, we
do hope, we do merit, we do labor and work our salvation with fear and
trembling, and not as Protestants te^ch, by only faith, and so with
presumptuous believing.

3. Let others therefore be content alone with colors of imputation: our souls
desire to be also innocent in substance. We respect not so much the outward
figure of hysope, as the inward virtue of our dear Saviors dear blood* Types
and ceremonies are excellent ordinances; yet we do lift up our minds highe^,
and by occasion of these we do more often remember, and more devoutly
apprehend the truths, which they do signifye. Some painted Tables are so
cut and painted, that one way they resemble a beautiful face, another way a
deaths head; and a certain artificial workman made such a like picture of
Moses brazen serpent having vnde^ it a multitude of Israelites looking upward
to be cured of the stinging of fiery serpents: and above it he placed a
looking glass in such a situation, that when he opened or drew a curtayne
hanging before the said picture (which though whiles it was covered you saw
nothing in the glass, and though whiles it was open you saw no other picture
but that of the brazen serpent) yet so soon as the curtayne was drawn you
might plainly see in the glass, not a reflection of the serpent, but a lively
representation of our Savior on the cross, with our blessed lady, S. Ihon,
and S. Mary Magdalen standing at the foot thereof: for as those other double
pictures are made by cutting and paynting the Table sidewayes, so this was done
crossewayes: in which as it downewarde represented nothing but the serpent
which was a type of our Savior, and upward reflected on the glass the thing
signified, which was his exaltation on the cross; so should we from the
inferior resemblance of all ceremonies, by opening the Curtayn, lift up our
minds to behold and lay hold on their signified subst^^ce for good things
are figured, to be remembered: and they are remembered, to be apprehended. And so
whiles we remember hysope sprinkling the blood of sacrifices, let us by faith
and good works of devotion, labor to apply the sacrifice of our Saviors
blood and passion.

3. Also hysope we know is a low herb and medicinable, which naturally
desires to fasten his root about stones; S. Aug.
so do thou fasten the root of thy love on Christ our rock; and by
imitation of his humility, he will cleanse thee. And as hysope is good to purge
the swelling of the lunges, so have we need of the humble virtue hereof to
purge our Breasts puffed up in malice or pride. As Saul went toward Damascus
breathing out hot and big crueltyes against the christians, but being once
humbled and cast down upon the earth, his swelling h^nges were purged, and
his unsavory breath was sweetened.

4. These propertyes also are written of hysope in two verses. Parua, calens,
p^ctus purgans, Act. 9.
petrosa, screatrix, Ius sapidat, pleuri congrua, spargit aquam. It is little,
and hot, purging the breast, stony, and spitting, it relisheth broathe, helps
a pleurisy, serves for water sprinkling. Also which do well agree with a
penitent; for thou must be little and lowly in thine own eyes, and so thou
shalt be exalted and great in the eyes of allmighty God. Thou must be hot
and fervent in charity; which is the love of God above all, and of our
neighebor as our selves for his sake. By sorrow and contrition thou must purge
thy heart from sin: spitte out this sin by confession: and by stony and
steadfast satisfaction take root in Christ our rock. These foresaid
religious exercises do relishe and give good taste to all our prayers and
devotions: they heal and take away all pain and punishment due to sin; and
lastly they sprinkle and refresh us with the dew and drops of all heavenly
grace. O come my soul to this medicinable herb of hysope, that being therewith
sprinkled, we may be cleansed: and being washed in these virtues hereof, we may
be made white above snow. Magist. sentent. lib. 4. did. 18. Scot. dict. 14.
We have need of all these: for sin is a deep pollution hardly cleansed,
whither it be a privation, or have ought in it positive, or negative? whither
it be directly in the soul, or a crooked relation to the justice of God, sure
it is of all men called a deadly ^eformity, and a detestable blotte, whose
guilte remains still in the soul, after the act is passed. It is a
poisonous spotte and a venomous leprosy: o what shall we do to be cleansed!
washed! and made white above snow^. A dangerous disease requires precious
remedies: when he physicians prescribe Bezar stone, or Confection of pearls;
then we know the patient is in a weak and woeful estate: And no less may we
understand our selves to have been in a wretched case when by no other means
we could he cured (speaking of Gods ordinary power) but by this rare and
excellent hysope sprinkled with the precious blood of our Savior Jesus.

OF DIVERSE CEREMONIES IN THE Catholic Church made profitable by the*
sprinkling and virtue of our Saviors precious blood, which is compared to the
water of the Poole of Bethesda. Sect 2.
1. IN this precious sprinkling I shall find a double cleansing. First I shall
be cleansed from venial faults: Hugo Cardinal.
and also if thou wash me I shall made white above snow from mortal sins:
for mortal crimes are remitted by washing of Baptism or repentance and
venial offenses by diverse other means, of which some are expressed in these
verses Confiteor, Tundor, Respergor, Conteror, Oro, Signor, Edo, ^ono, per quae
venialia pono. By Contrition, Confession, Knocking the Breast, Sprinkling with
holy water, Prayer, By blessing ourselves with the sign of the Cross, By
receiving the blessed sacrament, By eating holy bread, By Agnus Dei, holy
graynes, Indulgences etc. by giving alms and by forgiving iniuryes. By all, or
any one of these, ever joined with some contrition or displicence for our
faults, in general, or particular, we may be washed from our venial faults:
yet every one and all these are unprofitable except they be referred and
grounded upon the merits and virtue of our Savior Christ's blood, wherein the
hysop^ must ever be dipped or else these sprinklinges will do no good: but
being therein moystened, our holy mother the Church has appointed diversity of
hysope branches, that ever some might be at hand: and who wanted occasion or
affection concerning one, might readily find more and easily stir up his
devotion by another.

2. Because also it is necessary we do make use and benefit of this precious
blood, therefore diverse means are assigned by which we may apply his
excellent virtue. Joan. 5.
The water of the Poole mentioned in the gospel healed all maladyes: yet
except they entered into it to be washed, it cured none: so it is most true,
that without the blood of our L. Jesus, no sin is cleansed: nor any by this,
except we do enter into this founteyne. Wherefore as to that poole (which was a
figure of our Saviors precious blood) seeing the water is so necessary, if
there were certain gates by which we must enter, were it not wilful
slothfullnes, or idle madness, not to enter those gates which may be divided
into five sorts, as there be five kinds of sins. 1. Original. 2. mortal.
3. venial. 4. such as have the Guilte and erernall pains remitted, but are
subject to temporal punishments in this world. 5. or such of these last, who
dye before they have here satisfied all those temporal punishments, which
therefore they must suffer in Purgatory.

3. The first kind must enter this sacred poole by the large water gate of
Baptism, Panigar. in discepta^^one 7. part. 2.
which cleanses original sin. The second must pass into the same precious
poole by the narrow roughe ston y gate of penitence, opening his three hard
locks of contrition, confession, and satisfaction, which give entrance to
deadly sinners. The third for venial offenders is a plain free stone gate,
more easily opened (having always the master key of contrition) by any on
other key of those good works, Sacraments, Sacramentalls, or Indulgences, as
is before mentioned. To enter this healing holy poole by the fourth iron gate,
for satisfying or escaping temporal punishments in this life, you must needs
have either the key of penal good works, or of Indulgences, which upon some
good consideration may commute these penances. And lastly, for them who dye
before they have satisfied sufficiently for all their temporal punishments:
these to be altogether cleansed in the virtue of that pool^, must pass it by
the boat fiery gate of purgatory, which they pass the more spedily, having
the help of holy masses, indulgences, or prayers, offered by others in their
behalf.

4. This poole (I say) is the precious founteyn of our Saviors blood, unto
which all th^se gates and keys do direct: and without which, all these can
do nothing. But as o^^ lord Jesus is only the foundation of all our
redemption; and yet we use the h^lpe of his sacraments to communicate unto us
the benefit of his merits, which we do confess they do communicate without
any derogation or dishonor to our Savior himself: So good works, and
purgatory, and those Sacramentalls of holy water etc. they do wish and help
us, in the virtue only of his precious blood, not diminishing but applying the
marvelous fruit thereof, which by so manifold and diverse means is ready at
hand to profit us.

5. A weak body apt to faynte or sound, had need of many helps to hold or
recall life: among the rest it is used to sprinkle cold water in the face,
^hervpo^ Plautus said: P^t. Vega
Sparsisti aqua^, iam redijt animus: thou have told me so good tydinges, that
being ready to s^unde for fear, now thou have sprinkled water upon me, I am
come again to life. O blessed Jesus, my sins and my doubts had so reuolued
and turmoyled my conscience, that until I bleeued thy catholic truth which
thou love, and until thou did manifest unto me the secrets of thy
mysteries hidden in the wisdom of thy catholic church, I was ever doubtful
and fearful, and often ready to sound at the bare name of death: But now thou
haste sprinkled water* in my face by the precious hysope of thee my Savior, I
may say with Jacob when he heard of his son Iosephes welfare my spirit is
revived: C^n. 45.
for now my doubts are dissolved, my sins are absolved, my fear is
expelled, and my heart is settled in courage* O proceed, dear Savior, to give
yet more joy and gladness to my hearing, that, my humbled bones may reioye* and
that thy promise by Ezech^el may be fullfiled to power (...) clean water by
which we shall be cleansed from all our iniquit^es: Ezech. 36
for as S. Paul collecteth: if the blood of goats sprinkled did sanct^f^e the
polluted; how much more the blood of Christ, which shall cleanse our
conscience from dead works? Heb. 9*
and thus I hope, o lord thou will sprinkle me with hysope, and I shall be
cleansed.

THE WONDERFVLL EFFICACYE OF OUR Saviors blood, and of the sign of the
Cross, which was be sprinkled therewith. Sect. 3.
1. O most precious and miraculous blood! which do not spotte and steyne us,
as any other blood uses to do. Thou do rather cleanse us w^sh us and make
us white above snow. Ap^c. 7.
As the Saints washed their stoles, and whited the^ in the blood of the lamb:
not their persons only but also their garments. And as in Dyars art out of
one and the same Dyefatte they will make diverse colors, according to the
disposition or aptenes of the color put into it, as white will become blew;
yelowe will become green, and blew will become red: only black, will take no
color, but come out rather more black. So a foul, black, deadly sinner not
repenting truly, though he believe our Sauiors passion, or never so often
frequent the sacraments, so long as he continues still in his foul sin, his
black soul will take no other color: rather for his abuse, he comes away
worser; and of such the prophet asked; can a blackmore change his skin? But a
true penitent, or he that is in state of grace according to the preparation of
his heart and his devout disposition in which he applies to himself the blood
of our Savior; Ierem. 13.
so he ever receives therefrom a perfiter color. Wherefore. S. Augustine speaks
unto the catholic church in these words, O happy and heavenly mother! among
thy flowers neither want lilyes nor Roses, let every one endeavor to attain
the colors which he can: Sermon. 2. omnium Sanctor.
either by virginity a crown of white lillyes; or by martyrdom a crown of
purple Roses. In the contemplation of our hopes, we may have a fresh green; or
in the burning of charity, a perfect flame color: and in one word all the
beautiful colors in the world may be obtained by this one admirable Tincture
or Dye of our Saviors blood: therefore herein, o lord sprinkle me with hysope,
and I shall be cleansed in beauty.

2. Many herbs, beasts, fishes, and other creatures, have wonderful effects
of nature: But the virtues of all gathered into one, are not so strange nor so
strong, as this one effect of our Saviors blood To cleanse and make white,
the polluted black soul of a contrite sinner. Not the herb Guila; which S.
Ambrose says, the Turtles use about then nestes, Aelian. lib. de Animal. 2.
o^p. 37.
to drive away by his smell the hungry wolnes from devouring her young ones. Not
the leaves of the plane tree, by which the storke drives away from her neste
the owls or night Battes, least they touching her eggs should make then
rotten. Not the Pan^her, which by his sweet smelling skin draws other
beasts to him, and then deuours then: and yet he himself, so soon as he sees
the Hyaena, he runs to lie down at his feet, and by him is torn in pieces.
Not the little fish Remora, that sticking to a ship under sail presently
hinders her course. Nor the Torpedo, which from the hook by the Anglestringe
and the Rod so benummes the fishers hand, that he cannot draw him out of
the water. Not the Ind^an haematites, which so stoppes the course of blood,
that whiles it touches any part of your body, though you receive never so
many wounds; yet not one will bleed. Not these nor a thousand more strange
propertyes of all creatures, can be comparable to the admirable effects of one
drop of his blood, who was the Creator of all these, and the Redeemer of the
whole world.

3. Saint Peter's shadow did work miracles: but it was in virtue of this
blood. Act. 5.
What miracles may the shadow of the blood it self do? wherefore now a figure
or shadow of this blood; since it was really shed for us, can be no less
forcible then those figures which did but signifye it should be shed afterward.
As this Type of hysope, sprinkling the blood of legal sacrifices, what virtues
had it? May not therefore now the sprinkeling of holy water in a better memory
have more efficacy?

4. As for the sign of the cross, which touched and was besprinkled with his
blood: what mira^les! what force has it had? and has still every day
wonderful effects from the virtue of our Lords death, and the effusion of
his blood shed thereupon. Even the wood of the young man's Coffen, said S.
Ambrose, after Jesus had touched it, Lib. 2. sup. Lu^ Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. c.
7. and 8. Niceph* lib. 8. cap 28. Paulin. ep. 11.
began to avayle unto raising him to life, much more the wood of his cross it
self: which when it was found by S. Helena, both revived the sick, and raised
the dead. And only the sign of the cross, sometime without faith and devotion,
yet has wroughte marvelous effects; which does show the dignity that our
lord gives unto the sign, for the excellency of the thing it self, which he
sanctified by his death. As that christian who wickedly purposing to poison
himself, came to Jew a Doctor of physic for some strong poison: the Jew glad
to kill a Christian, gave him a violent poisonous potion. Before he drunk it,
he made the sign of the cross over it, as he used to do commonly before he
did eat or drink. It did him no harm: he complaynes to the Jew that his
poison was not strong enoughe. The Jew could give him none stronger: but the
increases the quantity of the same. As before, he takes it making the sign of
the cross. The poison preuayles not. He is angry at the Jew: and the Jew is
mad to see him still alive: he doubts the Christian had not taken it: or had
mixte, or done somewhat else to it. The Christian swears he had done nothing
to it: only he remembers he had made the sign of the cross, as always he
used. The Jew gives a little to a dog, which presently burste. The Christian
signing it with the cross, again takes a great deal more of the same poison,
in the sight of the Jew, and yet feels no harm: whereupon he repentes: the
Jew is converted: both of them ask God mercy, and become honest devout men.

5. A blessed sign: made holy, and most glorious, by touching the body, and
being sprinkled with the blood of our Savior, who was God and man; he hallowed
it with his death, sanctified it by his merits, honored it with his person:
and as it represents his passion, so it deriueth virtue from his merits. The
^res^e before times was a detestable torment for malefectors: now it is a
royal ornament in the crowns of Kings and Emperors: honored of all
Catholic Christians: scorned, or abhorred of none, but Pagans, Jews,
Heretics, and Devils. And as the wonted shame thereof is turned into honor;
so the former curse thereof is changed into blessing. O sacred sign, which as
the Royal standarde of the lamb shall come before him to judgment: A terror
to the devils, and such as shall damned: a conforte to all Angels, Saints,
and such as are to be saved: thou art the key of David vnlocking Limbo, and
Purgatory to let out souls unto liberty, and opening heaven and Paradise, to
give them entrance into rest and glory. Thou art the hysope of David which
helps to sprinkle sinners with the blood of our Savior, to be cleansed,
washed, and made white above snow. Or as Origin said: thou art Tendiculum
magni Fullonis, the Tenter of our great Fuller, who cleanses us with his own
blood instead of soape; and in place of our weak rotten clothe, suffered his
divine body to be stretched for us upon this Tenter of the cross.

THERE ARE SUNDRY DEGREES OF WAShing, cleansing, and whyting of sin. Sect. 4.
1. O Blessed Savior! wash me from the filthynes of vice: and in the beauty
of virtue, make me white above snow. By thy mercy cleanse me: and make me
white by thy grace. If I be white as snow in inward devotion for my self,
make me more white above snow in external exercise of good works toward
others.

2. Or thou, o my soul, take comfort from hence, that not only an innocent,
but even a penitent, Ockam in 4. sent. q. 8. Gab. did. 14. q. 5. a. 3. Esaias.
35. Demonst. euan* lib. 9. cap. 6.
may attain to estate of most perfect purity. As S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Mary
Magdalene, and holy David in this place, by virtue of Christ's merits hoped
after repentance to be restored to perfection and purity above snow. Wherefore,
if we have been great sinners, let us labor so much more to become great
Saints, that as the prophet says In the caves where dwelte drago^s there may
spring up green rushes: which (as Eusebius expoundes it) is instead of
venomous filthy sin, to have pleasant flourishing virtue. Neither let it seem
strange, that as a notable saint may become a notorious sinner; so a loathsome
sinner may become a glorious saint: for a garment which has been torn, did
you never see it drawn up with such skill that no rent could be discerned? and
if upon this occasion, the same garment were all embrodered, and the rent place
covered with gold lace, or set with pearl, would it not be both a necessary
mending of the rent? and a better decking of the garment? much better can our
Lord Jesus repair and adorn the deformed beauty of a polluted soul he can
sprinkle it, cleanse it, wash it, and white it above snow.

3. O sprinkle me with hysope, as a Begimner in goodness; to have at first some
dew and drops of grace. O wash me next with some more plenty of this water,
Innoce^. 3.
that I may proceed from grace to grace. And to the end I may be perfect,
make me white above snow. Among earthly creatures there is nothing whyter then
snow: but above this do the Saints in heaven shine as the ^unne. I beseech
thee, O Savior, sprinkle me with thy hysope, and wash me with thy blood, Math.
13. 1. cor. 15.
that when this corruption shall put on incorruption, and when this mortal
shall be clothed with immortality, then I may be made white above snow, and
shine as the Sun in eternal glory.

IT IS BETTER TO CONFESS THEN to excuse: to hear, then to speak: and of
sundry kinds of joy and gladness. Sect. 5.
AFter my pardon I will rejoice: But a soul that is in sin, how should it
have mirth? I will rejoice, o lord, by hearing thy comfortes, S. Aug.
not in pleading for my self excuses. Rather let me hear thy joy speaking
absolution to mine ears, then any way delighte in my tongue pleasantly
extenuating, or wittily avoiding my faults. Would thou after sin, feign
plead for thy reputation? rather hear thy conscience, and listen to
repentance. Be sorye for it, and confess it: then shalt thou hear joy in
thy heart, and no terror at thine ear.

2. In general, we know it is better to hear then to speak. And in
spiritual contemplation, except we first hear what God says to our heart,
how can we heartily speak to him with our mouth? according as in nature we
see him that is borne deaf to be ever dumb. Also among men, he that hears
as a good scholar, practices Silence, Belief, Humility, and obedience* but
he that is speaking as a paynful Teacher, must labor with his voice; he must be
careful that he speak to good purpose for others, without falsehood or
flattery; and he must be heedfull to himself, least his speech favor of
pride, or vaynglorie. Wherefore in S. Ihon it is said. The friend of the spouse
does stand and hear him: and S. Augustine there notes that if we hear
dutifully we are friends of Christ: and by hearing we stand more steadfast,
Joan. 3.
whereas he that is speaking is always in danger by his words to fall into
some folly.

3. Wherefore, o lord, do thou speak unto my soul, the wisdom of thy
misteryes; the comfort of thy promises; and the desires of thy love: o let me
hear the music of thy voice in all these harmonyes: and last of all, S. Greg.
let me hear that sweet close of happynes venite benedicti: come you blessed.
There is joy and gladness. In the souls felicity is joy: and in the bodies
immortality is gladness: as the propet said, in their own country they shall
possess double benefits. Then our bones, Esaias. 49.
that is our virtues shall rejoice: now they may be despised of worldlinges, or
of Devils assaulted: but if now they so humbled; then they shall be crowned.

4. Thy prophet Natha^, has let me hear the pardon of my guilt, and so the
release of eternal pains* but he has left a temporal pu^ishme^t still upon me*
Vega
that the sword shall not depart my house etc. o let me hear also the
relaxation of these temporal calamityes. For as in every sin, S. Tho. 1 2.
q. 87. art. 4.

Et in sent^ 4. d. 15. a. 4.

Dyo^. Carthus. Titelma.


there is auersion from God, and Conversion to some creature; so it has a
double punishment: first because so we forsake him who is infinitely Good: and
for our conversion to creatures sensible punishments are due, because we were
too much delighted in transitory vanities. O merciful Jesus! let me have joy
for the remission of eternal pain, and gladness for the pardon of temporal
punishments. Or joy for sin pardoned, and gladness for grace restored. In
every sort for all my sins, let my conscience be fully pacifyed, which till
I was converted would never suffer me to live without fear or disquiet.

THE JOYS AND GLADNESS OF GOOD men, different from those of sinners: with a
hearty rejoicing of the Author for his Conversion. Sect. 6.
1. THere is a hearing of faith, which bringes us to give obedience and
praises* and there is a hearing of words by reading or preaching: Hugo
Cardinal. Innocent. 3.

Romans 10. Psalm. 84. Math. 5 Psalm. 83.


the first is inward leading to joy: the second is outward directing to
gladness. Or the outward bringes us to the inward, and after both we come to
joy and gladness. Wherefore, o my soul, seek to increase faith by hearing
outwardly; and also do thou hear what our lord speaks within thee: o seek
joy in the pardon of thy sins; and desire gladness in the promise of reward.
A wicked man can have no true joy: but they may rejoice whose reward is
plenteous in heaven: such a heart may have joy; and such a body may have
gladness: as David says elsewhere my heart and my flesh have rejoiced in our
living God, the heart has joy believing it self purged from ^^irituall
pollution, and the body has gladness feeling it self cleansed from carnal
co^^uption.

2. In these shall our humbled bones rejoice: not so much of the body, as of
the mind: yet alas how few rejoice spiritually! and how many are full of
mirthe carnally? but the end of such mirthe is sorrow because they are glad
when they have done ill: and they recoyce in the worste things: Prou 14. Joan.
14.
whereas to the other it is said, Ask and you shall receive, that your joy may
be full, and your joy shall none take from you. It is exceeding hard to order
and subordinate any joy of this life, to that joy which is in our lord: the
one does diminish or endanger the other: but carnal and spiritual joys can
never dwell together; and of these S. Jerome said, that never any passed from
delights on earth, to joys in heaven. Sara brought not forth Isaac, which
signifyes mirthe, till she was old, that is, till carnal pleasures be
mortifyed we cannot conceive any spiritual joys, nor can this spiritual
Isaac agree with fleshly Ismael, who instead of mirthe is but a mocker:
wherefore let us banish this son of the bondwoman, for whereas the joy of
wordlinges is said in the scriptures to have a crown of roses which are but
flowers that will fade, Sap. 2. Psalm. 20.
the crown of Gods servants is said to be of precious stones, which are ever
of value and cannot wither.

3. How should we express, o my soul, the joy and gladness which we have
inwardly tasted, since we were reconciled to God. we are neither able worthily
to give thanks for it; nor sufficiently to express it: only let us most
humbly beseech our gracious lord to continue us this mercy, which verily is
alone more worth then all the kingdoms, riches, and delights of the whole
world. And I dare upon my soul assure any sinner or misbeleeuer, who shall
with contrition make a sincere confession, reconciling himself to God and his
Church, that presently he shall find himself so disburdened, and so
comforted, that he would not at that instante for all the world return
again to his former estate.

4. O how proper is that speech of holy S. Bernard to our heavenly father!
Quando c^r nostrum visitas tunc ei lucet* veritas, vilescit mundi vanitas, and
intus feruet charitas. O my heart! when God does visit thee, then shines to
thee his verity, the world appears base vanity, and in thee boiles heavens
charity. I can wish my best freindes no better, then to taste and see how
sweet our lord is: whersoeuer I may find a Nathanael I cannot choose but tell
him I have found the Messiah; let him come and see: unto his hearing and to his
heart he shall receive joy and gladness. And if his bones (that is, the best
facultyes of his mind) be humbled sincerely, they shall be wonderfully rejoiced.
This have thou experienced o my soul, for whiles thy bones would move and
stand upon their own strenghte, and still trust to their own skill, I could
find no ease, nor any rest; for always I felt somewhat was out of ioynte: but
since they were humbled to obedience of faith, and submitted to the instruction
and direction of the Catholic church, O what rest! what ease! and what
rejoicing of bones! for here be the best b^nesetters of a contrite soul: now I
feel no former doubts: nor wonted fears: I have all quiet; and all
assurance: the truth shynes clear, the world seems base, the charity and
love of God shed abroad in our hearts is so confortable, that it is
unspeakable. O what inward joy, what true gladness! O sweet Jesus when thou
entrest into a penitent publicanes house, thy father comes with thee, and thy
holy spiritie comes with thee. O blessed Trinity! come daily into my poor
heart with the riches of thy grace, and join me unto thee, that as our Savior
prayed us all, so I also may be one with you, not one in substance: but one in
humble and obedient unity of will, and one in devout and fervent unity of
love.

5. O how does my soul thirste (as a chased Heart to the water founteyn) to be
joined unto thee more and more in this love! I have obligation to love thee,
because of th^e benefits: but it thirsts more in devotion to love thee for
thie self, and because of thine own worthienes. Because thou art God,
therefore I will love thee: and because thou art our God, therefore I will
praise thee. O thou who art love it self! and Author of love: O warm my
soul; nay heat it; nay make it burn and flame in thy love. In this love is
inseparable unity: in this unity is unspeakable peace: in this peace, which
passes all understanding, is that joy and gladness which thou give to our
inward hearing. O let me daily hear thee enter into my heart, and say peace be
unto this house: o sweet Jesus make thy prayer effectual unto me; and
accomplish thy promise of se^ding us also some portion of thy holy spirit: o
come with thy Father; and take up your dwelling and make your mansion in me: O
come in unity of obedient will, and in unity of fervent contemplation; come
thus, and dwell with me: Let me thus rejoice in the: speak alowde, and say
unto my soul; I am thy salvation. So unto my hearing thou shalt give joy and
gladness; and my humbled bones shall rejoice.

MEDITATION. VII.
Auerte faciem tuam a peccatis meis, and omnes iniquitates meas dele. Cor
mundum crea in me Deus, and spiritum rectum innoua in visceribus meis. Ne
proijcias me a facie tua: and spiritum sanctum tuum ne auferas a me.

Turn away thy face from my sins, and blotte out all mine iniquityes. Create
a clean heart in me O God, and renew a right spirit in my bowels. Do not
cast me out from thy face; and thy holy spirit do not take from me.


A GENERAL INTERPRETATION OF all these words. And then what is meant by our
Lords fac^: and how our souls are deformed, and scribled full of sins, to
be blotted out. Sect. 1.
1. LEt us consider, o my soul how* prudent, modest, and diligent David is in
prosecuting his petitions: Innocent. 3.
and let us with him have care to ask those things which are lawful: which
are decent: and which are expedient. To be prudent, in asking things just:
modest, in desiring things honest: and diligent, in requiring things
necessary: least if we pray for things unlawful, our prayer be turned into
sin: if we entreat for things indecent, we shall not receive them because
we ask amiss* if we demand things inexpedient, it may be said unto us, you
know not what you ask. Wherefore let us be diligent continually to e^treat
pardon of our sins, as David still insisteth upon this same point. For this
is most expedient and necessary: Turn away thy face o lord from my sins and
blotte out mine iniquityes. Let us be modest against all uncleanness; and even
in our good deeds to desire humility of heart and sincerity of intention; for
this is most dec^nt and honest. Create a clean heart in me, o God, and renew a
right spirit in my bowels. Let us be prudent in praying for perseverance in
good; and in perpetual election of the Best, because these things are most
just and lawful. Do not cast me out from thy face, and thy holy spirit do
not take from me.

2. Turn away thy face from my sins: in regard of my time paste. Create a
clean heart in me: now in this time present. And for the time to come: do
not cast me out from thy face. Saint Augustine thus expounds the first
words. Turn away thy face: not from me, S. Aug.
but from my sins: for where he fastens his eye, he fastens his hand: if
upon good; to reward it: if upon bad; to punish it. And to turn aside his
angry face, thou must ^et a sorrowful face upon thine own sins: so neither
shall thy person be cast out from his face; nor his face set against thy
sins. O let thy face of mercy be showed upon us, Hugo Cardinal.

P^al. 129 E^^ch. 41


and we shall be safe: but turn away thy face of justice, or we shall be
confounded. Thy Cherub had two faces, which Ezechiel saw: a face of a man: and
a face of a lion. O blessed Savior cast me not out from thy face of pity, with
which thou did first appear when thou becamest man* but turn away from my
sins the face of a lion in severity with which thou will come again to
judge the world. Then will thou appear against sin (according to that
revelation) having eyes as a flame of fire, thy face more glistring then the
sun, Apoc. 1.
and a sharp two edged sword proceeding out of thy mouth: But now for favor
we entreat with thy spouse; show us thy face, and let thy voice be in our
ears: for thy voice is sweet, and thy face is exceeding beautiful. Cant. 2.
And so in the former verse, we desired to hear joye and gladness; and in this,
to behold favor and kindness.

3. The Romans sent to the Carthaginians a Mace and a Spear, to make election
of peace or of war: we have now our choice, of a mild countenance, or of a
severe browe: now o lord thy face is merciful: o cast me not from it: There
will come a time when it shall be severe: o turn it away from my sins. And
blotte out all my iniquityes. Pet. vega.
Let none of them remain written upon my soul, to give me shame, or help the
devils claim; as slaves, and cattle are marked to be challenged. Plato said
that the soul of an infa^te is tabula abrasa, like white paper, Arist. de
anima lib. 3. cap. 2.
or a clean leaf of a table book whereon nothing is painted or written: But
in process of time, as we give our selves to vice or virtue, so we suffer our
souls to be written full of faults, or of merits: And either we suffer the
Devil thereon to paynte hell, with his foul feendes and torments: or our good
Angel to decipher heaven, with the glory of the sun, the moon, and
beautiful stars.

4. O my soul, how long have we been under the Devils black pensell, who as
with a foul coal has for every sin drawn some ill favored mark or
picture upon thee? he has written all full of faults: o how he has
interlyned all: and even the margentes are filled full. I confess it was much
easyer at the first to have admitted my good Angels fair writing and
heavenly pictures (as children and young people are most capable of religion and
virtue.) But yet better late then never: thy mercy is omnipotent: o let it
blotte out all mine iniquityes: all the Devils blurres: all his hellish
pictures, and ugly handw^itinges: I desire to begin a fair copy: o gracious
Lord, turn away thy face from my old faults, and I will turn over a new
leaf, to begin a new lesson.

5. Thus shall the Devils paynting all be blotted out: for as S. Ihon says,
1. Iean. 3.
To this end appeared the son of God, to dissolve the works of the Devil.
Which is signified by the old custom of the Catholic church, which having
baptized new converted christians at Easter, and having used fasting and
penance in lent, they called the first Sunday after Easter Dominica in Albis:
white Sunday: because those who were newly baptized, were then all clad in
white, to show their cleansed innocence: and so they solemnly read that saying
of S. Peter, quasi modo geniti infantes: as children newborn: to teach us*
that after our sins washed by baptism, or blotted out by penance, we should
be careful to keep the garments of our souls white and clean: or having
become again as young children without malice or sin, we should afterward
procure the cleansed table of our souls no more to be defaced in vice, by the
Devils foul fyst* but to be adorned in virtue with golden letters of grace.

MANY SIGNIFICATlONS, AND PETITIONS, for creating a clean heart, and renewing
of a right spirit. Sect. 2.
1. BLotte out all my faults: and then Create a new heart in me, o God. First,
remission of sin: next, infusion of grace: For though Justification be in an
instante; yet in order of nature, not of time, pardon is before favor. And he
says Create grace in me: because it is not deduced out of any power or faculty
of our soul, Lyranus.
as are natural forms out of their substances or matter: but our soul had
lost all his moral essence, or Being of grace: Hugo Cardinal.

Ezech. 28 Ierem. 5.


therefore he says Create a clean heart, that is, restore in me all moral
gifts of nature: and renew a right spirit, that is, all spiritual graces.

2. Create my heart, which had lost it self, for Ezechiel says to a sinner,
Thou art become nothing. Neither let Jeremy call me a fool which has no
heart to res^ste sin: for to have no heart is to be dead and to have no life.
But in creating my heart; I ^ha^l ^ecouer both life and wisdom: Math. 5.
and by creati^g me a clean heart* I may be among those blessed, who shall see
God.

S. Greg.
3. Let me have a clean heart, not defiled with delights of any sin; nor
delighted in the filthynes of any pleasure: nor turmoyled with contentious
passions: nor troubled with peruer^e cogitations: for it ought to be a clean
temple of the holy ghost* not polluted with luxury: not straytned with envy:
with ambition not headlong: no^ houering with pride. Or if we hear any of
these clamorous affections within us, yet not take pleasure, nor give consent
to their allu^ing voices: not a whitte to feel them: who can say he has a
clean heart? Prou. ^0.
yet must we cleanse our hearts not to harbor and consent unto them. Or if we
have listened any whit too long unto such dangerous thoughts let us pray for a
clean heart: that all corrupt intentions may be abolished; and with a right
spirit all good purposes orderly directed: despising all the glory of this
world: fastening our minds in the love of God: keeping patience in reproaches
and inju^yes: humbling our selves to all men in meekenes: loving our freindes
in God; and our enemies for God: not coveting ought from other men, but rather
giving of our own to the poor: in prosperity sober; and constant in
affliction. Thus let us be renewed in the spirit of our ^indes, which in all
these is a clean heart and a right spirit: but by the vices which are
contrary unto these it does become a crooked and a loathsome heart.

4. Create in me a clean heart: not materially, but formally: for this
creation is not of the heart in substance, but of his quality in cleanenes.
Create cleanenes in my heart for infused vertu^^ and grace may be s^id created,
as neither compounded of any material substance; no^ derived therfrom But yet
being Accidental forms they are not created alone, ^ut existing in some
subject: and so Deuines say, Gratia non creatur, sed concreatur subjecto inesse
grato.

Euthym.
5. Least from my reasonable discourse, impertinent, or vicious thoughts should
ascend into my heart, Create in me a clean heart of understanding. Least my
actions should be hipocriticall, having my heart a far of from thee, Create a
sincere intention of heart in my will. And in my devout hearty affections,
Create a clean heart in me, that I may follow David, as a man according to
thine own heart.

6. And renew a right spirit in my bowels. Renew it: for I am waxen old in
vice: and make it right to be directed straight to heaven; Hugo Car.
nor bowed down in baseness; nor bended awrye in crookednes, to any thing of
this world. New: in grace, for we may not put new wine into old bottels: and
Right in nature: wherefore we pray unto the holy ghost. Send out thy
spirit, and they shall be created, and thou shalt renew the face of the earth.
Psalm. 13.


7. Our Bowels are of such earthly nature, that they have need to be renewed
in spirit* and our Hearts are so corrupted in sin, that they have need to
be cast in another molde which is to be created a clean heart. Innocent. 3
Psalm. 142.
O my soul, we were become like Ephraim a seduced dove having no heart: and we
may complain with the psalmist: Our heart has forsaken us: let us desire our
Lord to create us a heart. Also like the Queen of Saba, admiring Solomon, we
have no spirit; or faynting in goodness, we may say, ^. Reg. 10
defecit spiritus meus; our spirit fails us: let us beseech our lord to
Renew our spirit. O Jesus create in us a clean heart, Math. ^5.
out of which may not proceed lewd thoughts adulteryes, theftes, ambitions,
nor any wickedness. Renew in our Bowels a right spirit: to make us right in
all virtues, which according to the hebrew word are called rectitudines,
righteousness, straight lines, or perpendicular lines, from the center of the
earth leading right up to heaven: Eccl^siast. 30.
That as in the begimning our Lord made man right, so to the intent our End
may be answerable, restore us a right spirit.

8. David's hart^ was unclean by Adultery: his spirit was crooked by malicious
subtilty* in this subtle malice he murdered Vrias: in adultery he had abused
Bersabee. In like sort against lust we desire cleanenes of heart: and against
crafty crooked malice, rightnes of spirit; or we pray, that we may have in our
heart clean affections loving God entirely: and a right spirit of discretion
to discern good prudently. Also mixing these, we desire discreet affections
in our heart: and in our spirit loving and charitable imaginations. Nay we
have so much need of a better alteration, that we may alter and interchange
these words to desire a change of our selves almost into any fashion, rather
then to remain in our present corruption: o lord create in us a clean heart:
and renew a right spirit in our bowels: or create in us a right spirit and
renew in us a clean heart: Also we have need of a clean spirit, and me do
want a right heart. We have no heart, which therefore must be created; and our
spirit is old or lost, and therefore must be renewed. And all these defectes
are in our bowels, even in the principal and inward parts of our nature: if
our eye be blind, how great is our darkness? and when our bowels and our
chief nature is faulty, how great is our wickedness? O God! create: renew: a
heart: a spirit: and clean heart, a right spirit: a clean spirit: a
right heart: we have need of all; in all our nature; even in our very
bowels. O furnish all our defectes: Deus meus in quem deficio, vt fortis sim,
Lib. confess. 3. c. 6.
as said. S. Augustine, O mie Jesus upon whom I do desire to rely and fainte,
that so fainting upon him I may be revived more strong.

9. By cleansing my heart from all worldly filthynes, thou shalt cheer it and
lighten it in thy love, and so I shall live more cherfully: for as no creature
(say philosophers) can long live without some sort of love; so, such as our
love is, such is our life. Arist. in Eth. l. 3. c. 1.
If we would have our life pure, at liberty, and glorious; let not our love be
slavish, corrupt, or base: O sweet Jesus create in me a clean heart of love:
and because our soul is not moved by paces of the feet, but by affections of
the heart, therefore unto this love add a right spirit; not to be as wicked
men, who walk in a circle, Psalm. 11.
but like Ezechiels beast, which went right onward and turned not. Also a
right spirit even in the bowels of our sincere intentions, which as a direct
wind at stern may further and order all our actions, and hold all our
courses straight for heaven.

TO BE CAST OVT FROM THE FACE of God, is to be cast into all misery. Sect. 3.
1. NE proijcias me etc. Do not cast me out from thy face: and thy holy
spirit do not take from me. Dionysius Areopagita used to say, that our Lord
Jesus comes to us first, and goes from us last: for till we forsake him, he
does never forsake us. And as Innocentius tertius says. Vega.
The holy Ghost is taken from us; not so much when he cease to be possessed;
as when he begins not to be possessed: for he of himself cease not to
remain with us; but we first begin to dispossess our selves of him: for in
the day time, if any be blind, the defecte is in the eye, not in the sun; and
light departs not till darkness come.

2. Let us consider (o my soul) with Jeremy, how evil and how bitter a thing
it is to have forsaken our Lord God: Cap. 2.
the fault is evil, the punishment is bitter: It is evil because it is
sin, which is the worste evil: It is bitter in diversity of the pain; which
in his sensible part has exterior fire, and an interior worm, which also
in his loss is worthily deprived of the presence of God, whom we did forsake
unworthily. O Jesus let us never forsake thee of our own frailty; nor suffer
our selves to be plucked from thee by any tentation; least we deserve for ever
to be cast out from thee, whenever we yield, or love any thing else more
then thee. If thou turn away thy face of mercy, all will be in confusion: and
from thy face of justice, whither shall we fly? O illuminate thy countenance
upon us, and show us thy mercy; thou art our light and our salvation.

3. David releasing Absoloms banishment, gave leave he might return to his
own house; but with this commandment my face he shall not see: Afterward
Absalom complaynes to Ioab, 1. Reg. 14
saying, If my Father be still offended against me, let him rather take my
life, then forbid me his face: for it is a matter full of disgrace: empty of
comfort: and wantes a chief means to work reconciliation; because we are
sooner moved in favor, or in pity, toward those whom we have much
conuersante in our eye. Wherefore o gracious Lord cast us not out from thy
face: thrust us not out of thy favor: reject us not from thy mercy; exclude us
not from thy sight or knowledge: exempte us not from thy care or providence,
nor let us be estranged from thy love or contemplation. O let us never hear it
said against us, Take away the wicked, so that he never see the glory of my
face: for so was Lucifer cast headlong out of thy presence, as lightening from
heaven: and so shall all they be cast with violence from thy face, to whom
thou shall say, Go you cursed into eternal fire.

4. It is miserable to be cast into captivity and bondage, as our lord
threatened the Jews, I will cast you from my face: Hugo Cardinal.

Ierem. 7. 2. par. 25. 1. Reg. 25.


vidz: into Babylon. It is terrible to be thrown from an high Clyffe or a
steep mounteyn down upon rocks or stones, as were those in the chronicles, of
whom the scripture says: crepuerunt: they burste and cracked in pieces with
their fall. It is most horrible and intolerable to be reprobate from Gods
presence and cast into hell; and of such the scripture says, The soul of
thine enimyes shall be tumbled as in a wheel, or in a whirlewinde, or as in the
violence or circle of a slinge. We beseech thee cast us not into the miserable
bondage of concupiscence or slavish passions: nor into the terrible downfall
of pride or ambition: nor into the insufferable torments of future perdition,
S. Gregor.
or of present desperation: for he sins against the holy ghost* who
supposes his sins to be greater then thy mercy, which applies forgiveness
by means of the holy ghost: and therefore from him who casts himself into
such final desperation, thou do take away thy holy spirit. O cast me not
out (by any of these) from thy face* and thy holy spirit (in any sort) do
not take away from me.

5. Origin says that when our lord promises to look upon us, he promises
all that is good, In leuit. 26.
for all our welfare comes from his favorable countenance. O let us not be
Runnegates like Cayn from the face of God upon the face of the earth. 1. to
forsake God for the world: But let us beseech him to look upon us, like as he
looked upon S Peter, and upon that young man in the Gospel, whom when he saw he
loved him: to give us looks of admonition, that we may repent; and looks of
favor, that we may rejoice. To turn away his face of indignation from our
sins, whose faults do urge him to justice, and yet not to cast our persons
out of his presence, because our misery may move him to compassion.

6. To be cast out of our own country by banishment is a civil death: and it
is an ecclesiastical death to be cast out of the church by exco^muncation:
The first is next neighbor to death of body; and the other to death of soul:
But to be cast out from the presence of God, is more then both the^e: for it
is indeed the death it self both of body and soul. It is irckesome to be
debarred our own native country: and it is greiuous to be deprived the
communion of Saints: But to be cast out from the fruition and joy of Gods
presence, is most lamentable. The Mary-golde flower, and another which may be
called Follow-su^ne, whiles the cherfull sun shynes upon them, do always
turn themselves toward his beams, moving their heads after his course,
from East, to west; and whiles they feel his comfortable heat, they remain
open, beautiful, and fresh: but so soon as the sun is down, or covered
with a sharp storm, or great thick cloud, they close and shut up their
stowers, they hang down their heads, or altogether wither, if they long
want his presence, as in winter. O Jesus thou art my eternal sun, I am this
fading flower; yet if I will follow the, as thou will never go down, so I
shall never d^caye: o let me ever be turned toward thy face.

7 Pliny writes of a bird named Coladion which brought to a sick body, Lib.
9. cap. 42.
if she willingly look directly upon him, there is much hope of life: but if
she turn away her eye and would not see him, it is a sign of death. O Jesus
behold me, for my soul is sick: if thou turn away thy face from me, I must
needs dye; for only in thy presence is true life. Job was an eye to the
blind, Tullius de natura deor. lib. ^. Zach. 9.
as that sea fish Squilla does serve for eyes unto another shellfish called
Pina: O Jesus keep me in thy presence, and fix thy face upon me, according as
thy prophet Zachary said, Our lord is the eye of man, and of all the tribes of
Israel. As Ester with Assuerus let me find grace in thine eyes: O lord cast me
not out from thy face, least so I should want thy favor; thy guydance; and
thy defense: for even among men we fasten our eyes upon another* either for
love; or for government; or for protection: O Jesus cast me not out from thy
face of favorable love: O Jesus cast me not out from thy face of directing
government: O Jesus cast me not out from thy face of protecting defense: so
shall I rejoice in thee, as my kind Patron: I will obey thee, as my prudent
Tutor: and I shall be safe with thee as my allmighty Capteyn.

AMONG SUNDRY OTHER GIFTS OF the holy Ghost, let us inparticuler labor to be
thankful, and to be constante. Sect. 4.
1. ANd thy holy spirit do not take from me. I am a penitent, and yet I
presume to suppose I have thy holy spirit, whose effects I desire may be
increased, S. Aug.
not diminished. It is an effect of thy holy spirit to be displeased with
sin: for wickedness is a delighte to an unclean spirit. As therefore by this
gift of thy spirit I am come thus far forward to dislike my former sins,
and to seek pardon; so I beseech the not to take from me because of my
unworthiness that little which I have, but rather in thy goodness to give me yet
more, whatsoever I want. No man can call our lord Jesus: but in the holy
ghost. To name him in word, they may; 1. Cor. 10.
but not to believe in him and love him with their heart above any thing in
this world: this none can do without the holy spirit; (which is a spirit or
inward breath of holiness) no more then any can vocally speak without the
breath of air. O Jesus! I believe; help my fainte belief. O Jesus! I love;
increase my cold charity. The small love and poor faith which I have, do
come from thy holy spirit: O take not this holy spirit from me: thou have
given it freely; o increase it graciously.

2. In virtue and memory of our dear Saviors five wounds, some use to pray
to the holy ghost in five words. 1. Veni, come. 2. purga, cleanse. 3. Reple:
fill. 4. Accende: inflame. 5. Perseuera: Continue. Come with thy inspirations.
Cleanse by expulsion of sin. Fillfull with abundance of grace, inflame with
heat of thy love; and continue all these unto the end: all are necessary and
good, but without perseverance no virtue is crowned. I have begun in the
spirit; let me not end in the fleh: O take not thy holy spirit from ^e.

3. It is a question among schoolmen: which is most bound to allmighty God? One
who was ever innocent? or one truly penitent? Some do resolve it thus Innocens
maiora debet, sed poenitens magis debet. Innocence is a greater benefit: and
so he is in debted for a better gift: But penitence is more difficulte; and
also a demerited or disdeserued virtue, for which therefore such a one is
indebted so much more. To preserve one always innocent, is to do good unto a
man not ill. To draw a sinner to repentance, is to do good to an ill man. The
first did never merit his innocence: but the other had demerited his
penitence. Also it is easyer for him to go forward who is sound and standing
on foot, then for him who is sick and fallen under foot. And finally,
Innocence is a Jewel of more price in the substance, and penitence of more
value for the workmanship, wherefore the one owes more unto God for being
reserved in excellency, and the other because he is deliue red with such
difficulty.

4. And as both proceed of mercy undeserved; so if they do not continue in
perseverance neither of them shall be crowned. The fair blade of corn must come
to a good ear, to a full kernel, to a seasonable harvest, and to yeildable
flower. The beautiful blossom must grow to a wel^ set budde, and continue to
a kind ripe fruit. Saint Paul saying, There is reserved for me a crown of
justice. Saint Bernard enquireth, 2. Tim. 4.
what proportion between our eternal reward and our merits of a few years,
and also; what justice of reward can be due to us who receive all of mercy?
Doubtless becauses our merits proceed of his mercy, and so does not mercy
exclude merit or justice, Ad soro^em.
but rather uphold them. And as sinners are eternally punished, for offending
an infinite majesty, so just men thirsting after righteousness do merit an
eternal crown of justice; for if they were immortal on earth, they would
perpetually serve God. And being once sincerely penitent, with S. Augustine,
they would so abandon all their sinful pleasures, Confess. lib. 8. c. 11.
that from the instante of their repentance, they should no more return unto
them for ever and ever; such must be the purpose of a true convert; for ever
to cast of sin, least at any time he be cast out from the face of God: and
for ever to take care of perseueranae, least at any time he loose the holy
spirit, which he has received; for so eternal justice will give him an
eternal reward, herin proportionable to his eternal purpose and care to
serve God.

5. Not like those peicemeale penitentes who still reserve some sin; nor
those changeable conuertes, who are weary every moon, or such as for a time
cease to sin; for a lent; for a sickness; for a good sermon; or by any such
present admonition; but when the storm is passed, the vow is forgotten, and
the Saint is beguiled? or they are soon weary of well doing, they must needs
go back to the flespottes of Egipte. Non disce^dunt a peccatis sed recedunt:
non desinunt sed relaxant, these go not away from sin, they do but go
aside; they do not cease but slacken their iniquityes. Their time of amendment
is but like a parenthesis in a speech (being only in^erposed as in the by)
after which he presently follows his former discourse ^r as a mad merry
company at table, full of wine and good cheer, and more full of immoderate
mirthe and laughter, swearing, and scoffing, and telling of lew de tales,
until peradventure some body amongst them at the end of their meal at
leastwise for custom say a grace: and then all putting off their hattes, every
one for shame (if he have any) begins to set himself for a more sober
countenance, except some (like a Puritan) hold his hatte before his eyes to
dissemble and cover his continued laughter: But so soon as the grace is ended,
as men paste grace, they presently return to their unruly revel. Such are
they who fast a day, and become gluttons a whole week: who are abstinent in
lent; and all the year after luxurious: who are demure at sermons, and
lascivious in chambers: who in his prayers turns up the white of his eye; and
presently in his dealing would tear out his neighbors heart: who is sober or
continent for a few days about Easter, or any other time, to come to the
blessed Sacrament, but ere long after, he returns to his quaffing pot, or to
his cursed harlotte: Or whosoever else begins to be a penitent; and before
his end grows weary and faynte. From all these faylers, the grace of the
sacraments is subtracted, the gifts of the holy spirit are taken away, and
deservedly they are cast out from the face of our lord.

MEDITATION VIII.
Read mihi laetitiam salutaris tui: and spiritu principali confirma me. Docebo
iniquos vias tuas: and impij ad te conuertentur.

Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation: and with thy principal spirit
confirm me. I shall teach thy ways unto the wicked: and the ungodly will be
converted unto thee.


JESUS IS THE JOY OF OUR SALVATlON, which a sorrowful soul desires to be
restored, and a confortable soul prays to be continued. Sect. 1.
1. VEspasian the Emperor was called deliciae hominum? Delighte of men: because
he gave such courteous answers to all, that never any went from him
di^contented. Eutrop.
But with much more truth and reason do we call lord Jesus the Joy of our
Salvation, of whom never any asked heartily pardon and conforte, Luc 19. Joan.
3. Apoc. 1. Romans 4. Esai ^3. Rom 8. Philip.
who w^nt away denied or greiued. He came to heal the sick; to ^eeke the
lost; not to condemn, but to save the worcester de; that whosoever believes in
him, should have life everlasting: w^o has w ished us from our sins in his
ow^e blood: who dyed for our offenses, and ro^e again for our ju^tific^tion,
who verily did bear our infirmityes, and our sorrows he did undergo: who was
wounded for our iniquityes, afflicted for our wickedness, and by his tortures we
are h^aled. Allmighty God not sparing his only son: and he being God equal
to his Father, not ref^sing to become man, and to dye for us, not his freindes,
nor his servants, but his enem^es, and slaves unto the Devil; redeeming us
from hell and damnation, to be equal^ with Angels, and heirs with himself of
eternal glory. Wherefore, o my soul, I will glory in our lord; and I will
rejoice in God my Jesus: for in all these points recited He is the Joy of my
Salvation.

Eccles. 11
2. Light is pleasing and confortable, d^^kenes is irksome and odious: of
light comes de^ighte; but blacknes follows desperation. He that never before
saw light, yet loves the sun at first sight: Tob. 5.
But blind Tobias, who had seen day, sittes musing with himself, o what a
Joy would it be to recover mine eyes! who now sit in darkness, and see no
light of heaven. Holy David had seen much light of heaven: for even now he
said The doubtefull and hidden things of thy wisdom thou have manifested
unto me. The wisdom of God, we know, is the Son of God: And was there, or
is there any thing more doubtful in nature, then God to become man? or more
hidden to reason, then for him so to redeem the world by suffering on the
cross? wherefore these hidden doubtful secrets are called a stumbling block
to the Jews, as things ignominious and shameful, and are esteemed folly by
the Gentiles, as matters impossible and ^idiculous: for to flesh and blood
without faith they are doubtful and hidden. Unto David as a Prophet these
doubts and secrets were in some sort revealed: he knew the Messiah should
proceed of his lineage: and above all he expected (whiles he was in Gods favor)
to be partaker of the Benefits of his redemption: but having fallen into
sin, he perceived himself to be gone out of the joy of light, into the
horror of darkness, and not to have any part of salvation in those gracious
promises. Therefore desirous of his former estate, he does aptely pray: Restore
unto me the Joy of thy salvation: and fearful any more to sustain 2 like
loss, he carefully adds, And with thy principal spirit confirm me, vid:
least ^ fall again.

3. O merciful God how long have we sit in darkness and in the shadow of
death^* until by thy bowels of me^cy thy morning star from above, has
visited our hearts in the Joy of salvation; and enlightened our minds to
guide our feet into the way of peace. To come from hellishe darkness to light
from above, is Joy of heaven. To be taken out of the shadow of death, into
the way of peace, is salvation of Jesus. O sweet Savior by thy bowels of mercy
we beseech thee to visit us in this Joy; and to enlighten us in this
salvation: then shall thy seruante depart in peace, when mine eyes do behold
thy salvation.

4. Salvation and Joy, are well joined: for even the future hope of salvation
has present possession of joy; for who does firmly hope to be saved, he does
cherfully rejoice in his hope: But S. I^rome translating this Joy of
salvation, to be Joy of Jesus, he does include much more: for in Jesus are
contained all the infinite theasures of the Deity, and of our felicity: unto
Jesus is committed all power in heaven and in earth: Jesus is the brightness of
eternal light: Jesus is the figure and substance of his Father: Jesus is the
hope of Israel and of the nations: Jesus is king of kings and lord o^
lords: Jesus is Prince of peace: Jesus is the wisdom of his Father: Jesus is
beautiful above the sons of men: Jesus is the glorious sun of justice:
Jesus is the way, truth, and life: Jesus is the water and founteyn of life:
Jesus has the words of life: Jesus is the bread of life: Jesus is the Father
of the poor, the mother of the afflicted, and the Brother of the patient:
Jesus is a glass of chastity without spotte; a high watchtowre of all
virtues; and a Citadell or armory of perfection: Jesus is the clearenes of
Angels: Jesus is the contemplation of the Patriarchs: Jesus is the illuminati
of the prophets: Jesus is the level and Rule of the Apostles: Jesus is the
Doctor of the Evangelists: Jesus is the master of the Doctors: Jesus is the
victory of m^rtyrs: Jesus is the courage of Confessors: Jesus is the spouse of
Virgins* Ie^us is the head of all Catholic christians: Jesus is the reward
and crown of all Saints: Jesus is the mediator of God and all men: Jesus is
to us cause and conjunction of Joy and salvation, by uniting in one, God and
man, and so becoming our Jesus.

5. O joyful Jesus: O Savior Jesus; O most loving and bountiful Jesus: most
delectable and comfortable Jesus: most meek and merciful Jesus: O Jesus the
salvation of them who believe in thee: O Jesus the Joy of them which hope in
thee: O Jesus, Jesus, the bond and union of Joy and salvation unto them which
love thee. O give them salvation who have none; restore them to Joy who have
lost what they had: and to whom thou have vouchsafed thy self, O sweet
Jesus, least they should loose such a treasure, Confirm them for ever with thy
principal spirit. O let my soul in such love and resolute affection toward
thee (O dear Jesus) be like his who was content to endure any calamity, or to
go into hell it self, if there it were possible to dwell with Jesus: But o
detphes! such is the presence of the virtue of Jesus; that hell with him, would
turn into heaven; for in Jesus is Joy and salvation, of certain security of
secure eternity, of eternal quietness, of quiet happynes, of happy swetenes, of
sweet Joy, and Ioyefull salvation. O give me this Joy of thy salvation and
confirm me in the same by thy principal spirit.

THE NOBILITY OF A PRINCIPAL SPIRIT, perseuering to finishe constantly, what
it has begone generously. Sect. 2.
1. IT is no less virtue to reteyne what we have gotten, then to obtain what
we wanted: therefore confirm us, as Ecclesiasticus said of wisdom; so may we
say of this Joy: they who do drink thereof do thirste for more; Eccles. 24
not as dronkardes for wine, or covetous men for riches: but for the heavenly
comfort of righteousness spiritual just men do desire to be more just. So S.
Paul forgot what was behind him, endeavoring still forward: and counsels all,
to hold out to the end of the race, Philip. 2. 1. Cor. 9.
or else we should fail of our Garland. S. Francis after many years of his
stricte life, and after our L. Jesus had honored him so miraculously which the
marks of his five wounds; and not long before his death he calls to his holy
companions Incipiamus fratres etc. In vita eius. c. 14.
Let us begin good brethren to serve our lord God, for hitherto we have
profited little: such was his humility not glorying in what was paste; and in
desire of proceeding such was his feruency.

2. As in natural philosophy, though the matter does much desire his
natural form; yet the form desires much more to be joined to his ^aturall
matter; for the first desires it of natural necessity; the second of natural
goodness: so the love of God like the form of our perfection does more seek to
help us, the^ we can or do desire his assistance: for our forcible necessity
drives us to him; and it is his own goodness which draws him to us: but
always voluntary goodness is more effectual then compulsory force; for good
inclination continues, when necessary compulsion cease. And therefore our
gracious Lord who has no need of our service, yet does he help us to labor,
because he would give us a reward.

3. And considering his readynes to help us, it is our fault if we faynte:
Luc. 9. Genesis 19. Philip. 1. Gemin. lib 5. cap. 69.
having our hand at the plowe, we may not look back to Sodom; for S. Paul
says, he who has begun in us a good work will perfect it, until the day
of Jesus Christ: wherefore we must expecte and continue until his days, not
like the leoparde who seazeth upon his pray by skipping and iumping; but if he
miss at two or three of the first skippes, he follows no further: O let us
not be such as either will come to perfection of devotion per saltum, and to
their desires of holiness at the first leapes, or else they leave of, and do
despair. It is pride, to seek to mount with the eagle before we be full
fethered: Prouer. 6.
and it is slothfullnes not to continue like the poor Ant, which wears a
pathe in a hard stone, with often passing over it: Rather, we must expect our
Lord, Psalm. 83.
work manfully, and we shall be comforted, walking from virtue to virtue,
until we may behold our God of Gods in Sion. We must work manfully, with all
our power, according to our present ability and strenghte of grace: we must
expect patiently, and pray without ceasing for further ability and force; so we
shall be comforted in our labor, and in our prayer; so we shall go forward from
virtue to virtue; and so at last ascend from grace to glory, from Sinay to
Sion, and from among men who live as Gods, unto him who is a great king above
all Gods; from travel of our jorney to the rest of eternity, from the desire
of faith, to the possession of hope, and to the fruition of charity, which
abides for ever and ever world without end.

Tit^lma.
4. O confirm me with this principal spirit: vidz: of a prince, or of a king,
to be generous, magnanimous, and heroycall against all difficultyes, which
would hinder my continuance, or proceeding in thy service. O give me this
principal spirit to govern and rule all my affections, and passions, which
would at any time disquiet me. With help of this spirit, and by the special
assistance of allmighty God (and not without these) can a just man persevere in
his justice: Council. Triden. de iustif. c. 23.13. and Can. 22.
if a ship at sea have no wind at all, it must wafte with the waves: And so
shall we be tossed and carried by our affections and tentations, if through our
defaulte this spirit and divine breath do forsake us. Wherefore relying upon
this as in humility we may not distruste, so in presumption that we have this
spirit, we may not be secure. O let us not to soon suppose our selves healed
enoughe by satisfaction, least remitting and slacking our minds from a
careful guard and watch upon our hearts, so we come to fall soon, because we
imagine our estate safe: S. Greg.
We must say as it is in another psalm: O let my heart rejoice, that it may
fear thy name, for filial fear to offend will ever keep us in joy not to
have offended: Psalm. 85. Psalm. 32.
and true spiritual joy for our pardon, will never make us careless of our
faults. Wherefore as the heavens are confirmed by the word of our Lord in a
successiue motion of night and day, for labor and for rest; so confirm us we
entreat thee in rest of joy, and in labor of fear, that by our sonnelike
fear we may be directed in our labor, and finally admitted into the eternal
joy of thy rest everlasting.

SEVERAL DISTRIBVTIONS OF THE same spirit, into Right, Holy, and Principal.
Sect. 3.
1. IN these ver^es, the spirit is thrice mentioned. 1. a right spirit. 2. a
holy spirit. 3. a principal spirit. The son of God is a right spirit. A
holy spirit is the holy Ghost. And God our Father is a principal spirit.
Sin is said sometime to be forgiven by grace; sometime blotted out by the blood
of the cross; and somtinne to be covered by charity. S. Aug. S. Amb. Apol.
Da^id c. 13. and 15.
The holy ghost infuseth grace; the Son shed his blood; and God the Father
in wonderful love to us, gave his only son for us. O blessed Savior, renew
us with thy right spirit: o holy ghost take not thy holy spirit from us: O
allmighty father confirm us with thy principal spirit. Renew us by thy
blood; take not thy grace from us being renewed; and not loosing grace, let us
be confirmed by thy principal spirit: for so shall all our sins be blotted
out, have pardon, and be covered.

2. O holy and undivided Trinity; Create my heart, which is worse then naught,
for thou art creator. Renew my bowels who serchest our Reins, for thou art
Redeemer. And give me a right spirit instead of my corrupt thoughts, for
thou art Sanctifyer. Do not cast us of, for thou art our Patron, to whom
else can we fly? Take not thy self from us for thou art our paymaister, of
whom else can we have reward? Restore us, for thou haste made gracious
promises; and Confirm us, for in all these thou haste principal power. I call
first upon the spirit of the Son; because none can come to the Father but
by the Son: and I place the holy ghost between them both; because from both
he proceeds. Also I pray thrice for thy spirit, to have some proportion
(though not the same measure) with the Apostles who received him thrice. 1. to
heal diseases when they were sent to preach. 2. after the resurrection, when
they received full Orders. 3. when they were confirmed and illuminated in their
authority at Pentecoste. I beseech thee let me have my sins and infirmityes
healed: let me receive grace in thy Sacraments: and confirm me ever with
boldenes in the profession of thy faith; that if before time I have fled from
thee as a fearful Disciple, I may after thy Pentecoste as a strenghthened
Apostle rejoice in suffering for the name of Jesus.

3. Furthermore by thy Right spirit grante me verity. By thy holy spirit
Bonity. And in thy principal spirit, unity. So to have Truth of faith joined
with goodness of life; and neither of them separated from unity of love and
peace; that so also in thy spirit, our Belief may be right; our
conversation may be holy; and above all our peace and love may be principal:
either because it is a principal mark of thy true disciples; or is a
principal virtue; or because Satan laboring nothing more then Division, we
have need to pray for the principal power and spirit of unity, to confirm
us ever in this principal charity.

4. Or by thy right spirit order me arighte toward my neighbor; by thy
holy spirit make me good in my self* and toward thee, o God, let me have a
principal spirit; for to thy honor we must direct all, and love thee above
all. Also let me enjoy a right spirit against covetousness and injustice; a
holy spirit against luxury, and intemperance; a principal spirit against
pride and oppression; for a principal noble mind is humble and not cruel in
superiority; a holy heart is moderate and abstinent in all delights; and a
right eye does never covet another man's goods, nor will look upon any Bribe.
Thus shall we not be squynte eyed nor pur-blynde, against whom the prophet
complayneth, They have not known to do right, Amos. 3. Heb. 12.
treasuring up iniquity and robb^rie in their houses. Thus shall we observe
the counsel of S. Paul charging us to follow sanctity without which no man
shall see God* Thus if be humble and courteous even toward our inferiors, our
Lord has promised by Esaias, Esaias. 66.
that his spirit shall rest and remain upon him that is humble and fears
his words. Wherefore in all these let us ever pray for the joy of Jesus and
his salvation: to be given, if we want it* to be preserved, if we have it: to
be restored, if we have lost it: and so always to be confirmed with his
principal spirit.

TO TEACH OTHERS IT IS CONMENdable: but it is necessary first to be well
informed, and reformed ourselves. Sect. 4.
1. THis is a work worthy commendation, to teach the bad to become good. The
chief skill of a good pilote is among rocks; S. Ambr.
of a discrete school master is about dull or unruly wits; and of an
experienced Capteyn is among fearful or disordered soldyers: So our Savior
came to heal the sick^, and to bind up the broken hearted; S. Aug.
so must we also seek to help the sick, for the hole have not such need of
the phisityan; to teach the wicked and ungodly, least any sort be lost by our
negligence; to bring the wicked into the ways of God, and that the ungodly may
be converted unto him: whether they be wicked Christians, or ungodly Pagans* or
such as have no God; have forsaken God; or do greiuously offend God: for as S.
Paul says, It is God who iustifyeth a penitent sinner: of what sort soever.

2. Thus let us draw all sorts we can unto repentance: the tractable by hope
of pardon; S. Greg.
and the hard hearted by fear of hell fire; for this is both a sign and a
duty of a true convert, to be desirous also to convert others; either by
persuasion of words, or by example of deeds; assuring our selves that the
zeal of souls is a great satisfaction on our part, and unto our lord a
grateful sacrifice.

Hug. Car.
3. Observe notwithstanding that first we must desire to be converted and
confirmed our selves, before we take in hand to reduce and teach others: as
our Savior appoynting his Apostles to convert all the nations of the world,
yet first he wills them to sit in Jerusalem till they were endued with
virtue from above: Luc. 24.
first to have our selves enabled, which our lord performs to them who sit
in Jerusalem. 1. who abide in constancy within the city of peace; for until we
be well rooted, how shall we endure a storm? or bring forth fruit.

4. So also said Exechiel The lips of the tables one hand breadthe were
turned inward: In Ezech. lib. 2. hom 21. Prou. 19.
upon which words S. Gregory collecteth, that measuring by palms or hand
breadthes, signifies actions: and to turn the lips inward to these, is to
hear first as a scholar before thou speak as a teacher, to taste what
thou give as a nurse; and to work what thou command as a laborer. For
Solomon calls him sluggarde who hides his hand in his bosom and will not put
it to his mouth, not so much for meat, as to perform with his hand what he
speaks with his mouth. And thus let us follow S. Peter's advise, As every one
have received grace, so to employe it toward others: 1. Pet. 4.
in grace of speech; and grace of action: that as the holy ghost appeared in
fashion of a tongue, so also, he is called in holy scriptures Digitus Dei the
finger of God, Luc. 12.
our Savior saying he cast out devils by the finger of God, that is, by the
virtue of the holy spirit, which is a finger of action, as well as a tongue
of speech: that as our cou^tryman venerable Bede has written a Treatise
teaching men to speak or express their minds, by the signs and motions of
their fingers (as we use to talk with dumb me^) so we should learn
according to our English phrase to handle our tongues well. i. by the works of
our hands to make good the words of our tongue. For otherwise that accusation
of Jeremy will fall upon us, mendacium operatus est, Ierem. 8.
we have wroughte alye, whiles our bad actions do falsefye our good speches;
or when we do good for hypocrisy not for sincerity; it is a monstrous lie:
because ordinary lies are spoken; but such a lie is wroughte: operatus esi
mendacium, a lie with a wroughte latchet, which may be seen. Contrariwise a
true seruante of God, and one who will teach his fellow servants the just
and complete will of his master, he must learn Salomons lesson: Read my law
as the apple of thine eye, vidz: with attention And write it on thy fingers,
namely, in execution: so the prophet says the word of our lord was made in
the hand of Aggaeus; where he mentions making of it in his hand, for
revealing of it to his knowledge, because our knowledge is vain without
practice: as in Geometry and the Mathematiques one quarter of an hours
practical demonstration will make you to understand more then a whole weeks
theoricall study: and as the 7. planets give more influence then the fixed
stars, because the one are fixed in their spheres, and the other have their
peculiar motions; for influence proceeds from light and motion, not from
light alone: and therefore we must like S. Ihon Baptiste as well burn and
move in heat of charity, as shine and stand still in light of faith. Not as
the Lacedimonian of the nightingall, to have a sweet voice only, and nothing
else. Nor Jacobs mild voice, and Esaus roughe hands. Nor as Agis said of a
witty Sophister that when he held his peace he had nothing good in him. Or as
Stratonicus coming by a fountyen asked of the inhabitants next it, whether
the water were good? they answered: we use to drink of it. The^ says he, it
is like to be naught, for your faces and complexions seem to be corrupted:
judging of their founteyne by the operation and effects thereof: as we likewise
shall be discerned by our deeds, what is in the founteyn of our hearts.

WHAT BE THE WAYS OR PROCEEdinges of our justification: and what faith does
teach us in these ways. Sect 5.
1. Wherefore least penitent or thirsty men should drink of corrupted
founteynes, I will direct as many as I can, to the clear waters of healthful
doctrine, whose springes are only within the bounds of the Carholique church.
I will teach the wicked thy ways; vidz: such as have been in wickedness of
sin, or of heresye, I will show them thy wa^es of justification.

2. I will teach them, that sometime thy laws and thy ways are called
iustifications praying with David I would my ways might be directed to keep
thy iustifications. Psalm 118.
2. so^time they are said to be justified who are only declared to be just,
which is imputative righteousness, whereof Esaias said: woe be to you who do
iustifye the wicked for bribes. 3. sometime for the first justification, or
obteyning of justice unto a sinner; Esaias. 5.
whereof S. Paul says whom God calls, he iustif^e^h. 4. sometime for increase
or proceeding in further justice, which is called a second justification of one
already just; Romans 8. Jacob 2. Apoc 22.
of which S. James speaks, concluding that a man is justified by works, and
not by faith only: and S. Ihon wills him who is just to be further instifyed.

3. I will teach them that the end of our justification is the Glory of God,
and the salvation of our souls. That the chief efficient cause of our
justification is the Goodness and Mercy of God: the efficient by-way of merit,
is the passion of Christ: Council. Triden. sess. 6. c. 7. Ephesians. 1^
the efficient by-way of instrument united, is the humanity of Christ: the
efficient by-way of instrument separate, are the Word, Sacraments, and their
Administers. The material cause or subject of our justification, is the mind
of man, es^ecially the will, wherein this justice is wroughte and remains. The
formal cause in habit intrinsecall, is the habit of grace or charity
infused: in habit extrinsecall, or exemplar, Car. Bellar. de iustif. lib. 1.
cap. 2. 1. Cor. 15.
it is the very justice of our Savior Christ, in which S. Paul admonishes us
we should bear the image of the celestial man, i. Christ; as we have borne
the image of the terrestrial man, Adam; But the formal cause in Act, are
good works; which in one respect are the Effects of our justice; and in
another have also so efficiency in our justification; as likewise have fear,
faith, hope, love, and repentance; all which last, as dispositions preparing
our mind and will, do every one in some sort iustifye. I will teach them
that faith necessary to justification, is not to be restreyned only to the
promises of Gods mercy; but it must believe all Truth which God has taught;
And that faith is seated principally in the understanding, and not in the will
as a confidence; for so it should be all one with hope; And that in the
understanding it is a firm assent unto all things which God propounds to be
believed; and not a knowledge of them.

4. Touching the first: Our Savior in the holy Go^pells, and in the Epistles,
and Acts of the Apostles, they do often require other points of faith to be
believed, beside the promises of mercy: Math. 9. Math. 16. Joan. 14. Act. 2.
and 4.1. cor. 15. Ephesians. 3.
as that Ch^iste is omnipotent: that he is the Son of God: that he is God and
man; and the true Messiah: that he was crucified, and rose again etc. and so
all the other Articles of the Apostles Creed (whatsoever the Caluinistes say
to the contrary) are points of justifying faith without belief whereof no man
can be saved; and yet most of them perte^ne to other matters then to promises
of mercy.

5. Touching the second: that faith is an assent of the understanding in
belief; not a confidence of the will, which perteyne^ to hope: and therefore S.
Paul says that in Christ Jesus we have trust and access in confidence
through his faith: therefore faith is not a trust or confidence, Lib. de
praed^st. SS. cap. 2. Intert. ses d. 26. ^ 1. q. 5.
but the cause of trust and confidence, which we get through faith. And S.
Augustine says: Credere, nihil aliud est nisi cun assensu ^ogitar^: to believe
is nothing else, but to think of a matter with assent thereunto And S.
Bonauenture makes a double certeinty; one of faith in the understanding;
another of hope in the will: By the fi^ste, we believe firmly as true all
propositions of Gods word in general* and by the second, we have good
confidence in the particular application of those things which may perteyne to
our selves, as good for us: For attingimus Deum we are joined or do reach unto
God* only by our understanding and our will: ^ane^yro. discep. 9. p. 2.
in our understanding is faith: and because our will considers things; either
as just, and so we love them, or as p^ofitable, and so we desire them;
therefore in ou^ will is both hope expecting our heavenly profitable Good;
^harity loving all that is equally just: And so we have the 3. Theological
virtues: faith: hope and charity.

6. In the third point: Faith is not a distinct knowledge; but an obedient
assent captiuating the understanding to the obedience of faith: for where there
is a plain knowledge of truth, 2. cor. 10.
it needs not to captiuate the understanding to obedience: Therefore the
Apostle twice reckons knowledge and faith, as two several gifts of God:
and the common phrase is oportet discentem credere. 1. cor. 12. 1. cor. 13.
A learner must believe, viz: such things as he does not or cannot understand.
S. Hilary said, It has rather a reward, then need of pardon to be i^norante
what thou beleeuest: as in the mystery of the Trinity. Saint Prosper alleging
those words of scripture Except you believe, De Trini. lib 8. Esaias 7.
Censess. l.
you shall not understand, collecteth thence, that faith proceeds not of
understanding, but understanding comes from faith: and S. Augu^tin accordingly
prayed, credam vt intelligam, non intelligam vt credam* o Lord let me believe,
that so I may understand, not by understanding to believe: w^erfore faith going
before know^edge, is not all one with knowledge: For first there is
apprehension: next is Assent (which two together make faith) and thirdly is
knowledge; n^w in ^arte; and hereafter fully, when fides shall be vides; when
we shall know as we are known.

7 Note al^so, that this apprehension is ey there indistincte and in gross; or
it is evident and particular: this last is neither necessary, nor enoughe unto
faith the first is necessary, but not enoughe; for both of them must have
Assent. Therefore if a countryman, or other ignorante plain soul do give his
firm Assent to that which he apprehendes but grossly, he has faith; whereas a
heathen philosopher, or other cunning Clarke* ^houghe he have never so clear
an apprehension, yet he has no faith, if he have not assent and credit to
that which he understands: wherefore faith consists more in Assenting
obedience, then in understanding knowledge.

8. Likewise this Assent is double: De vtilitate cred. cap. 11.
either grounded on reason and the evidence of the matter; or upon the
authority of the Teacher. The first may be called knowledge: but the latter is
properly faith. So says S. Augustine That which we understand, we ^ we it unto
reason; but what we believe, unto Auctority. And yet thus, though faith be not
knowledge; yet is knowledge both profitable to increase out love of God, and
commendable in them who desire so to profit. And therefore with David I will
teach the wicked in matters of faith what to believe, yiedling their Assent to
the infallibility of the church: and in matters of knowledge how to understand
by illustration of arguments grounded upon reason: for these are the ways of
God and of certain truth; which if they be not sensibly demonstrable to
fleshly eyes, yet are they evidently credible to spiritual hearts. Thus I will
teach thy ways, which are thy iustifications.

HOW MANY OTHER PATHS DO LEAD unto the ways of justification: and that we
are not justified by faith only. Sect. 6.
ANd the ungodly will be converted unto thee. How shall a wicked heretic or
ignorante man learn thy ways of truth? By obedient faith. How shall an
ungodly Catholic or a lewd sinner be converted unto thee in a good life? By
justifying faith. It is faith which begins first to iustifye a sinner: and
secondly also the just shall live by his faith. In matter of our
justification always faith must be one: yet only faith does never iustifye.
Neither first as the only Disposition unto justice: nor 2. as the only formal
cause of our justice: nor 3. as the only encreaser or preserver of our justice.

2. Luther on the Galathians once said that faith is our formal justice for
which a man is justified making faith an essential cause of our justification.
Cap. 2.
But since all protestants reject that saying, and make it only a bare
instrument, as a hand receiving an alms: and so to iustifye us only
relatiuely. Yet touching the concurrence of other virtues and good works, the
Electorall Wittembergians or softer Lutherans following Melancthon (with whom
herein concurreth Calvin) they require the presence of good works as necessary
signs and fruits of faith; yet denying them to have any efficiency unto
justification. But the Saxonians and harder Lutherans following Illyricus deny
any necessity of good works to justification; either in presence; or in
efficience; alleging these sayings of Luther, Faith does iustefye without and
before charity: and in his disputation, Galath. 2. Tom. 2. Proposi^. 3.
whither works avail to justification, he avouches That faith, except it be
without the least works, does not iustefye; nor is faith. These and many other
be their particular dissentions among themselves, though against Catholics
good works they all conspire, That only faith iustifyeth.

3. But the Council of Trent* beside faith which is the first Disposition,
Sess. 6. c. 6.
requires also Dispositions of fear; hope; love; penitence; a purpose of
using the necessary Sacraments* and a purpose of a new life in observing Gods
commandments. The first then is faith: as S. Paul says, It behooves him
that comes to God to believe that he is, Heb. 11.
and that he is a just Judge and a punisher of evil: and a merciful father
and rewarder of good. Out of the one proceeds next, fear, which likewise as
well as faith, is an introduction or disposition to justification. For
Ecclesias. says, He that is without fear cannot be justified: Eccles. 1. Cap.
26.
and Esaias says, From thy fear we have conceived and brought forth the
spirit of salvation.

Romans 8.
4. Then from beholding of mercy and reward thirdely grows Hope, which
likewise does iustefye as the Apostle expressly speaks we are saved by hope,
and in the psalms often They shall be saved and de^iuered because they hoped
in God. Psalm. 36. and 90. etc
Fourthly after hoping for Good, follows ^oue of the Benefactor, which love is
before remission of sins; either in time (if it be an imperfecte love only
beginning) or in nature (if it be perfect in all ou^ heart abounding) as our
Savior said to S. Mary Magdalen Many sins are forgiven thee, Luc. 7.
because thou have loved much: and although perfect love is not in us, till we
have the holy ghost fully dwelling in us; 2. Cor. 7. S. Joan. 3. S. Joan. 20.
Cap. 18.
yet we may have imperfect love before this complete spiritual habitation,
though indeed neither this love, nor any of these other dispositions are in
us before and without the preventing grace, or special help of God.

5. Fiftely from this love of our gracious Benefactor we must proceed to
Penitence, which is a sorrow and cont^i^ion for having sinned against him, whom
now we begin to love above all the world, and therefore do detest and greiue
for what is pass: and this sorrow says S. Paul works penitence unto firm
salvation: Math. 22 Origin. Tract. 20. in math. S. Hilar. ^an. 22. ^n math. ^.
Hiero. ibidem S. Greg. ho. 38 in eua^. S. Suc. 10. S. Math. 12. and 24. S. Iac
2. Doct. Sta. Promp. Cathol. Dom. 12. post Pent. Luther in pro. epist. Iac.
etc. Bren. in Conf. witte^berg. c. de sacra. s^ri Eras. in Annot. Mag. Cen 1.
l. 2. c. 4. (...). ^xa^. Se^. 4. Ill^ric. ^la. ^^ri. part. 2. ^ra. 6*
therefore this also does h^lpe to iustifye. And with this sixtely is joined a
purpose and desire of coming to Baptism (if the patty be unchristened) or to
Confession and Satisfaction, if since our Baptism we have mortally offened.
And that these are necessary entrances unto justification, as well as faith, it
is manifest; for except we be borne of water and the holy ghost we cannoe
enter into the kingdom of heaven: and the successiue substitutes of Christ
have auctority from him; that whose sins they remitte they are remitted,
therefore only to believe is not sufficient, except we have also a sincere
purpose to be Baptized and Confessed. And lastly we must have a resolute
determination by Gods grace to lead a new life, amending our faults, and
endeavoring to keep our lords commandments, as Ezechiel said, cast from you
all your iniquityes, and make in you a new heart and a new spirit.

6. In fine, our Savior does often require, besides faith, also charity and
works (of which two consists the wedding garment that is so necessarily
required) saying also, that if we will enter into life we must keep the
commandments: and that at last we shall be judged by our works. And holy
scriptures in many places require justice and good deeds; for not the hearers
only, or believers, but the Do^ers of the will of God shall be justified Do this
and thou shalt live: said our L. Jesus. And S. James of purpose against only
faith in express words avouches, that a man is justified by works, and not
by faith only. Denying the word only for which they s^riue so extremely,
that rather then they will not have their will, they will doubt of S. James
Example whither it be true scripture, as Lu^her and diverse of his folowers
did. And Illyricus shameth not to say of all scriptures requiring good works,
that when certyen excessi^e effects, and praises, and even salvation it self,
is attributed in scriptures unto good works, we must judge that to be ascribed
to them which is not convenient for them* O blasphemous impudency! he boaste^
of scriptures, and yet will thus controlle scriptures, as giving too much
praise and excessive effects unto good works: he confesses scripture to
ascribe unto good works even salvation it self: but he has authority
(forsooth) to call this an excessive praise and effect, and that herin the
holy ghost does ascribe that to good works which is not conueni^nt to be
ascribed. And thus do all heretics ever brag of scriptures; yet so, that
they will reiecte them, or interpret, or controlle them, according to their
own fancyes, whenever they find them contrary to their own opinions.

7. Much more modestly and discretely S. Augustine aduertiseth, that where faith
in scriptures is extolled and required, there good works are not excluded: and
where good works are praised and commanded, there faith is not debarred. But
whereas diverse things are necessary unto our justification and salvation, Tit.
de ^per.
they are seldom or never all expressly reckoned together in any one place,
much less in every place or scripture, or of any other writer but sometime one,
and so^time another, according as occasion is offered. And so the holy
scripture does not exclude what it concealeth, but does require what it
expresses: De fide and oper. c. 13. and 23.
and when several things are mentioned in diverse places, yet all about one
purpose; we cannot deny them to have all some virtue in the same office: and
therefore we must acknowledge good works to have virtue in them about the act
of our justification; neither separating faith, nor rejecting works from their
mutual assistance founded upon our Savior Christ; and in his merits,
concurring both of them to the very work of our salvation.

OF THE HOLY WAYS; AND OF THE sacred feet and footesteps of our heavenly
Guide and Teacher. Thus I shall teach thy ways unto the wicked, and the
ungodly will be converted unto thee. Sect. 7.
1. THE wicked misbeleeuers have need of a right faith; and all ungodly
livers do want good works: these will be converted by thy grace and
inspirations: and the other must we teach by our example and instructions. Unto
both of them we will show the ways, in which all of us must walk with those
two feet of works and faith.

2. Thy ways, O lord, are mercy and truth: not only truth in verity of
faith; and mercy in the reward and merit of works: but also thou haste
truth of justice against obstinate presumers, and mercy of favor for
tractable penitents. If these would learn to walk in thy ways it were good
they should be taught to follow thy footesteppes: but how should we better
discern thy footesteps then by knowing thy feet? Therefore let S. Bernarde
teach us how the feet of our Savior are mercy and judgment: with these
feet he walks upon the water waves, trampling down both our proud high
minds swelling as waves; and our soft delicate flesh as mooueable as water:
with these two feet he traueleth up and down in all places; to do us good;
and to free us from ill; to give us health, and to cast out devils; as
Abac^c prophesyed the devil should fly away from before his feet, both
visibly out of bodies, and out of souls spiritually.

3. Wherefore come, O my soul, we will sit us down at these feet with S.
Mary Magdalene, let us mark well his feet, and consider his fotesteps: his
feet are mercy, and judgment: his footesteps are hope and fear. O happy
souls in whom are imprinted the steps of both these feet! and this happynes
they have whosoever with S. Mary Magdalene will wash them both, will annoynte
them both, will wipe them both, and will kiss and embrace them both: to wash
them and to wipe them by cleansing sorrow, to kiss them and to annoynte them
by sweet smelling love: to sorrow in fear; and to love in hope: to fear his
foot of judgment; and to hope in his foot of mercy: not to be busy about the
one foot, and to neglecte the other, but to embrace them both: If I be
timorous and sorrowful without hope, I shall despair: If I be confident and
secure without fear, I shall be presumptuous; more slothful in negligence,
more cold in prayer: my actions will grow more careless, my laughter more
loose, my talk more inconsiderate, and the whole estate of my outward and
inward man much more unsettled.

4. Therefore I will teach the wicked presumer thy ways in thy footesteps of
fear, and the ungodly mistruster shall be converted unto thee in thy harbor
of hope: Psalm. 100.
and so we will sing of mercy together and of judgment unto thee O lord. And
so likewise let the just man reprehend me in mercy, and chyde me. The vines
are made fruitful, both by cutting of their superfluous branches, and by
adding to their roots necessary and norishing dunge. Profitable reprehension
is a proyning knife of unprofitable imperfections; and for necessary virtues a
mild admonition is a manuring of mercy. Wherefore woe unto them, Ecclesiast. 22.
said the Wiseman, who turn the dunge of oxen into stones, nor let me ever be
made fat with the oil of sinners. Let me never grow abundante in vice by
the soft oyley flattery of worldly freindes: nor at any time turn the
fruitful dunge of good counselors, into hard stones of obstinacy. Rather let
them teach me me thy ways, first by sharp reprehension, when I wander from
thy footesteps of fear: and next by cherfull encoragement, when I faynte in
following the footesteps of hope.

5. Yea, o Father of mercy and judgment; I desire the to be angry with me
according to thy mercy, and to teach me thy ways according to thy justice.
Correct me in that anger by which thou ^oost reclayme a wanderer, not whereby
thou do exclude a runneagate. Say not thou have taken away thy zeal from
me, as from one who is incurable, Ezekiel. 16.
and so because I am desperate thou will no more be angry with me: for who^
thou do love thou do chasten. If therefore thou will not chasten me going
amiss, thou do not love me to teach me thy ways. It is said: thou werte
merciful unto the Israelites taking vengeance upon all their fond inventions.
O gracious Father whenever I follow inventions of mine own appetite, Psalm.
98.
teach me to come home to to thy ways by the vengeance of thy mercy. For it is
thy peculier condition, to remember mercy when thou art angry: and therefore
having offended, I shall then have confidence in thy favor; not when in
pleasure I feel no smarte of punishment: but when in affliction I feel thine
anger for amendment.

SOME DEVOVTE DESIRES, AND THANKSgiuinges of the Author, unto Almighty God.
Sect. 8.
1. THus o lord I desire to be taught By thy self; and By others: By
encoraging exhortation, or By severe admonition: By fear; or By hope: By
judgment, or By mercy: To avoid all desperate fear; and to beware any
careless securit^: To amend faults; and to profit in goodness: and with these
to be instructed in thy ways of true faith; and converted unto thee in works
of good life; that so in some poor sort like S. Peter being converted in my
self, I may better confirm others: and also being confirmed with thy
principal spirit like David, I will be bold to teach thy ways unto the
wicked, and the ungodly shall be converted unto the.

2. As I am mightily obliged to endeavor this satisfaction; and as thou haste
given me, o lord, an earnest desire to perform this obligation; so I beseech
the give force unto my endeavors, and let me see some effects of these
desires. I desire to teach them, not the secrets of Philosophy, nor the
pollicyes of statesmen; but thy ways: For there be two kind of sciences; one
of holy me^; another of wise men; one of just me^, another of learned me^: if
both be joined, both are good: but if wisdom or sort of our co^mo learning be
without holiness, we may well call the^ as Erasmus termed the common lawyners in
England Indoctum genus doctissimorum hominum, an unlearned kind of most
learned men. 1. subtle and acute in their quirkes of law, but ignorante or
unskillful in other true learning: and so all knowledge without skill in
Christ's way, is to be a speedy post master out of the way.

3. Also I will endeavor to teach, not as a master in Israel, but as a
scholar at the feet of Gamaliel: I will help my fellows in the same lesson
which I have learned; not to seek vaynglory by teaching; nor by setting out my
self unto the world, to aim at the world: But I beseech thee, o Inspirer of
all good teachers, herein ever to direct my purposes sincerely; by converting
or teaching of souls, to seek them; and not theirs; nor any thing else of
this world: Rather in this, and all other things, to intend above all, thy
heavenly Glory; their spiritual God; and my bounden duty.

4. And were it not vanity to ascribe much to our selves about the conversion
of souls, we can but teach thy ways by our outward voice, and so they shall
be converted unto thee by thy inward grace: as David here promises to teach
them; but their conversion he leaves unto thee. Paul may plant; Apollos may
water; but thou o lord must give the increase: men may remove the stone from
Lazarus grave, and some have authority to loozen and untie his hands and his
feet; but our Savior himself must raise Lazarus to life: we will teach o
lord, but thou must convert.

5. And verily, neither are any so ready to learn, nor we so willing to teach,
nor yet so desirous that our dearest freindes should be converted, as thou who
did thirste upon the cross that all should be saved: so that we are far
inferior unto thee, o Jesus, in our charitable desires; and they who will not be
taught thy ways, nor be converted unto thee, such are still worthy to wander
out of thy way; and continuing such, are for ever unworthy to come unto thee.
For as thou haste appointed the End, so thou do declare the way.

6. O sweet Jesus, if we be taught thy way outwardly as Catholics, it is thy
mercy and it is greater mercy inwardly if we be converted unto thee. O what
recompense should we make nay what thanks can we return! Our thanks cannot
express what we owe; much less will our recompense discharge our debte. If
thy ways be thy law* and thy law be immaculate converting souls; o how
excellent a privilege is this! to be taught such away; and such a law; a
law of grace, and a way of life: which is immaculate, both because it makes us
immaculate, and also in comparison of the law of Moses, S. Remig. Antisiod.
which was maculated with many shadows, spotted with much difficulty, and did
discover our blemishes and sins. For Moses law did command to obey; S.
Hieron. S. Augustinus.
but not as the law of Christ give grace to fulfill it, that turned away
from evil the hand or the eye by fear; this conuerteth unto good the heart
and soul by love: that was a law for servants; this for sons. O let David
teach us thy way in this law, and hereby let our souls be converted unto
thee: from captivity, unto liberty; not pressing us by terror, but drawing us
by swetenes; from things temporal, unto things eternal; from the hope of
reward, to the charity and love of God himself. O let us be converted unto
thee; and let us be taught this law, and this way; S. Ruffin.
which leads sinners unto repentance, kindles them who are cold; inflames
the^ who are warm; rayseth him up who is down; hastens his pace who is slow;
cleanses the unclean, for it is a law immaculate; and iustifyeth the
unjust, for it conuerteth souls. We are wicked: o teach us this way: and
convert us unto thee, for we are ungodly. Teach thy ways unto our body an^
outward senses which are wicked; and let our ungodly soul and inward
thoughts be converted unto thee.

7. This is all the recompense we can make: these are all the thanks we can
return: to give thee our wicked body, and ungodly soul: to desire from thee
more benefits, that so we may be able to pay our debtes: and in this payment
we shall be gayners; but thou shalt be no richer; for when we give thee all,
yet we render the but thine own, whereas by this gift we have our wicked
bodies sanctified, being taught in thy ways; and our ungodly souls
justified, being converted unto thee: yea thus, o lord, we do less then pay
thee thine own: nay we do worse; because we do keep no proportion in our
exchange. For neither do we learn all thy teaching inspirations; nor do we
answer all thy converting vocations: and besides we give wicked bodies, and
receive them holy; we give ungodly souls, and receive them just. O happy men
who have to deal with such a God! o gracious God, thus we entreat thee to
teach thy ways unto the wicked; and let the ungodly be converted unto thee.

MEDITATION. IX.
Libera me de sanguinibus Deus, Deus salutis meae: and exultabit lingua mea
iustitiam tuam. Domine labia mea aperies, and os meum annunciabit laudem tuam.

Deliver me from blouddes O God, O God of my salvation: and my tongue shall
rejoice thy justice. O lord thou will open my lips; and my mouth shall
declare thy praise.


FROM ALL CORRVPTE AND CRVELL Blouddes, let us all desire deliverance. Sect. 1.
1. IN the former verse, our Prophet had showed whom he would teach, namely the
wicked, ^nnoce^. 3.
what he would teach, namely thy ways: and wherefore he would teach, namely
to the end the ungodly may be converted Now he adds who is a fit and
meet teacher: namely he that is freed and delivered from sin* and next
adioyneth, how he shall teach, namely By declaring thy praise and rejoicing thy
justice.

2. In charity toward our neighbor, we will teach others thy wa^es: In
charity toward our selves, we desire to be delivered from our sins: And in
charity toward God, we will show forth his honor and praise. Also we must
make our conversion a matter of much consequence; not idle, but to teach others
by our experience: not unprofitable; but that others may be converted, and we
our selves delivered from sins: nor unthankful; but rejoicing in Gods
justice, and giving glory to his goodness. Thus, O lord, I desire to teach
others thy ways; for so I am bound in satisfaction: I desire to be delivered
from mine own sins; for so it behooves me to be free from the slavery of
the devil: and I desire to rejoice and declare thy praise; for so it becomes
them who receive such favor and fredome. Libera me de sanguinibus. Deliver me
from blouddes. S. Ambr.
From the blood of Vrias and his companions slain through my subtilty: and
from all my heinous mortal sins which proceed of the concupiscences of flesh
and bloudde. S. Aug.
If the phrase and speech of blouddes be improper in the latin, or in our
language; yet rather had the Interpreter speak somewhat rudely, then to alter
the word and phrase of the holy ghost. Or in mentioning blouddes plurally, he
understands many sins, and many offenses, which the Hebrews attribut^e to
blood as we ascribe our faults to flesh, and sometime to both, Pet. de Vega. 1.
cor. 15. S. Aug.
saying our vices do proceed of flesh and blood: And so S. Paul says that
flesh and blood shall not possess the kingdom of God; that is; neither our
sins which proceed of the corruption of flesh and blood; nor that flesh and
blood which is subject to the sensuality of sin: and so he excludes the
sinful corrupuion of our nature; but not our nature it self* he denies not
place in heaven to our bodies which consiste in substance of flesh and bloudde;
but debarreth our sins which arise and depend as effects upon flesh and
blood: and so sins are called flesh and blood, as words and languages are
called tongues: and as an ill tongue is harshe and not esteemed, and corrupt
flesh and blood are abhorred; so on the contrary, sanctified bodies shall be
honored, and tongues serving and praising God shall be rewarded.

3. Therefore deliver us, o lord, from* blouddes: Euthim. Lyran. Genebra. Iansen.
both from the blood of Vrias and his company which were unjustly slain; and
from the guiltynes of my blood, which deserves likewise to be shed, in
recompense of blood for blood. And further deliver me from all corruption of
flesh and blood, in abominable cruelty, in subtle deceyte, in filthy
fleshlynes, and all other manner of vile sinfullnes. O deliver me from all
crafty and bloudthirsty circumuention of any man's life, for as it is in another
psalm, men of blouddes and crafty shall not hold out half their days;
Psalm. 54.
not half their course of nature; or not half their own desire of long life.
Deliver me from all unlawful lust, and fleshly filthynes, for none polluted
and unclean shall in such sort enter the kingdom of heaven. Deliver me from
all negligence of instructing those who are committed to my charge, or whom I
ought to teach of charity, for thy law says Except thou shalt show unto
the wicked his iniquity, I will require his blood at thy hand. Deliver me from
guiltynes of sin present and successiue, least blood touch blood, Deuteronomy. 34.
and so iniquityes be multiplied. Deliver me from all future punishment of
sins paste and present, least I hear it said, Osee 4.
thou will make thine arrows even drunk in the blood of vengeance upon me.

4. Thou have given them power to be made the sons of God, Joan. 1.
who are not of blouddes nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but are borne of God. O deliver me from blouddes that I may be borne of God.
Our lord Jesus was borne of man corporally; and men are borne of God
spiritually: but to proceed of blouddes is to proceed of concupiscences and
carnal appetites; or to be corrupted with many loathsome sins and offenses.
And S. Augustine says, by flesh is meant our mother; S. Aug.
and he understands our Father by the name of man: and so by the will of flesh
he may well mean our womanish frail passions; Glos. interlin. Venerab. Beda.
and by the will of man our humane erroneous opinions. But the original of all
these, is our sinful inclination by the corrupt mixture, or mixte corruption
of blouddes: therefore, o lord, deliver us from blouddes, that so we may be free
from all these: neither partaking in passion, nor for opinion consulting with
flesh and bloudde: but having power given to be made sons, and so be borne of
God, let us proceed with David earnestly to repeat the name which we love,
and to show the strong desire of our petition by a zealous and vehement
repetition, Deus, Deus, salutis meae, O God, O God of my salvation.

SOME SHORT PETITIONS DIRECTED unto the name and Goodness of God. Sect. 2.
1. O God, O God of my salvation. Some interpret this word God, in greek to
signifye one who beholds: or one who runs. He sees our salvation in his
foreknowledge; and in his exceeding love he runs spedily to perform all our
redemption: Hugo. Card.
O God look upon us: O God run unto us. Behold us for our salvation; and
hasten unto us in our redemption. See us also in thy foreknowledge of our
redemption o God; O God come running unto us in thy love of our salvation.
Furthermore, because we hau^ need to be saved and sanctified in the knowledge
of our understanding, and in the affections of our will; therefore also bring
us salvation of understanding to see thee and know thee O God^ O God, hasten
us by willing affection to run unto the, and to love thy salvation; as in
another p^alme it is said Thou art my illumination and my salvation, viz: unto
my will, salvation: and illumination to my understanding. Therefore, Psalm 26.
o God so look upon me, that I may also see thee being rightly illuminated: O
God so run unto me, that I may come unto thee, being devoutly affected.

2. O God the Author, o God mediator of my salvation. O infinite Deity! O
merciful humanity of my Redeemer! O Jesus who art God! O Christ who art
man! O Emmanuel who art God with us men. O son of man! because thou tookest
ma^hood of a blessed pure Virgin. O son of God! because thou art God of God,
and the eternal substance of the eternal Father. O God which art man! O man
who art God! Thou have auowed of thy self I am the salvation of the people
working our salvation by suffering as man; Psalm. 3.
and accomplishing our salvation by ouercoming as God. o deliver us from
blouddes, by the blood of thy salvation. It is a work of great power to
deliver me from my sinful corruption of blouddes, O God: O God, it is a favor
of much mercy to shed thine own blood for my salvation. O God deliver me from
those blouddes, for only the power of God can work it: O God, grante me
salvation in thy blood, for only the mercy of God will accomplish it: deliver
and cleanse me from my abominable corruption of humane blood, by the
inestimable preciousnes of divine blood: this I do account and desire, as a
mysterye of God, and a mercy of God, for my admirable salvation. Deliver me
from blouddes, O God, O God, of my salvation.

WE DO REJOICE OUR LORDS justice by trusting in his promises: or by
acknowledging of his mercy, which forgiueth the offendour, and yet fullfilleth
justice. Sect. 3.
1. ANd my tongue shall rejoice thy justice. O lord thou will open my lips,
and my mouth shall declare thy praise. S. Greg.
Saint Gregory says that the justice of God is faith in his true religion: and
we do rejoice his justice when we resist, or forsake heresy for Gods cause;
neither coveting the aduancements or aboundances of this world; nor fearing
his disgustes or pouerity: for it is better to live depending upon the word
and promises of God, in a patient firm hope; then to rely upon the best
vncerteintyes of all this world, in any present possession. For without true
catholic faith it is impossible to please God: and by this faith a just man
shall live: First spiritually, rejoicing more that he is a poor member of the
Catholic Church, then if he were a mighty rich Prince in heresye: and
secondly for his body* and for his necessityes praying and trusting unto him,
whose most fatherly providence feeds the Birds of the air; and clotheth the
lillyes of the feilde; and with whom if there be provision for sparrowes, there
is more for men: and as he has done good to our souls, so he will not
neglecte our bodies.

2. O my soul, for thy life, keep ever this confidence on him, and so rejoice
on his fatherly justice: for if we ask him bread, he will not give us a stone.
But especially let us rejoice in his justice; for having delivered us from the
loathsome blouddes of our sin, and brought us to the knowledge of his truth
and into the estate of justice and of justification by his grace. Also with
men it semes justice to revenge an injury, and to free a malefactor is
accounted injustice: neither will the rigor of man's sentence be satifyed,
though an hundred others would give their lives for one offender condemned,
but the party who is guilty must be executed: therefore, o lord, we will rei^yce
in thy justice which is appeased by the death of thy only son, to make him a
Savior of life for millions of slaves: this thy justice does both free and
advance heinous offenders: this thy justice does release any injury, and pardon
any penitent malefactor. Thy mercy has propounded and promised all this: and
this, thy justice does perform.

ALL THE WORDS OF OUR MOUTH should proceed from God, and again be referred
unto God. Sect. 4.
1. O Lord thou will open my lips, and my mouth shall^ declare thy praise.
Except thou, O Lord, do open my lips: Innoc. 3.
except thou do give me this grace; neither can my tongue rejoice, nor my
mouth declare thy praise. It is not you which speak (said our Savior) but
the spirit of ^y father which is in you: Math. 10. Psalm. 84.
therefore with David I will harken what our Lord speaks within me: andso by
his assistance, in mine own comfort, and for his honor, I will exercise all
the instruments of my voice: my tongue: my lips: and my mouth. My tongue
shall frame words: my lips shall grace their soundes: and my mouth shall
pronounce their full sense; to rejoice in his justice, and to declare his
praise.

2. The wise man said, It is thou o lord who do shut up the mouths of the
proud; and make the tongues of infantes to become eloquent. S. Gregor. Sap.
10.
If we open our mouths of our selves, we either speak vainly or falsely: and
sometime we join the^ both together, speaking falsely to obtain vainglory;
whereas if thou, O God, did open our lips. If we did direct our speech
to thy honor, we should ever have truth in our tongue; and thy praise in our
heart. It is convenient always to remember that saying Quis, Cui, Quid, Quare
tu dicas, fac saepe requiras. Who, to whom, what, wherefore thou art about to
speak, first do thou examine thy self. If I be to teach, O Lord open my
lips: that it may be to profit souls; not to set out my self not insisting
in persuasible words of humane wisdom, 1. Cor. 2.
but in declaration of the spirit and of virtue: and thus he will open our
lips, if first we ask wisdom of God; and then so speak as the words of
God, referring them only to his glory and to the good of souls. Jacob. 1.


3. If I be to pray: o lord open my lips, that I man neither ask amiss to
unfit purposes; nor pray alone with my lips having my heart far from
thee: but hold me in attention from wandering thoughts: warm in devotion from
cold desires; and seeing I am insufficient of my self to think, or to
cherish, or to express a good thought: O let thy holy spirit teach me to
pray in wardlie in mind with unspeakable sighs, and outwardly in body with
decent signs of due reverence.

4. If I be to talk or discourse, O lord, so open my lips, that nevertheless
according to the wise man's counsel, I may make a door and a bar to my
mouth, and vnt^ my words a beam and a balance. Ec^le. 28.
To my mouth a bar of silence, and a door of warynes with a beam of
discretion, and a balance of measure to my words. Thus I pray with David
elsewhere. Psa. 140.
O Lord place a guarde unto my mouth, and unto my lips a door of
circumstance: In all our talk let us number our words, lest we become
talkers: let us measure every syllable, that they may be convenient and honest,
not uncivil nor immodest: let us weighe and consider all our speech, to
ponder before hand every circumstance; to have it just in truth; grave in
sobriety: not to light in mirthe: equal in good Curtesy: neither balance
rising upward in high minded vanity but rather weighing downewarde in
profound humility. O thus let us consider before we speak; whether to say
this, would it savor of envy or slander? whether to speak that, would it
not discover some matter which it were better to keep secret? would it cause
needeles suspicion? would it give offense? or is it any way like to be
indiscreet.

IN ESPECIAL, OUR PRAYERS AND our Praises should have respect unto God. S^ct.
5.
1. THis is in conversation with men: But with God especially our spiritual
communication by prayer must be with respect: And because he is the Author of
every good gift, G^nebra. in Tractat. Berachoth.
and we have need in our prayers to be taught to pray; therefore the old
Hebrews began all most all their public prayers and liturgyes with these
words O lord open thou our lips. And so the Catholic church considering
that the end and beginning of all actions ought to have relation to allmighty
God; therefore at Complynes finishing the day, we say Convert nos Deus, O God
turn us, viz: from all our offenses of that day passed. S. Bonau. in hunc psalm.
And then the Mattynes are begun with these words, O lord thou will open
our lips: insinuating that after the silence of the night, we must first
open our lips in the honor of God; and that in the innocence of the morning
we are aptest to praise God.

2. For to praise God with our breast full of sins, is like a cunning singer
who has eaten garlic, or has a stinking breath, his voice may be sweet to
them who are a far of; but to those that stand near him, it gives a bad
savor So among men, our praises may seem to be devout, butif we have sin in
our heart; our lord will consider the loathsome savor, more then the sweet
sound: such lips may utter good words; but no such mouth ca^ give true
praise. Nay rather to ^uch a one our lord says* why do thou declare my
justice? Psalm. 49.
He that has a festered ca^ker in his m^ath I am sure you would not suffer him
to chewe meat to feed your child? And were it not offensive to hear a
dronkarde discoursing against dronke^nes? or one given to the vice of the flesh
to preach against wantonness?

3. Shall we presume outwardly to pray unto God? or to sing him praises? whiles
neither we are resolved to forsake sin; nor do feel in our hearts any
spiritual joy. To stand and move our lips, and to feign as if we answered
or spoke to the Judge, were it not a mockery? even such is our lippe-labour,
when we praise God, or pray unto him, and yet do voluntarily abide in sin.
For he that loves any sin, does not love God: how can he then praise God whom
he does not love? or as a malefactor, whiles he fears just punishment, how
can he harbor true joy in his mind, as if he were a well beloved son? And
we know our lord will not hear sinners: that is; Joan. 5.
neither their outward prayers wanting inward devotions; nor any petitions for
favor, except they be resolved for ever to forsake sin. If we be sorry for
what is passed, and do verily purpose by his grace never to offend in time to
come* our lord does hear such sinners by his ear of mercy, though not by his
ear of justice: but without resolution of amendment, D. Thom. 2.2. q. 83.
our praises and our prayers themselves are turned into sin: for we pretend
what we mean not, and do but abuse and dissemble with the majesty of God.

4. If we were to speak in a kings presence, we would be heedfull to our
words and behavior; much more therefore in the presence of God. And if the
king should help us to declare our meaning, and incorage us in our speaking,
we would rejoice for such favorable audience, and confidently hope to obtain
our request: such trust we may have in allmighty God; for so he deals with
us: and therefore let us first desire him so to open our lips: For as we
cannot speak of our tongue or of the air, without the air and without our
tongue; so neither can we praise God or pray unto him devoutly, except we have
some help from God, wherefore o lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall
declare thy praise.

IT BEHOOVES ALL THEM WHO TALK WITH God, to have the roots of their tongue in a
clean heart. Sect. 6.
1. EVery man desires the commendations of honest, but not of suspected
persons, much less of notorious sinners. Abstinence and Fasting would not be
praised of a full bellied glutton; for the praise of virtue is most proper in
the mouth of the virtuous: and the praise of God does not become any but such
as be devout and religious. Pericles beyond his custom once apparelled
himself exceeding bravely, Ammia.
to go to the marriage of a fair personable young man: and being asked the
reason of such extraordinary care of comelynes: he answered: because I would
go as comely as I can, to grace, and not to disgrace so comely a man. And so it
is a dishonor rather then an honor unto religion, to have a wicked sinner take
upon him to be a devout singer: S. Greg.
neither can such men say in truth, Os meum, my mouth shall praise thee.

2. The covetous man prayseth not God with his own mouth: nor does he use his
own mouth in the service of God who is dronkard, a glutton, or a luxurious
person; for whiles they pronounce that with their mouths, whereof they have no
savor or delighte in their hearts; they do but counterfeyte or borrowe the
mouth of other true religious men, who utter with devotion, what these do but
pronounce for fashion; like puppeets which speak by art, not by nature.
Rather except they would amend their lives, it were better for themselves
they should hold their tongues: as Bias sailing in a ship with certain
maryners and passengers whose conditions he noted to be very vicious; Laert. iu
vita Biantis. lib. 1.
therefore in a storm which presently followed, when they all began to lift up
their voices, and cry unto their Gods, he earnestly desired them to hold
their peace. Sil^te, ne voshic nauigare Dij sentiant: be silent, least the Gods
perceive that you sail here. Meaning, that the prayers of such companions,
would rather provoke then appea^e the wrath of heaven.

3. And so David here, desires first to be freed from blouddes or sins; and
afterward he entreats for grace to have his lips opened: for as it is in
another psalm If I have respect to iniquity, Psalm. 65.
our lord will not harken* for how should I obtain remission of sin, if yet
I have any intention still to sin? O lord open my lips, o lord do thou
make me worthy: do thou make me able, to pray unto the, and to praise thee. My
tongue of it self is of no value: it is only a small piece of flesh, which yet
according to his use may work great effects, marvelous good, or extreme bad:
as Anacarsis being asked, what was the best of man? he answered the tongue. And
again being asked, what was the worste? Laert. in vita A^a^har.
he answered the tongue: and therefore nature has placed it in the close vaulte
of our mouth; besette it with teeth as a percullice; and our lips are as the
gates; to the end that with such Guardes it should be warily kept in: for it
must be carefully governed, as the Rudder or stern of a ship; the minute
wheel of a clock; the trice or pully of a Crane. And one compares it to a
mattocke or pickaxe which may serve to dig a dungill, or to work in a mine of
gold; because our tongue may be an instrument to blaspheme, swear, revile,
sclander etc. or to defend Right, to teach truth, to persuade virtue, to pray
unto God for his mercy, or to praise him for his goodness: And so I desire o
lord, thou will open my lips; and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

ALL CREATVRES DO PRAISE OUR LORD by declaring his goodness of necessity: let
us yield him all honor for love and duty. Sect. 7.
1. WHat praise shall we give thee, o God, who did make man of the slyme of
the earth? what honor shall we ackwoledge to be due unto thee, who have
redeemed us (being lost) by the death of thy son? in the first we confess
thy gracious power: inthe second we do admire thy powerful grace. All the
honor, and praise, and glory, which possibly we can give unto thee, is not to
add any thing to thy praise or honor (which thou haste in thy self infinite
without our commendation) But to declare some part of thy glory and praise, S.
Bonauent. lib. de process. relig. c. 8.
which from all creatures is due unto the. And hence it is that the heavens,
are said, to declare thy glory: and hence it is that usually in thy honor we
do inuit all thy works, even dumb creatures to manifest thy praises.

2. All creatures, O God do declare thy praise, even wicked men and devils,
whither they will or no, they do affoarde matter and occasions to show forth
thy justice, providence, wisdom, power, goodness, long sufferance: But
betwixt these praises of thy freindes and enimyes there is much difference:
for the one is willing, the other unwilling: or the one is given of purpose,
and the other drawn from them without their purpose: or the one proceeds from
the nature of their substances, or order of their actions; but the other
especially from the love of their will, from the light of their understanding,
and from the grace and goodness which is in them both. O lord give my soul
such grace: and let this grace be diffused in my lips; to love the, and honor
thee in my heart; and so with my mouth to declare thy praise. O thus let me
desire ever that my whole life and all my actions and passions may be directed
and intended by thy love, unto thine honor. O let my heart burn in this love:
and let the flames of thy praise proceed out of my mouth; to give heat unto
others, as well as feel warmthe in my self.

3. And as it is the nature of great heat, not so suffer our mouth to be
close shut nor will we cease to praise what we love: so contrarily the dead
coldness of sin, does both quench this heat, and stop our mouths, and so
will not suffer us to praise our lord: Thus S. Basil notes, that it is the
nature of sin, to make us tongue-tyed, and to shut up our mouths, least we
should be able to pray unto God, or to praise him: and else where David says
obstructum est os loquentium iniqua, they that speak wickedness, their mouths
are even stopped whiles they speak. Psalm. 62.


ALL OUR CONSIDERATIONS AND actions should have some relation unto the praise
of God. Sect. 8.
1. O Lord open my lips, to take in breath of thy grace: and my mouth shall
set forth thy praise in words of thanksgiving. Thy honor and glory, O God,
shall be the scope and end of all my life: my soul shall serve for thy praise;
and my body shall herin help to serve my soul: Because as Seneca said, I am
more noble, and borne also to a more noble end, then to serve my body as a
brute beast. But in my souls contemplation, I will consider for thy greater
honor, thy omnipotency in creating: thy providence in disposing: thy virtue in
finishing in preservation of what is finished, thy power: in government of
what is preserved, thy wisdom: thy mercy in doing good to all; and thy
justice in punishing the bad. These things I will consider in mine
understanding: in my senses I will admire them: rejoice for them in my will:
and with my voice I will declare thy praise.

2. Saint Peter said, this is one end, why our lord redeemed us, that we
should show forth his virtue. And so a philosopher being asked, why man was
created? 1. Pet. 2.
he answeree: to contemplate and behold the heavens and the divine powers. O
my soul let us endeavor thus to meditate on God: by contemplation to know
him; S. Augustine sermon. 55. ad fratres in eremo. Psalm. 90.
by knowing to love him; by loving to possess him; by possessing to enjoy
him; and in this joy to praise him. O how wonderful great are thy works, o
lord, thy cogitations are exceeding deep: an vnwi^e man will not know, and a
fool will not understand these things. If I be not able, or not worthy, to
fasten mine eyes upon thy self, I will begin to consider thy creatures, and so
from them I will raise up my thoughts unto their Creator: For haec spectari
voluit, non tantum aspici: he would that these creatures should be veiwed
seriously, not alone slightlie gazed on: Senec. de vita beata. c. 28.
and by the interior consideration ever to learn some what of God, at least
for his praise: otherwise, he that studyes upon the nature of the heavens,
stars, air, water, sea, earth, flowers, herbs, fishes, beasts, and other
creatures, pondering no more but their nature, and altogether omitting to
collecte somewhat touching their Author, he is like a man who has skill,
means, and matter, wherewith to build a palace, and yet spendes all his time
among children and boys, only to make little houses of claye, durte, or cockle
shells.

3. Adam is said to have been placed in Paradise, to keep and to cultiuate that
garden: but we know that before his fall the earth had no need (much less
Paradise) to be tilled by labor of the body: wherefore his chief dressing and
keeping of Paradise, was by labor of the mind, in contemplation, love, and
praise of God. Behold, O my soul, where thou may have both an office and a
place in paradise: would thou live in paradise? would thou here begin
to be happy? If heaven be on earth, it is in a devout religions man's cell. If
the life of Angels be among men, it is in the quyre, or among them who praise
God like Angels. To burn and to boil in the love of God, is a most pleasant
refreshing to a thirsty soul. O my soul, be thou thus thirsty: this heat
will cool thee* this thirste will refresh thee: this fervent love will make
thy praises fruitful: these praises, as they delighte and draw unto us the
Angels and Saints so they vex and drive away the devils and all bad
spirits: for this is the music of David's harp which drove away the evil
spirit from Saul: and these are like the desires and meditations of our
blessed lady, when the Angel came to salute her.

4. Thus Plato called the body a musical instrument, and the soul a musician,
who according as he handles and uses his body, so it affoardes him bad or
good melody: learn the^, o my soul, to keep thy body in tune: release:
stretche: and touch his stringes with order, and for harmony; that is; with
charitable discretion toward our selves, and other men; and for heavenly
respect to the greater glory of God: so let us labor, or rest: feed, or
fast: talk, or pray: and do every thing else in domino, as in the sight;
for the service; and to the praise of allmighty God. Thus the ancyent
Christians, as Pliny wrote to Trajan, were a people which lived innocently, and
exercised themselves in the silence of night, to sing hymns unto Christ,
before the dawning of the day. Thus S. Paul and Silas being in prison, they
worshipped and praised God: thus, o my soul, let us often accord with the
holy Angels in a devout Sanctus; Sanctus; Sanctus; holy; holy; holy; father;
son; and holy ghost; or with our Savior himself, who in his humanity as he
is man, Act. 16.
sings Sanctus; and the Blessed Virgin his mother with all the triumphante
quyre of heaven, sings Sanctus; and Sanctus must be our song with the priest
at the Altar, Esaias. 6.
and with all the Church militant here on earth. Thus also let us often
join with the whole court of heaven in Alleluia: Alleluia: Alleluia: with
heart and voice Alleluia: Apoc. 19.
with instrument and lips Alleluia: with mouth and tongue Alleluia,
rejoicing Alleliua, singing Alleliua, or meditating Alleluia. Thus all honor,
glory, praise, and power to God and to the Lamb Alleluia. Thus I beseech the,
o lord, that thou will open my lips, and the^ my mouth shall thus declare
thy praise.

MEDITATION. X.
Quoniam si voluisses sacrificium, dedissem vtique: holocaustis non
delectaberis. Sacrificium Deo spiritus contribulatus: cor contritum and
humiliatum Deus non despicies.

Because if thou would have had sacrifice, I would have given it
accordingly: with whole burnte offeringes thou will not be delighted. An
afflicted spirit is a sacrifice to God: a contrite and humbled heart, O God,
thou will not despise.


THE DIVERSITY OF SACRIFICES: and some differences between the law and the
Gospel. Sect. 1.
1. OF sacrifices we read of three kinds. 1. victimae animalium, the bodies of
living creatures. 2. oblationes aridorum, the substances of fruits. 3.
Libamina humidorum, S. Bona.
the moisture of liquors. The first were called victimes, either because they
were for victoryes, or because they were tied or bound to the Altar, as vincta,
the second were oblations, given to be offered: The third were Libamina liquors
to be powered out, or to drink^ of. The first were killed, the second were
pownded or bruysed, the third were powered out: and all of them must be one way
or other somewhat altered from their former existence. Wherefore if we will
begin a sacrifice of our selves, we must purpose a change of our qualityes:
our waterish pleasing thouhtes must be powered out in tears of repentance: our
dry unprofitable speeches bruysed into well relished words: and we must kill
the concupiscence of all our bodily works. Or it will be good to mortifye the
desires of our will, as a victime tied or bound to the Altar: To pownde or
bruyse the dry meditations of our memory for an oblation to be consecrated
unto God. To power out the flowing and vnsethed cogitations of our
understanding, referring all to the wisdom and providence of our heavenly
Father. So shall he have humbled thoughts: a memory contrite: and an
afflicted spirit: which kind of sacrifices, O God, thou will never despise:
especially when like the old sacrifices, they have fire and salt, that is,
some heat of fervent devotion, and well seasoned and ^alted with some
discretion.

2. These sacrifices shall ever be accepted: But it may be our David
prophesied, Innoce^. 3.
that there would come a time of grace, when thou would not be delighted
with any sacrifice of the law. The legal sacrifices, S. Aug.
were but as the scaffoldes of the building: when the building is finished, the
scaffoldes must be removed: and yet our Savior came not to dissolve, but to
fulfill the law. To fulfill the inward substance and truth of the law
which is eternal: and to dissolve the outward figure and shadows which were
temporal. Iacobus de Valentia.
And so another psalm says in the person of our Savior. Sacrifice and
oblations thou will none, but thou have perfected a body for me etc. then I
said, behold I come. But when the king himself comes his Viceroy must give
place.

3. Also the sacrifices ofthe law did rather signifye, then iustifye: but
ours do as well iustifye as signifye. The law of Moses received obedience
more for fear, Innoce^. 3.
then for love: the law of Christ more for love, then for fear. And so, that
law did rather restreyne the hand, then the mind; rather the outward deed,
S. Aug. lib. 1. contra Adima^t. Et lib. contra Faustum.
then the inward intent: But our law does more respect the intention of the
mind, then the work of the hand. In that law were more earthly and
temporal promises, then heavenly and everlasting: but in ours there are more
eternal and spiritual promises then corporal and transitory. In both laws
there are indeed both eternal and temporal promises; and both do require
obedience of heart and of hand; for love, and for fear: for under both laws
there are some perfect men, and some imperfect: But under the law of Christ
there is more perfection; and so more love, then fear, and yet some fear:
more promises eternal then temporal, and yet some temporal: S. Thom. 1. 2.
q. 107. art. b
and these temporal promises, and this fear, in the law of Christ, are for
the imperfecte. And on the other side, for those which were perfect in the law
of Moses, some did obey for love and with a good heart, and for such it had
some promises spiritual; but these were fewer, much inferior unto them of the
Gospel.

SOME OTHER DIFFERENCES BETWEEN the Law and the Gospel. Sect. 2.
1. BUT the principal difference is, that Moses law did not iustifye ex
opere operato nor did the sacrifices and ceremonies thereof conteyne grace in
themselves: S. Tho. 1.2. q. 103. art. 2. Et 3. q. 62. art. 4.5.6. Et Cajet.
ibid.
For the mysterye of our Saviors incarnation and passion, not being really
accomplished, they could not really conteyne virtue of that which yet was not:
only ex opere operantis if the parties offering were in state of grace, and had
faith in the expected Messiah, then did those sacrifices iustifye; not as
conferring grace of themselves causally, but only as signs accidentally. It is
true; the sacraments of our law in like sort require faith and devotion* but
moreover in themselves they are more then signs, and do conteyne and confer
grace: not corporally abiding in them, for so can nothing merely spiritual be
contained in a bodily substance: But instrumentally and really remaining in
them, and so virtually intended to pass and be conveyed by them. For our
sacraments effect grace chiefly as isntrumental causes, and that, as
instruments mediate and separate, such as is a staff, not as an instrument
coniuncte and immediate, such as a hand. And so the principal efficient cause
of grace is God himself: the humanity of our Savior Christ as an instrument
coniuncte: and as separate instruments and causes of grace, are our
sacraments; both satisfactions for sin, and meritorious of favor.

2. Wherefore though the sacrifices of the old law justified as signs
testifying the faith and obedience of the offerer, yet this was only ex opere
oper^^tis by the obedience and faith of the parties, applying the merits of
our Savior Christ by that faith, as only by an inward act of the mind in
the offerer; which inward action of faith though always it be necessary, yet
furthermore we have the virtue of our Saviors passion applied unto us also by
the outward use of external sacraments, which is a privilege of more favor,
and a prerogative of more grace.

3. And thus is the law of Christ more perfect and more abundant in grace,
then was the law of Moses: for what the Leuiticall law did but promise and
signifye, our Eua^gelicall law does exhite and perform: and as S. Augustine
said significando causat gratia^ in signifying does also cause grace in us.
Wherefore though the law of the gospel propound more temporal afflictions
and less store of worldly prosperity, yet does it affoarde a more speedy
passage to heaven, and so much greater reward of eternal glory: thirs was
generally for a more carnal and sensual people, and more imperfect; but ours
is especially for men more perfect and more spiritual, which as it requires
more perfection, so it does enable us with more grace; and so it is a much
easyer yoke, because it does endue us with far greater strength.

4. If you consider them both by the bare outward letter; yet as S. Augustine
said the law had the gospel hiddenlie inuolued, and the gospel has the law
plainly revealed: the law did foreshew our Savior as one a far of dimly
seen; and the gospel does manifest him clearly as one present. And in respect
of their commandments, admonitions, and other instructions, let them be alike
in this point of their letter, that in both of the^ the letter does kill; S.
Tho. 1.2. q. 106. art. 2. Romans 4.
because when the letter of the law or gospells commandment is not fulfilled,
it is accidentally or improperly said to be the occasion of sin, and so to
kill: yet seeing it is the spirit which gives life, and considering that the
law of Moses was a dead law working wrath, requiring obedience, and not
enabling to obey; and considering that in the law of Christ, beside the
outward letter and commandments written in paper, there is also abundance of
grace inwardly shed into all good Christians hearts; not only prescribing what
we are to do, but assisting us ever in the doing: this is an excellent
difference, and a confortable encoragement.

5. Wherefore S. Augustine said: Libro de spiritu and litera.
In the old testament the law was established outwardly, by which unjust men
should be terrifyed: but in the new* it is inwardly given by which they
might be justified. And so, the law was made by Moses, but grace and truth
was given by Jesus Christ: and therefore the Apostle says their law was given
in tables of stone; but ours is written in the fleshye tables of our hearts;
and calls their laws, a ministration of death and condemnation; but ours he
names a ministratio^ of the spirit and of justice; because with ours we
receive inward grace helping to be saved; but theirs had only the outward
letter which accused,

6. In this respect David might say that our lord would not be delighted
with the sacrifices of Moses law, although he had so strictely commanded
them: Ianse^. Ti^elma^.
he exacteth them: and yet refuses them: they were commanded; thereby to show
the faith and obedience of the Offerers: and yet he refused them in regard of
any value in the sacrifice it self: they were exacted, because of that which
they did signifye: but he did not regard them for any worth or virtue in
themselves. As when the Post or other messenger bringes us a letter, whose
carriage must cost us dear: Sir, here is a letter for you; pay me for the
portage. If we desire first to read it; he will say no, if he suspecte we will
return it him unpaid: for he knows we care not for the bulk of the letter,
but for the meaning of the words: and that the paper of it self is nothing
nere worth the price which he demandes: so the sacrifices of the old law
were required for signification of the Messiah, and were accepted according to
the faith of the offerers: not for any value which of it self was in the blood
of beasts, or in the swetenes of fruits.

7. Thus S. Jerome, and others note of Abel, Theod. q. 3. in Genesis Lyranus. S.
Aug. libro de mirab. sacrae scrip.
that our Lord more respected the person offering, then the sacrifice offered.
And so S. Augustine observes in Abel 3. primarye virtues, vidz. he was the
first priest, the first virgin, and first martyr: wherefore our lord first
respected him, and then his sacrifice. And peradventure David here considering
his own unworthiness by his sins so fowly committed, durst not presume to
offer any sacrifice, because it may be, doubting he had not sufficiently
repented, he feared his person yet to be loathsome, and therefore his sacrifices
would not be accepted. So let us take heed unto our selves, O my soul, that
we approache not to the Altar of God, whiles we have a loathsome conscience,
uncleansed from sin, for unto such Esaias threatens, he that offers an ox,
is as one who kills a man; and he that sacrifices a beast, Esaias. 66.
is as one who beats out the brains of a dog. For when a wicked wretch
without repentance, whiles his person is unholy yet dare meddle with holy
things, he does not pacifye but provoke the wrath of God against him, because
he does profane and abuse divine mysteryes, which if we use them well are
heavenly remedies. So he that celebrateth or hears mass abiding in mortal
sin without remorse, he is as Judas, who boughte and sold our Savior
Christ, and yet supped with him: And like the Jews he crucifyeth again our
lord of life, who remaining in deadly sin, does receive unworthily the most
blessed body of our Savior; or in like sort prophaneth any other holy
sacrament. O let us not as Jews so kill such a man: nor so make our selves
like unto Judas that dog, who as he was hanged deserved also to have his
brains beaten out, as well as he had his belly burste, so that his bowels
gushed out.

OUR LORD DOES MORE REGARD THE heart then the gift, and the devotion more
then the sacrifice. Sect. 3.
1. OR these words may have reference to the bare outward figure of Mosaycall
Ceremonies; Iacobus de Valen.
not to the inward truth by them figured. Our lord will not have the shadow
of the sacrifices, without the substance of the Messiah. And so the Jews law
was promised to be eternal, in regard of the substance figured; not in
regard of their ceremonies, figures, and shadows, which when Christ
fulfilled, they were finished. And so he came not to dissolve the inward
truth of the law, but to fulfill it, and to continue it for ever as eternal:
according as he dyed only in his body; not in his soul: for so the outward
part of their sacrifices and signs are ceased* they dyed with our Saviors
consummatum est, and by the Apostles were buried by little and little with
honor: but their inward truth is still alive: The work of our redemption is
accomplished, and the fruit of our Saviors sacrifice and passion is now in
force, and shall remain eternal for ever more.

2. O let us likewise offer our sacrifices with inward sincerity and truth:
not only bring sweet smelling frankincense for outward smoke* S. Aug.
but especially an humbled and a contrite heart with secret flames of devotion;
not to seek beasts or birds, to kill them in sacrifice; thou have inwardly
in thy self, O my soul, many appetites and faults which should be mortifyed.
Our lord does not so much require the gifts or riches of men, as the man
himself. If we offer our selves together with our gifts, he takes any thing
in good part: but without our inward true heart, he will accept nothing
whatsoever. Holocaustis non delectabitur. He will not be pleased which whole
burnte offeringes, which were the best sacrifices, nor with all the best
outward oblations. Wherefore let us exhibit our bodies a living sacrifice*
Hugo Cardinal.
not hartles: for without the heart it is dead: nor a sacrifice, nor a heart
defiled with sins, but holy and pleasing to God. And all this, according to
discretion, which is our reasonable obedience. Non holocaustis: not in such
whole burnte sacrifices, where to destroy some offense or natural infirmity,
we do consume also our very natural substance: for almighty God does not
exact any thing too much at our hands, nor will be content with any things
too little. But as it were too little, though we should give all our Gods in
alms, or suffer our bodies to be burnte, not having in us the true love of
God: so neither does he require that voluntarily we should too much hurt our
selves with pretense of his love, or in desire of doing penance; for this were
to hinder, and not to further his service. And in this sense Lycurgus, and
Socrates ordained that the people should offer small sacrifices unto their
Gods: the one said, because they should so offer to day and this year, that
still they might have somewhat to offer the next year and to morrow: the
other said, because God having no need of our gifts, he did rather regard
the heart of the giver, then the greatness of the gift.

3. In this sense, I say, their ordinance was good. Otherwise David here
refuteth them both: especially as some interpret the word Zebab, a thousand
sacrifices, because it begins with the Hebrew letter Zain, which in their
accomptes does stand for seven; and so by a certain number, they say is often
signified an exceeding great number: as if he should say: I would willingly (if
thou o God would demand them) yield the 1000. or 1000000. sacrifices: yea
all that I am, or have, or can have; even all this all at once; for when our
lord does require it, nothing can be too much, or too great, or too dear, or
too good for his service, or to testifye our obedience and love unto him. And
then it does appear that he does require them, when either he takes such
things from us by his providence, or by his holy inspirations he does move us
to leave all the world to enter into religion. And in these cases, he that
gives the whole orcharde or Gardeyn all at once, doubtless his gift is much
more and far better, then if he should continue every day to give some
flowers of that Gardeyn, or some fruits of that orcharde. And although the
Goats hair given by poor people to the building of Moses tabernacle, and
the poor widows mite in the Gospel, were no less acceptable to God, Exodus
25.
then was the Gold and great Gifts of rich men, because if the willingness of
their hearts be equal, their reward shall be equal; yet all sorts must
testifye their willingness, according to their abilityes; for of him that has
many talentes there is more increase required: and if a rich woman should give
but a mite, or if Goats hair should come from the hand of a wealthy man,
surely of such we might say: He or she that being able to do much, performs
but a little* out of question, little is their willingness.

4. The schoolmen dispute: If a man being sick, cannot be cured, but by a
medicine which must cost all the wealth which he has, whether with a ^afe
conscience he may rather suffer himself to dye of that disease, then so to
spend all that he possesses? In some cases, some are of opinion. That he may:
Except he be such a person, whose life does much importe the public good of
the common wealth, or of diverse others beside himself. But in no case may we
adventure the death of our soul* rather says our Savior, if it cost us our
hand, or our foot, or the very eyes of our head, we must sooner pull them
out, or cut them of, then loose our soul to save them all, or to gain all
the world. So let us say, and perform it with David; If a million of
sacrifices, or millions of millions were requisite, O God, if they were in our
power, we would yield them all most willingly, not alone for some recompense of
our sins but, also to testifye our willing love, and our bounden obedience,
unto so gracious a lord, unto whom we do owe our selves, our souls, our
bodies, and that we have, or can have: so that if occasion be, we may say with
S. Peter and the Apostles, Ecce nos reliquimus omnia* Behold we have forsaken
all, to yield our selves unto thy good pleasure; S. Bernar.
for allbeit we have no kingdoms, no lordships, no lands, nor other great
riches or dignityes to forsake, no more then had those poor Fishermen, yet (as
they did) if we willingly part from all we have in present possession or in
future possibility; and no less from the love, affection, and desire of this
world, then from the honors, wealth, and pleasures themselves; in this case
we may well say reliquimus omnia, we have left all; though we enjoyed never so
little: for herein to subdue our will, and to yield our Desire, is as much as
to give him all the world, if it were ours to give: and he that so resignes
his Desire and his will unto all, doubtless he resignes All, and so much more
then All.

5. Thus therefore let us offer him All with David, that whenever it shall
please him to take all we have, or any part, we do gladly give him All, and
every part: and in this kind, although we do not in fact render unto God a
thousand sacrifices, not whole barnte offeringes, because we understand, that
he does not absolutely exact them, yet should we always be such poor men in
spirit, that in our hearts we be prepared to yield him all we have, whenever
we perceive that he does necessarily require them. And so let us say Quoniam si
voluisses sacrificium, dedissem vtique: Holocaustis non delectaberis: O lord I
give thee no whole burnt offeringes, because I do suppose thou do not
require them: But if it were thy will to exact a million of sacrifices
Dedissem vtique: verily I am ready to obey thy will; and if it were in my
power, I would willingly give thee all the world.

WE HAVE NEED TO BE PENITENT: and how acceptable unto our Savior is any soul
contrite for sin. Sect. 4.
1. ALL this is most due unto our lord, who nevertheless is so gracious that An
afflicted spirit is a sacrifice unto God: A contrite har^e, and humbled, O God
thou will not despise. For my sins I will afflicte my mind, and my spirit
with dolor and sorrow; and I will humble my heart, my senses, and my body, with
mortifications and labor. Ecclesiasticus 35. Esaias. 66.
These sacrifices, O God, I know thou will never refuse. For thou have said
that it is always an heathfull sacrifice To attend unto thy commandments, and
to depart from iniquity. And that thou will soonest regard the poor and
contrite in spirit, and such as fear thy words.

2. And these sacrifices are most acceptable: because in every outward
sacrifice there being 3. things 1. devotion. S. Bona.
2. oblation. 3. signification; sometime the last is impertinent or expired: the
second sometime is not necessary, nor required: but the first is ever
requisite, and grateful, and profitable: of which kind are an afflicted
spirit, and a contrite heart. The spirit and understanding is afflicted by
knowledge and consideration of our sins and of their enormityes: our will and
our heart is humbled and greiued by acknowledgement of our base guiltynes, and
with a detestation of our loathsome faults.

3. O my soul, if we consider the severe justice of allmighty God, who for
sin threw down Lucifer and those arrogant Angels out of heaven; expelled
disobedient Adam and his posterity out of Paradise; drowned all the world
except eight persons; and except his seruante Lot and some with him burned all
the five cities of Sodom; so often punished Pharaoh and all the Egiptians with
such strange and terrible plagues; caused the earth to open and to swallowe
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram quick into hell; and ever since in all ages and
places has sundry times manifested his dreadful judgments against careless
sinners: O how ought we to fear and to afflicte our spirit? that we
afflicting our selves he may spare us; and that beginning by peircing fear, as
by a sharp needle to draw into us the thread of love, we may come to be sowed
and united unto him in atonement and reconciliation. Thus O lord we pray
with David in another psalm Confige timore tuo carnes meas. O wound and pierce
my flesh with thy fear: S. Aug. Psalm. 118. Psalm. 47.
it will be like the ^urgeons wound which lets out corrupted blood or
putrefyed matter. There shall dolores parturientis, the sorrows of a woman in
childbirthe, that as our sins were conceived in voluptuous pleasure, so we
cannot be delivered of them without afflicting pain.

4. Nay we are happy, that sin by nature bringing us sorrow, we may (if we
will) so use this sorrow, S. Chrysostom. in hom. 5. de p^nitent.
that it shall extinguish sin, as the wood breeds a worm, the iron a rust,
and the garment a mothe which consume the substances whereof they were
engendered. Nay much more happy, that so easy and so small a means as an
humbled and a contrite heart, may change the justice of God into mercy.
According to that vision showed to a holy woman; wherein she saw our Savior as
it were sitting on a throne with great majesty, attended on by all the Angels,
Saints and holy host of heaven, and yet very often to rise of from his seat,
to go to every pitiful voice which called upon him, she asked what voices
those were? and why he himself so often moved from his throne? and did not
rather send unto them some one or more of his heavenly attendantes, which
might well seem more then sufficient? He answered, that those voices were the
sorrowful sighs of any sinners contrite heart, who if they could not so much
as name Jesus, yet if they did in true humility sighe, and with an afflicted
spirit syncerily greiue for their sins, he did so much love rather to show
mercy then to observe majesty, and did so much delighte in the contrite
conversion of any sinner, that he did most willingly rise up himself, and
withal in joy to move the whole court of heaven to give comfort and
welcome to every such soul.

5. Wherefore let us be of good comfort, o penitent souls; for though we be
destitute of all worldly wealth having nothing to give, but rather do beg
for alms, although we be so weak and so sick in bodily health, that we can
neither fast, nor use any corporal mortification, no nor be able to speak or
name Jesus, yet if we do but sighe for his mercy and for his love above all
things else; and if for that respect above all, we do but wish for pardon of
our sins, detesting them with an afflicted spirit, because we have offended
so gracious a lord* and with a contrite har^e for the fowlenes of our faults,
if we do but conceive an humble thought, with a hopeful desire,
acknowledging our own unworthiness, and craving his forgiueness; certainly such
a sacrifice of such a spirit* O God, thou will never refuse it.

A DESCRIPTION OF CONTRITION AND Attrition: and their several propertyes.
Sect. 5.
1. COntrition is a part of penance having a willing sorrow of mind for our
sins committed, Greg. de Valent. Tom. 4. d. 7. q. 8. p. 1. Nauar. man. de.
contrit.
which now we do detest more then all other hateful things, because it is an
offense against God, whom now we do love above all the world: and having an
hope of pardon through Christ, we do fully purpose for ever to absteyne from
sins, and to confess, and to satisfye, so far forth as we are bound, or
shall be able. This is the description of perfect Contrition, formed with
complete charity: But Attrition which is imperfecte and somewhat unformed, Is a
sorrow of mind detesting sin committed (though not alone and above all for
the love of God) and has a purpose (with hope of pardon) ever to absteyne as
least from mortal sin, and to confess, and to satisfye, as shall be
requisite. This Attrition of it self alone, is not sufficient to obtain
pardon, until there be added and adioined some sacrament unto it, by which it
obteyneth effectual remission.

2. And understand: 1. that there is a sorrow which is a grief only because
of punishment, or for shame, without any respect of God 2. in part for these,
and in part because God is offended; yet so that he would not sorrow if he
had no fear of shame or punishment.3. both for these, and because God is
offended; and so that he would sorrow for having offended God, though those
other were not: But nevertheless, he does not detest sin more then any
hateful thing, Greg. de Val. ibid. punct. 2.
nor love God above all in this world.4. Is (without these) a perfect
contrition grounded upon a sorrow detesting sin more then any other hateful
thing, and because we love God perfectly above all the world. The first is
of natural sense, the second is of a servile mind, the third is attrition of
an imperfect filial fear, the fourth is perfect and complete contrition.

3. Any sorrow may be profitable, and is good, when it does include (at least
virtually) some respect of grief because God is offended: And though our
sorrow, or fear, at first be but natural or servile, yet may it proceed to
be initiall, making imperfectly an entrance; and at last come to be filial in
perfection. Out of these, some differences are collected about Contrition and
Attrition. Domin. de Sotod. 17. q. 2. a. 5. Nauar. Greg. de Valen.
As first, that some Contrition does fully pardon all sin, both all the
guilte, and all the punishment, though the party should dye before he could
come to Confession, or any other sacrament: if he did desire them, and use his
true diligence to obtain them: whereas other Contrition, in the like case, does
remitte all the guilte and pain eternal, but not all temporal punishment.
But the best Attrition is not sufficient without some sacrament adioined to
absolve us from the guilte of sin.

4. Also there is a grosser attrition, which proceeds more from the fear of
shame or punishment then because God is offended: whereas the best Attrition is
more for the offense of God, then for any punishment or shame: Also there is a
difference betwixt remiss Contrition, and the best Attrition; because any
contrition detesteth sin above any thing detestable, being founded upon the
love of God above all: whereas even the best attrition, though it principally
love God and hate sin for it self, yet no^ above all. But the absolute love
of perfect contrition differs also from remiss contrition, not for that it
is sorrow only because allmighty God is offended, without any respect unto
shame or punishment, but because the one does exceed the other in intention.

AN AMPLE DECLARATION PLIANLY SETting forth the former description of
Contrition. Sect. 6.
1. NExt let us consider all the parts of the form description, as they
stand in order. First contrition is a part of penance: Melanctthon in Apol.
Confession. Augusta. Institut. lib. 3. c. 3.. 3. Ses. 6. c. 6. and Ses. 14.
cap. 3. Can. 4.
against the Lutherans, who make Terrors caused by the law, and faith fastened
on the gospel, to be the two parts of repentance. And against Calvin who
rejecting the Lutherans faith^, does no less improperly make the death of the
old man, and the life of the new man to be the only parts of penance. But
these points of fear, faith, mortification, and regeneration, are only either
preparations and dispositions leading unto repentance, as be fear and faith;
or they are necessary effects following repentance, as are mortification and
regeneration. And so all the Textes of scripture requiring these points, do
only prove that they are requisite and do concur with repentance, according
as the Council of Trent declares: denying nevertheless that they are not
properly material parts of penance; which in truth are contrition,
confession, and satisfaction.

2. Having a willing sorrow of the mind. Not natural only, or compelled, but
principally a willing sorrow: and that of the mind, rather then of the body:
and in the mind, rather in the intellectual part of the will, then in the
sensitive part: not excluding the sensible sorrow of the will or of the body,
which being added do give it conueniency, but only for necessity requiring an
estimatiue or appreciatiue inward sorrow, more then any outward intensiue
vehement grief. For there may appear, or a man may feel in himself a more
vehement and intensiue sorrow for the loss of his Father, his son, his wife,
his friend, or his estate, then he can peradventure find in himself for all
his sins: yet it is sufficient that in the election of his will, he do
sorrow for sin as much as he can, and do esteem and prise the horror of his
offenses, at a higher rate in general, then all the disasters and discontentes
of this world, so that if it were now in his choice, he would rather endure
any torment and death, or loose all the world, then deliberately to commit a
mortal sin. If he have this estimatiue or appreciatiue sorrow in the
reasonable part of his will, although it break not out into the sensible
part, I say it is sufficient: nay in some men many tinnes, I may say, that
such an hidden close grief, is even intensiuely more vehement, and greater
then outward sensible sorrow. Yet nevertheless if we can come to sorrow of
sense, in tears, sobbes etc. it is very profitable and convenient, although
not absolutely necessary.

3. This sorrow must be for our sins committed. Either personally and
particulerly for our own sins: or as we are parts and members one of
another for general or participated sins of our family, country, or common
wealth wherein we live: though this contrition of others sins be not properly
contrition. Which now we do detest more then all other hateful things,
because they are offenses against God, whom now we do love above all the
world. Where note, that it is not necessary to make a particular comparison
between our hate of sin and our love of God; whether we detest sin more
then present death? or hell? or the devil? etc. nor whether we do love God
above our king? our Father? our friend? or any other such or such particular
which we do love or abhor most in this world. Rather it is unto necessary
discretion causing doubts, fears, and unprofitable scruples by considering
such particular comparisons: for it is abundantly sufficient, that in my
contrition I am fully resolved in general rather to suffer or to loose any
thing, then to have committed, or again to commit any mortal sin^e.

4. And such sorrow is requisite for deadly offenses; but for venial faults a
smaller kind of discipline is competent; generally abhorring them, and desiring
with endeavor to avoid and to be free from them. Also for the avoiding and
preventing of them, and to be absolved from them in guilte and in all
punishment, we are much helped and benefited by the use of knocking our
breasts, by holy water, holy bread, agnus dei, medalls, graynes etc. hallowed
by the prayers of the church, in virtue of the blood and merits of our
Savior Christ. And by these, or by any other means, either against venial
or mortal sins, the more our devotion and contrition is increased, though
we may seem to have already repentance competent, yet the more we add with
humility, the more comfort and merit we shall find; the more certainly we
shall have all pardoned; and we shall be the more plentifully rewarded.

5. Neither may we too lighty suppose that every sorrow, or sighe, or knocking
of the breast, and saying miserere, or any such other signs of repentance are
sufficient contrition or attrition, except they have the inward propertyes
before described. In lib. 50. homil. hom. 41. Lib. de paenit. cop. 77.
Rather S. Augustine doubted of their salvation, who only in time of great
dangers, or after their sickness do begin to repent: not doubting but if
their contrition were true, then their pardon would be certain: but he fears
their undoubted salvation, because he doubts their fal^e repentance; who in
such times are much more like to be sorry alone for fear of punishment like
Antiochus, then for any true hatred of sin, or love of God above all. And
such he says are versi, turned only by fear from sin, not conuersi for love
converted unto God. And this many times does appear, In Cap. Nullius.
when such parties being recovered or delivered from their fear and their
perils, they soon after return again to their former sins. Wherefore it is
true indeed that the church grants her Rytes and christian burial unto all
such as professing themselves Catholics do use but any outward sign of
remorse, leaving their hearts to the trial of God; not warranting their
repentance to be good: but in charity rather choosing to absolve an hundred
thousand false penitentes, then by severity to reteyne bound any one soul
truly contrite.

6. Unto the foresaid contrite sorrow must be adjoined an hope of pardon
through^ Christ: with a full purpose for ever to absteyne from sin: and to
confess: and to satisfye: So far forth as we are bound, or shall be able.
For if it should evidently appear, that we do want any of these, we cannot
be absolved: otherwise not so appearing, it may be supposed, that either
virtually or actually we have them: and that is sufficient.

Greg. de Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 7. q. 8. pun. 6.
7. As for as the sins, for which Contrition is required, it need not be of
every particular sin in number to have a several Act of contrition, but of
all which we can remember, according to their number, or according to their
kind, we must detest them all and be sorye for them, either in one Act of
contrition, or in more, as conveniently we can: for example sake: In calling to
mind that I have sworn 500. times, or spoken falsely or vaynegloriously*
1000. times, more or less, as near as I can conjecture, I may in one Act of
contrition be sorry for them all at once. And so I must proceed to remember,
and to be contrite, for as many kinds, or numbers, as I can call to mind, for
no man is bound to more then he is able, neither in contrition, Vide Cajetan.
in Summula.
confession, nor satisfaction. And therefore in case of speedy or sodeyn death,
one general and true Act of contrition is sufficient for all our sins at
once, considered in gross as offenses of God. And so it is in case we cannot
well call to mind their several numbers, nor their distinct kinds.

8. As for the times when every one must be contrite, under pain of a new
particular sin, they are set down to be these. 1. whenever we find our
selves in evident danger of corporal death. 2. whenever by occasion of sin
not repented, we see our selves in evident danger of spiritual death; that is
to say; like to fall further into more damnable sin. 3. In any public and
grievous Calamity of the people or Common welthe which does require our
particular prayers and humiliation unto God allmighty for his mercy. In all
these cases we are bound to be contrite, I say, under pain of a new and
particular sin of omission, vidz: against the commandment of repentance. Not
that it is lawful for any to remain in mortal sin until some of these
times do happen; no not a minute of an hour: for by the Commandment against
which the sin is committed, we are ever presently bound to repentance:
although, I say, not under pain of a particular new sin of unrepentance
beside the former, until we come to some of these times. And then, if we
omit repentance, it is a new particular sin beside the offense whereof
before we remained guilty.

9. Lastly our purpose of amendment must be sincere; and the performance must
be effected according to our power: for if I seem to be contrite, or do
confess, and yet deteyne another man's goods, being able to restore them: or if
I reserve any spleen of hatred or malice against my neighbor, not striving nor
desiring to drive it or put it out from me: or if I do not avoid as much as I
can all such dangerous occasions, as I have found or may evidently preceiue do
usually put me in great hazard of consenting or committing some mortal sin:
In all these cases, if I be not careful to remedy or prevent them, surely my
purpose is not sufficient, and therefore I am not in such cases truly penitent.

20. But now when I have once entirely undergone the sacrament of penance, I am
no more bound of necessity to iterate or repeat my repentance for the same
sins. And wise men do give it for good counsel, not to recall to our mind
such passed sins as perteyning to delights of our flesh, or to the honors or
Riches of the world were so pleasing unto us, that their remembrance though
with pretense of remorse may move us in thought again to delighte somewhat
in them, as soon as in deed to be contrite for them. Except it be at such
times, when either we feel our selves in fervent devotion, or find in our
selves such abundant mortification, that we need not fear their enticement.
Other wise, that which is delectable to our nature without special grace, will
easily draw us to incline to his desire.

11. I said we are not bound of necessity to repeat our Contrition for the
same sins: yet when without the said danger we have opportunity, doubtless it
is very convenient sometimes to renew and to repeat our contrition; and so to
endeavor to make it sure and good, least peradventure before times it have
been insufficient. Especially at the time of our death we have need to repeat
it, and as much as we can to make all sure: yea, S. Augustine used to say,
though his conscience accused him of no crime unrepented, yet it is very
convenient at our death to have Co^trition for whatsoever offenses of our life;
and accordingly that holy Father in his sickness before his death caused the 7.
penitential psalms to be set by his Bedside in great letters, that he might
often repeat them (as he did) with many tears. Possido^, in eius vita.
And in this I speak of general Contrition actually to be repeated as often
as conveniently we can do it: I do not speak of the often repetition of the
self same general confessions, which having been made with diligence and
devotion once, twice, or thrice at most in our life time (as grave, learned,
and discrete men do auouche) it is abundantly sufficient: for as it is
requisite on our parts to use our true diligence, so it is as necessary in
regard of God allmightyes great goodness, to have good trust and much
confidence in his love, mercy, and fatherly affection toward us, believing
credibly that all is forgiven us most favorably; for our gracious God is not
like a crafty copesman, or a cauilling lawyer ready to spy every frivolous
nullity, and to take advantage upon the smallest ouersighte no: no: we may, and
ought to be assured that our Lord is more ready to forgive then we to ask
pardon wherefore having done our endeavor, we may comfortably rely upon his
gracious favor.

12. Yet our repentance, though Actually it need not be outwardly repeated
more thou once, nevertheless it must ever habitually be continued inwardly
during our life: that is we must never commit any thing contrary to the
inward habit of repentance; nor may our sins passed at any time afterward
again please us: rather they must always greiue and displease us, at least
habitually and inwardly. And these are the propertyes of true contrition.

THE EXCELLENCYES OF CONTRITION: and how in some sort it may be compared with
martyrdom. Sect. 7.
1. IT is good to know what be the qualityes of contrition: but the practice
of them is much better. It is true; the grief and sorrow of a contrite heart
is unpleasing and bitter in the taste; but it will be afterward wholesome and
comfortable as wormwood is to the stomach: for sweet meats do sooner cause
corruption and obstructions, when medicines which are bitter do open and purge
the body. And of sins in the soul David says There are the dolors of a
woman in childebirthe, which have pain in their travel, and as they had
pleasure in their conception: so, for the delighte of our sins committed, we
must feel some grief when they are repented: and this grief though it be
bitter as Aloes, yet it is the best medicine against the gnawing worms of our
conscience: and as of iron is bred a ruste; of clothe a mothe; and of timber a
worm, which consume the substances whereof they were engendered: and as against
poison are made tryacles and Antidotaryes of other poisons: so, is sin
consumed by sorrow for sin, and against the punishment of wickedness, the
punishment of penance is a sovereign remedy.

2. Only hereof we must have a care, that our sorrow for sin be sincere. If
thou tell me thy body is wounded, show me thy flesh bleeding or bruised: if
thou tell me thy heart is contrite; let me see thy tears; or though men
preceiue it not, yet at least God allmighty must see thy sorrow. In proyning of
the vine, if it distill any drops, it is a sign it will be fruitful; but if
thy repentance be without tears, at least of contrition, surely thy amendment
will be very barren.

3. Wherefore Jeremy said, be thou gyrded with hayrecloth, that is, mortifye the
appetites of thy flesh, Ierem. 6.
and be thou sprinkled with ashes, that is, refrain the motions of ^^y proud
mind: And cause unto thy self a bitter playnte as the lamentation of an only
^hilde; not of an eldest or dearest child, for so is insinuated that more
children remain* but either as a parent lamenting his only child; or as an
only child mouring for his parents; whose greifes must be greatest because
they alone must take all the grief. And so, not much unlike; when by our sin
we loose the favor of good, because we can have no more Gods, we must lament
our loss of him as the loss of all* for without him we are nothing, nor can
have any thing: And either we must by our sorrowful repentance regayne his
favor, or for ever perish in his displeasure.

4. But most happy we are, if we neglecte not our possibility: because as
Solinus writes of a founteyn in Epyrus which not only quenches a burning
torche, De mirabil mundi.
but kindles it again being quenched: so by our tears of contrition we may
at one instante both quench the flames of hellfyre due unto us, and inflame
our selves again in the favor and love of God which we had lost, and was
justly taken from us. For the exercise of contrition and daily mortification
are so notable in their efficacye and in their dignitye, that David here
calls such an afflicted spirit, a sacrifice to God: and our holy mother the
Church in the hymn of Virgins being also martyrs has these words, Haec tua
virge duplici beata sort dum gestit fragilem domare corporis sexu^, domuit
cruentum corpore saeclum, Vnde nec mortem, nec amica mortis saeua poenarum
genera pauescens etc. This thy virgin bessed in a double sort, whiles she
endeavors to mortify the frail sex of her body, she overcame the cruel
world together with her body: wherefore neither fearing death nor any savage
kinds of tortures which are the freindes of death etc. Behold here two
causes why she is blessed. 1. for mortification of her flesh. 2. for conquering
of the world. And so in these words are compared penance with martyrdom, and
conquering the world with subduing of the flesh. And hereupon is inferred,
that whosoever labors to mortify himself in contrition, does therewithal
prepare himself for martyrdom: for, they that afflicte their hearts with
penance for the love of God, the same will despise the world and endure any
torments of Tyrants for the same love of God. And so, if martyrdom be an
acceptable sacrifice unto God, mortification also and such an afflicted
spirit may well be termed a sacrifice, because it is a continual living
martyrdom.

5. Nay, in one respect, a true contrite heart daily continued, is either
equal, or may be preferred before an ordinary martyrdom: for as Seneca said,
melius est femel scindi quam semper premi: it is better to have the head
struck of all at one sharp blow then to have it hackled or harshly cut of
with a handsawe. And so S. Martin Bishop of Turyn esteemed the prolonging of
his life a greater labor then suffering of death, saying unto God almighty in a
prayer made on his death bed, Domine si adhuc populo tuo sum necessarius, no^
re^uso laborem: O lord if yet I be necessary for thy people, I do not refuse
the labor. In respect of which words the church says in his following
Anthymne, that he was a man Nec labor victum, nec morte vincendum: neither
overcome by labor, nor by death to be overcome. In the Breuiary the reason is
added. For he neither feared to dye, nor refused to live. In which words we
see that what S. Martin called labor these words do name life: and therefore
do infer, that he would not be conquered by the pains of death, because he
was so constant in the labors of life. For though death be fearful to
nature, yet in truth, it is an end of sin and of misery: whereas the
prolonging of a penitent and contrite life, is the continuance of a lingering
martyrdom, which out of doubt has a wonderful great merit. For as in our
excessive use of physic for fear of sickness or death, well said Martial, Hic
rogo, non furor est, ne moriare, mori? Is it not a folly to dye, for fear of
death? according as we say, he lives miserably who lives medicinally, that is,
not in regard of temperate diet, or discrete physic, but in respect of
untimely or immoderate medicines, or of too nice a care to keep us from every
wind that blows. Or as indeed a crazed weak sickely body had better be dead
at once, then linger in pain, and to be in hazard and fear of every air,
and of every meat, for every small matter may soon distemper him; so it is
easyer for our frail dispositions by death to be quitte from our inf^rmityes
and sins, then for a contrite heart to live in danger of so many tentations,
ever striving against disordinate delights? avoiding the pleasures which other
men seek; brideling his appetites; measuring and weighing all his desires,
marking and composing the very motions and gestures of his feet, hands, and
eyes; and never putting in effect, nor consenting to any thought, which
first is not examined by the rule of a good conscience. Such a contribulated
spirit is a sacrifice to God, as well as martyrdom: not troubled with
superfluous scrupulosity but contribulated with religious vigilance: This
living contribulation is a lively sacrifice of great merit.

6. And as Seneca said, he is worthy of praise, quem non piget mori, cum lubet
viuere, unto whom it is not yrkesome to dye, Epist. 55.
when he may have joy in his life (for it is small commendacion to desire to
dye only because we are vexed with our life) so it is a matter of merit, to be
content to live in labor, danger, and contrition, when by our death we might
have ease, joy, and content. So S. Paul desired to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, in regard of the gain which comes by death; and yet was
content to live in labor for the profit and service of Gods Church. And such
is every man, says S. Augustine, who th^s submits his desires of death or of
life, non solum patienter moritur, sed potius viuit patienter, and
delectabiliter moritur. He does not only dye with patience, Tract super Joan.
but rather with patience he lives, and dies with delighte: his patience and
his labor prolonged do increase his merit, and his delighte differred shall be
increased, when he comes to cease from his labor of a religious life
patiently continued, is a kind of living martyrdom constantly endured: and the
martyrdom of an humble contrite heart, our lord will not refuse, but will
account such a troubled spirit an acceptable sacrifice. O Jesus grante me such
a contrite heart in compunction, such an humbled mind in confession, and such
a troubled spirit in satisfaction: that so my spirit may be contribulated,
that is, troubled together with my body in corporal penance, against carnal
delights: that so my mind may be humbled by the plain confession of my
mouth, against proud and vain glorious words: and finally that so my heart
may be contrite in sorrow, Innoce^. 3.
against unlawful pleasing thoughts: for such sorrow is a sacrifice to God,
and such a contrite and humbled ^arte, O lord, thou will not despise.

MEDITATION. XI.
Benignefac, Domine, in bona voluntate tua Sion, vt aedificentur muri
Jerusalem. Tunc acceptabis sacrificium iustitiae, oblationes, and holocausta;
tunc imponent super Altar tuum vitulos.

Deal kindly, O lord, in thy good will toward Sion, that the walls of
Jerusalem may be builded. Then will thou receive the sacrifice of justice,
oblations, and whole burnte offeringes; then they shall offer calves upon thine
altar.


A SERIOVS LAMENTATION FOR SION and Jerusalem, that they may not be laid
desolate by external persecution, nor by internal discord. Sect. 1.
1. IT is verily a thing most worthy and just that a sinner pardoned should
lift up his heart to give thanks unto God: and we are not only to pray and
give thanks for our selves alone, but as the Church uses in the mass, after
all our particular petitions to add a general Collecte for the universal
estate of our Country and of all christendom: according as David here having
entreated for himself, does now also remember Sion and Jerusalem: and so we
must pray, both for the Catholic Church of Sion, and for the Common wealth
of Jerusalem.

2. And first for Sion as the mother of our souls: and next for Jerusalem as
the nurse of our bodies: and therefore David here first desires our lords
good will toward Sion, that so we may have afterward foundation for the
walls of Jerusalem: for whatsoever Atheistes or worldly politicians do
pretend, yet the chief strenghte of a common wealth does especially consiste
in the flourishing of religion: neither can the walls of Jerusalem be well
fortifyed, except they be founded in the gracious good will of our lord
toward Sion: they may stand stately and proudly for a time, like the walls of
Babel; yet in all the world it was never seen that where religion was debased,
but in few Ages their commanding policy was confounded.

3. Wherefore let us pray continually for the sincerity of Sion, the prosperity
of Jerusalem. Psalm. 101.
O lord repair the walls unto the one; and unto the other show the kindness of
thy good will. Arise, O God, and have mercy upon Sion, because, it now seems
time to have mercy upon her, and because her high time is now come, if great
need can show when it is her high time; for now new fangled people broken o^
from thy church are broken into thine inheritance; thy have polluted thy holy
Temples and profaned thy churches; thy Altars they have cast down, and they
have cast out thy holy sacrifices: they have turned thy houses of orderly
religion into habitations of most disordinate pleasures, or else have laid
them desolate in barbarous ruynes, posuerunt Jerusalem in pomorum custodia^t,
hey have made Jerusalem, (which was well inhabited) either like a poor Cottage
of an orcharde where dwelles some churlish warrener; Psalm. 78.
or it is quite suffered to decay since all the fruit was gathered. They have
placed the dead bodies of thy servants to be meat for the souls of the air;
and in some places they have left the flesh of thy saints unburied, to become
a preye for the beasts of the earth: they have shed the blood of many like
water in the circuit of Jerusalem, and there were none permitted to bury them
with sacred ceremonies. We are made a reproach unto our neighbors, a laughing
stock and a scoff unto them who are round about us. How long, O lord, will
thou be angry unto the end? shall thy zeal be kindled like fire? O power out
thy wrath upon the nations which have not known thee; and upon the kingdoms
which have not called upon thy name. For they have eaten up Jacob, and his
place they have laid desolate. O remember not our old iniquityes, but let thy
mercyes soon prevent us, for we are made exceeding poor. O God our salvation
help us, and deliver us O lord, for the glory of thy name: and be merciful
unto our sins, for thine own name. Least they say among the nations, where
is their God? rather make known unto the nations before our eyes, the
vengeance of the blood of thy servants which has been shed: and let the
sighs of them who are in fetters enter into thy sight: and according to the
greatness of thine arm possess and preserve the children corporal or
spiritual of them who now are martyred or oppressed, whether they be children
of nature or of grace, of succession, or of conversion.

4. Deal kindly, O lord, in thy good will toward Sion: Benign sac, or
bonam fac: make Sion to become good: or though it be faulty, Iansen. Tit. 3.
yet show it thy favor in thy good will. Also for the Benignity of our
Saviors incarnation as Saint Paul calls it: or according to the gracious
providence of thy good will, and pleasure; both decreeing our remedy, and
fullfilling thy favor. Or as unto God the Father is attributed the mind; unto
the Son reason: and will unto the holy Ghost; so let us particularly pray
for this good will of his holy spirit, therein to sanctify Sion; Inno^. 3.
and withal for our selves as passengers in a ship, to direct it ever by
his good will, as the helm.

5. That the walls of Jerusalem may be builte: not alone, that the Temporal
state may be free from domestical suspicions and forreyn fears, flourishing in
strenghte of unity at home and amity abroad, by which it shall be compassed
and defended as with firm walls: But especially that in the quietness of
christendom free from persecution, we may have many good religious men renewed,
and repaired, to be saints, and dear servants of God: for these are the
chief defense, the best Armies, the horsemen, the footmen, the Artillerye,
the munition, the ships, and the walls of any kingdom. And of these the
scripture says all thy walls are precious stones* and all other good
Catholic Christians are well squared living stones, Esaias. 16. 1. Cor. 3.
Ephesians. 2.
builte upon our L. Jesus as the ch^ife and principal foundation, beside whom
no man can lay any other first foundation: and then secondly next after him
S. Paul tells us, we are builte upon the foundation of the Apostles and
prophets. And among them chiefly upon S. Peter and his successors, unto whom
our Savior promised, that upon this rock he would build his church.

6. O gracious Savior, thou haste hitherto continued this promise, and we
doubt not but thou will perform it unto the end of the world, so that the
gates of hell, neither by Devils, Tyrants, Heretics, nor Antichrists, shall
prevail against it: But in particular we most humbly, earnestly, and
sorowfully entreat thee, not only to continue and bless Sion where it is now
well seated, but also to build and repair the walls of Jerusalem,
wheresoever they have been defaced. O sweet Jesus repair our ruynes, restore
our breaches, make us all living stones of thy Temple, and vouchsafe once
again amongst us to renew the walls of Jerusalem: Let us be so composed and
combyned in unity of Catholic religion, and in charity of true Christian love
so compacted, that we may seem like one of those Towers in the walls of
Jerusalem, which Josephus says was so artificially contrived, that it appeared
all but one stone. Thy charity is the best bitume mortar, or cement, or
plaster of Paris, or spanish yesso, wherewith to combyne us and bind us
together: O let this charity be so diffused and spread abroad in all our
hearts, that we may be all of one heart, of one mind, of one faith, and of one
flock under one shepherd, and one God.

7. Sion signifyes a watchtowre: and Jerusalem a city of peace. In his tower
thy preistes and prelates are watchemen: and all thy constante Catholics are
inhabitants of Jerusalem. O how beautiful is this tower when it stands in
unity! but when it crackes or breaks by division, o how ruynous and dangerous!
And as for the other Commons and Citizens of Jerusalem, how can they remain
undestroyed by Titus and Vespasian their common enemies? whiles they foster
broils, or breed factions within their own bowelles. Wherefore O dear
Savior! O God of peace! settle our towers of Sion, in concord of watchemen:
and unto thy Citizens of Jerusalem send thy peace: thy external peace, from
outward persecution; thy internal peace, from inward division: and thy
eternal peace in everlasting consolation. By this shall the walls of Jerusalem
be rebuilte, if we seek and keep peace* and by this shall we be known to be
thy disciples, if in that peace which thou did bequeath us we do love one
another. O merciful Jesus take not away thy peace because of our
disagreementes: but rather take away our disagreements and restore us thy
peace: we deserve indeed more anger, yet according to thy benign^iy deal
kindly with Sion, and build again the walls of Jerusalem; that once again
thou may accept the sacrifice of justice, oblations, burnte offeringes, and
calves upon thine Altars.

A CONTINVED SVPPLICATION FOR the good will and mercy of our Lord, unto all
estates of his church and against several vices. Sect. 2.
1. AND also in these words the Catholic Church is described by three
names of Sion, Jerusalem, and his Altar; which may signifye the 3. sorts of
people in his church. Inn^ce^. ^.
1. religious persons. 2. secular preistes. 3. lay people: which are designed
also by Noah, Daniel, and Job. The first are of spiritual contemplation,
dwelling above in solitary Mount Sion. The third and last, are in temporal
actions inhabitants beneath in Jerusalem, as in a city full of turmoyle and
earthly trafique. The second and middlemost, being preistes, do frequent the
Altars of the Temple, which was seated between Sion above, and the said city
below, as men of a mixte life, partly spiritual and partly temporal, and
therefore be called secular preistes: vidz preistes, for their exercise and
ministration of divine mysteryes; and secular; because of their particular
possessions, and their often conversation in the assayres and with the men of
this world.

2. O Jesus deal kindly with Sion, replenishing thy monasteryes with multitudes
of saints, worthy to abide in such a holy hill. Build the walls of Jerusalem,
so that all lay men and the citizens of this world may be combined and dwell
together in charity; may be limited and kept within the bounds of equity; and
may be defended safe against all their enemies. And finally grante we beseech
the, that all thy preistes may offer unto the with due devotion, the sacrifice
of justice, and with decent reverence present thy oblations upon thine Altars,
neither slubbering thy sacrifice, nor poasting thy service.

3. Furtherfore, Sion is interpreted speculation, and Jerusalem a vision of
peace: o deal kindly with us by thy mercy, S. Aug.
that in this life we may have some speculation of certain hope, though but as
in a glass: and that in the next life we may possess the perfect vision of
blessed peace. Then shalt thou receive our sacrifices of justice, our due
debte of praises, our willing oblations of thankfullnes, our whole burnte
offeringes, and our calves shall be laid and consumed upon thine Altar; our
concupiscences and our sorrows shall then be quite consumed as whole burnte
offringes, by the heavenly fire of thy divine feruor. Then shall we need no
more contrition or penance, which now we must practice in this life: for there
all tears shall be wiped from our eyes; and our heavy mourning as penitent
Trutles, shall then be changed into the lively ioyfullnes of innocent Calves.

4. And therefore also we do so earnestly entreat, that thou would build
the walls of Jerusalem; because out of the unity of the church compassed with
those walls of the communion of saints, we are sure that no sacrifice will be
acceptable unto thee; wherefore, that these walls may be builded, deal kindly
with Sion in thy go^d will. For as the prophet says thou art a clement God,
merciful, patient, of much miseration, and pitiful to our wickedness. In
creating us clement; Iona. 4.
merciful in redeeming us: patient, in expecting our conversion: in comforting
us, of much miseration: and in forgiving all out faults and frayletyes, full
of pity. In all these kindnesses of thy good will, O do good and deal kindly
with Sion: that the walls of Jerusalem may be builded: that our prelates may be
of good example and much reverenced: that thy holy sacraments may be devoutly
received and administered: that in thy militante church, we may have the strong
Bulwarks of faith, hope, and charity begone: and in thy church tryumphante
the stately towers of perfect charity, sure possession, and evident knowledge
accomplished.

5. Solomon, that is, Peace, did build the walls of Jerusalem: but in the time
of Ioas which signifyes temporality, they were destroyed. Ozias, 2. paralip. 25.
which is interpreted Seeing God, or Faith, did rebuilde what temporality had
ruynated: but Nabuzoradan, that is, a prince of cooks or voluptuousnes, again
defaced what faith had repaired. Nehemias, which signifyes consolation,
restored all once again; 4. reg. 15.
but Antiochus of Syria, that is, haughtynes, or silence of poverty, beat them
down for vayneglory of our good deeds, and silence without confession of our
bad, 4. reg. 25.
do exceedingly tread down all true consolation. Lastly Judas Machabaeus
vidz: the confession of a warrior, acknowledging his own frailety, and
fighting against pride, he did reedifye: 1 Mac. 1.
but Titus, which may be construed good, or else durte, that is, fair seeming
hypocrites good in show and durte in deed, these last of all do lay waste
and make desolate the hill of Sio^ and the walls of Jerusalem which shall be
lastly succored by Enoch and Elias. And as these things pas^ed with the
material walls of Jerusalem, so may they serve (as has been showed) for our
moral information.

THE TIMES, THE MANNER, THE PLACE, the persons, offering all these sacrifyces,
oblations etc. Sect. 3.
1. THEN will thou accept the sacrifice of justice etc. Then. 1. by the virtue
of thy passion, after the fulness of time, when the law of Moses shall be
consummated. 2. Then, in the flourishing prosperity ofthy church upon earth,
when persecution shall be abated. 3. Then, in the perfect happynes of thy
church in heaven, when we shall clearly behold and know God face to face.
When in these three sorts the walls of Jerusalem shall be finished; then in the
first will thou accept the sacrifice of justice, even Christ himself our
Justice sacrificed for us upon the cross. Then in the second thou will
admit our mixed oblations like Martha busyed in many things; and our entire
burnte offringes like Mary choosing the better part. And then in the third,
we shall lay our calves upon thine Altar, that is, our youthful wantonness, or
wordly cherfullnes shall be abandoned; and being sacrificed here upon thine Altar
of penitence, Hose vllt.
shall be there changed first into the calves of our lips cherfully moving to
give thee honor and praise, and afterward accomplished in the joyful vision,
clear sight, and perfect knowledge of thy divine majesty, in which is
comprehended our unspeakable felicity.

2. Then also, will thou accept the sacrifice of justice, the passion and
merits of our Savior, and for them all the good works of his se^uantes;
whether they be the oblatio^s of feruorous Confessors, or the whole burnte
offring^^ of zealou^ martyrs. Or whether they be offered by lay people as
devout (...), Euthym.
or (...) the whole burnte sacrifices of religious persons. Then will all these
lay Calves upon thi^e Altar: that is; bring many young folk unto thy service,
to be suckled and to be fed in thy catholic faith, with the sacraments of thy
church, and with many good examples and Rules of piety and morality, Titelma^.
wherein they shall abide and remain. For whatsoever is laid upon thine Altar,
there it ought to remain as in thy presence, holy, and consecrated to thy
service; and shall be accepted in our lord Jesus, in whom alone all our
sacrifices of soul, body, and Goods, are of a most excellent sweet savor,
grateful in him who is only our Savior, our chief priest, our best
sacrifice, and our principal high Altar.

3. O most gracious God! how kindly haste thou dealte with Sion? when thou
did send thy dear some from heaven, to descend unto the earth, and into
the nature of man, to save us men who are but earth. What thing can be more
kind and gracious, then for the son of God to take upon him the shape of a
wilful slave? to be subject to the cruelty of death? and to the shame of the
cross? to redeem us by shedding of his blood? by his innocence to repair our
trecheryes; by his justice, to satisfye for our sins; to pull us back from
the mouth of hell gaping for us, and to give us entrance to the gates of
heaven which were shut^e against us. To enlighten his church with the
clearenes of his truth in the midst of errors; to preserve it by his power
against the storms of persecution: to feed it with his own body: to wash it
with his blood: to cherish it with all his sacraments: to direct it in
general by his holy spirit, and to comfort every particular with the swetnes
of his love, with the hartynes of his grace, and with the abundance of his
mercy. O kind dealing of extraordinary good will! O divine love above measure!
O wonderful work without any example or pattern? a work of heavenly charity,
without any foregoing merit: and in one word, O God, a work of thy good will.

4. This is the building of the walls of Jerusalem. Babell walls are builded of
brick, and founded upon sand, whiles worldly men either trusting to their
riches, or fixed on their carnal pleasures, are proud, or careless: but as
Augustus said he found the walls of Rome made of brick, and left them of
marble; so by our mortification of the flesh and renunciation of the world,
with the help of our Lord, we may change brick into marble; the walls of
Babel into the walls of Jerusalem, and a foundation upon sand into a
foundation v^on a Rock: So said Esaias: The brickes are fallen, but we will
build with square stone; they have cut down the wild fig trees, Esaias. 9.
but we will turn them into Cedars. And this they do, who turn delicacy into
severity, liberty into limits, the law of the flesh into the law of the
spirit, the old man into the new, and Adam into Christ. O happy walls, which
have such a head corner stone to combine them, and such a rock to uphold
them! these walls have strenghte and comelynes: strenghte upon their rock, and
by their Corner stone, comelynes: or by their united charity, strenghte, and
comelynes by their decent sanctity: and of such says the psalm, strenghte and
comelynes are his garments: not in virtues alone, comely, and yet weak
against tentations; but strong against all impugnations, Psalm. 31.
and comely in all virtuous ornaments.

5. If Jerusalem which is the militant church here below be thus peopled and
builded, what glory shall we see in the church triumphante, which is Jerusalem
above, the mother of us all, a free city, and the highest Imperial seat; not
so much as touched with any corruption or sin, Galat 4.
nor can any misery or sorrow approache that place, where no enemy can enter
in, nor any citizen shall desire to go out: a city of all peace and prosperity,
whose streets are paued with the purest gold etc. in whose building is no
noyce of hammer, axe, or saw, Apoc. 22.
no more then was in Salomons temple; for all our souls must be apted, purged,
squared, and fitted before we come there. David, a warrior, may make
preparation, 3. Reg. 6.
but only peaceable Solomon can accomplish the building: we may in this life
gather together many merits by fighting and resistance of tentations and
vices, but only in the peace of our lord Jesus shall we be accomplished and
made perfect.

WHAT A SACRIFICE IS: AND THAT THE holy Mass is our peculiar Sacrifice of the
new Testament. Sect. 4.
1. Wherefore that we may be prepared for Jerusalem above, we beseech the, o
lord for Jerusalem here on earth, to repair the old wasted decays, and to
build on forward the new Bullwarkes and walls. For, when, or wheresoever
Jerusalem florisheth in peace, Then will thou accept the Sacrifice of
justice; not of sin; of constante virtuous Catholics; not of Heretics,
Schismatiques, nor any vicious persons.

2. Also, this sacrifice of justice is referred by S. Ambrose, and others, to
the sacrament of the Altar which is offered and received in the holy mass: S.
Amb. Oecumen. Haymo. Genebr.
in which religious service of God, we do offer unto him a sacrifice for the
living and the dead; and we do receive unto our selves a sacrament of justice,
containing and conferring righteousness and grace.

3. And the mass is not improperly or in general only called a sacrifice, as
alms, and every good work may be so termed: nor is it alone an inward
spiritual sacrifice: Philip. 4. Heb. 11.
but it is an external sacrifice properly so called: and yet more, a peculiar
sacrifice instituted of our Savior Christ himself in his last supper, and
ordered and adorned afterward by the Apostles and their successors; as
appears by the Canon^ of the Apostles, by the mass of S. James, S. Mark, S.
Basil, S. Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose. Yea, it may be colected out of the Acts
of the Apostles, Act. 13. Panegyrola dis^ept. 17. part altera.
where it is said: (...): whiles they were liturgizing. For we know that
masses are called in Greek liturgyes; as be the liturgyes of S. James, S.
Chrysostom etc. And the vulgar translation is ministrantibus illis Domino,
whiles they were ministering unto our lord, which general words do sometime
signifye the particular action of sacrificing, as in the old Testament is
found; and Erasmus does expressly interpret them sacrificantibus illis,
whiles they were sacrificing: although it be frivolous which he adds, that
their sacrificing was preaching; for neither the sense of the Text, nor the
nature of the word can bear it: and were it not absurd to say they were
sacrificing, that is, preaching to God?

4. As for the use of the Mass, as a sacrifice in the primitive times, it may
appear by Ignatius (who lived in our Saviors time, and saw him on earth)
writing to the Smyrnians: It was not lawful then without a Bishop to offer
sacrifice, nor to celebrate* Mass And the same Author writing ad-Trallianos;
and ad Neronem, says, when S. Peter celebrated Mass, Saint Clement and
Anaclete were his deacons helping him therein. And that Timothy and Linus were
Deacons unto S. Paul, when he celebrated Mass.

5. And the same S. Clement Romanus in his 3. Epistle de officio Sacerdot* and
Anaclete in his Epistle ad omnes Orientales. And Dyonisius Areopagita in his
ecclesiastical Hierarchy do all of them often mention the sacrifice of the
Mass. And all these were the Apostles scholars.

6. Also the sixte Synod (or Council) does affirm S. James to have said
Mass. And S. Andrew (as it is in his life) said to Egeas the Proconsull these
words: I do every day sacrifice the immaculate lamb. Lib 1* de offici^s.
And S. Isidore says, that the order of the Mass was first appointed by S.
Peter.

7. But now, to the end, you may the better know what Mass is; and how the
better to assiste with reverence, and with devotion to offer this holy
sacrifice; understand that a sacrifice is by learned men thus described. A
sacrifice is an external oblation of some outward matter, according to
certain Rites and Ceremonies altering in somewhat the nature of the thing
offered, S. Thom. 2.2. q. 85. a. 3. Greg. de Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 11.
and so is consecrated by a Lawful priest unto almighty God alone, as
acknowledging him only to be God and lord of all, and our selves to be his
creatures, servants, and vassalls. This is a sacrifice in general. In
particular the sacrifice of the Mass has bread and wine for the outward
matter; and by the blessing, consecration, breaking, mixtion, and receiving
thereof it is made a perfect sacrifice, and changed into the Real body and
blood of our Savior: which change, because it is made by the words of
consecration, therefore is the consecration to be esteemed the most essential
and chief part of this sacrifice; and so, together with the other actions, it
is finished and perfected for a religious sacrifice, wherein we do of duty
render him praise for his admirable goodness in himself; and thanks for his
great Benefits toward us; and also we do in humility crave his merciful
pardon to forgive all our faults, and his gracious bounty to supplye all our
wantes; and all this for the merits of our Saviors death and passion whereof
in the mass we do make and keep a remembrance and commemoration.

8. And therefore whereas in the old law they had several sacrifices according
to their several intentions and necessityes, only in this one of the Mass are
all those kinds of sacrifices contained. 1. of Commemoration or representation
of our Lords passion. 2. of praise for his goodness in himself. 3. of
thanksgiving for his benefits toward us. 4. of propitiation, for his pardon
to our sins, De ciuit. Dei lib. cap. 20.
and for his releife to our necessityes. And so S. Augustine said that it
succedeth in place of all the ancyent sacrifices, and that unto them all in
value it is equal.

9. And although in the Communion of the Mass, all the oblation is consumed
yet is it no less a sacrifice then were the holo caustes or whole burnte
offerings of which no parcel was reserved. Neither is it one whitte the less a
sacrifice because it is also a Sacrament* which may be in diverse respects,
as the same thing may be in several considerations both received of God, and
given unto him again: for else, what can we give unto him, which we have not
received from him?

10. And further to prove that it is a sacrifice, Lib. 8. Consti^.
Apostolicarum. cap. 5.
Clemens Romanus reciting out of the Apostles Institution the form of the
prayer used when Bishops were to be ordained, sets it down in these words:
Give him (O almighty Lord) the participation of the holy Ghost, that he
may have power of forgiving sins etc. and of pleasing thee in meekenes, and
with a clean heart offering unto thee without fault ever and without sin
that pure and vnblouddie sacrifice, which through Christ thou haste ordained
for a mysterye of the new Testament.

11. Also Saint Iustine Martyr says of allmighty God that he receives
sacrifices of none, but of his own preistes. Wherefore almighty God
preventing (with favor) all those which in his name offer the sacrifices which
Jesus Christ commanded to be made in the Eucharist of bread and of the cup,
which (sacrifices) are performed of christians in all places, our lord
testifies that they are grateful unto himself.

12. Saint Cyprian likewise writes thus. Jesus Christ our lord and God is
himself the high priest of God his father: and himself first of all offered
sacrifice unto God the Father, Lib. 2. epist. 3.
and commanded the same to be done in remembrance of himself.

13. In the psalm it is said our lord has sworn, and it will not repent him:
thou art a priest for ever according to the Order of Melchisedec: Psalm. 109.
upon which words S. Augustine, They know who read what Melchisedec took out
when he blessed Abraham: and now they are partakers thereof: they see such a
sacrifice now to be offered unto God in all the world. But the swearing of God
is a reprehension of the incredulous: Lib. 1. contra Aduersa. legis.
and that God will not repent, is a signification that he will not change this
preisthood* but he will change the preisthood according to the Order of Aaron.

14. If it be said, he offered not bread and wine unto God, but took it out for
Abraham. First the Text does not say so: rather Abraham had victuals enoughe
of the spoils he got; of which he offered Tenthes to Melchisedec. Or suppose
he took it out for Abraham: it does not therefore follow, that he did not
withal offer it unto God in sacrifice. For Clemens Alexandrinus notes that
Melchisedec gave sanctified bread and wine for norishment, in figure of the
Eucharist; Vidz: Stromat. lib. 4.
that as the Eucharist is first offered unto God and then is received: so
Melchisedec both, offered these unto God in sacrifice, and brought them out
unto Abraham for his norishment.

15. Furthermo^e the mass is that sacrifice which Malachias foretold; from
the rising of the sun unto his going down, great is my name among the
Nations, Malac. 1.
and in every place is sacrificed and offered unto my name a clean oblation.
See, says S. Chrysostom, how plentifully and plainly he has interpreted
the mystical table which is the vnblouddy sacrifice. And S. Augustine about the
same words says, Hom. 95. in psalm. De ciuit. Dei l. 18. cap. 35.
whereas we see in every place from the East to the west this sacrifice to be
offered unto God by the preisthood of Christ according ^o the order of
Melchisedec etc. And Damascen speaking of the mass, says, This is that pure
and vnblouddie sacrifice which our lord declared by the Prophet, should be
offered unto him from the East to the West.

16. In like sort many other places out of the Ancient Doctors might be
alleged, and though some of them in some places do refer those words unto
spiritual sacrifices, yet do they not therefore exclude that which themselves
or others have directly construed also for a material sacrifice. For real
sacrifices must be also spiritually offered: and as the law and religion of
nature and Moses, had their material outward sacrifices, so must our law of
grace and the gospel planted by Jesus Christ. And this appears by the
succession which Malachy makes of his prophesied sacrifice unto the sacrifices
of Moses law: for if under Christ we have true priests and a preisthood of
Melchisedec, it is necessary also we have real proper sacrifices which only
these preistes may offer up, which therefore must be somewhat else beside
prayers and mere spiritual sacrifices: for the offering of these perteyneth
unto others, as well as unto preistes, and therefore are no proper real
sacrifices.

17. As for those places of S. Paul to the Hebrews: that Christ was offered
once for all and needs no more to be offered: It is most true, in the manner
of a bloudye sacrifice: but the mass is called by the old Doctors (as you see
above) a sacrifice vnbloudye. And also he speaks of the sacrifice of the
cross, as primary and independing, and therefore most sufficient never to be
iterated: but this sacrifice of the mass is depending thereon and secondary;
wherefore as representing that former sacrifice, and deriuing virtue from
thence, it is but a continuance and application of the same. In caput 10 ad
Hebraeos.
And so S. Ambrose answers in effect, saying. What do we? do we not offer
every day? verily we do offer: but doing it for remembrance of his death. And
this sacrifice is but one, not many: for that was once offered in sancto
sanctorum, but this sacrifice is a representation of that: we do always offer
the same sacrifice not now verily one lamb, to morrow another, but awayes the
same sacrifice: Therefore the sacrifice is one: otherwise, because it is offered
in many places, there should be many Christ's. Not so: but Christ is one
every where our Highpreist: he offered a sacrifice cleansing us; we do now
also offer the same. But that which now we sacrifice it is done in
commemoration of that which was sacrificed; not another sacrifice, as the high
priest, but we do always sacrifice the same. Thus far S. Ambrose, teaching
that we now do not offer a sacrifice altogether different from the first,
but the self same in respect of the thing offered though diverse in regard
of the manner; which in the Mass is done vnbloudily, and was bloudily done upon
the cross: Neither is the Mass altogether of the same efficacye with that of
the cross: for now we do not sacrifice to reconcile mankind unto God anewe
and again, as by another new and first Act of reconciliation; but only to
derive and to apply unto our selves the fruit of that primary, principal,
first, and infinite sacrifice on the cross.

18. The sacrifice of the cross first merited: and the sacrifice of the Altar
deriues that merit. By that first, the remedy is sufficient; and by this
second it is effectual. That had merit of infinite measures; but the measure
of merit in this is finite and proportionable unto us. according as we in our
devotion do apply it: and therefore that sacrifice being infinite was but once
offered, whereas this is offered every day, being proportionate and finite, to
the end that we may daily have more merit hereby applied. Neither do we any
more injury to that infinite sacrifice, by deriuing and applying the merits
thereof every day in the repetitio^ of the mass, then if one should say that we
derogate from the merits and virtue of his passion, when we frequent and
repeat the use of the holy communion, or some other repeatable sacrament, or
de^otion, whose virtue depends on the passion: for by repeating these we do
not crucyfye him again, nor think that is was not sufficient he was once
crucified, but we desire continually to profit^ more and more, and to apply
the merits of his cross, both by those devotions frequented, and by the daily
sacrifice of the Mass.

THE NOTABLE PROPITIATORY VERTVES of the sacred Mass, which ought to move us
to the frequenting and applying of the benefits thereof. Sect. 5.
1. FVRTHER more the Mass is not only a sacrifice in general: or of
comemoration only: or of thanksgiving alone: but likewise it is a sacrifice
propitiatory to obtain forgiuens of our sins, and all other things
necessary for our souls and our bodies for the living and for the dead.
Cateches. mystag.
Saint Cyril Ierosolymitanus writes thus: After that same spiritual sacrifice
is made, and that same unbloody worship, we do beseech allmighty God by that
same sacrifice of Propitiation, for the general peace of the church, for the
tranquillity of the world; for kings, for souldyers, for our fellows, for
the sick, for all afflicted, and in sum for all them who do need releife,
whereof indeed we have all need. Afterward we make mention also of them, who
are dead before us: first of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and martyrs; that
almighty God by their prayers and intreates would receive our petitions. Then
for the holy fathers and Bishops deceased: and finally we do pray for all
them who from among us have departed this life, believing it to be the greatest
releife of souls, for whom is offered the entreaty of that holy and reverent
sacrifice which is laid upon the Altar.

2. Hereof also says S. Chrysostom: we do sacrifice for the fruits of the
earth, of the sea, and of all the whole world. And S. Augustine reports,
Hom. 77. in Joan. De ci^it. Dei lib. 22. c. 8.
That one Hesperius a man of worship and principal credit among them, in the
Territory of Fussal had a Manor or Grange called Cubbedi, where together with
the affl^ction of his cattle, and of his servants, he found that his house
was hanted with the violence of malignant spirits: he entreated our preistes
in my absence (says S. Augustine) that some of them would go thither, by whole
prayers they might give place. One went: he there did offer the sacrifice of
the body of Christ, praying as earnestly as he could that that vexation
might cease. And almighty God presently showing mercy, it ceased. Quaestione
34. ad Antioch. Hom. 69. ad popul. E^ist. ad Faust. Enchirid. ad Ia^^. cap.
110. etc.

De cura pro mort. agenda. lib. 1. Confess. l. 9. c. 13.




3. Saint Athanasius avouches plainly: we do understand that the souls of
sinners do participate some beneficence from that same v^bloudy offering and
gratification made for them. And S. Chrysostom: These things were not rashly
ordained of the Apostles, that in the reverend mysteryes there should be made a
commemoration of the dead: for they know that from thence may succeed unto
them much gain and much profit.

4. Saint Ambrose tells Faustinus, that he must not so much bewail his
sister with tears, as rather commend her soul unto God with oblations. As for
S. Augustine, he is plentiful in diverse places mentioning both suffrages and
sacrifices for the dead, and used them in particular for his own mother
deceased* not only to give thanks for their deliverance out of ^his world; and
in their honor who were certainly reputed to be in glory; but also for pardon
and propitiation of their souls, who they were not sure had escaped purgatory.

5. O most sweet Jesus our blessed Savior! as thou have given us thy self upon
the cross, so we most humbly beseech the to grante us in our country the full
and free use of this sacrifice of Justice, for the religious application of all
thy merits, unto the living and to the dead, by the mysteryes and virtue of
the holy mass. O give us grace daily so to be present at those miraculous and
sacred solemnityes of thy wonderful love and bitter passion, with such
attentive reverence, such reverent love, and such loving attention, that most
effectually we may ever obtain the blessed communion of all thine infinite
mercyes and goodness. In this treasure is hidden the value and worth of more
then many hundred marks: let others threaten prisons, or by their laws make
it felony, or treason, to be present or assistante at this heavenly sacrifice
of the mass: yet let all zealous Catholics rather yield and loose their
lives, then not to render unto God this divine and devout service, and so to
be partakers of the vnualewable merits of this most holy and precious
sacrifice.

6. O my soul! let us frequent these holy mysteryes of the mass, as the daily
bread of our life: here we have spiritual food, and medicine: it gives us
food for nourishment in grace; and it affoardes us medicine for remedy
against sin. O come, we will offer it as a sacrifice, and receive it as a
sacrament: as it is a sacrifice it pays the debtes of the offerer; and as it
is a sacrament, it gives justice to the receiver. O sacrifice of Justice! make
me just; and be my sacrifice. O most gracious Savior! let my soul melt in
thy love, and let me be partaker of thy grace: thou werte once offered in thy
self, and thou art every day offered in this sacrament. O be my sacrifice by
the first, and by the second make me just: O sacrifice of justice! O mirror
of love! O treasure of grace! did ever any love so willingly pay an enemies
debte? Prosper. in l. Sent.
or who has suffered torments for his friends with like rigor of justice? was
there ever any favor, and grace, more plentiful, or so rich, as this
inestimable sacrifice? O sacrifice of justice make me just, and be my
sacrifice. All^houghe according to Saint Bernards vision I have no Title unto
heaven by mine own justice alone, In eius vita.
yet my Savior has a double just claim, of merit, and inheritance: one for
himself, and the other for me* O ^weete Savior, through thy sacrifice make
me so just, that I may inherit heaven by thy justice: and be thou my sacrifice
and my Jesus.

7. It is not diligence enoughe for the sick or wounded to know that in the
Apothecaryes shop be salues and medicines which can heal him: or who will
excuse a soldyer unarmed in the field, because he knows there are weapons and
armor in the Garrison? O no: we must by daily and particular exercise of
religion apply the merits of our Savior, and always stand girded, and put
upon us the armor of our lord Jesus, if we will be defended from the Devils
and Hell, or if we will be cured from sin and imperfection: as Esaias said*
I^xta est qui iustificat me: he is here at hand who iustifyeth me. Not alone
i^ the church where I should be, and yet am not present; nor only upon the
Altar, before which I am kneeling in body, whiles my heart is absent: But i^xta
est, he is where I am and I am where he is. O dear Jesus be my Jesus, and
vouchsafe in some good sort that as of S. Gertrude, so of me thou may say,
In cord eius inuenies me, in his heart you shall find in me: or at least: O
lord let my heart be always found and founded in thee: O let me be partaker of
thy sacrifice of justice; by offering up all my doings, and sufferinges, in
the company, and with the value of thy just merits: and not only to have part
in thy merits by offering this sacrifice, but also to become part of thy
self by receiving this sacrament: to have participation with thee, and withal
thy Saints who serve thee. O give unto us the efficacy of this sacrament, and
accept for us the dignity of this sacrifice; that so we may become one with
thee in grace, as thou did become one with us in nature: not by changing
thy self into our bodily substance, but by assuming of us into thy spiritual
qualityes: by this sacrament received, making us to be thine, and by this
sacrifice offered, making thy self to be ours; to be cleansed from our evil
in the one, and in the other to be enriched with thy goodness; both making our
own merits to be of more worth by this sacrifice, and by this sacrament to
make all thy merits to become ours.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS PERTEYNING to the devout hearing of mass and ending of
our life. Sect. 6.
1. O sacrifice of justice! an oblation and a whole burnte offeringe, more
worth then all the calves in the world which can be laid upon thine Altar. A
medicine says S. Cyprian, to heal all infirmityes, and to purge all
iniquityes. A sacrifice, as S. Augustine said, which in it self alone
conteyneth all the virtue, In ser. de coena Do.
and more then all the valewe of all the sacrifices in the old law. Unto this
they were then all referred, and in this they are now all included. All their
lambs, their goats, their oxen, their fatlinges, their pigeons, their
turtles; all their beasts and birds; all their fruits and herbs; all their
meat offringes, their drink offringes, and whole burnte offringes: all their
oblations for sin, or for thanks, in sorrow, or with joy; all of them must
give place unto this, for in this alone they are all contained, accomplished,
and perfited.

2. Wherefore let us frequent hearing of Mass with all devotion; for it is a
sacrifice of iustic^ above all other sacrifices: let us bow down our heads
and our hearts, first to accuse and confess our own faults and defectes,
with sorrow and humility: let us secondly lift up our hearts and our hands,
to magnifye and praise our Lords mercy and goodness, with joy and gladness:
Thirdly let us stand up on our feet, as ready to obey his Gospel, and
professing to believe his Creed: let us fourthly offer and adore the sacrifice
and the substance of so divine a mysterye, by acknowledgment of our homage unto
him, and with remembrance of his passion for us, so to yield him our duty for
all his benefits, and to entreat him for his pity to all our sins: Fifthly
let us accompany this most effectual sacrifice with our supplications and
petitions, in general, and particular, for the whole church, and for our
selves, for our Benefactors and our freindes, for the living and for the dead,
and for all the communion of saints; in all our necessityes, and wantes of our
bodies, goods, lives, or souls: Sixtely let us prepare and proceed to be
partakers of the communion (at least spiritually) desiring our Lords peace and
his mercy; considering our vile unworthiness, and his incomparable love: And
seventhly let us conclude with all thanksgiving and lively cherfullnes, for
this sacrifice and all other his benefits, for his infinite love and
unspeakable goodness, rejoicing unto him for that which is paste, and trusting
in him for what is to come.

3. O summa Bonitas! O greatest goodness! O almighty goodness! O all goodness!
infinitely good in our Creation, redemption, vocation, justification,
perseverance, and glorification: what can we render for so great goodness? Let
us again, and again, every day receive this cup of salvation, and call upon
the name of our Lord. First, after some convenient preparation for so great a
sacrifice, let us begin with Confiteor, and kyrie eleyson etc. to acknowledge
our fall in Adam, and to accuse our own sins* 2. to laud and praise our
Sauiors Goodness and redemption, with Gloria in excelsis, or Sanctus Sanctus:
etc. 3. To profess our constant Catholic faith by the Gospel and Creed. 4.
At the Consecration and elevation, by adoring and remembering our Savior and his
passion, to offer sacrifice and homage. 5. in the Collectes and mementos, to
make our petitions and prayers, for our selves and others, according to our
necessityes and devout desires* 6. with the P^ter noster to begin, with the
Pax, and Agnus Dei to prodeed, and with Domine non sum dignus to accomplish the
communion. 7. and lastly with the last Collectes, and Ite Missa est to give
all thanks in gratitude, and to receive the preistes Blessing with hope that
what we have offered and prayed at the Altar, shall be admitted and granted in
heaven; through the mercy, merits, mediation, and passion of our sweet Savior
Jesus, who is our chief priest, our best Advocate, and our dearest sacrifice,
abundantly to procure unto us by his goodness, whatsoever he shall see to be
necessary for us in his wisdom.

4. Thus O my soul! let us every day consider: rejoice: believe: obey:
worship: wonder: pray: or give thanks, during all the time of the Mass. Let
us consider the holy action we are about; and our own wretched and unworthy
estate. Let us reioyes with the Angels and all the host of heaven for our
gracious deliverance. Let us Believe what our lord teaches by his Church:
and ever obey whatsoever he commands. Let us worship him as Really and
Royally present: and wonder at his infinite wisdom, power, and goodness, who
has vouchsafed to leave us such a sacrament. Let us pray for his mercyes and
supplies to all our wantes: and give him most hearty thanks for his admirable
love, and all his benefits. O my heart! can thou hold in my body, when thy
Savior comes down from heaven unto the Altar? should thou be wandering? or
dull, whiles such a sacrifice is in the preistes hands or before thine eyes? O
sacrifice of justice! which as S. Augustine said, significando causat gratiam: O
gracious Savior, let it signifye and imprinte in our hearts, the memory, and
fruit, of thy death and passion, thereby in patience to order our life, and to
prepare us for death with ioyfullnes.

5. Then will thou accept, oblations of secular people according to their
devotion; and the whole burnte offringes of religious persons, who renounce
themselves and all they have into thy peculiar obedience. Innoc. 3.
Then shall both these sorts be willing and ready to lay calves upon thine
Altar, that is, says Innocentius, to suffer martyrdom for the Catholic
faith; for which in this world we may be tormented and sacrificed as upon thy
cross, or upon thine Altar, of pain or disgrace; but Then in the next world
we shall assuredly remain with those martyred souls, which S. Ihon saw in his
revelation, to rest under thine Altar, of quiet and glory. O gracious Savior!
I am of my self most unworthy in any of these sorts to serve at thine Altar:
O sweet Jesus, thou haste begone among lay people to make me a little worthy:
If it be thy blessed will, I humbly do beseech thee among religious persons
or martyrs to make me more blessed: O give me this strenghte, and confirm me
in this will: Then if I willingly forsake the earth for thee, I shall in
heaven ^^ore speedily and more certainly for ever reign with thee, where with
all Angels and ^yntes o Lord let us all offer the sacrifice of just praise,
yiedling the celestial oblations of our bodies incorruptible, and the glorious
immortality of our souls transported into an holocauste of heavenly zeal;
loving, praising, and rejoicing with all our heart, with all our mind, and
with all our soul; that is; in all our understanding without any error, in all
our memory without any forgetfullnes, and in all our will without any
contrariety. Thus ever let us offer eternal sacrifice, and always enjoy thy
happy presence. O blessed Savior this we beseech thee for thine own precious
merits, and by the prayers of thy most dear Mother and all Saints. Amen.

Omnia Sanctae, Romanae, Catholicae, and Apostolicae Ecclesiae submissa sunto.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE MEDITATIONS AND SECTIONS CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK.
MEDITATION I. Psalmus David cum venit ad eum Nathan Propheta, In finem.
quando intrauit ad Bersabee.
OF the occasion and number of this Psalm, by David's example to beware of
Lust. Sect. 1. OF witty and plain reprehensions: and of the Authors
lamentation of his former life. Sect. 2.
MEDITATION II. Miserere mei Deus, secundum magnam misericordiam tuam: Et
secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum dele iniquitatem meam. Amplius laua
me ab iniquitate mea: and a peccato meo munda me.
A Short Division and explication of all these words. Sect. 1. The miserable
effects of sin are declared according to the Schoolmen: And some short
petitions for mercy are made against their misery. Sect. 2. Other wretched
effects of sin are declared out of the Scriptures and Doctors, by which we
are warned from them. Sect. 3. Of the Name and Nature of God: Who he is, what
we are: and how unspeakably we are beholding unto his great goodness. Sect. 4.
Sundry excellent observations of S. Bernard applied to this Meditation of our
Lords great Mercies and multitude of Miserations Sect. 5. What mercy is, and of
the effects. Also how sins are blotted out by multitudes. Sect. 6. Of the
great care we must use to purge all sin: and that we our selves must do
heerin some diligence, not standing idle to leave all unto Christ. Sect. 7. We
must daily proceed in zeal against all sin: and in particular against the
sensualities of the flesh. Sect. 8.
MEDITATION III. Quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco: and peccatum meum
contra me est semper. Tibi soli peccaui and malum coram to feci* vt
iustificeris in fermonibus tuis, and vincas cum iudicaris.
HOw we must mark, abhor, and beware sin, as a treacherous and dangerous
enemy. Sect. 1. That every one must acknowledge his own faults, and laying
his hand on his own heart, rather accuse himself, then censure any other. Sect.
2. It is necessary to remember harms of sin, thereby learning to amend and
take-heede of sin. Sect. 3. Diverse interpretations of these words, Tibi
soli, Unto thee alone etc. Sect. 4. When we comitte sin before our Lord: And
that he sees not as man sees. Sect. 5. Of Diverse ways by which our Lord is
justified, and may be said to overcome when he is judged. Sect. 6.
MEDITATION IIII. Ecce enim in iniquitatibus conceptus sum: and in peccatis
concepit me matter mea.
A Paraphrasticall exposition of the former words. Sect. 1. David in the former
Verse accuses not his parents: nor is the act of Marriage of it self any sin.
Sect. 2. Why our mother is mentioned to be accessory to our original sin,
rather then our father: whereas in deed it comes more from Adam then from
either. Sect. 3. What original sin is, and how it is derived unto us: also
how it is accounted a guilty fault in children. Sect. 4. Original sin comes
from Adam alone, as principal, and how bad parents have good children. Sect.
5. How original sin is derived from Adam by means of our parents: and yet
we have not our souls from them, ex traduce. Sect. 6. Our Savior and our Bl.
Lady were exe^pted from original^ sin. Sect. 7. The most gracious and
wonderful remedies of our original sin. Sect. 8. All the guilte of
original sin is quite forgiven in Baptism: And the first motions of
concupiscence are not syn, until we delight or consent unto them. Sect. 9. The
conclusion of the former declarations about original sin, with some short
admonitions to mortify his force. Sect. 10.
MEDITATION V. Ecce enim veritatem dilexisti: incerta and occulta sapientiae
t^ae manifestasti mihi.
Diverse devout interpretations of these words: And an humble tha^ksgiuing of
the Author for his undeserved Conversion. Sect. 1.
MEDITATION VI. Asperges me Domine hysopo and mundabor: lauabis me and super
niuem dealbabor. Auditui meo dabis gaudium and laetitiam: and exultabunt ossa
humiliata.
THe use of Ceremonies declared by a picture: and the propertyes of hysope
whereunto they may be alluded. Sect. 1. Of diverse ceremonies in the Catholic
Church made profitable by the sprinkling and virtue of our Saviors precious
blood, which is compared to the water of the Poole of Bethesda. Sect. 2. The
wonderful efficacy of our Saviors blood; And of the sign of the Cross which
was besprinkled therewith. Sect. 3. There are sundry degrees of washing,
cleansing, and whiting of sin. Sect. 4. It is better to confess then to
excuse: to hear then to speak: and of sundry kinds of joy and gladness. Sect.
5. The joys and gladness of goodmen different from those of sinners: with a a
hearty reioyeing of the Author for his conversion. Sect. 6.
MEDITATION VII. Auerte faciem tuam a peccatis meis: and omnes iniquitates meas
dele. Cor mundum crea in me Deus: and spiritum rectum innoua in visceribus
meis. Ne proijcias me a facie tua: and spiritum sanctum tuum ne auferas a me.
A General interpretation of all these words: and then what is meant by our
Lords Face. And how our souls are deformed, and scribled full of sins to be
blotted out. Sect. 1. Many significations and petitions for creating a clean
heart, and renewing a right spirit. Sect. 2. To be cast out from the face of
God, is to be cast into all misery. Sect. 3. Among sundry other gifts of the
holy Ghost, let us in particular labor to be thankful, and to be constant.
Sect. 4.
MEDITATION VIII. Read mihi laetitiam salutaris tui: and spiritu principali
confirma me. Docebo iniquos vias tuas: and impij ad te conuertentur.
Jesus is the joy of our salvation, which a sorrowful soul desires to be
restored, and a confortable soul prays to be continued. Sect. 4. The
Nobility of a Principal spirit, perseuering to finish constantly, what it has
begone generously. Sect. 2. Several distributions of the same spirit, into
Right, Holy, and Principal. Sect. 3. To teach others it is commendable: but it
is necessary first to be well informed, and reformed our selves. Sect. 4. What
be the ways or proceedings of our Justification: and what does teach us in
these ways. Sect. 5. How many other paths do lead unto the ways of
Justification: and that we are not justified by Faith only. Sect. 6. Of the
holy ways, and of the sacred feet and footesteps of our heavenly Guide and
Teacher. Thus I shall teach thy Ways unto the wicked and the ungodly will be
couerted unto thee. Sect. 7. Some devout desires and thankegiuings of the
Author unto Almighty God. Sect. 8.
MEDITATION IX. Libera me de sanguinibus Deus, Deus salutis meae: and exultabit
lingua mea iustitiam tuam. Domine labia mea aperies: and os meum annuntiabit
laudem tuam.
FRom all corrupt and cruel bloudes let us all desire deliverance. Sect. 1.
Some short petitions are directed unto the Name and Goodness of God. Sect. 2. We
do rejoice our Lords justice by trusting in his promises, or by acknowledging
of his mercy which forgiueth the offendour, and yet fulfilleth Justice. Sect.
3. All the words of our mouth should proceed from God, and again be referred
unto God. Sect. 4. In especial our prayers, and our praises should have
respect unto God. Sect. 5. It behoues all them who talk with God to have the
roots of their tongue in a clean heart. Sect. 6. All creatures do praise our
Lord by declaring his Goodness of necessity: Let us yield him all honor for
love and duty. Sect. 7. All our considerations and actions should have some
relation unto the praise of God. Sect. 8.
MEDITATION X. Quoniam si voluisses sacrificium, didissem vtique: holocaustis
non delectaberis. Sacrificium Deo spiritus contribulatus: cor contritum and
humiliatum Deus non despicies.
THe diversity of sacrifices, and some differencesbetwen the law and the
gospel. Sect. 1. Some other differences between the law and the Gospel.
Sect. 2. Our Lord does more regard the heart then the gift, and the devotion
more then the sacrifice. Sect. 3. We have need to be penitent: and how
acceptable unto our Savior is any soul contrite for sin. Sect. 4. A
description of Contrition and Attrition, and their several propertyes. Sect.
5. An ample declaration, plainly setting forth the former description of
Contrition. Sect. 6. The excellencies of Contrition: and how in some sort it
may be compared with martyrdom. Sect. 7.
MEDITATION XI. Benign fac Domine in bona voluntate tua Sion: vt aedificentur
muri Jerusalem. Tunc acceptabis sacrificium Iusti^iae oblationes and
holocausta: tunc imponent super altar tuum vitulos.
A Serious lamentation for Sion and Jerusalem, that they may be laid desolate
by external persecution, not by internal discord. Sect. 1. A continued
supplication for the good will and mercy of our Lord unto all estates of his
Church, and against several vices. Sect. 2. The times, the manner, the place,
the persons offering all these sacrifices, oblations etc. Sect. 3. What a
sacrifice is: and that the holy Mass is our peculiar sacrifice of the new
Testament. Sect. 4. The notable propitiatory virtues of the sacred Mass, which
ought to move us to the frequenting and applying of the benefitts thereof.
Sect. 5. Some Considerations pertaining to the devout hearing of Mass, and
ending of our life. Sect. 6.
ERRATA SIC CORRIGE.
Page 4. in titulo Sect. 2. form, read former. Page 12. in titulo Sect. 4.
read Sect. 5. Page 14. in titulo Sect. 5. read Sect. 6. Page 15. in titulo
Sect. 6. read Sect. 7. Page 17. in titulo Sect. 7. read Sect. 8. Page 28. in
titulo Paraphasticall, read Paraphrasticall. Page 32. in titulo is omitted the
Section, which should be the First in number, and so the rest in that
Meditation are to follow in order, to wit, the 5. must be the 6. the 6. must be
the 7. the 7. must be the 8* the 8. must be the 9. the ninth must be the tenth
Section.
Other Errors of less moment, I desire the courteous Reader to correct of his
charity, the Author himself being far absent, when it was printed.

FINIS.

