Certain wholesome Observations and Rules fo Jnne-keepers, and also for their
Guests, meet to be fixed upon the wall of every Chamber in the house; but meant
more specially for the good of Mr. Henry Hunter and his wife, of Smithfield,
his loving brother and sister, and of the Guests which use their house.
1. WE Read of Inkeepers that they were of ancient time, as in Ios. 2. Judge.
19. verse. 21. 22.

2. Our Savior in the Gospel commends the use of Innes. Luke 10. ver. 34. and
brought to an Inn.

3. Yea Christ himself by his own presence did sanctify the use of Innes by
eating his passover there. Mat. 26. 18.

4. In Acts 28. there is express mention of an Inn with approbation and
liking. They came to meet us at the market of Appius, and at the three Tauerns.

5 Common experience shows all men what use there is of Innes for case of
Trauailers, that their bodies which are the members of Christ, and Temples of
the holy ghost appointed to a glorious resurrection, may be refreshed after
wearisome labor.

6 It must not be accounted a small matter to afford house room, lodging,
rest and food to the comforts of Gods children.

Rules for Innekeepers.
1. THough your house (as an Inn) be open for all men to come unto, yet
account honest men your best guests: ever hold their company better then their
rooms.

2 Amongst honest men, let such as be religious withal, be most welcome. The
feet of the Saints are blessed, and often leave blessings behind them, as we
read of Joseph. Genesis 39. 4. 5.

3. Of religious and godly men let faithful Ministers have heartiest
intertainement. The feet of such as bring glad tidings of peace and good
things, oh how beautiful are they. Romans 10. Such as receive a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet shall have a Prophets reward. Mat. 10. Be not so glad of your
gain* as that you may pleasure such.

4 Because your guests be Gods children, and their bodies the members of
Christ, let their usage for meat, lodging, diet, and sleep be such as becomes
such; worthy personages, as be heirs with God, even fellow heirs* with
Christ. Romans 8.

5. In serving and loving your guests, remember you do serve and love God, who
takes all as done to himself, which for his sake is done to his. Mat. 25. 34.
33. 36.

6. Content your selves with an honest gain, so using your guests as they may
have an appetite to return to you when they are gone from you.

7 Make choice of good servants, such as know God and make conscience of their
ways: for these are likeliest to be true, faithful, diligent, and cheerful
in their service; also such will best please your best guests, and will not
justly offend your worst. Moreover, God will cause your business to prosper best
in the hands of such.

8. Give your servants no evil example in word or deed, bear not with their
lying, deceit, swearing, profaning of the Sabbath, or wantonness. Cause them to
keep the Lords day holy, going to the Church by turns: examine them how they
profit by Sermons; love such servants best, as most love Gods word.

Rules for Guests.
1. Use an Inn not as your own house, but as an Inn; not to dwell in but to
rest for such time as ye have just and needful occasion and then to return to
your own families.

2. Remember ye are in the world as in an Inn to tarry for a short space; and
then to be gone hence.

3. At night when ye come to your Inn thank God for your Preservation: next
morning pray for a good Journey.

4. Eat and drink for necessity and strength, and not for lust.

5. At table let your talk be powdered with the salt of heavenly wisdom, as
your meat is seasoned with material and earthly salt.

6. Above all abhor all oaths, cursing and blasphemy, for God will not hold
him guiltless which takes his name in vain.

FINIS.
T. W.


