The Lamentation of Melpomene, for the death of BELPHAEBE our late Queen.

With a Joy to England for our blessed KING.

By T. W. Gentleman.

printer's device of William White (1577?-1617) of a chariot drawn by dragons,
the driver presumably being Triptolemus or Demeter

Imprinted at London by W. W. for C. K. at the sign of the Holy Lamb in S.
Paul's Church-yarde. 1603.

HE that to please a multitude, his studies would employ,
A Faggot even as well may bring, to burn bright burning Troy.
The ancient Poet Persius, most wisely said, I tro:
Velle fuum cuique est, nec voto vinitur vno.
So diverse is the minds of men; some will have this, some that:
Some verse, some prose: and some again, would have they know not what
Therefore I care not who find fault, let who list laugh and scoff:
Let him that likes it, reed the same: he that disliks, look off.
The Lamentation of MELPOMENE, for the death of BELPHAEBE, our late Queen.
O In what uncouth place or gloomie Cell,
Shall sad Melpomenes tragic spirit dwell?
The cheerful day torments my chearles heart,
And every splendent star wounds like a dart.
If ever Muse had cause to mourn in deed,
Now fits the time: and now the heart should bleed:
Now should each member join it self in one,
And make a symphacie of grief, and moan.
Let colored Silks be died to sable black:
A Mourning habit fits each Mourners back.
Day change thy self to everlasting Night,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, forgo your glittering light,
Dissolve you Mountains, and you durate Rocks,
Lament you Shepherds, and your tender Flocks:
Let Tears distill in such a bundant wise,
That like the Ocean billows they may rise.
Caos, not Cosmos let the World be cleaped,
Let woe on woe, and care on care be heaped:
For lo; the Lamp that whilome burnt so clear,
Is quite extinct, and darkness does appear.
A glorious Lamp; a goodly Light it was,
Which whilst it burnt, all other did surpass.
No place so far remote but day, and night
It was illuminated with this Light.
Whilome it was the chiefest light alone
Of England, France, Ireland, and Calydone.
Few Lamps like this (yea few) or none at all
Are worthy of the like memorial.
The chaste Belphaebe is of life depriu'de,
Merrour of Chastetie, when she suruiu'de:
She like a Rose mong'st many weeds was placed,
They grace'd by her, and she by them disgraced.
Therefore the Fates supposed the earth too bace
To succor one of such immortal race:
And for a plague to men sent meager Death,
To take away her sweet Ambrosian breath.
What heart so hardy? (if it mortal been)
But will lament the death of such a Queen,
Which like a Goddess, not an earthly creature,
Appeared both in hauiour, and in feature.
Prudence, and Constancy possessed her mind;
A rare memorial for all women-kinde:
No virtuous lore, ne well beseeming graces,
But lived in her, each in their several places.
The Fates had chosen her Earths Sovereign,
And by the Fates, Earth has her lost again.
After long darkness on the earth, came light,
And now again ensewes eternal night:
Dianas sister Lady of the day,
From earth to heaven has taken herspeedy way;
Second to none in Wisdom sure was she,
The Queen she was of true feminitie.
Well could I wish if Destenies thought good,
Her habitation on Parnassus stood:
And that from Jove's great Court she were accited,
And with my sisters in pure zeal united.
Never till now did grief my heart surpresse,
And now it is cloyed with too much heaviness:
I must resign my place: I cannot choose,
And bear no more the name of Tragic Muse;
For I am Metamorphised with grief;
Grief without end, and endless to relief.
If Heaven, or Hell, do harbor any soul
Whose heart is made of such a senseless moule,
That Death and Hell; that God, or cruel Fate,
Cannot with true compassion annimate,
Let him possess my place upon the Hill:
For I Will resign it with a right goodwill.
I Will trauerse through the world in Pilgrimage,
And undertake Belphaebes Patronage;
I Will massecar my self, lament, and moan,
Whilst there remains no day to tell but one,
In the remotest place from any wight,
Where neither Sun nor Moon do lend their light:
There will I make a close-light shadowing Cell,
And till Times date be out, I there will dwell,
Dreaming on horrors, ghastly sightes, and fears:
Sad thoughts and I will live espoused Spheres.
I Will teach the Screechowle, and the hissing Snake,
To bear a burden to the moon I make:
I Will learn the Syluaine Birds to hand their wings,
When once my melancholy Organt singes
Sad Canticles, of her immortal praise,
Who living, blessed the world with golden days.
Both Peace and Justice flourished in her age:
Such was her foresight, such her counsel sage,
If Virtue, Learning, Manners, Beauty, Wit,
Immortal fame to mortal creatures gitte.
Thrice happy she, for these in her remainde,
As in her course of life was well explainde:
Morata should her surname be by right,
For she with manners was most richly dight.
Her body was a Temple, where did reign
The true tipes of a virtuous Sovereign.
She utterly detested Roman Laws,
The Popish Relickes, and the old Priests Sawes:
The Truth she honored with vntaunted mind,
And with Trueths girdle did her Loins combinde.
Worthy she was to live Sibillas days,
Her worth did equallize Sibillas praise.
Had the three Sisters which the life does guide,
Not man's felicity so much enui'de:
Yea, and against the Gods appointment toe,
Attempt the thing they wished them not to do:
Lo, such pre-eminence has Destenies,
To do what so they list (though Jove denies.)
See how the laboring Ant begins to droope,
See how the lofty headed Stagge does stoop,
The Grass does wither and the Fields wax baire,
The Birds leave singing, and Detest the air
And to the rockie clystes with speed do fly,
And fraught with anguish do despair, and die.
Salt tears distill from all good Subjects faces,
Which on their cheeks make goodly milke-white traces
Sables is common, and in estimation:
He that wantes Sables is not in the fashion.
Why these are sights well fitting my sad spirit:
Now shall my heart his long wished ease inherit,
When every creature does conioyne in one,
Belphaebes parture from the world to moan.
She is departed, dead, and gone long since,
And has in Heaven a place of recidence:
From Earth she came, and thither's gone again;
In Heaven she is, and there shall still remain.
O Virgin chaste, O Phoenix of thy kind,
Which being gone, leaves not thy like behind.
O Lamp of light, O Star celestial,
Thy matchless beauty was Angelical,
With thee did die the worlds felicity:
With thee decayed all antique dignity.
She is captiued in an endless Chain,
No hope of future comfort does remain.
In her lay all men's hope and love: she dead,
All hope and favor is for ever fled:
She was men's joy, in her they only joyed,
By her departure, they are much anoy'd:
Thus hope, and favor, joy, (yea every bliss)
Since her miscariage, ever fair'd amiss.
Let men and women break their hearts with groans,
Let Babes and Children spend the time in mones:
Let sorrows soppes mixed with a bitter gall,
Suffize the hunger of both great and small.
Let tears distill, and strain their tender parts,
Let grief be Nector to rejoice their hearts.
No man survive that has no tears to spend,
He that does weep until his tears have end,
Unto the lowest earth let him take way,
And borrow tears of woeful Hecuba:
Which many Pooles has caused to flow with tears,
Since her last date of twice three hundred years.
Awake you Feendes, whose nature is to sleep:
Awake I say, and strain your selves to weep:
Somnus arise, deaths messenger awake,
And to some mournful task your selves betake,
The time commaundes, and time must be respected:
Time cannot be recal'd that is neglected.
You that have all this while slept in a trance,
Enwrapped in a cloud of ignorance,
Hap'ly may think that causeless I lament,
And every tear I shed is vainly spent:
But know the cause: Eearthes sovereign Queen is dead.
Dead sure she is, imbalm'd, and wrapped in Lead:
For this cause sorrow, and lament with me;
Follow you after, I Will chief mourner be:
My hearts condolement shall excel you all,
For it is made of Liver, more then Gall.
Why, now you are compassionate I see,
I weep before, you after second me,
And now you sight, your colors come and go:
A certain figure of your inward woe.
Now poaste again to Plutos regiment,
Unfold to him this sudden accident,
Go Messenger of death, and Somnus Go,
Be you the messengers of pale faced woe:
Let tears hereafter be your choycest drink,
With tears fill all your Rivers to the brinke.
Let Heaven and Hell for ever mourn I say,
Night be there ever, never be there day.
Continue thus until the Fates relent,
And she from whence she came alive be sent.
Mount winged Fame, and furrow through the air,
Make Heaven resound with echoes of despair:
Proclayme sad tydinges of this lucklesse chance,
And with thy Trumpe awake dull ignorance.
Sound loud, for he is deaf, and nothing knows,
He never greeues nor pines at anyes woes,
He sets, and neither stirs, nor speaks whole days.
He answers none, nor minds what any says.
Not far from Lethe this aged Sire does dwell,
This Lethe a spacious River is in Hell,
Whose nature is to dull the Memory
Of those that drink thereof; or dwells bie.
Fame spread thy wings in Heaven, in Earth, in Hell,
To every mister wite, her downfall tell.
Come Sorrow come, and help me to lament,
My fainting spirits now are almost spent:
My speech begins to fail, my limbs wax faint,
Ere I ascend the top of my complaint.
Then here I Will stay, in this dark vale I Will rest,
And in dum shows my grief shall be expressed.
Die heart with sorrow and eternal pain,
Unless Belphaebe do revive again.
Now whilst Melpomene lay in a sound,
Dewing with tears melancholy ground,
His absence was deplored on Parnass hill,
Tears did from every Muses eyes distill.
Some in a fury rent their golden locks,
Some hanged the head, some stamped, the breast so^e knocks,
Some inly sigth, and others wrong their hands,
To show their state wherein their sorrow stands,
At length in secret Synod they decreed,
To send Terpsicore abroad with speed,
To search remote, and melancholy nookes:
Which his sad humor with contentment brooks,
Much ground he trauerst over hill, and daile:
It Was long ear aught his travail did avail.
Still as he went, upon his Harp he playde,
By which Melpomene was much dismayde,
When as the sound did to his hearing fly,
For grieved minds do Music quite defy.
At last directed by the powers Divine,
He saw whereas the wandering Muse did pine:
Goodly he louted, and soon him bespake,
That to Parnassus he would journey make.
To take possession of his long void place,
And live among'st the rest of heavenly race.
Melpomene to him made no reply,
But like a senseless stone upon the ground did lie,
Terpsicore with speed flew back again,
And told the Muses of their brothers pain,
Which he left speechless on the frigorous ground,
Either quite dead, or in a deadly sound.
With that the Muses much amazed flies
Unto the dwelling of the Destenies,
To know their brothers sudden cause of grief,
And whether they would send his woes relief.
The Fates recomforted their grieved hearts,
And bade them never dread Deaths sharp point darts:
Told them at large, the cause of his lament,
And how to give his grief a sudden vent:
Soon they took leave, and to the place did fly,
Where the sad Muse lay wrapped in misery:
They rubde his temples, lifted up his head,
In his pale face, pale death was figured,
At length some sparks of life in him appeard,
Which all their late dead hearts revived and cheered.
With cheerful words they cheered him, and him prayde
No more to grieve, no more to be dismayde.
The Fates (quoth they) in private so decreed,
That she for whom thou weep'st, by death should bleed,
And they which by deaths cruel hand are slain,
Nor sigthes, norsingulfes can reduce again:
And know, the Fates have seated in her place,
Though not a Woman, yet of heavenly race,
A goodly KING, to be earthes Sovereign:
Which Justice, Peace, and Virtue, will maintain.
Then joy a new, recall thy wonted rest:
The Fates were kind, that thee from death has blessed.
These words, his woe did somewhat mittigate,
And he assumed again his former state:
With wings of joy they furrowed through the sky,
And soon arrived at Parnassus hie:
Where now each Muse enioyes his hearts content,
Spending the time in wanton meriment:
Thanks be to those auspicious powers above,
That has established this concordant love.
FINIS.
Mors septra ligonibus equat.

