FISHERS folly unfolded: OR THE VAVNTING IESVITES VANITY discovered in a
challenge of his (by him proudly made, but on his part poorly performed.)
UNDER TAKEN AND answered by GEORGE WALKER Pastor of S. JOHN Evangelist in
Watlingstreet LONDON.

M.D.C.XXIIII.

FISHERS folly unfolded: OR THE VAVNTING Jesuits vanity discovered in a
challenge of his (by him proudly made, but on his part poorly performed)
undertaken and answered by GEORGE WALKER Pastor of S. JOHN Evangelist in
Watlingstreet LONDON.
IN the hot Month of June last past, viz. Anno 1623. when the courages of our
true-hearted English people were generally much cooled through the absence of
our rising Sun the illustrious Prince CHARLES then detained too long in
Spain among the Antipodes of our Nation; but the Priests and Jesuits those
hot lovers of the Romish Babylon enraged with the lusts of that proud whore,
and puffed up with hope of prevailing in this Land, were as busy as waspes and
hornets about our beehives, and as wolves about our folds seducing our flocks,
and sending general challenges of disputation to our Shepherds every where. It
so happened that Father Fisher the Jesuit, a man as famous for his forwardness
and impudency in challenging, as foolish in performance; and of as great
esteem and name among the blind Papists; as of little worth in himself and
in the judgment of wise learned men, was by the means and procurement of one
of his disciples drawn into the lists to fight a single combat with Master
Walker above named in manner and form following.

First, a disciple of his, a desperate Popish Novice, resorting often to the
house of an elder brother of his own who dwelt in Cheapside, and (as the
fashion of such seduced Popelings is) railing upon the religion, and vilifying
the learning and gifts of Protestants, did most intemperately extol the Church
of Rome, and the learning of her Priests, especially of Fisher the Jesuit, whom
he did by name praise to the heavens for his disputation with Doctor White
before the Kings Majesty, and did not only boast of a glorious victory which
there he had obtained, but also did proclaim him a challenger of all Preachers
in England, and did dare the most hardy to meet him face to face in any place
or before any Auditors, where they might dispute conveniently. A younger
brother of his who was a Protestant, and lived in the house with his elder
brother, being often assailed and attempted by him, and not able to endure any
longer his boasting and daring speeches, did by his elder brother and others
importune Master Walker to accept the challenge, which he did upon condition
that a convenient day might be agreed upon and appointed by both parties. That
the challenge is accepted they signify to their Popish brother, Fishers
Novice. He wonders that any dare be so hardy as to yield so far in promise,
and tells them, that the promise will never be performed, neither will any
Protestant Minister be so bold as to meet his invincible Master Fisher; but
being urged and pressed to make a trial, he brings word at length upon a
Satturday at night, that the next Monday the Jesuit Fisher will come to his
brothers house to encounter with any opposite whomsoever. They send word to
Master Walker, who having urgent business, desired to have the meeting
deferred till the next day, or till the evening of that day, but could not
obtain so much; nevertheless because he would in no case forgo that
opportunity of disputation with Fisher, nor give occasion to the insulting
Novice to triumph (who upon his excuse of urgent business in that day, began
to boast that the victory was gotten, and that he knew and foretold before
hand how they should find it, and that no Protestant durst be so hardy as to
meet Fisher in the face) he willingly did lay aside all business, and
promising to be ready at the time appointed, sent word to the Jesuit, that if
he did not appear at his own hour, which was upon Monday at ten of the
clock before noone, he should be judged the coward and left without all
excuse. At the hour appointed Master Walker came, and heard nothing of the
Jesuit, for he came not till toward dinner time, but then coming with his
Novice, who was brother to the master of the house, he was entertained with a
dinner, till Master Walker was again sent for. Who about one of the clock
returned, and by the way called upon Master Burton Pastor of S. Matthewes
parish in Friday street, and did request him to go along with him, and to be a
witness of the whole carriage of the business. At their first entrance Master
Fisher complained because they came two against one. Master Burton did assure
him that he came only to be an hearer, and promised that he would not speak
nor intermeddle, except when both parties should agree to it. Then (diverse
friends and neighbors to the Master of the house coming in to hear and see
what passed) Master Walker began to speak to the Jesuit as follows.

Mr. Walker. Sir, if that fame and report, which you and your friends have
raised, and which goes abroad concerning your worth and learning be true, you
must needs be a man able to do more for the Romish religion, than any other of
your fellows now living, or of your predecessors going before. We who have
heard of your bold intrusion into the Court and the presence of our learned
King, and of your challenges which you have made and sent to Doctor White, and
other men of great learning and note, do expect from you some extraordinary
grounds and arguments for the Popish religion, and such skill and learning, as
has not been seen before in any of your profession. Our desire is therefore,
that at this time you will make known unto us some of your best skill, and
show us some of the chief grounds upon which you build your faith and
religion. And I for my part, if I cannot overthrow them by Gods word, will very
willingly yield unto them, and acknowledge that you have the truth on your side.


The Jesuit at the mention of his great fame and report showed a kind of
itching delight, and used never a word tending by way of modesty to extenuate
his learning and gifts; but as one desirous to increase his own fame, and to
justify the report which the blind Papists give out concerning his worth,
breaks out with a smiling sigh into a Pharisaicall commendation of himself to
this effect.

Mr. Fisher. Indeed I must confess, that I have always from my childhood
loved the truth, and diligently sought after it. Once I was a Protestant (God
forgive me) and did with an hungring desire inquire after the truth, but could
never receive any satisfaction among any sects of Protestants, but spent my
labor in vain, still remaining full of doubts and scruples. Whereupon I did
with all humility, fasting and prayer seek unto God, and pray unto him, to
guide me into the way of truth. Who at length for my humility and the
sincerity of my heart, did grant my request, and did draw me unto the
Catholic Church, where I found the truth and a sure ground to rest upon, from
which I purpose never to be moved, but will hold me to it for ever.


Mr. Burton. Mr. Burton grieved to hear the Jesuit boasting after such a
Pharisaicall manner, could not refrain, but taxed him of pride and hypocrisy
for ascribing his calling and his knowledge of the truth and of true religion
(as he termed it) to the merit of his own humility, sincerity, and his
prayers, which he made before his conversion, while he remained in ignorance.


Mr. Walker. Mr. Walker also taking hold of his speech desired to ground a
disputation upon his words, and offered to prove that the Jesuit did err most
damnably and heretically in the first grounds of his faith and religion, in
that he builded his first calling upon the merit of his own virtues and of his
works which he performed before his calling in the state of ignorance and
blindness. He also taxed him of manifest absurdity and contradiction in his
speech, in that he first so far vilified and condemned the Protestant state,
and counted it so sinful and damnable, that he asked forgiveness of God for
his once being a Protestant: and yet immediately did attribute his conversion
and calling into the Catholic Church unto the merit of works which in that
state he performed. Moreover he charged him with extreme folly and madness
for abandoning and forsaking that Church and state, wherein (by his own
confession) he did perform works meritorious, and betaking himself to the
service and slaverie of the Church of Rome that whore of Babylon, the reward
and just wages of whose servants and followers is showed in Gods word, Revel.
19. to be the wrath of God and eternal vengeance in the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone for evermore.


For answer to these objections, the Jesuit complained, that it was uneqvall
for two to set against one both at once. And Master Burton desiring to be
excused for that he could not but out of his zeal reprove his palpable
boasting of his own merits, promised to be silent hereafter, if he would fall
to disputation with Master Walker. Then the Jesuit proceeded and spoke to this
effect.

Mr. Fisher. The Church of Rome, of which I am a member, is the only true
Catholic Church, for it holds the same truth which Christ and his Apostles
commended to it, and has not altered nor erred in any maine point, but holds
the same still, which all true Catholic and Orthodox Fathers and Doctors did
teach, as here is manifestly showed and proved in this book by Gualtherius
(meaning Gualtherius his Chronographica sacra, which there he had brought and
laid before him on the table) who does produce plain testimonies of the
Fathers in all ages, from the time of Christ, confirming the maine points of
the Roman Catholic religion, wherein Protestants dissent from Catholics. I
do challenge you to show the like evidences for the Religion and doctrine
which your Church does hold; which because you cannot do, it is manifest that
you have not the truth, neither are a true Church.


Mr. Walker. Well Master Fisher, if this be the best ground which you have to
build upon, we shall easily answer you, and make it appear that you are not
the man which flying fame reports you to be, and that you build on a sandy
foundation. I did expect some grounds and arguments gathered out of the sacred
Scriptures, and hewed out of the rock of Gods word by the hand and art of some
deeply learned Divine: but I perceive that the best testimony which you have
to allege for your Religion, is that book composed by one of your own side,
and all you can say for your self, is as the old Proverb runs; Ask my
fellow these if I be a true man, which you know it stands him upon to affirm
whether true or false. As for ^^^^^rius, he is as bold, impudent, and
shameless a Pa^^st, as needs put pen to paper; For those testimoni^s of forged
Fathers, and of old Liturgies, which all the learned of your Religion (who have
any wit, learning, or dram of modesty appearing in them) have rejected, he
does boldly and familiarly cite and produce for proofs without any shame or
blushing. If I should for our Religion cite and produce a book of Luther or
Calvin, or any other Protestant, you would laugh me to scorn: yea, you reject
the books of the Fathers printed or set forth among us, though you could never
justly tax or convince any one of us of partial dealing, or of the least
wilful falsification. Let me further admonish you, that you show little
discretion in bringing humane testimonies, especially of late writers, to
maintain your Religion against me, or to confute my Religion; For I am, as you
know, a Preacher of the Gospel, one of them whom ye call Protestants, and we
do not build upon any but the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ
himself being the head corner stone. We do not regard in a controverted point
of faith, what any Father or Doctor does hold, or has held in former ages; but
what Christ and his Prophets and Apostles have left recorded in the infallible
Scriptures of the old and new Testament, and what the Fathers have truly from
thence observed. We use the learned who have gone before us as helps and guides
in places of Scripture and opinions which are doubtful; but we do (as they
desired) deny their testimonies to be grounds of faith. Wherefore let us
leave off all superfluous and idle allegations and discourses, and let us come
to a strict form of disputation about some maine points of controversy. If
you be pleased to oppose any special article of our faith, I will defend it,
or if you will take upon you to answer, I will prove against you, That your
father the Pope is Antichrist, That the Church of Rome is the whore of Babylon:
That your doctrine of merit of justification before God by your own works is
heretical; And that your Imageworship is damnable idolatry.


Mr. Fisher. If you be so forward to dispute, I am for you, and I come for
that purpose; But have you no other points to prove, save these, That the Pope
is Antichrist, and the Church of Rome the whore of Babylon? I remember that you
urged me to dispute upon these above three years ago, when you came to me in
the New-prison, belike you spend all your time and study in these questions.


Mr. Walker. It is true that I desired to dispute upon these questions four
years ago, and then you refused, I hope you have since studied how to defend
them, though then you were unprovided. Indeed I do offer these questions first
of all to every Priest and Jesuit with whom I meet, because the proving of any
one of them does at one blow overthrow all Popery: but you all are as much
afraid of these questions as a dog of the whip. I could never yet meet with one
of you, which durst undertake to maintain the negative part: For you are as
wise as Serpents in your generation: you know by woeful experience, what hard
and base and silly shifts Bellarmine, Suarez and others of your most learned
Jesuits, have been driven to seek, while they labor in writing to answer us
in these questions, and how miserably they are confounded, contradicting one
another, and every one himself in many things. And this is the cause why you
cannot endure to deal with us in these killing points of controversy, wherein
you are sure to be overthrown. But if these please you not, do you name any
other questions, and you shall find me ready and willing to dispute with you
without further delay.


Mr. Fisher. I am content: But that we may have some ground to build on; First,
I will propound some questions to you in writing, to which I require your
answer in writing also, that there may be no mistaking or misreporting
hereafter of that which passes between us.


Mr. Walker. If you will set down any question in writing, and write down
also your arguments, I will also write my answers to them, but all other kind
of questioning I refuse, as a means tending to prolong the time, and keep us
off from strict disputation. I remember that when I was with you four years
ago, you did trifle away a whole afternoon by ambiguous questions, and could
not be drawn at all to disputation.


Mr. Fisher. We cannot dispute without some ground laid down and agreed upon:
I will therefore first here propound in writing this question, (then he wrote
down as follows) God the Father sent his Son our Savior to teach all
points of faith necessary to salvation, bidding his Apostles hear him.


Mr. Walker. This is no point of controversy between you and us; but if you
make it questionable, I answer affirmatively, granting the proposition to be
true, do you prove the contrary if you can.


* Then the Jesuit taking the paper, wrote a second proposition, viz.

Mr. Fisher. Our Lord said to his Apostles, As my Father sent me, so send I
you, he that hears you hears me, go teach all Nations, baptizing them,
etc. and teaching them to observe all things which I have commanded you;
behold, I am with you all days until the end of the world.


Mr. Walker. To this Master Walker answered when he read it; That he desired
an argument, not a new proposition, and urged him either to dispute upon the
former question, or else to propound some point of controversy; for he would
not be deluded nor spend any more time in trifling and writing down
propositions not controverted.


Mr. Fisher. If this proposition be not controverted, do you grant it under
your hand, and I will upon your owns confession ground a controversy and an
argument which shall hold you fast.


Mr. Walker. Before you can make an argument, you must agree with me upon some
point of controversy, let us therefore know what I shall defend, and what
point you will dispute against.


Mr. Fisher. I come instantly to the point, if you will grant the last
proposition to be true, under your hand, (this being done) he takes the paper
and writes the third proposition. This commission of our Savior to his
Apostles, was not only to their persons, and for their lives, but to those
which should by them be sent, and should lawfully succeed them in all ages,
years, months and days, until the end of the world.


Mr. Walker. Master Walker seeing this, refused to answer to any more questions
or propositions in word or writing, except it were a proposition disputable;
and when the Jesuit said that by degrees he meant thus to bring him on to a
maine point of controversy, upon which he would dispute; Indeed (says he)
you have so promised, and deceived me now three times, I will no longer be
held in suspense; and if you can no way come to disputation but by such
propositions, I will try whether I can by the same means draw you to some
head of controversy: Then taking a paper, he wrote down this proposition:
They who teach, hold and maintain doctrines contrary and repugnant to the
Scriptures, even the word of God taught by Christ and his Prophets and Apostles
in the old and new Testament, are not the true successors of Christ and his
Apostles.


Mr. Fisher. This assertion the Jesuit granted, but would not write down any
thing, and still urged Master Walker to grant his third proposition.


Mr. Walker. Stay (says Master Walker) I must first have you to answer a
second proposition, before I answer your third; then he wrote down a second
to this effect. The Church Teachers and Pastors, who do teach no other
doctrine as necessary to salvation, but that, and only that which is taught
in the Scriptures by Christ and his Apostles and Prophets, are undoubtedly the
true Church of Christ, and the true successors of Christ and his Apostles.


Mr. Fisher. To this the Jesuit seemed unwilling to answer, till at length
being much urged, he for very shame yielded to grant the proposition, by
saying, I do not deny it.


Mr. Walker. Whereupon Master Walker spoke thus: Now Master Fisher, you have
granted me two maine grounds, upon which I will dispute, and upon the first I
will prove, That the Church of Rome and her Pope and Priests, are not the true
Church, nor true successors of Christ and his Apostles. And upon the other I
will prove, That the Church of England and her Protestant Pastors are the true
Church and successors of Christ and his Apostles.


Mr. Fisher. But stay (says Fisher) let me first have your answer to my third
proposition, and then we will come to disputation immediately.


Mr. Walker. If I do answer, you will not dispute, because there is no matter
of controversy in your proposition. Nevertheless, that you may have no excuse
nor color of delay, I grant your assertion thus understood, viz. That to all
those who are sent by the Apostles, and in calling and doctrine lawfully
succeed them in all ages, years and days, until the end of the world, Christ
gave commission to teach people of every Nation, and to baptize them, and
promised to be with them. But if you mean by the last clause cunningly to
imply, that there are in all ages, years, months and days, a continued
succession of Bishops and Pastors in one and the same visible Chair and Sea,
sent by the Apostles, and lawfully succeeding them as in place, so in all
points of doctrine; I deny your proposition, and if you please, let this be
the question between us, and let it be your part to prove it against me.


Mr. Fisher. This answer Master Fisher desired him to write down, which he
promised, upon condition Fisher would first write down his answers to the two
propositions by him propounded. And after much ado, the Jesuit takes the
paper, and under the first assertion which he had before granted, viz. That
they who teach doctrines contrary to Gods word, are not lawful successors of
the Apostles, he writes an ambiguous answer in these words: I grant, but
Catholics do not so.


Mr. Walker. Against this answer Master Walker excepted, that it was an
equivocation, and might be understood two ways, either thus; I Fisher, out of
my private opinion, or for some purpose, grant this proposition to be true,
but it is not granted by Catholics generally; or else thus, I grant that they
who teach doctrines contrary to Gods word, are not true successors of the
Apostles; but Catholics do not so teach: If you mean the first way, and in
the first sense, you do but mock us: But if you speak in the latter sense,
your answer is more than needs, and is a denying of an assumption which I have
not yet expressed, viz. That Catholics do teach doctrines contrary to the
Scriptures. If by Catholics you understand all such as hold the true Catholic
faith, I do not, neither will charge them with that which you deny before
hand. But if by Catholics you understand Papists, your conscience does accuse
you before hand, and I will prove that supposed assumption which you deny, to
wit, That the Papists teach doctrines contrary to the Scriptures.


Mr. Fisher. I pray you be not so hasty, let us come fairly and easily to
another chief thing, unto which I labor to bring you, which will be more
material, as you shall see presently; then taking the paper, he writes a
fourth proposition in these words: This company of Doctors and Pastors
succeeding one another, appointed to instruct people in all ages, and to
confirm them in faith, could not perform their duties without being so known
in the world, that all men of all ages might have recourse to them, and might
learn from them all truth, neither could they be so secret, that all stories
should be silent of the Doctors and doctrines taught by them in all ages.


Mr. Walker. This proposition when Master Walker had read with an audible
voice, he asked the Jesuit whether it were his purpose to dispute upon it
(which he affirming) he answered, that it was not a fit proposition to be
disputed, because it contained a great number of questions and equivocations,
and being urged by the Jesuit to show his exceptions against it, he noted
down these particulars. First, that it is absurd to hold, that all Pastors and
Doctors lawfully succeeding the Apostles, were known in the world to all men
of all ages; for there be many thousands of such Pastors who were known to
none but to the men of the ages in which they lived. Secondly, it is an error
to hold that all the men of the ages in which they lived had recourse unto
them, and learned of them the truth; for it is sufficient that their own
flocks, even the sheep of Christ, did know them and hear their voice.
Thirdly, men may be true Pastors lawfully succeeding the Apostles, though they
teach not all truth, but only the maine points of faith necessary to
salvation. Fourthly, such true Pastors may be so secret that all stories may
be silent of them, and of their teaching and doctrine. Fifthly, though their
names and doctrines were recorded in the stories of those ages, yet the stories
now extant may be silent of them; because some Popes, by name Gregory the 7.
did corrupt and deface all sorts of records and writings both civil and
ecclesiastical, which made against their forged primacie, pride and corrupt
doctrine, as Aventine testifies, lib. 5. Annal. Boiorum. By which means many
ecclesiastical stories perished, and others are corrupted until this day.


Mr. Fisher. To the first of these exceptions, the Jesuit yielded, and limited
his long speech by adding immediately after the word (ages) this clause (in
which they lived.) Concerning the second exception, he asked this question,
Whether none but the sheep of Christ did know the true Pastors and hear them?
It was answered, That it was enough that they were known and heard by the
sheep of Christ: To which Fisher replied, That their persecutors must needs
know them, and hear of their doctrine, or else how coula they actually
persecute them and their doctrine. Master Walker answered, That their
persecutors did not know Christ to be the Lord of life, nor them to be his
servants, nor the truth of their doctrine, for then they would not have
persecuted them; only such as in persecuting them did sin against the light
of the holy Ghost (if there were any such persecutors) they did know them and
their doctrine. To the third exception Fisher first yielded, and inserted after
these words (to learn from them all truth) this clause (in all the maine
points necessary to salvation) and then he asked what he did understand by a
maine point.


Master Walker answered, That by a maine point he understood that which the
infallible Scriptures of the old and new Testament do teach to be necessary
to salvation, and require that we should so believe it.


To the fourth and fifth exceptions he gave no answer, but laboring to decline
the mention of them, takes the paper and writes down^ a cavilling demand,
concerning the maine points necessary to salvation, in these words: Name what
particular points these are, or give a general definition, by which all sorts
even of Protestants shall agree to be such. Which when Master Walker had read,
he answered to this effect.

Mr. Walker. Now Mr. Fisher you do show your self in your colors what you
are indeed, and what I have ever since I first knew you suspected you to be,
even a very idle wrangling Sophister, unskilful in the art of Logic, and
ignorant in the rules of disputation. First, if you demand a general
definition of a maine point necessary to salvation, that I have given already
when I wrote down that it was, that which the infallible Scriptures do teach
to be necessary to salvation. But your words are senseless in themselves, and I
cannot tell what you mean by this clause (a definition by which all sorts of
Protestants shall agree to be such.) This speech savours of distraction: For no
sorts of Protestants do go about to make themselves to agree to be maine
points of truth necessary to salvation, we desire only to know, believe, and
teach such points.


Mr. Fisher. Fisher thus caught in his own net, had no other way to wind out
himself, but only urged Master Walker to name all the particular points which
the Scriptures do teach for maine points necessary to salvation. To which
Master Walker thus answered.


Mr. Walker. Indeed I commend your wit and wise providence: for if you could
persuade me to undertake the naming of all such particular points, you know it
would require more time than till to morrow night, and by this means you
should escape without disputation, and sleep quietly in a whole skin this
night. But you shall not so escape, For I do appeal to all here present,
whether this be not a mere wrangling shift to avoid disputation for the
present. And I do here charge you (if your own conscience does not inwardly
tell you, that either your Religion is so false that it cannot be defended; or
you your self so unlearned that you are unable to maintain it) that you do
without further delay agree to dispute with me upon some maine points of
controversy between Protestants and Papists. If you refuse, I will tax you
for a faint hearted coward and dastard, and so esteem you hereafter at all
times.


Mr. Fisher. But if I yield to dispute with you, who shall be Judge between us?


Mr. Walker. The chief judge of all shall be the word of God, and these
hearers shall judge of the form and carriage of our disputation, and to whom
the victory does belong.


Mr. Fisher. They know not the word of God, neither can you your self
certainly tell which is the true word of God.


M. Walker. Yes, I have it here at hand to show (and taking out of his pocket
Plantines Hebrew Bible in octauo without pricks, bound with a Syriacke and
Greek Testament) Lo (says he) here is the true word of God, even the whole
Scriptures of the old and new Testament, in the original tongues wherein they
were first spoken by the spirit of God, and written by his penmen.


Mr. Fisher. How do you know that this book is the word of God and the
original Scriptures?


Mr. Walker. I know that all, not only Protestants but Papists, acknowledge and
confess it so to be. First Papists, because Arias Montanus a great learned
Doctor of the Church of Rome did set it forth, and Plantine a Catholic Printer
did print it, and that at the charges of Philip the second your great Catholic
King of Spain: so that you being a Roman Catholic cannot (except you have
cast off all shamefastness) but acknowledge it for the word of God in the
original tongues. Secondly, we Protestants are so confident of the infallible
truth of the word contained in this book, that we altogether build our faith
and religion upon it.


Mr. Fisher. How do you know that Plantine printed this book?


Mr. Walker. Lo here the title page, where it is testified to be printed by
him at Antwerp, and the year of the world according to the less account of
the Jewish Rabbis is here specified (with these words he showed the book and
page to Fisher) who discerning it to be printed in such a Character as he could
not read, put it from him, as if he had been afraid to look on it. Whereupon
Master Walker began to play upon him, and taking advantage of his ignorance,
made the company some sport, saying: What Master Fisher, are you a learned
Jesuit, and one of the Popes great champions, and yet can you not read this
fair print? I cry you mercy, Graecum est non potest legi: yea it is worse than
so, it is Hebrew printed in Hebrew words and letters, which to the common sort
of Popish Priests is more terrible and dreadful than conjuring figures. But in
good sadness can you not read it? or do you but dissemble, Master Fisher? I
am afraid by your gestures that you are in earnest, and your countenance does
make me so confident of your ignorance, that I will adventure my book upon it,
and though I will not otherwise take twenty shillings for it, yet I here before
all this company promise to give it you for your pains, if you can but read
one sentence in it out of the original text. Which offer when Fisher refused,
some of the standers by laughed at him, others wondered whether this were Fisher
the Jesuit, and made a question of it. Master Burton who had promised silence,
observing the Jesuits folly by this behavior and other idle speeches, told
him, that he must give him leave to laugh and not be offended, for he had by
his promise at the beginning bound himself from speaking, but not from
laughing.


Mr. Fisher. The Jesuit plunged into this perplexity, thought it best to be
gone, and said that his business called him away, he could stay no longer.


Mr. Walker. Mr. Walker answered, that this was an idle excuse. For (says he)
you know Master Fisher that this day and hour was appointed by your self and
set apart for disputation, and though my business was great, I was forced to
lay all aside for this work, because no other day nor time would be accepted.
Therefore it is very unlikely that any business should now call you away, or
that you should appoint this time for any other employment, except you came
either in hope to find no adversary which durst encounter you, or with
purpose, if any appeared, to shift off disputation by some such device. By
these and such speeches, as also by the importunity of the standers-by, the
Jesuit was detained, and falling into the question about the infallible word of
God, after many speeches which passed to and fro about the original Scriptures
and the translations, which was most authentical, and which translations the
best and most incorrupt and free from gross errors. Master Walker to cut off
all needless discourse about such questions, did very earnestly demand of the
Jesuit, whether he thought the vulgar Latin translation of the Bible to be the
most pure, incorrupt and authentical edition of the Scriptures, and the true
word of God according to the determination of the Council of Trent.


Mr. Fisher. Fisher answered, that he held it to be the incorrupt word of God,
and the most authentike edition of the Scriptures,


Mr. Walker. And though I do much dissent from you in this opinion (says
Master Walker) and do hold that of all translations which are of any esteem
among Christians, there is none so full of errors and mistakings, even in the
judgment of S. Hierome himself, upon whom the Papists falsely father it: yet
so far I do approve of it, that I do not doubt but any learned Divine may
easily gather, teach and confirm out of it all doctrines which are necessary
to salvation. For whatsoever necessary truth is omitted in one place by
mis-translatio^, it is plainly expressed in some other places of the same,
which are truly and faithfully translated. And here I do make a fair offer,
and most equal motion to you before all here present, viz. That I will
undertake to make a plain confession of the Protestants faith, and of all the
articles of religion (which the Church of England holds necessary to
salvation) in the very words and sentences of the vulgar Latin Bible without
any material alteration at all, upon condition that you (when I have made good
my word and promise) will grant and acknowledge that the confession so made is
a true confession of the true Christian faith, and that all such articles are
to be received and embraced for articles of the true religion.


Mr. Fisher. This offer when the Jesuit refused to accept, he was much
condemned, censured and reproved by the hearers. Wherefore to avoid all further
urging in this point, and for the escaping of more reproof and censure, he
flies back to the general question concerning the word of God, and taking a
paper wrote down his assent: That the word of God comprehends in it, 1. The
Scriptures. 2. Whatsoever by good consequence is gathered from the holy
Scriptures. And withal he wrote down this question, viz. who must be the
Judge when the Scriptures are doubtful, and when the question is of the
goodness of the consequence. And withal he professed that for his part he
held the Church to be the Judge, and that when the Church has judged, no
private man must oppose.


Mr. Walker. Mr. Walker on the other side professed, that for the goodness of
the consequence Logicians must judge by reason and the rules of Logic. And
for the sense and meaning of the doubtful places, the Scripture is the best
expositor of it self, and the plain places of it do give light to the places
which are obscure, and do best expound them. And therefore every private
person, and the whole Church it self in matters doubtful must fly to the
Scriptures themselves, as the last Judge of controversies in matters of faith
and salvation. And here he asked Master Fisher if he durst, in this
controversy, stand to the judgment of the ancient Fathers, such as S.
Augustine, Chrysostom, and others of that rank.


Mr. Fisher. The Jesuit answered, that he knew the Fathers were on his side,
and did altogether fly to the judgment of the Church in matters of faith,
when any controversy did arise.


Mr. Walker. That (said Master Walker) is most untrue, and the contrary shall
be showed presently out of their own writings, set forth and printed by
Papists: then calling for two volumes, the one of S. Chrysostom upon Matthew,
the other S. Austens third Tome, both printed and set forth by Papists, as the
inscription did show, and Fisher could not deny: First he turns to the
Homily of Chrysostom upon these words of the Gospel, Math. 24. (When you see
the abomination of desolation stand in the holy place, then let him that is in
Judea fly to the mountains) and shows the Authors exposition, which was to
this effect: That when Antichrist rules and bears sway in the holy place the
Church, then all professors of Christian religion who are in the true Iudaea,
that is, Christianity, must fly only to the Scriptures, for they are the
mountains upon which the Church is founded; according to that saying of David,
Her foundations are upon the holy mountains, Psalm. 87. 1. And in those days
when Antichrist sits and succeeds in the Sea of holy Bishops, and overrules
all, works miracles and makes great show of godliness in hypocrisy, then the
Church cannot be known by succession of Pastors, nor by the miracles and holy
life of teachers, as in former ages, but only by the Scriptures.


Mr. Fisher. The answer which the Jesuit gave to this testimony* was, that
this could not be proved to be the work of Chrysostom.


Mr. Walker. More shame (said Master Walker) it is to your Doctors and
Printers, who cite places out of this book under the name of Chrysostom, and
do print and set it forth in his name: but suppose it be not the work of
Chrysostom, yet you cannot deny it to be the work of an ancient writer of
great antiquity, and therefore it makes much against you being approved in the
Church so many ages. Neither shall you so escape; For lo here in the third
book of S. Augustine, De doctrina Christiana, which was never questioned, but
is generally received and acknowledged by all, it is most plainly taught by the
learned Father, That the best way of expounding the Scriptures is, in words
which have many significations, to observe the scope and circumstances of the
place, and thereby to expound them; and to expound obscure places by comparing
them with other plain places of the Scriptures, which speak of the same
matter and subject. Then he showed the words to Fisher, and read them in
Latin to him, who could not deny them, but heard them read with much
impatiencie, as his gestures showed; but when he began to expound them in
English to the people there present, the Jesuit could not contain himself,
but said; Away, this is nothing to the purpose, we will examine these things
some other time. And when words would not prevail, he reaches with his hands
to the book, and did strive to shut it, that the words might not be read;
notwithstanding Master Walker held it by strong hand, and read the words, which
when the people present did hear and see, they confessed that Fisher was
openly convinced; some of them told him that his own conscience did witness
against him, and all condemned his impudency joined with most intolerable and
desperate obstinacy.

The Jesuit thus condemned on all sides, and not able to outface the matter any
longer, did make show as if he stood upon coals, and would gladly be gone, and
his Disciple who brought him thither, being ready to help him at a dead lift,
when he saw him so confounded, calls upon him to remember the place which they
were to go unto, whereupon they made haste to depart, but by much importunity
were stayed, and Master Walker still urging him to propound and prosecute one
argument upon any question of controversy before they parted; he answered,
that now there was no time, but promised to dispute at some other time. At
length, out of an earnest desire to draw one argument from the Jesuit, he
offered to him this advantage, That if for the justifying of any point or
article of the Romish religion, he would make a perfect syllogism in mood
and figure, and presently upon the denial of any of the premises, second it
with a prosyllogisme, not failing in form, to prove and conclude the
proposition denied, the point or article so far proved, should for this one
time be yielded to him, and he should have liberty to make his best advantage
of it, for the justifying of any other point of Popery which he would
presently dispute upon. But all this could not prevail to wring one syllogism
from him, which made the hearers think that he had no art nor skill to make
an argument: And that they did not think amiss nor err in their opinion,
appeared by that which followed; for although he durst not undertake, during
the time of the conference, to make one syllogism, or to propound an argument
in form, yet at the breaking up, when he was ready to depart, he took his
paper and wrote down and gave to Master Walker, desiring him to answer at
leisure this argument which follows, and which is yet to be showed under his
own hand, though perhaps to men of judgment it may seem incredible that any
Priest or Jesuit of his name and note, should be so absurd, as to propound for
a syllogism such a confused speech, without form, mood or figure: It runs
word for word thus; That Church which beginning with Christ, and his Apostles,
has visibly professed in all ages that faith (which Christ and his Apostles
taught) without change in any point necessary to salvation, is that Church
whose judgment is to be followed, and no private man must oppose his
judgment against it. There must be one such Church in all ages. But no such
Protestants can be showed. This syllogism no doubt will appear (as it is in
form) very absurd to all the judicious, who shall hear of it, or read it:
And yet the author thereof (if we consider either the time when, or the manner
how he propounded it) was therein far more absurd and ridiculous. For he
delivered it for an argument of such force and strength, that it was not to be
answered but at leisure, and upon much study and meditation. Yea, he wrote it
down, after that every point and tittle therein, which requires any answer,
had been by the present adversary Master Walker, there at that time
abundantly answered, to the full satisfaction of the hearers (as they
confessed.) For after Master Walker had fairly offered, and earnestly urged
that all controversies of religion which were between them, might be tried,
first, by the original Scriptures; secondly, by the sincere writings of the
ancient Fathers; thirdly, by disputation in strict syllogismes: and all these
were refused and rejected by the Jesuit, as is before related; They who were
present, wondering at him, and some of them asking him, whether he had any
ground of his faith and religion, besides his own sense and will.


Mr. Fisher. He answered, that he would be judged by the Church. For (said
he) when the Church has judged, no private man must oppose his judgment. And
this I made a Protestant Preacher confess heretofore in a conference, and that
under his own hand.


Mr. Walker. Master Walker answered, that the Church of God never judges (as
it is a true Church) but by the Word of God in the holy Scriptures; and as it
is said of a just Judge in a Commonwealth, that he is Lex loquens, so it is
said of every true and faithful Church, that it is Scriptura loquens, The
speaking Scripture. Now against this judgment of the Church no private man
must oppose his judgment, that is, his own private opinion: for all singular
opinions of private men are vain errors; if they were true they could not be
singular, seeing all truths necessary to salvation taught in the Scriptures,
are common to all the faithful. Therefore the Protestant Preacher which you
named, did grant nothing but the truth, from which you can pick no advantage
to help you; for you, when you appeal to the judgment of the Church, do in
many things differ from this truth. First, by the Church you understand no
other Church but the Church of Rome, that whore of Babylon, your own mother;
and your appealing to her to be the judge of your Religion, is as if a Bastard
should seek to be judged by the whore his mother, whether he be lawfully
begotten, which he knows she will affirm and judge him to be for her own
credit. Secondly, you rest on her judgment in the maine principles of
Religion, which are already most plainly and infallibly determined in the holy
Scriptures, and in which no Christian truly sanctified and regenerate, being
grown up to years of discretion, and well read in the Scriptures, needs the
judgment of any other judge, besides the Spirit of God enlightening his heart.
Thirdly, when you speak of the judgment of the Church, you understand such a
judging power and authority, as does by determining points of faith and
manners, make them true and lawful, whereas the true Church of God has no
power to coin new Scriptures, or to make articles of faith, but only the gift
of revealing, propounding and expounding of the word of God, and the articles
of Religion, which Christ has commended to the faithful. Fourthly, you
require in the true Church, and attribute to your Church of Rome such
properties, as cannot be found in any particular Church on earth, viz. that it
has continued in the same place, state and condition, visibly and sensibly
professing from the days of Christ and his Apostles, the same faith in all
points necessary to salvation; whereas by consent of all stories, and by
manifest experience it is plain, that doctrines which by the Apostles were
taught to the old Roman Christians, as justification by faith without works,
and by imputation of Christ's righteousness, Romans 3. and 4. and 5. are now
condemned by the present Romish Church. And others which the Apostle did call
Doctrines of Devils, as forbidding to marry, and abstinence from meats, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 3. it urges as necessary to be believed and obeyed for salvation, by
some persons.


Mr. Fisher. I do hold that the Church is the chief judge of all
controversies, in the matters of Religion, and that all private persons must
submit to it, and not seek to the Scriptures; First, because the Scriptures
are translated out of the original tongues before that private men can read
or understand them, and the translations are not to be believed nor received,
but by the authority and approbation of the Church. Secondly, the Church gives
such authority to the Scriptures, that without it we are not bound to believe
them, nor receive them for Gods word, according unto that excellent profession
of Saint Augustine, Non crederem Evangelio nisi me Ecclesiae moveret
authoritas; I would not believe the Gospel unless I were thereunto moved by
the authority of the Church.


Mr. Walker. And I answer, that all this which you say makes no more for the
Church of Rome than for any other particular Church; for all other particular
Churches have as much authority in this kind, yea, more, because she is more
impure and corrupt than any of them, and has least ability or sincerity to
judge of the truth. And undoubtedly Saint Austen meant not the Church of Rome
(of which he was no member) but rather the Church of Millaine in which he was
converted. Secondly, I say that Saint Austen in the place by you cited, speaks
by way of supposition, and not by way of asseveration, as the learned have well
observed from the scope and circumstances of the place. Thirdly, it is true
that over-weake Christians, who are babes in Christ, the Church in which they
live and are baptized, has such authority (as you speak of) namely, to
translate the Scriptures, and to commend them for the word of God, and for
truth, and they are bound to give credit to it therein, and not to oppose their
own fancies and conceits. But when Christians are grown up in grace and
knowledge, and have felt by their own experience, the effects and work of the
Spirit in their souls wrought by reading and hearing of the holy Scriptures,
and when not only by the inward testimony of the Spirit, testifying that they
are the truth; but also by the inward heavenly comforts and spiritual strength
which they thereby and from thence receive, do sensibly perceive that Gods
hand is with them, and he does in them speak to their consciences: then they
need no more the judgment of the Church, nor of any external judge, to assure
them that the Scriptures are Gods true infallible word; for though all
professors in the world, or an Angel from heaven should preach and affirm the
contrary, they will not assent unto them; but rather count them as Anathema
and accursed, as the Apostle commands, Gal. 1. 8.


Mr. Fisher. They who are true Catholics, and rest upon the judgment of the
Church, have as much assurance and certainty of the truth of the Scriptures,
as is needful, from the testimony of the Church; for they build upon the
rock against which the gates of hell cannot prevail: But you teach men to
build their faith on their own private spirit, and you are lead every one of
you by his own conceit, which is the cause of so many sects and schisms and
several opinions among you, every one assuming to himself presumptuously such
an infallibility of judgment in matters of faith, as does not belong to any
private man, neither can be attained unto by the common and vulgar sort of
Christians.


Mr. Walker. You show your self by this speech of yours to be not only a
mere carnal man, such a one as has never felt the lively work of Gods
spirit in his heart, nor tasted of the heavenly gift; but also a brutish man
corrupting that reason and darkning that light which by nature is in you; which
I will evidently show diverse ways. First, you prefer the external
testimony of the Church, before the internal testimony of Gods spirit, and
make it a more sure rock to build on, than the Holy Ghost who is the spirit of
truth. Secondly, you seem to exempt and exclude the common sort of Christians,
and all private men from the communion of the Holy Ghost, and from that gift
and grace and inward work of the spirit, by which they are illuminated to see,
and persuaded to believe the truth of Gods word every one particularly in his
own soul and with his own heart, contrary to the Scriptures, which teach,
that the spirit of Jehovah resting first and originally on Christ the head,
Isa. 11. 2. is from him inspired and infused into all and every faithful
member of his body the Church, Romans 8. 9. in such sort, that they are said, by
that one spirit to be baptized into one body, whether they be Jews or
Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and their bodies are said to be temples of the Holy
Ghost which dwells in them, 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19. and by this spirit they
are said to have the gift of knowledge and faith, 1 Cor. 12. and to be led into
all truth, Ioh. 16. Thirdly* you call the holy spirit of Christ (which we
challenge in Christ by a common right, as common to all the elect, and which
does work the same faith and knowledge in every particular Christian) by the
name of a private spirit; wherein you show most palpable ignorance
overspreading your carnal eyes, and possessing your carnal heart. For that
spirit which flows from that one common fountain of all goodness, even God
the Father of all, and is sent forth in and through the name of that one common
Mediator and Savior of the world his Son Jesus Christ; which is also the
same in Christ the head, and in the whole universal body of the elect and
faithful, and does work in all and every one particularly the same common
knowledge of the same truth, and the same common faith in the same promised
seed: And all this by no private motions or inspirations separated from the
word of God; but only by that common means, even the word of Christ spoken by
his mouth, and written by his Prophets and Apostles in the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament; this spirit can in no case be called a private spirit.
For it is the property of the Holy Ghost, the true Comforter, to come from the
Father in the Sons name, and to teach the truth, and work faith by the
common rule and means of the Scriptures, and not to speak of himself new
things which Christ had not spoken before; but only to speak what he has
heard, and so to receive of Christ's, and to give to us; and to lead us into all
truth by calling to our minds the word spoken by Christ and recorded in the
Scriptures, and by writing it in our hearts, as our Savior plainly testifies,
Ioh. 16. 13, 14. This spirit which is discerned by these properties we
challenge to our selves, by the common right of the elect in Christ, and he it
is who does testify to our spirits, that the holy Scriptures are the true
infallible word, and does transform our souls into the obedience of them, and
does work in us that same faith by which all the Saints have been justified
and saved from the beginning of the world. But now as I have showed you, which
is the true spirit of God common to all the elect and faithful, and that by
his properties observed from the words of Christ our Savior, and also that the
spirit of Protestants is that spirit: So I demand of you, whether you Papists
have any such spirit working in you that faith and knowledge of the Scriptures,
which you build on the testimony and authority of the Church. If you say that
you have no such spirit, but are led every one by his own sense; then are you
carnal and sensual men, not spiritual by your own conf^ssion: If you say
that you have the spirit moving every one of you particularly to rest on the
judgment of the Church of Rome, and causing you to believe that the Pope
cannot err, and that the Scriptures which he does commend unto you, are
therefore Gods word, then I would know of you, why that spirit so resting and
working in every particular Papist should not be esteemed a private spirit, as
well as that which works in every Protestant.


Mr. Fisher. Your spirit is a private spirit, because he leads every one of you
into several opinions and private interpretations of Scripture, which have
never been received in the Church, nor commonly acknowledged of the godly
Fathers and Doctors.


Mr. Walker. If you have no more to say for your self than this, I shall
easily convince you by your own mouth, and prove from your own words, that
the spirit of Papists (not the spirit of Protestants) is indeed a private
spirit. For first our spirit persuades us to receive for Gods infallible word
no other Scriptures, but those which by the common consent of all the ancient
Fathers, and of all sorts of Christians, even of you Papists your selves, are
held for Canonical: but you Romanists receive diverse Scriptures for
Canonicali, which by S. Hierome and other Ancients, and by all the reformed
Churches are and have been censured for Apocrypha; and so you are in this more
private in your opinion than we. Secondly, we Protestants build upon no other
rock but that which is common to all the faithful from the beginning, even God
himself, who is prima veritas, the first truth, and upon his word of promise
made in Christ the promised seed; and we are founded on the Prophets and
Apostles, who are the common foundation both to all the fathers in the old
Testament, and to all Christians in the time of the Gospel. But you build upon
a new rock, even the Pope of Rome, whom ye call the universal Bishop sitting
in Peter's chair, a foundation which all the faithful forefathers before the
coming of Christ were ignorant of, and never heard or dreamed. Neither did the
first Christians in the primitive Church for diverse hundred of years after
Christ acknowledge any such name or title; but even Gregory the Great, a
Bishop of Rome, who lived 560. years after Christ, condemned it as a note of
Antichrist and his forerunner, as by his epistles is manifest. Thirdly, though
diverse sects of Anabaptists, Familists, and Enthusiasts, men of fanaticall
spirits, have grown up like tares in the field of the reformed Churches, who
follow their own private fancies, imaginations, and diverse inspirations of
Satan, which have no warrant from the Scriptures, but are contrary to the
written word: yet they are not of us, we renounce their society, and expel
them out of our Churches, and say of them as the Apostle did, 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us. And as for the interpretations
of some obscure Scriptures, which Luther, Calvin, and other learned men have
lately found out, and do find out daily, which were not known of old nor
commonly received; we embrace them not for novelty, nor because they are
singular, nor for the authority of the expositors themselves; but because we
find them to be agreeable to the original text, and to other plain places of
the same Scriptures, and to contain the old and common doctrine of Christ, and
his Apostles and Prophets, which has been believed and embraced in all ages
of all true Christians: But a great number of the articles of the Romish
religion concerning Image Worship, Canonization of Saints, Purgatory, Pardons,
Indulgences, Transubstantiation, Massing, sacrificing for the dead, and such
like, they are builded upon private visions, apparitions, dreams, imaginations
and fancies of Friars, and upon singular inspirations of Monks, and other
doting persons slavishly devoted to your superstitions, so that the Popish
spirit is indeed the same with the private fanaticall spirit of Anabaptists and
Enthusiasts, as plain reason and experience do show.


Mr. Fisher. The Jesuit taking little pleasure in the hearing of these things,
made great show of a desire to break off, and to be gone, only he put on a
bold and impudent face to deride the opinion of Protestants concerning the gift
of the spirit; by which particular Christians are enabled to know and believe
the Scriptures, and to be fully persuaded and assured of the truth and true
meaning of them: And as for you (says he to Master Walker) it is well for you
that you have such an infallible spirit which does enable you to discern the
word of God, and does more assure you of the truth thereof, than the public
testimony of the Church. But pardon us if we hold it doubtful, seeing we have
no more but your own word for it.


Mr. Walker. Yea and I will have your word professing the same of your self
also, or else I will make you appear to all here present, to be void of all
true Christianity. First, you shall see that all your scoffs shall not make me
ashamed to profess and to proclaim the grace and gift which God has given me
for the knowledge of his word, and how I come to know it by the work of his
spirit. Secondly, I will urge you upon your conscience, to answer me whether
you have experience and feeling of the same grace in you. That which I can with
a good conscience testify of my self, I hold to be no singular gift, but a
grace common to all true Christians, and it is this: First, I confess that I
was borne of Christian parents, and my father and mother who tenderly loved me,
and were also of me dearly beloved, did teach me the first principles of
religion from my infancy, and did tell me that the holy Scriptures contained
in that Bible which was read and expounded in our Church were the true word of
God; I being not able to judge of it my self, believed it so to be upon their
word and authority for the reverent respect and esteem which I had of them.
Afterward they caused me to frequent the Church, and to hear that word read
and expounded by learned Preachers, and told me that I ought to believe what I
heard out of it preached in the Church; and so I did: for I believed the
Preachers publishing that word, in so much that partly by their exhortations,
and partly out of a care which I had of my souls health, and in a desire of
Gods favor and blessings which were thereunto promised, I did even from my
youth give my mind to read and learn the Scriptures. Howsoever I must
confess, that at the first and in my childish years, I did find but little
savor and sweetness in the most profitable parts of the Scriptures; such as
David's Psalms, Salomons Proverbs, the books of the Prophets, the Epistles of
the Apostles, and such like; yea though I believed that they were Gods word:
yet by reason of my natural corruption, I did take more pleasure and delight
in Poetical fables and feigned histories, which did feed my corruption, and
were a kind of fuel to my sinful lusts and vanities. Nevertheless whether
it was mine own conscience urging me, or the spirit of God which moved me, I
cannot certainly tell; but sure I am, that still I did upon the testimony and
authority of my Parents and Teachers, reverence the Scriptures as Gods word,
and force my self to read them contrary to my rebellious nature; and at
length when I came to more ripe years: I found that the word which was most
opposite and distasteful to my sinfu^l corruption, did work upon me most
strongly and effectually, which is an infallible token of Gods hand in it, and
a sure sign of the divine power and supernatural excellency thereof, I felt
the promises of the Gospel, and the words of the Prophets and Apostles which
before had little relish, begin by Gods grace to be most sweet and comfortable
in all crosses and afflictions, and to be most profitable by strengthening me
with the spirit of prayer and faith against temptations, by mortifying my
fleshly corruptions, and by reforming my life; so that I began to rejoice in
the Scriptures, more than in any earthly treasures, and did devote my self to
the study of them; and now partly upon the testimony of Gods spirit
witnessing inwardly with my spirit, and partly upon the sense and experience
which I have of the power of them in overcomming my natural corruptions, as it
were against my will; and partly upon that particular sight and knowledge which
I have of the glory and divine Majesty shining in them, I am so confident and
assured, that they are Gods most holy and infallible word, that my conscience
tells me, I had rather forgo all the world, and my dearest blood and bodily
life, than deny the truth of them. Yea if the Church and Teachers which
persuaded me first to receive them for Gods word, should fall away by
apostasy, forswear and deny them, or any part of them; or if any Angel from
heaven should teach the contrary, I would count them accursed, as the Apostle
enjoines me, Gal. 1. 8. And now I can say to the Church and my Teachers, as the
Samaritans did to the woman who brought them to Christ: Lo I have heretofore
believed the Scriptures to be Gods word upon your testimony and authority;
but now I see with mine own eyes, I have the inward testimony of Gods spirit,
and feel by powerful effects and by experience in my self* that these
Scriptures are Gods holy word, and the power of God to salvation. This (I
freely confess) is my knowledge and persuasion of Gods word, which by these
degrees I have attained unto. And I daily have experience and evident signs of
the same grace in all other Christians, with whom I do converse familiarly.
Now therefore in the second place, I charge you before God and upon your
conscience to answer directly and plainly before this people here present,
whether you have experience of the same grace in you, and whether you have by
these degrees o^ any of them attained to this full assurance of knowledge and
understanding of the Scriptures?


Mr. Fisher. What is that to you, whether I have or have not? Or what if I hold
it needless to assume so much unto my self?


Mr. Walker. It is very necessary that you should do either the one or the
other. And whether you confess or deny, you are taken and ensnared. If you
say that you have experience of this grace in you, and of this gift and
testimony of the spirit, then you are plainly convinced by your own mouth of
wilful blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, in that you have denied,
contradicted, derided, and scoffed at that work of his in the Saints of God,
of which work you have experience in your own soul. But if you confess that
you never felt this order and work of grace in you, and that your faith is
nothing but an implicit believing of the Scriptures upon the Churches
testimony and authority, without any sense or experience of the power and
virtue thereof in your soul, and that you blindly and desperately cast your
self on the Church, without any particular discerning of the truth of the
Scriptures, or any inward testimony of the spirit; then it is certain (to say
the best) that you are yet a babe in Christianity, and Christ Jesus is not yet
formed in you. Yea I fear that you are worse than so: for (if after so many
years study of Divinity, and so long continuance in the public calling of a
Priest, and teacher of others) you be found not only destitute and void of
this necessary grace of a Christian; but also an opposer and gainesayer of it,
and a scorner of such as profess it; we cannot but deem you a very Atheist
and son of Belial, in whom is verified, that which S. Paul foretold of the
slaves of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. viz. That God should send them strong
delusions, that they should believe lies; and be damned, not believing the
truth, but having pleasure in unrighteousness. Also that which is testified by
S. Jude of such reprobates, who are of old ordained to condemnation, viz. That
they speak evil of those things which they know not, and whatsoever things
they know naturally, as beasts which are without reason in those things they
corrupt themselves, and that they are corrupt trees, and without fruit, twice
dead and plucked up by the roots, and raging waves of the sea foaming out their
own shame, and wandering stars to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever.


Mr. Fisher You are very sharp and uncharitable in your judgment; but it is
no matter what you say; neither will I argue more with you at this present, for
it is time for us to depart.


Mr. Walker. I do not judge you but by your own mouth, and by the infallible
word of God, and from henceforth I leave you to the judgment of God, and to
the censure of all here present, who have heard you at this time; only thus
much I must tell you, that I do manifestly discern by your carriage, speeches,
and behavior, your evil conscience, and that you do dolo malo wilfully
oppose the truth, and factiously cleave to the Romish religion. For all here
present have seen that you refuse, and are afraid to be tried either by
Scriptures, or Fathers, or disputation, and reason, or by the spirit of God,
which you would never do so openly to your shame, if your conscience did not
tell you, that they are all against you in the special articles of your
religion wherein you dissent from us.


To this diverse of them who were present gave their assent, and professed that
they were exceedingly deceived in their opinion of Fisher, wondering that one
so vain and ridiculous, as he showed himself, should dare to undertake the
defense of his religion face to face against any learned man, before any
understanding hearers; or that any should be either so foolish and blind, as
to be seduced by him, or so impudent and void of judgment, as to give him the
name and report of a learned man, or to number him among subtle disputants. And
one among the rest calling unto the Jesuit, asked him very earnestly, whether
he were indeed that Fisher the Jesuit who disputed with Doctor White before the
King, which when he acknowledged;

Surely (said the man) I should never have believed it if any other had told me
so; for it could never have sunk into my mind, that any of your name and
report should be so absurd and ridiculous, as you have here showed your self.
For I see that neither the Original Scriptures, nor your own translation of
them, nor the Fathers, nor disputation and argument are of any account with
you. Do you think that any man will be so foolish, as to believe you, who
have no ground but your own word and will? But now I am glad that you have
given me just occasion, as to abhor your religion more than ever before, and
to esteem you a vain wrangler of no judgment: so also to stop the mouth of
some of my kindred, who are of your religion, and great admirers of your person,
and praisers of your learning, by reporting and testifying unto them concerning
you, what I have seen with mine eyes, and heard with mine ears this day.


But the thing which did most astonish the beholders was, the desperate
behavior of the Popish Novice, the procurer of this meeting, who did in the
time of this conference most lively express the slavish nature of a seduced
Roman Catholic, to whom God has sent strong delusion, to cleave to lies, and
to reject the truth. For he did most manifestly show, (as the standers by well
observed) that he came with a full purpose and resolution, and an heart and
forehead hardened to scoff, deride and gainesay whatsoever was said against the
mind of his ghostly father Fisher the Jesuit, whether good or bad; and to
extol and admire with most intemperate noise and clamor, whatsoever Fisher
did aver, without regard of right or wrong, truth or falsehood. In so much,
that one time when Master Walker had spoken something which seemed to give
content to the hearers, and they openly applauded, and the Novice (as his
manner was) scoffing at the speech, said to his younger brother, and others
near unto him, that he never heard a more absurd and foolish reason, and that
any child might answer it: Master Walker overhearing, urged him to tell
wherein the absurdity and foolishness of his reason did consist, and what it
was: But he was not able to repeat one word, so that all the hearers laughed,
and condemned him for an headstrong fool, in speaking evil of that, which he
neither knew, nor cared to understand. But all this could not bridle his
tongue, nor make his impudent face ashamed. For a little after, when Master
Fisher the Jesuit was speaking something, which Master Walker seemed to
slight, and to smile at, the popish Novice spoke out in a passion more loud
than ordinary to his brothers, and others about him: Lo there is an argument
to the purpose, which I warrant you can never be answered by the best of your
Ministers; let him answer it if he can. Which Master Walker noting, turned once
more to the Novice, and desired him to repeat that strong argument, or if he
could not do that, to tell the meaning or the matter of it; but he was not
able to repeat a word, nor to tell what was the matter in hand, which made the
beholders astonished at his desperate impudency and wilful blindness; in so
much that some sharply rebuked him to his face, others blamed Fisher for
nuzling him up, and suffering him to go on in such notorious impudency and
wilful blindness, and diverse did not stick to say, that they never saw nor
heard of such a dangerous example, and that undoubtedly they perceived this
Novice to be so devillishly addicted and devoted to his Master Fisher, that if
Fisher would blaspheme the name of Jesus Christ, this Novice would justify his
blasphemy, and maintain it unto death. And thus the conference ended. But at
the breaking up, the Jesuit gave in writing to be answered at leisure, the
confused speech before mentioned. And Master Walker wrote down an argument,
which he gave to him to be considered and directly answered in writing upon
mature deliberation. The sum of the Argument was this.

That Church which has the chief properties of the great whore of Babylon,
mentioned Revel. 17. is undoubtedly that great whore, and the Church of
Antichrist. The present Church of Rome now subject to the Pope, has those
properties, ergo it is the great whore.
The assumption confirmed.
These following are the chief properties of the great whore. First, she must
be such a Church as being once most famous and renowned over all the faithful
Spouse of Christ, has by degrees fallen away into spiritual whordome, that
is, Idolatry and Image Worship: for the Scriptures do never style by the name
of whore any City or Church, but such as thus fall away.

Secondly, she must still hold her visible succession of Bishops in the same
place and Sea, and profess her self the chief spouse of Christ, while she
commits Idolatry in the Churches of Christ, and mingles it with his outward
and verbal worship, and while he does by persecution sacrifice to her God
Molech, such children, as she, by means of the Scriptures and some parts of
his worship, which she still after a sort retains, has begotten and borne
to Christ.

Thirdly, she must be the mother of whoredoms, by assuming to her self the
power to canonize for Saints whom she pleases, and to authorize the worship of
them and their Images: and by obtruding upon the Churches of other nations,
Cities and Countries her forms of idolatrous worship.

Now there is no Church or City in the world which has, or can have these
properties, but only the present Church and Sea of Rome. 1. For she was for
faith renowned in all the world, as Saint Paul, Romans 1. and many of the ancient
Fathers in their writings do show. 2. And she now continuing her visible
succession of Bishops ever since the Apostles, in the same place and Sea, is
become a worshipper of Images, which is Idolatry, as all the world may see and
observe. 3. And though she does challenge to her self the authority to
canonize Saints, and to authorize all Image Worship, going a whoring from
Christ her first love, after his pretended Vicar the Pope, and his
superstitions, and obtruding upon all nations her abominations: yet she still
glories in the name of the chief spouse of Christ, and under show and color
of zeal and love to him, does persecute and murder such godly men as (being
converted to Christ by those means of Christianity which she still
retains) do reprove and rebuke her for Idolatry, superstition, and other
vices; as Jerusalem did when she was a great spiritual whore and adultresse,
Ezech. 16. Therefore the present Church of Rome, now subject to the Pope, has
the chief properties of the great whore of Babylon, and by consequence is that
great Babylonish whore, and the Church of Antichrist:

This argument being to this effect delivered in writing to the Jesuit, he
departed, and has not yet returned an answer. Only he sent within a few
days after to Master Walker, by his disciple above mentioned, certain
propositions which he commonly carries about him as the chief weapons of his
warfare, and by which he does provoke and challenge all Protestant Divines with
whom he does meet in any place.

FINIS.

