To the Honorable Assembly of Commons in house of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Waggoners or Carriers of the Cities of Oxford,
Cambridge, Norwich, Colchester, Northhampton, and other Towns and places
within this Realm. And also of the Clothiers and Tradesmen using traffic
and commerce in the said Towns and places.
Humbly showing,
THat the Kings Majesty's Proclamation given at Winsor the sixth day of August
in the twentieth year of his Highness most happy Reign over us of this his
Realm of England, hereunto annezed, is a great hindrance and grieuance to your
Petitioners; for relief whereof your Petitioners about February last was
twelve months, did most humbly petition the Kings most excellent Majesty, who
thereupon was graciously pleased to refer your Petitioners said grieuance to
the consideration of the Lords of his Highness most honorable Privy Council,
unto whom your Petitioners repairing with his Majesty's said gracious
reference, their Honors being busied with more important affairs, had no
leisure to consider thereof, and so did nothing therein.

Wherefore your humble Petitioners being still molested and troubled by virtue
of the said Proclamation if they go with their said Wagons, do most humbly
pray and beseech this honorable Assembly to receive this their Petition into
consideration, and to read their grieuances and allegations hereafter
following, importing both a necessity and conueniencie that Wagons with four
wheels should rather be in use then Carts with two wheels; And to be a means
that the said Proclamation may be called in, and they at liberty to use their
Wagons with four wheels as in former times, not carrying above twenty
hundred weight the six months in the Winter season; And they shall daily pray,
etc.

Their Allegations.
1. First, a Wagon or Drug having four wheels will seldom or never
overthrow (whatsoever his loading be) because when one of the wheels does
rise, the other does incontinently pull him down again, and by that means
the passengers and goods that are therein, and also the Driuer, are in safety.

Where on the contrary, a Cart with two wheels will very often (inevitably)
overthrow, and in overthrowing endanger the lives of the Passengers, if any be
therein, and spoil, hurt and soil the goods, to the loss of the owners
market.

2. A wagon by reason of such his secure travel, does make more speed on the
way then a Cart, and is sooner at his iourneys end, and therefore seldom or
never much benighted.

Where on the contrary a Cart (for fear of being overthrown) cannot make such
speed, and so is enforced to travel late in the night to accomplish his
accustomed iourneys, to the exceeding toil and danger of the Carter.

3. By the convoy of wagons, many Passengers, both men, women and children,
aged, lame and impotent persons are carried to and fro, from place to place, as
their occasions drives them, dry and safe, and that for a small charge, which
otherwise could not ride on horseback, or travel on foot, to the great ease
and benefit of many of the Kings subjects, and profit to your Petitioners the
Waggoners.

Where on the contrary, not any can be so convoyed in Carts, without great
peril and danger of their lives, by reason of overthrowing, whereof there has
been lamentable examples of certain persons killed near Ingerstone, to the
grief of the subject, and loss to the Waggoner.

4. A wagon may be guided by a slight and engine down any steep hill.

Where on the contrary a Cart cannot, and therefore is not fit for travel in
all places.

5. If a wagon be set fast in a mire-pit, the same is with less strength
drawn forth with the motion of four wheels, then a Cart can be with two
wheels.

6. A wagon with four wheels having a load of thirty hundred weight laid
upon the same, will make a lesser cut or impression in the ground then a Cart
with two wheels, having but twenty hundred weight; and the reason is, because
the thirty hundred weight lying upon the four wheels, viz. seven hundred and
a half upon a wheel, and the Carts two wheels bearing ten hundred upon a
wheel, the weight of ten hundred upon a wheel does cut and sink deeper in
the ground then seven hundred and a half.

7. A Cart will be driven and turned aside every way, and so search out and run
over the whole compass of the ways, and often times in turning short, does
make such a slough or cut in the ground, that a load of stones will scarce
fill up the same pit again.

Where on the contrary, a Wagon cannot turn out of the way, but go straight
outright.

8. It is a hinderance to the Waggoner, and almost a double charge to the
Merchant or tradesmen using carriage, that the Waggoner is restrained and
limited by the said Proclamation, that he may not carry no greater loades in
the Summer time, when the ways are impressible, then in the Winter season,
when they are almost impassible.

9. For that since the cessation of Wagons with four wheels, and recourse of
Carts only with two wheels, experience shows it to be true, that the road
ways are never a jot bettered or preserved, but rather worser and impaired:
therefore and for the reasons aforesaid, your Petitioners do humbly pray as
they have prayed.

Lastly, the cause of the foulness and badnesse of the high ways, is not
caused through the recourse of Carts and Wagons, without which the Common
wealth cannot be, but for lack of due amending and repairing in the most
needful places in times convenient.



