ALAE SERAPHICAE The SERAPHINS WINGS to raise us unto heaven.

Delivered in six Sermons, partly at Saint Peter's in Westminster, partly at S.
Aldates in Oxford. 1623.

By JOHN WALL Doctor in Divinity, of Christ-Church in Oxford.

BERNARD Ser. 4. de verbis Esaiae. Qui vna tantum ala volare contendit, quo
magis attollitur, eo peius colliditur.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for ROBERT ALLOT, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Black Bear. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of Lincoln, the Worthy
Deane of Westminster, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, my
very Honorable good Lord and Noble Patron, be multiplied daily favor with GOD
and Men.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IN the vision of Ezechiel, there was rota in rota; One wheel, within another:
my desire is, there may be here, ala in ala; One wing, within another: (or
rather indeed) one wing, upon another: the wings of these Seraphins, within the
wings of your protection: and the wings of your protection, upon the wings of
these Seraphins. For as in the Tabernacle, the faces of the Cherubins, looked
toward the seat of Mercy: So do the faces of these Seraphins, look toward
the Seat and Sea of your Honorable favor and gracious piety. Stories write
of FORTUNE, and VICTORY, that when they came from MACEDONIA, and coasted
toward ROME, they put off their wings, and laid them down, as if they would
go no further. What are these winged tracts and feathered writings, but in the
Prophets phrase, liber volans? In the Poets language, (...)? If once they come
into your Honors presence, they will leave their wings, and seek no other
Patronage. When they first sounded in the air, for the most part, you gave
them audience. Now they first come to the light, vouchsafe them countenance;
and let them ever glory, in his name, that sits like an Angel, in the Church
of God: and does most truly verify, the character of Athanasius; who was said
to be, (...): Of an heavenly, and Angelical presence: of a more heavenly and
Angelical understanding. God forbid, I should dip my pen in oil, or mingle
honey with my sacrifice; as one that would enchant your ears, with the Sirens
language, of demulcent vanities: Church and State, Altars and Tribunals, have
witnessed the Nobility of your Soul, and quit me of that suspicion: whose
diffusiue goodness many have found, and do justly honor. Augustine writes, of
that good Father Ambrose, that his breast was Sanctu^ Dei Oraculum, an heavenly
Oracle, from whence God spoke. There is none almost so ignorant, of your divine
Excellence, but is ready to make the Parallel: and we read of the same Father
in his life by Costerius, that he was never advanced to any government in the
Church, though never so powerful and sublime, quin ampliore dignus haberetur,
but that he seemed worthy of a greater: Such is the worlds opinion of your
rare VVorth, and Senatorian Eminency; though you begin with Hilarion, in Saint
Hierome, Calcare mundi gloriam, To contemn and trample upon the outward Pomp
of humane glory. I have not least reason, though I am least able to do your
Lordship service, and therefore as your favors toward me, have been like the
Graces in Seneca, Virgins, pure, and chaste Virgins; not violated, or
depraved with the least touch, or thought of corruption: So must they be ever
Iuvenes, green and flourishing, lest at any time they die, and perish through
unthankfulness, or oblivion.

It is my wish, that I had some lasting monument, of Art, and Wit; more durable
then brass or marble, to engraue the memory of your Sacred and Divine merits:
that you might not only be chartaceus or parietarius; but Cedrinus and
Marmorarius, or that which comes nearest to eternity. Well may you challenge
the learned pen, since your Diamond-pointed quill taken from some Angels
wing, has given a kind of immortality to the learned, and best of Kings,
our late SOVEREIGN, of most precious and blessed memory. But what can you
expect of him, that is but (...), (as Saint Basil writes of himself) one of
those ancient fisher-mens disciples? All that my Tree bears, is but fruit of
this kind, wherein your Lordship most abounds. Yet am I encouraged by that of
the Epigrammatist, Jupiter Ambrosia satur est, and Nectare viuit:
Nos tamen, exta Ioui, thura, merumque damus.
to wait behind, at your Honors feet, with the poor Oblation of this
worthless mite: and to draw you a while (as Bernard did Eugenius) ab
amplexibus Rahelis, from the care, and exercise of public administrations. If
there be small good in the Tree, there is much in the Bush: and therefore lest
I should be ouer-troublesome, to Moses talking with God in the mount; I end
with Jacobs beneplacitum. The good will of him that dwelt in the bush, rest
upon the top and flower of your sacred and divine Excellence.

Your Lordships most humble devoted Chaplain and Servant in all duty and
thankful observance, JOHN WALL.

CVLTVS ANIMAE, THE Souls Ornament.
TERTVL. de cultu foem. Vestite vos serico probitatis, byssino sanctitatis,
taliter pigmentatae Deum habebitis amatorem.

THE FIRST SERMON.
CANTICLES 8. ver. 6. Set me as a Seal upon thy heart, and as a Signet upon
thine arm.
THough all Scripture be given by inspiration, and is profitable to instruct,
and to reprove, that so the man of God may be perfect in every good work: yet
is there none more suitable with the rest of God's Ark, and the peaceable
condition of his Church, then what is now before me. It is written by Solomon,
a King of peace; it is framed into a song, the voice of peace; it begins with a
Kiss, the sign of peace; it is spent in Love, the bond of peace, it runs upon
him, that is our peace; and has not only made peace our borders, but set at
peace through the blood of his Cross, the things in earth, and the things in
heaven. This peace is most comfortably shadowed forth unto us in the mystical
Dialogue of this Sacred Epithalamie; where under the rine and the bark of
things visible and corporal, we draw near unto the flower and the pith of
that which is invisible and spiritual: for what the Apostle writes of the Law,
(...) the Law is spiritual; that Nyssen extends, to this song: (...), This
song is spiritual, and will not abide we should continue in the outward court
and naked letter, of springs, rivers, gardens, vineyards, breasts, towers,
spices, ointments, or whatsoever may delight the organs of our sense: but
draws us to a higher meaning, agreeable to the Majesty of God, and the divine
sublimitie of his undefiled goodness, till having plucked the veil from off
the face of Moses, we behold with pure eyes the tender bowels of his
unspeakable love, to that Ethiopian Queen, the blackness of our nature; the
sacred Union, and Sacramental coalition, of God and man, Christ and his
Church, in the cords of love, and the bands of mercy, for there is no
similitude able to reach the depth hereof, she will ever be in his sight, he
will ever be in her thoughts, she will be engrauened in the palms of his
hands, he will be placed as the signet of her arm. Shall I tell you the claim
of this interest, it is Love, for that was strong as death, and cruel as the
grave: he spared not his life unto death, but gave it as a ransom for the
sins of many, and sealed it with his blood, crying to her as Galba to his
soldiers: Ego vester vos mihi, I am wholly devoted unto you, you are wholly
devoted unto me: therefore will he be as a seal on her heart, and as a
signet on her arm: (...)

Put me as a seal on thy heart, and as a signet on thy arm: The words of the
Text are as a sacred armorie, where you have a shield for the hand, and a cover
for the heart; or as an heavenly wardrobe, where me thinks I see the cloak
and the ring, which Judah left with Tamar, the ratification and assurance of
spiritual grace, and everlasting holiness, they hold some Analogy with the
offices of state the seal and the signet, here is a seal, a broad seal for
the largeness of our hearts: Put me as a seal on thy heart, here is a signet,
a little signet for the roundnesse of our arms.

As a signet on thine arm. Pauca at salutaria, expedita at sancta, (as we
read in Saluianus) short and holy, few and wholesome, brief in words and
precept, but in sense durable and permanent. That which I shall punctually
distinguish unto you, is first the habit and ornament of the Church, that is,
Christ and his righteousness employed in the affixe of my Text, (...) Put me,
or set me.

Secondly, the Part and the Subject to be adorned, that is, the heart and the
arm: Put me on thy heart, and on thine arm.

Thirdly, the figure and semblance, that is, a seal or a signet. Put me as a
seal on thy heart, and as a signet on thy arm.

Last of all the superinduction, with a (...) in the Original, which is upon,
or the circumposition, with a (...), in the Septuagint which is about. Put me
as a seal on thy heart, and a signet about thine arm. All this is gathered,
and recapitulated in that of Paul to the Romans, Put ye on Christ Jesus, and
take no care for the flesh to satisfy the lusts thereof. But more perfectly in
the same Apostle, to his Corinthians, Ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God, in your bodies, and in your souls: for they are his. He will be
on thy heart, by Faith and Truth, and inward sanctification: he will be on thy
arm, by love, and holiness, and outward manifestation. He will be here, and
he will be there, as a seal, or a signet: that bearing the marks of Christ
Jesus, in our bodies, we may be like those thousands of Israel, who were
sealed in their foreheads: sealed and selected unto the Lord, against the day
of our redemption. Put him on thy heart, for he is the wisdom of God: Put him
on thy arm, for he is the power of God: Put him on thy heart, for he is the
life of thy soul: Put him on thy arm, for he is the strength of thy flesh:
Put him on thy heart, for he is the only begotten Son of God, who lives in
the bosom of his Father: Put him on thy arm, for he is the mighty Redeemer of
the world, that sits on the right hand of God in the glory of the Father:
Put him on thy arm, that he may direct thine actions: Put him on thy heart,
that he may settle thy affections: Put him as a seal, and signet on both, that
he may know thee for his own, and bind thee to himself with an everlasting
covenant. Quid enim prodest, si Deum gestamus in front, and vitia in animo
recondamus? as Saint Augustine has observed, What auailes it to have God in
the forehead, so we treasure up wickedness in the conscience? If he be on thy
heart by study and meditation, he will learn thee knowledge, and make thee
understand the mysteries of his cross, and the righteousness of his kingdom:
If he be on thine arm for practice and imitation, he will order thy goings,
and make thee delight in the way of truth, and the custody of his precepts. If
he be as a seal on the door of thy heart, and the posts of thy arm, thou
shall not only escape the punishment of the destroying Angel: but exalt thy
horn, and triumph with the Lord, and rejoice exceedingly in the power and
glory of his salvation. Thus does God call upon us, but it is for our good and
comfort. There is much pleasure in that we love, though sometime absent: but
then is our joy full, and there is life in it, when that we love is at hand and
present: Therefore will he be in oculis, and in osculis, as the signet of our
arm, for sight and presence; as the seal of our hearts, for delight and
remembrance.

Put me as a seal on thy heart, and as a signet on thine arm. Hitherto we
have looked upon the words of the Text, as so many coins of gold and silver, I
shall now put them in the balance of the Sanctuary, and take their several
value, that so I may proceed to my first observation, Christ and his
righteousness, employed in the affixe of my Text (...) Put me, or set me.

Some play the Critics, and would have the Church to speak unto Christ, not
Christ to the Church, because the affixe is not masculine, but of the seminine
gender: indeed if points and vowels had been equal with the Original, and not
invented after by the Jewish Rabbis, they might deserve hearing: but since it
is otherwise, our safest course is to run with the Fathers, I mean Theodoret,
and the rest, who make Christ the spokesman, and that for himself, (...) Put
me and set me.

Great and wonderful, is the beauty of the creature, such as might bewitch
the heart of man, with the enchanting cup of deceitful vanity: but whether
ye look upon the brightness of the stars, whether ye behold the glory of
the Angels, whether ye consider the treasures of the deep, whether ye admire
the power of the elements, from the center of the earth, to the circle of the
heavens, there is nothing ought to be as a crown to us, save that gracious
light, which shined to Moses in the bush, and sat in the Tabernacle amidst the
golden Cherubins. It is the word of Christ must be as the jewel of our ears,
it is the yoke of Christ, must be as the chain of our necks, it is the faith
of Christ, must be as the girdle of our loins, it is the justice of Christ,
must be as the clothing of our nakedness: his cross our standard, and his
blood our colors. What is the glory and boasting of Christians, but in him
that died for us, in that name which is above every name, in that name, in that
name whereunto we are baptized, and wherein we are blessed? O thou Lord of
hoasts and King of Israel, we adore thy majesty, we honor thy mercy, the
sacrifice of thy flesh, the oblation on the cross, the price of our
redemption, the riches of thy salvation, whereby thou have paid our debt, and
reconciled us to the Father. Therefore says that chosen vessel, God forbid I
should glory in any thing, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: whereby
the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world: If any man preach other
then ye have received, let him be accursed: If any man receive other then we
have preached, let him be accursed. Saint Bernard gives the reason: Alijs rebus
non tam ornati, quam onerati sumus. Other things are more cumbersome then
profitable: it is well if they prove not hurtful and pernicious, like that
fatal habit, which the Turkish Emperors used to cast on those whom they meant
to execute, famously known by the name of deaths mantle, in their stories.
What means that of Christ for himself? Without me ye can do nothing, but in
me ye have life eternal? Or that of Paul against himself, Was Paul crucified
for you, or were ye baptized into the name of Paul? But that we should be
wholly fixed on this object, and drawn from the love, and the service, and the
foolish admiration of every creature. No man likes his friend, should love his
gift better then himself; and shall the Lord be pleased with such, that care
more for his blessing, then for his goodness? I will not say, but that he is
most ready, to loose the bands of Orion, and to power down the sweet
influence of the Pleiades, as so many golden showers in the bosoms of his
servants: yet is it his pleasure, we should set more by his person, then by
his favors. Aurum in arca, Deus in conscientia (says that learned Father
Austin) God in the heart, is like gold in the coffer. Health to thy navel,
marrow to thy bones, cheer on thy table, music in thy feasts, sweetness in
thy pleasures, security in thy honors, store in thy garners, plenty in thy
vineyards, increase and fullness of all thy soul does love, or imagine. Yet
may we delight in the temporal benefits of our spiritual Isaac: the fatness
of the earth, and the dew of heaven, so it be with relation to his glory, Non
ad corruptionem, sed ad consolationem, non ad illigandum sed vtendum, (as Saint
Austin has distinguished it) not to corruption, but to consolation: not to be
entangled with their vanity, but to be refresht with the lawful use of their
supply and virtue. It is not said, he that loves father and mother, is
unworthy of me: But he that loves father, or mother, or brother, or sister,
more then me, is unworthy of me: Neither is it a positive use, but a
comparatiue that is here restrained. Well may the seed of Abraham embrace
riches, and honor, and jurisdiction, and power, and due observance (as it
were) from the sheaues of their brethren, together with the sweet increase of
the Sun, and the sweet increase of the Moon, as a reward of piety, or the
smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed: but if it be more then him, they
are unworthy of him: or if it be not for him, they are unworthy of him: and
therefore says Ambrose, In omnibus istis fragret odor Christi, In all this let
the savor of Christ be fragrant, and his love abound? Yea let it be
predominant, and supereminent, as oil on the top of water: that our water may
be turned into wine, the rainy delights of watery pleasures, into the sweet wine
of true joy, and spiritual gladness. It was the pride of Seneca, and he
boasted much, Vbicunque ago, Demetrium circumfero, that wheresoever he went, he
bare Demetrius with him, O that we could say the like of God! Vbicunque ago,
Deum circumfero, Wheresoever I go, I bear Christ Jesus with me: the secret of
my bosom, is as the house of Zacheus; where he was received with
cheerfulness, and alacrity, it is not a material crucifixe, or a visible
picture, wrought in gold, or framed in silver, but the sweet remembrance of my
blessed Savior, that is ever with me: the print of his love, the example of
his virtue, the image of his goodness, the record of his mercy, all the
miracles that he wrought for my conversion, all the precepts that he gave for
my instruction, all the miseries and indignities that he endured and sustained
for my liberty and salvation: the power of his death, the triumph of his
cross, the glory of his rising, the comfort of his appearing is that which I
bind, as signs upon my arm, and lay as Camphire between my breasts.
Vbicunque ago, Deum circumfero. Wheresoever I go, I bear Christ Jesus with me:
as the lot of mine inheritance, as the crown of my felicity: (...) (says
Alexandrinus) the friend of my bosom, the companion of my study. It is the
light of thy countenance, that was stamped upon us: and it is the light of thy
countenance that must shine within us: if ever we be as the Moon, fair, and
beautiful: Whence shall the image of God, derive her beauty, but from God?
Whence shall the Spouse of Christ, take the ornaments of grace, and
comeliness, but from the treasure of his righteousness? Adultera anima (says
Austin) that soul is wicked, and adulterous, guilty of spiritual
fornication, which embraces the creature, and leaves the Creator. There is no
help for us, but in that fountain, which our Fathers thirsted in the
wilderness. It is with the heart of man, as with the hand of Moses: when he
plucked it out of his bosom, it was foul and leprous, when he put it in, it
was fair and comely. Christ is our bosom, and the cure of our leprosy, the
refuge of his Sanctuary: without him we are foul and leprous, with him
honorable and glorious, sanctified and purged, from the leprosy of sin, and
the filth of iniquities. We read in the Stories of the Church, that when
Antioch was troubled with a lamentable earthquake, Euphremion the Bishop
received an Oracle, that every one should write, Christus nohiscum, Christ be
with us, upon the doors of their houses: which being done, the earthquake
stayed, and the inhabitants were comforted. I know not how true that was, sure
I am, if the faith of Christ be written upon the doors of our hearts, it will
not only stay the fears, and the earthquakes of our weak flesh, and ruinous
habitations: but make strong our bars, and stablish the foundation of that
spiritual building, that new Jerusalem, which came down from heaven, and is
like unto a City that is at unity within it self. Thus you see there is much
ground for a (...) Put me, and that we should rather forsake nets, and ship,
with James and Andrew, yea the whole world, and our selves to boot, then not
to cleave to him, that is aeternum gaudium, the fountain of life, the author
of blessedness, the glory of his Church, the honor of Paradise, the
everlasting joy, and great reward of men and of Angels: that when the Prince of
this world shall come, we may take up the words of our Savior: Venit, sed
nihil inuenit. Indeed he came, but he found nothing in me, John 14. 30. Yet
there be that do more affect (...) then (...), as Nicephorous writes in
history. The image of Caesar, more then of Christ. That which thieves may
steal, and the moathes eat, and the rust consume, more then him that abides
for ever. Others like the Gergasens, drive him out of their coasts, and will
not abide he should come near their houses, if once they see him in his
distressed members, whether blind, or lame, or sick, or naked, they cry with
those Devils in the Gospel. Quid tibi and nobis fili David? What have we to do
with thee o thou Son of David, do thou come to vex us and trouble us
before the time? Yet there he is, and makes profession of it. Esuriui, it is I,
that was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat: it is I, that was athirst, and ye
gave me no drink: it is I, that was naked, and ye did not cloth me: it is I,
that was in prison, and ye did not visit me. Here might I knock at the
consciences of many, and examine what it is they lay to heart. Has not pride
shut Christ out of the heart of the vaineglorious? Has not pleasure shut
Christ out of the heart of the voluptuous? Has not profit shut Christ out of
the heart of the covetous? Has not strife, and envy, and contention, and
division, quite shut him out of the heart of the turbulent and seditious? These
are thy Gods o Israel, which lead thee back into the darkness of Egypt,
Lares and Penates, those Idol gods that set up altars in thy heart and rule in
the temple of thy body. So that Christ may stand at the door, and knock, till
his head be full of dew, and his locks with the drops of the night, there be
few will let him enter, crying as he does in my Text, or rather in the Gospel,
Volucres nidos, and vulpes foueas, the birds have their nests, and the foxes
their holes: but the Son of man has not whereon to lay his head. Yet is
there a double place due to him, the one without, the other within: the one on
the heart, the other on the arm. And so I pass from the ornament, to the
subject, from Christ Jesus the Bishop of our souls, to our hearts the sea, and
palace of his residence.

Put me on thy heart, and put me on thy arm.

(...), (as Nyssen writes in the life of Moses) heart and arm, are
emblematicall, the one of contemplation, the other of action. Both due to God,
and his service, but first he calls for the heart, like wisdom in the
Proverbs. My son give me thy heart. If our heart be the seat of love, what
is God but love? If our heart be the keepers of our treasure, What is God but
our treasure? he lay in the heart of the earth three days when he was abased:
but now he is exalted, let him rest in the earth of our hearts, from day, to
day, and from generation, to generation. Though he be Lord of all, and command
every part, yet there would he set up his throne, and place the septer of his
dominion, as in the Metropolis of his Kingdom. It is fitly resembled to a
Castle, which being taken, and surprised, the whole City is forced to yield:
the understanding her intelligence, the affections her counfellours, the senses
her watchmen, the members her servants: Yet if the Lord do not keep the City,
it is all in vain, and therefore says the Evangelist, Intrauit Jesus in
Castellum. The Lord went into the Castle, or intrabit Jesus in Castellum, the
Lord shall go into the Castle, that salvation may be our walls, and praise our
gates. For if Satan get but footing, all is lost: Jerusalem will be as a heap
of stones, and the abomination of desolation will light upon our City. It was
a controversy between Plato, and Galen, whether the heart, or the brain,
were the seat of life, and motion: but the Church resolves determinately, that
our heart is the receptacle of heavenly grace, and spiritual inspiration. In
the natural man it lives first, and dies last: in the spiritual man it lives
first, and dies last. Let the eye be dark, how great is that darkness? let
the heart be dead, how great is that deadness? a goodman brings forth good
things out of the treasure of his heart; an evil man brings forth evil
things out of the treasure of his heart. For as there is life in the heart: so
out of the heart, proceeds thefts, and murders, fornications, and adulteries,
the 15. and the 19. of Matthew. Be advised then, who it is you place there. If
Christ knock let him not stay, he alone is that fire, which is able to soften
thy heart, though hard as iron, or impenetrable as the adamant, and make it,
like melting wax in the midst of thy bowels. He alone, is that bread, which is
able to fill thy heart, the several Angels of that capacious Trigonum, with
the immensitie of his presence. O let him not stand only in thy forehead by
show, and profession: but call him into thy heart, by faith, and prayer, and
devout acknowledgement, and religious invocation; else are ye like those that
go into the Sun, not for heat, or warmth, but to be seen, and to be
admired: shall he cry to these, Vulnerasti cor meum, thou have wounded my
heart, thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes; and wilt not thou
make answer, Paratum est cor meum, my heart is ready, o God, my heart is
ready? O the true Isaac, and beloved of his Father, this is that dear, and
only beloved son, which he will have thee offer. Alms, mercy, repentance,
charity, instruction, prophecy, contrition, humiliation, or whatsoever we can
perform without a heart, is but as an offering without salt, and makes but an
hateful and prodigious sacrifice. If the Psalmists rejoice, it is in the
innocence of heart. If the Apostle exhort, it is to simplicity of heart. If
the Lord be pleased, it is with uprightness of heart. If the Law be ended, and
the Gospel established, it is in love, from a pure heart and a good
conscience. The end of the Law is love, from a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. I remember God charged the Priest to sanctify
the breast of their shake offering, as well as the shoulder of the heave
offering. That we might see, it is not so much the outward man, as the inward,
wherein he delights, neither is it enough to bear Christ in the head, as
Minerua did Jupiter, unless we bear him in the heart, as Mary did our
Savior. Grauidare potuit, grauare non potuit beatam virginem. He might well
fill her womb with the glory of his flesh, he could not burden her, with
trouble of his presence: How then will they satisfy this demand, that have no
heart unto goodness? The army Philopoemen is likened unto a man, that has
legs and feet, but no belly: because they wanted money, which is the heart of
war: so I fear in the Church militant, there be diverse that have legs, and
feet, but no belly: they have the legs and the feet of outward
conversation, but they want the heart and the belly of inward devotion. Non
vitae sed famae negotiatores, (as Tertul. makes the charachter) such as
negotiate and trade more for a good name, then for a good life: for a good
report, then a good conscience. If the Lord will be on the ear, who so ready
to attend his word, and to call for a Sermon? If the Lord will be on the
tongue, who so forward to confess his name, or to speak of Religion, till
they have turned Sacramentum in sermonem, (as Saluianus speaks) the sacred
use, of his glorious name, into vain babbling, and the foolish contention of
words and trifles. But let him call for the heart, they are quite blanke,
either it is losteth the cares of this world, or sold to work deceit and
wickedness. Thus have they a show of godliness, but deny the power thereof,
like fiddlers, that are more careful in tuning their instruments, then in
tuning their lives: their tongues are their instruments, if they be in tune,
and the strings thereof well set, to fair language and glozing hypocrisy, all
is well: they have done their parts, and duty, I know not whether I may say
they have no heart, or a double heart, (...) as Hebricians use to speak, a
heart, and a heart, one for Christ, another for Belial, one for God, another
for the Devil. Sure I am, they are cardiaci, and fall under the curse, the
wise man has denounced, Vae duplici cordi, Woe to the double heart, for the
Lord will not part stakes with any, neither has righteousness any
communication with unrighteousness. They are not many hearts, but one, that he
desires, howbeit the conditions thereof be diverse. For it must be a new
heart, and a clean heart, and a sound heart, and a broken heart, renewed by
his word, cleansed in his blood, sound by the truth of doctrine, broken by the
contrition of spirit, else will he forsake the tabernacle of our body, and
abhor both heart and arm, which is the second receptacle of our Savior.

Put me upon thy arm.

For though Love precede Faith in order of perfection, yet Faith precedes Love
in order of generation; did the Prophet begin to speak before the heart waxt
hot, and the fire was kindled in his breast? First believe with thy heart, then
confess with thy mouth, yet so that heart, and mouth, and hand, and arm, may
go together. Good works joined to Faith, are as a strong building on a good
foundation: the building of gold, and silver, upon that ground which is laid of
old, I mean Christ Jesus. Mary had no sooner borne Christ in her womb, and
presented him in the Temple, but Simeon takes him in his arms, and embraces
him joyfully. For we must not be ashamed of our profession, but carry the
ensign of our Savior openly before us, that so the virtue, and the patience,
and the meekness, and the obedience of Christ Jesus, may be found in every
part; but chiefly in our actions. Christ on the heart, is like seed on the
earth: Christ on the arm, is like corn on the ear. Christ on the heart, like
a tree planted by the rivers of water: Christ on the arm, like a tree bringing
fruit in time of Autumn, and therefore true Religion, and undefiled before
God, is practical, and operative, in the works of mercy: To visit the
fatherless, and widows in adversity: and to keep our selves unspotted of
the world. If our lips drop honey, by the preaching of his word, and the
sweetness of his doctrine it is good and commendable, but if our hands drop
myrh, by the crucifying of him, and the mortification of our earthly members by
the obedience of Christ, and the perfect imitation of Christian holiness, it
is most comfortable and heavenly. There be that follow the paths of Christ, and
(to use the words of Saluianus) Patentiora faciunt Domini vestigia, they make
the footsteps of our Savior more plain and easy, by the example of their
virtue, and the evidence of their bounty. These be they which bear him in
their arms, and carry him as a lamp burning in their hands for the benefit
of others. Do men gather figs of thorns, or grapes of thistles? Ye shall know
them by their fruit. And as Christ said of himself, interrogate opera, ask
my works, for they speak of me: so may we say of them, interrogate opera,
ask their works, for they speak of them, look not on the face, regard not
the voice, they may have the voice of Jacob, but the hands of Esau: enquire of
their works, they bear witness of them, and are the surest marks of every
Christian. Auditur cum videtur says Tertullian, A good Philosopher is best
heard, when he is seen; and a true Christian best known, by the glass of
his life, and the president of his actions. It is a good resemblance that
ancient Father used in his Moralls. Alis feriunt, vbi opera ostendunt. The
works of the Saints, are as the wings of the Cherubins that touch one another:
for as they smite one another by their wings: so we excite one another by our
works, and provoke (as it were) to godliness of living, remember then (I
beseech you) the end of your vocation, that ye are the workmanship of God,
created in Christ Jesus to good works: That he gave his life for you, to the
end you might be a peculiar to himself, zealous of good works: die unto
sin, live unto righteousness, cast of the works of darkness, put on the
armor of light, that ye may be worthy of the Gospel of Christ, and the
doctrine of our Savior in all things may be honored. Ye are they, of whom the
Apostle does travel in birth, that Christ may be formed in you, and you
transformed into him, as well in arm as in heart, as well in body as in
spirit. O let it never be said of these blessed arms, the arms of your
works, as Milo said of his arms, the arms of his flesh, Hi mortui sunt, they
are dead, and there is no life in them. But let the power, and the courage, and
the vigor, and the Spirit of Christ Jesus, quicken and make ye vigetatiue in
all goodness. Anatomists do observe, there is a vein runs from the heart to
the arm, and bounds on the finger, where the ring is worn, if Christ be our
ring and seal, he must be so on the arm, that he leave not the heart, so on
the heart, that he reach unto the arm, for direction of faith and manners.
Here might I call heaven and earth to record, and witness before God and his
Angels, how injuriously we are traduced, to despise the Law, and not to care
for the decalogue, to rely upon a naked faith, without the fruit of holiness,
or the observation of his precepts. Oh thou which bindest thy words, as signs
upon our arms, and as frontlets between our eyes, plead our cause, and
vindicate us from this calumny: tell these men, thou art not only as a seal
upon our hearts, by the knowledge of thy truth, but as a signet upon our arms,
by the conformity of life, and the exercise of holiness. And so I hasten to
the seal, and closure of discourse: which is the form and semblance, and that
is a seal or a signet.

Put me as a seal, and a signet. Well may he be termed a seal, that is, the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and the engraven form of his substance, but
that which is here a seal or a signet, is only (...) in the Original. A
ring, or a seal, that as we have borne the image of the earthly, so we may
bear the image of the heavenly, by similitude and conformity to our Savior:
whether in his obedience and his righteousness, or in his patience and his
sufferings. For as no silver is current, unless it bear the image and
superscription of the Emperor: so there is nothing available before God,
without the stamp of his Son, and the character of our Savior. Thoughts,
vows, meditations, prayers, intentions, actions, are but vain and frivolous,
and will never be able to purchase heaven, unless they be sealed in Christ,
and the assurance of his mercy: in whom all the promises of God, are yea and
Amen.

This made the Church in her Liturgy, seal up her petitions in the name and
mediation of Christ Jesus: in all her supplications, and intercessions, she
does adjure God, and bind him (as it were) by this seal, Per Iesum Christum
Dominum nostrum, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, through Jesus Christ our only
mediator and redeemer. I will not draw my Text to the Cross in Baptism,
because it is not said, he will be a seal, but as a seal, and there is a good
meaning of that in Saint Austin, Deus amat signorum suorum factores, non
pictores: Yet let me tell the turbulent Schismaticke, and factious Noualist,
that it is an ancient Ceremony, derived from the Primitive Church, grounded
upon reason, and observation. For what is the sign of Christ, but the Cross
of our Savior, are not the Sacraments of God, the seals of God? wherein we
are sealed and confirmed, by the arrabon and witness of his Spirit? As the
doors and threshold were signed with the blood of the Paschall Lamb: so it is
the blood of Christ, our true Passover, that does seal both our hearts, and
foreheads; I do not say with Austin, Repellit exterminatorem, si Christu^
inueniat habitatorem, Though in his 50. Tract upon John, it be twice repeated,
within the space of six lines. Yet let me borrow so much from that learned
Father, Nihil olim in carne intolerabilius, nihil modo in front gloriosius.
Heretofore there was nothing more bloody, and intolerable to the renting of
our flesh, and the tearing of our bodies: Now there is nothing more glorious,
and honorable, to the acknowledgement of faith, and the beautifying of our
foreheads. But what means the seal of my Text? And why is he desirous to be
as a signet? Take it actiuely, take it passiuely, for the impression that is
made, or the seal and ring, that makes the impression, it is diversely used,
and has many singular effects, Ad custodiam, ad notificationem, ad gratiam, ad
confirmationem: For beauty and exornation, that his glory may shine in us,
for distinction and notification, that we might be known from strangers, for
custody and preservation, that nothing go in nor out to annoy and hurt us. For
assurance and confirmation, that we be not drawn from God, or relinquish the
truth of our profession. Thus are we become as an enclosed garden, or a
fountain sealed up, like that Eastgate in Ezechiels Sanctuary, which was shut
and might not be opened, lest any should enter. Open locks tempt thieves: but
that which is sealed remains inuiolate. So if Faith, and Truth, and hope, and
joy, and the graces of the Spirit, and the mysteries of our salvation, be not
sealed in Christ, they may be stolen from our hearts, and become a prey to the
enemy. But if they lie under this seal, they are fast and sure: No heresy, no
vanity, no cruelty, nor policy, shall be able to rob and spoil us of our
glory. Well may Satan come in, like a thief by the windows, and enter
through the passages of our sense: if once he epsy this seal upon the heart,
he will recoyle, and fly back. It is a strong munition, able to repulse, and
exterminate all the devils in hell, though multiplied and banded in troops and
legions. Now we have the force of the Original, and the emphasis of
Septuagint, the one upon, the other about, he will be upon our hearts to
suppress the evil that is within, and to prevent the danger that is without,
he will be about the arm, that we may be environed on every side, and secured
from the inrode of spiritual wickedness. Should I distinctly prosecute the
several virtues of this seal, you might call for a seal unto my lips: and
therefore I labor to be short. Yet is there one meaning of this Emblem, which
I may not forget, and that is love, and honor, with a dear respect, and most
precious estimation. Consider that of Jeremy, If he were as the seal of my
right hand, yet would I pluck him thence. Remember that of Haggai, I will make
him as the signet of mine arm, because I have chosen him: what does this
sound, but of grace and favor? It is the seal of our ring, and the image of
our friend, whereof we are proud and boast.

Ventilat aestiuum digitis sudantibus aurum: Thus will he be as the seal of
our hand, or as the gemme of our finger, that he may be held more dear and
precious, then thousands of gold and silver: For what is more sweet, what more
pleasing, what more glorious, what more honorable, then Christ Jesus? at whose
beauty, the Sun and the Moon are abashed, on whose face the Angels look
with admiration, and astonishment. His power made us, the power of his
Godhead: his weakness saved us, the weakness of his manhood. Therefore may
he justly set his mark upon us, yet is it not the rubie, or the chrysolite, or
the saphir, or the diamond, or any other precious stone, that he would stock
and graft in us, but himself, the image of himself, more dear and precious,
then all the world beside. O that we did esteem him as a rich pearl, or
jewel of great price, and incomparable value, and not only so, but in this
imitate Cleopatra, put him into our draft, and traiect him into our bowels,
with the hunger and thirst of righteousness. We know the zeal of that Theban
Captain, when being brought into the camp half dead, he asked whether his
shield were taken by the enemy, as if nothing else were to be regarded; and
when he found it safe, he began to kiss it and revive again: Such ought to be
our zeal toward Christ, the shield of our defense, and the seal of our
redemption. What is the Church but as a garden? What are we but as spiritual
Bees? O let us suck the flowers, and draw the sweetness, and never rest, till
we have made a hiue of our souls and bodies: that our hearts may be as wax,
softened, and mollified, for the impression of this seal, and nothing but
this, I mean, Christ Jesus and him crucified. The place he chooses for
himself, is the heart, by faith and confidence: the arm, by love, and
charitable operations: and that as a seal, or a signet, for esteem and
dignity. Let me therefore once more beseech you, that you would all be keepers
of this seal, without which nothing is to be held: but chiefly the house of
Aaron and the Tribe of Levy, whether God has placed us, as the signet of his
arm, judge you, there is peace within our walls, and plenteousnesse within our
palaces, we sit under our vines, and our figtrees, and there is none to make us
afraid: our sons grow up as young plants, and our daughters as the polisht
corners of the Temple: our garners abound; and are full of all manner of store,
our sheep bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our folds: our oxen are
strong to labor, and there is no decay, no leading captive, no complaining in
our streets. Thus has he put us, as the seal of his heart, and as the signet
of his arm, by the care of his love, and the tenderness of his affection. Not
to do the like with him, and to answer love by love, were great inhumanity,
wonderful impiety: he does not so with other Nations, he rather makes them
as a mark to shoot at in the fierceness of his displeasure: but let us never
forget his abundant loving kindness, crying with Saint Bernard, Sufficit amor
Christi, the love of Christ suffices, in him alone we are rich, and have
enough: he is very sweet and delectable, the rest of our labor, the stay of
our pilgrimage, the comfort of our heaviness, the pledge of blessedness. That
as now we are as the seal of his left hand, by temporal favors: so hereafter
we may be as the seal of his right hand, by his everlasting mercies. Which the
Lord grant, for the merits of his Son, to whom with the Spirit, three
persons, and one God, be honor, and glory, power, and majesty, this day and
for ever. Amen.

Triumphus CHRISTI: Christ's Triumph.
AVG. Ser. de Temp. Didicit coelum portare hominem, and sub pedibus Christi,
famulantia aethera iacuerunt.

THE SECOND SERMON.
PSALM. 45. 5. Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on, for the word of
truth, and meekness, and righteousness.
CHrist is the end of the Law (says the Apostle) yea and of the figures, and
of the Ceremonies: toward him they all look, from him they receive their
accomplishment and perfection. He is the Moses that shows us the true God, and
teaches us his Law: He is the Joshua that destroys our enemies, and brings
us unto Canaan: He the David, that smote Goliath: He the Solomon, that built a
temple, a temple (I say) not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.
Where then shall I go for the meaning of these words? but to that universal
center, of every line within this sacred volume? Non recedamus a lapide
angulari (says Austin) There is no departing from the corner stone, unless we
mean to loose our way. Christ is the landmark, and boundary of this and other
prophesies; what though David write unto the King, or speak of his son? It
is the beloved Son of God, that lies in the bosom of the Father, that is
the subject of his prediction: Thus does one wheel, run within another, as in
the vision of Ezechiel, Christ in Solomon, and grace in Christ: for what the
Apostles saw in the flesh, the Prophets behold in the spirit, and if ever David
were the pen of another, moved by the holy Ghost, and set a work by the
finger of that eternal Majesty, to write, and speak, not after the will of
man, but after the will of God, it is now: whilst under the shadow of terms
indefinit, he proclaims honor, and felicity, with the flourishing increase
of triumphant exaltation to the Lord, and to his anointed: and that for his
words sake, that Evangelical word, the word of the Gospel.

Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on, for the word of truth, and of
meekness, and of righteousness.

Refer my Text to Solomon, you have a been diction, refer it unto Christ,
you have a prediction; it wishes well to Solomon, and there it is Oration: it
speaks well of Christ, and there it is Oraculum: Not showing what he would
have done, but what should be done, by the rod of his power, and the scepter of
his Dominion. Good luck have thou with thine honor: What then do you observe
in the land-scope of these words: But the dew of Hermon, lying upon the hill of
Sion, honor attended with felicity, the promise of felicity, as the dew of
Hermon: the sublimitie of honor as the hill of Sion.

Good luck have thou with thine honor, Or rather if you please a golden
branch, on the top of Libanus, the flower and the leaf thereof, is honor; the
fruit and sweetness, is felicity: Good luck have thou with thine honor.

The expansion, and stretching forth, is increase.

Ride on with thine honor.

The root and body, is (...) a word of truth.

Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on, for the word of truth, and of
meekness, and of righteousness.

O the blessed foundation, whereon the Apostle builds gold, and silver, and
precious stones, honor and felicity, with the joyful succession of
victorious power, and royal sovereignty. It is a word of truth, and confirms
his promises, it is a word of meekness, and prays for his enemies, it is a
word of righteousness, and iustifies his servants. He was crowned with honor
in the work of our redemption, he was advanced to ride on, for the
consummation of our glory. There we find his patience, here we find his
perseverance, every where the oil of joy, and of gladness: whereupon says
Bernard, Nemo saluus, quanto minus saluator. There is none can be saved, much
less a Savior, without the constancy of perseverance. Good luck have thou
with thine honor, and ride on:

Good luck have thou with thine honor, and begin what thou have to do.

Ride on with thine honor: and finish what thou have began. It is thy promise
that does bind thee, and thy word that does excite thee, a word of truth that
shows us thy precepts, a word of meekness that forgiues our iniquities, a
word of righteousness that purifies the conscience.

Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on, for the word of truth, and of
meekness, and of righteousness.

These are the drops of rain from above, which I desire may fall gently into
yoursoules, as into a fleece of wool, with facility of patience, and
humility of devotion. Good luck have you in hearing, good luck have I in
speaking, from him that rides on the circle of the heavens, and is now drawn
throughout the whole world on the four Evangelists, that triumphant chariot,
the chariot of the Gospel. And so I begin with my first observation, and take
the Omen of my text, Fortunam Domini cantare and nobile regnum. (...) Good
luck have thou with thine honor. That inscription of (...) or good fortune,
which Demosthenes bare on his shield, Christ bore in his cradle, and the star
that shined at his birth, was auspicious through the whole course of his life,
it brought him to honor, it kept him in honor, and made him triumph
gloriously, over the whole power of the enemy, for what is the magnificence of
humane greatness, without the assurance of divine goodness, but (as Saluianus
notes) Sine medulla corpus, as flesh with our life, or bones without marrow:
Many refuse to be great, none to be fortunate. Mark the speech of Bajazet the
fourth, when his son was taken captive, and one of his chiefest Cities
ransackt by the enemy, he enuies the condition of a heard, and his discontent
breaks forth as lightning. O happy sheep heard; that have neither Orthobules
nor Sebastia to loose. And therefore I the less marvel what Saint Austin
notes among the Romans, that when they built temples on to their Images, and
deified their several powers, they all give place to Felicity as Queen and
Empress among the gods of the Nations, and Idols of the heathen: for it is the
dew of heavenly grace and celestial benediction, that must crown and
establish not only the labors, and designs, of man's wit, and humane
invention: but the highest aduancements, and greatest preferments we can
sustain. You may compare it to that silver cup, which Joseph put into the
mouth of Beniamins sack, all the sons of Jacob returned laden from Egypt,
with come and money in their sacks: only Benjamin had the cup, as a singular
pledge of his brothers favor. And though many rejoice for the corn and the
wine, and the oil that has increast, yet this grace cup, whether you term it
scyphum gratiae a cup of grace, with Ambrose, ore calicem benedictionis, a cup
of blessing, with the Apostle, this silver cup, this grace cup, is still kept
for Benjamin, the sons of God, and the children of his right hand, that grow
and flourish, under the wing and shadow of his protection. Great was the honor
of Christ, in regard of his threefold unction, he was anointed as a Prophet,
and spoke as never man did; he was anointed as a Priest, and laid the holo
caust of his body upon the altar of his cross: he was anointed as a King,
and now sits regnant on the hill of Sion, the house of Jacob, the throne of
David, having received all power, both in heaven and earth by donation from the
Father. Yea says Bernard, Pretiosi magis panni saluatoris: The robes of Kings,
are not to be compared with the rags of Christ: nor the throne of Princes,
with the cross of our Savior. There is more honor in the nails of his
cross, then in the pearls of their crowns, that manage the scepters of
diverse Nations, and mighty kingdoms. But whether his arm be full of strength,
or his lips be full of grace, or his soul be full of knowledge, or his flesh
be full of glory, the ground is taken from the Prophet, Quia Deus in eternum
benedixit: Because God has blessed him for ever. Full of grace are thy lips,
because God has blessed thee for ever. And therefore let us beseech our
heavenly Father, as the daughter of Caleb did her earthly father, that he would
give unto us, the springs above, as well as the springs beneath, that irriguum
inferius, of humane grace, and temporal happiness: that irriguum superius, of
divine grace, and spiritual blessedness: wrestling with God as Jacob with the
Angel, till he bless us, and make a union of that double character, Traiano
melior, Augusto foelicior: the virtue of Traian, with the fortune of Augustus,
Non te demittam nisi benedixeris, I will not let thee go except thou bless me.
Yet let me not confine the honor of Christ, to any particulars, when he was
lifted on a throne, the whole Temple was full of his glory, and if we desire
to comprehend with all Saints what is the length, and the breadth, the height,
and the depth thereof, we must take the wings of the morning, and fly to the
uttermost parts of the earth, the height reaches up to the clouds, the depth
pearceth below the center, the length stretches from one generation to
another, the breadth extends from the river to the sea, and from the sea to the
worlds end. But that which is here chiefly intended is military, and
Thriambeuticall, like that of Knighthood and chiualry, got (as if it were) in
the field, by the strength of his arm, and the power of his own right hand,
the triumphant honor of his glorious victory over death, hell, world, and the
devil. When he was lifted from the earth, and drew all things unto him, when
he entered the strong man's house, and took away his prisoners, and smote
Goliath, with his own sword, and delivered the prey from the jaws of the
enemy: when he destroyed the kingdom of Satan, and bare away those gates of
brass upon his shoulders, and trod the wine press, and came victoriously
from Edom, with his garments red from Bozrah, leaving this encouragement to all
posterity (...) be of good cheer, (my friends) I have overcome the world.
Beloved Christians that stand in the Courts of Jerusalem, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to admire his glory: What greater honor then to
smite his enemies on the cheek bone, and to drown Pharoh and his chariots in
the sea? To cast the Dragon and his Angels into the bottomless pit of
Cimmerian darkness, and everlasting destruction? To save Israel, to pass
Jordan with the staff of his cross, to redeem Sion, and with a few drops of
blood to purge the whole earth, and to bind up the fractures thereof. Yea
says that good Bishop of Nazianzum, (...) as runnet curdles milk, so does the
blood of Christ unite and conioyne, and cement, and coagulate (as it were) the
whole company of Gods elect, in one fellowship and communion, to the praise of
the glory of his grace. This is it that does magnify the Lord, that heaven is
not able to contain him: before the triumph of his cross, he might have been
held in a stable or a manger: but now heaven must be enlarged, and the gates
thereof set wide open for the entrance of his glory. Lift up your heads, o ye
gates, and be ye lift up, o ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory
shall come in. Who is able to express the wonderful celebrity of his
magnificent greatness? There is a voice heard, and the Saints of God are
converted by the trumpet of his word; to come forth and behold the solemn
coronation of his victorious majesty. Egredimini filiae Sion, Come forth ye
daughters of Sion, and behold King Solomon in his crown, It was a crown,
though it were of thorns, when he made the cross his throne, and a reed his
scepter; Egredimini filiae Sion, Come forth ye daughters of Sion, and behold
King Solomon in his crown. O let not those dead flies of Jewish infidelity
corrupt the sweetness of this precious ointment, or taint the savor of his
incomparable glory. Mused blasphemy (says Bernard) these dead flies are
blasphemous obloquies of heathens and infidels, that stumble at the weakness
of his flesh, and are scandalized with the humility of his passion, that tread
under foot the blood of his cross, and insult over the misery of his
voluntary sufferings, much like Tiberius in Sueton, Qui Germanici facta
eleuabat, that snarled at the greatness of Germanicus, and traduced his noble
acts as vain and frivolous: Whereas we know Christ's honor is great in our
salvation, and that whatsoever he endured was but dispensatiue, as when one man
goes down into a pit, that he may help another out, or a Physician tastes a
potion, that he may temper it for the sick: by the greatness of his love, and
the bowels of his compassion. What then shall I say, but as the Apostle does,
our uncomely parts have more comeliness on: neither are we ashamed of our
God, though he were crucified, that was his glory, and will be our felicity.
O Lord if thy shame be glorious, what is thy glory? How shall we be advanced
by the strength of thy power, that are so dignified by the weakness of thy
sufferings? It is the honor of Christ to save us: let it be the honor of
Christians to serve him. Yea and (as Basil speaks) (...) the very top and
crown of our glory and rejoicing. When the wise men brought myrrh, they knew
he should die like a man; but when they brought incense, they knew he was to
be honored as a God. Take heed then (I beseech you) lest at any time the
weakness of his manhood abolish that honor which is due unto his Godhead. If
yet it be obscure, he will proceed and ride on, by the declaration of his
power, and the amplification of his kingdom: which is the second thing that is
here promised of our Savior: (...) Ride on, for the word of truth.

He rode on the cloud of his flesh, when he came into the world, he shall ride
on the clouds of heaven, when he comes to judgment: He rode on an Ass, the
emblem of meekness, when he went to Jerusalem, whether he do so in the host,
when he is carried aloft by sacrificing Priests and ridiculous shauelings, be
ye Judges. John in the Apocalypse speaks of a white horse, the purity of his
righteousness, and of a red horse, the severity of his justice, he fits the
one, in the long animitie of patience: he fits the other, in the execution of
his vengeance. Sometimes he rides upon the Church, for she is likened to a
troop of horses, in the chariots of Pharoh: sometimes on the Cherubins, for
there he is advanced by the excellency of their knowledge. But if ever he
sat upon a colt, it was when the Disciples spread their garments, that we
might be sure he will not abide the skittish wildness and untamed perverseness
of our depraved nature and coltish dispositions: unless we cloth our souls
with the precious robes of divine grace, and Apostolical holiness. Yet in all
this he neither rides back, or round: back with the Apostate, or round in the
mill of professed wickedness or resolved impiety: or in the maze of
inextricable thoughts, or confused distractions. His motion is directly
progessiue, as a Giant in his course, or a Bridegroom from his chambers. (...)
Ride on for the word of truth, till thy horses get the hill, and thy Chariots
bring salvation: nay till thou have placed the Kings daughter in a vesture of
gold at thy right hand, and made her as a Queen Paramount, with the Sun over
her head, and the Moon under her feet, this is well employed in the Chalde
paraphrase, (...) upon the throne of Majesty, and the horses of thy kingdom:
which the Septuagint reads, (...), rule, and have Dominion, be exalted and
take unto thy self the royalties of a King. For it is not enough that Christ
should purchase an heritage with his blood, unless he bring it unto glory.
The stone which Daniel saw cut without hands, did not only break the image of
gold, and of silver, and of iron, and of clay: but proved a great mountain,
and filled the earth with the immensitie of its presence. So is it with the
power of Christ, he must not only bruise the Nations of the earth with a rod
of iron: or say with the Prophet, Judah is my lawgiuer, Moab is my washpot,
over Edom will I cast my shoe, over the Philistims will I triumph: But he must
erect a kingdom of his own, and spread his banner over it, till he make the
beauty thereof as Carmel, and the glory thereof as Lebanon. If he be risen
from death, he must ascend on high, if he be gone on high, he must pour forth
his Spirit, that he may direct and govern, protect and advance his Church,
above the crown of pride and the malice of the adversary, Praeclare
administrans quod facile est adeptus, managing that with honor and dignity
which he got with power and facility. These are the steps and degrees of his
royal pace and maiesticke procession, whilst he comes leaping over the hills,
and skipping over the mountains, from mount Tabor, where he was transfigured
to mount Caluarie, where he was crucified from mount Caluarie, where he was
crucified to mount Oliuet, where he was exalted from mount Oliuet, where he was
exalted to mount Sion, where he lives and reigns for ever: till he descend and
come down to the veil of Iosaphat, with the voice of an Archangell and trumpe
of God, there to purge his floor, and to burn up the chafe with fire
unquenchable. But how does Christ ride on, if we be at a stand, are not we his
seed? are not we his members, the Magistrate his hand, armed with the sword of
Justice, the Minister his foot, shod with the Gospel of peace, yea and his
eye enlightened with the beams of knowledge, and his tongue purged with coals
from the altar? Nay we are all members of that body whereof Christ Jesus is
the head, and may not say with John, Oportet illum crescere, he must increase,
we must decrease: He must increase, that we may increase, his increase our
increase, his righteousness our righteousness: and therefore let us ride on,
and never stay till we come before the Lord in the hill of Sion; standing
waters gathere filth and stench: running brooks are sweet and pleasant.
Abhor the one, resemble the other: till we all meet and join with that
Crystal river, whose living waters issue from the throne of God, Apocalypse
the last and the first. In the Law there was Cauda sacrificij, and the Lord
will not be pleased unless he have the rumpe as well as the fat of the burnt
offering, which is a continual proceeding in the works of holiness. When the
kine bare the Arc toward Bethshemesh, which signifies the habitation of the
Sun, they lowed as they went, and yet they went on: we all bear the Arc of
truth in our breasts, and our way lies toward heaven the sanctuary of God, and
the blessed habitation of the Son of righteousness: well may we low and
groan under the burden of our cross, and the cross of our afflictions for
these are the Symptoms of humane frailty and natural infirmities, but if we
go not on, wear inferior to these kine, and not to be compared with the
unreasonable creature. There is a threefold proficiencie, which Saint Bernard
commends unto us, under the similitude of a kiss. The first is Osculum pedis,
the kiss of the foot, when the soul of man does kiss the foot of Christ
and lies prostrate before him in humility and devotion: the second is Osculum
manus, a kiss of the hand, when the soul of man does kiss the hand of
Christ, and is taken up by him, that he may exercise the works of charity, and
the deeds of mercy: the third is Osculum oris, a kiss of the lips, when the
soul of man does kiss the lips of Christ, and enjoy the sweetness of his
presence, by the inspiration of his love, and the contemplation of his glory,
running daily forward in the savor of his ointments; Ille in plenitudine, nos
in odore, as Saint Bernard, he in his fullness of grace and mercy: we in the
odor of life and safety. Beloved, I could wish that nothing could stay the
course of this proceeding: whether it be actus diuturnitas, or obiecti
difficultas, (as the Schools distinguish) the hardness and toughness of the
thing we are to do, the irkesomenesse and tediousness of the space we are to
endure. But that we hasten and ride on with cheerfulness and alacrity, to
that which is set before us, Per saxa, per ignes, or rather as the Apostle
notes, Through a good report, and an evil report, looking toward Christ the
Author and finisher of our redemption.

I know not whether I may use the words of Hierome, Per calcatum patrem ad
vexillum crucis euola, Let thy children hang about thy neck, and thy wife
entreat thee with disheauilled hair, let thy father lie sprawling in the way,
and thy mother show the breasts that gave thee suck, tread upon the womb that
bare thee, be not moved with the tears of her that lies in thy bosom, fly
amayne to the standard of the cross, and let nothing hold thee from the kisses
of thy Savior, the spitituall embracings of thy sweetest love Christ Jesus.
Perhaps ye will cry with the Disciples, Durus est hic sermo, this is a hard
saying, and comes near the apathie of Stoics. Yet God knows and my
conscience bears me witness how I long for your perfection: that ye proceed
in all virtue and godliness of living: that ye ride on, having your loins
girt like the Son of man, whose paps were girt with a girdle of gold, that ye
prove, (as it is said of Job) Magni inter orientales, Great amongst the
inhabitants of the East: not the inhabitants of the West, but the inhabitants
of the East, what is that? but as the moralizing Father does interpret,
interchoros superorum, among those that shine and rise as the stars of the
morning in the light of truth, and the beauty of holiness. There is a fiery
chariot where Elias sat, the chariot of love and mercy, ride on there. There
is a stately chariot where the Eunuch sat, the chariot of contemplation and
study, ride on there. As for the chariots of Pharaoh drawn with pride and
vanity, and those wild horses of unbridled passions and intemperate fury,
they are very dangerous, not to be kept with us, if any sit there, it is worse
then if they were bound to Ixions wheel.

O my brethren, have we not the Church as an arc, or a throne? have we not
Christ as a guide or a ruler? have we not the word of truth, and of meekness,
and of righteousness, as a teame to lead and draw us to everlasting
blessedness? Have we not the reigns of love, the bridle of peace, the
scourge and the whip of government and discipline, Cuius flagello exterminatur
mundi istius princeps, At whose lash the Prince of this world does scud, and
the vanities thereof are driven quite away? Why do not we ascend and ride on
here? (...) upon the word of truth, and of meekness, and of righteousness:
for so many read the text, or (...) for the word of truth, and of meekness,
and of righteousness, which is most genuine and agreeable to the original,
and so I pass to the ground of all that has been spoken, and that is (...)
the word of truth, and of meekness, and of righteousness.

It is not the adventure, but the motive, not the danger, but the reason that
dignifies our actions. If we labor for the word of deceit and iniquity, it
will neither prove honorable nor fortunate; the expedition of Christians, is
like that of Gideons soldiers, for the Lord, and for Gideon: for the word, and
for Jesus, for the maintenance of truth and the preservation of righteous
dealing. What though we break the pitchers of our bodies in the painful
conflict of this our spiritual warfare? There is no loss so we keep our
lamps burning, and make the light thereof shine as it were a candle in a dark
place: did not Paul so? and the holy men of old? I could lead you to that
noble army of heavenly Martyrs, that wash their garments in the blood of the
Lamb, and now stand about the throne of God with crowns on their heads and
palms in their hands. Though I know the encounter of my text, is not outward
and temporal, but inward and spiritual: Yet let me call to mind one exploit
for the word of truth, when these generous Argonauts were transported to the
City of the great King for the honor of God, and the liberty of his
servants. France, Germany, Denmark, Italy, with this our mother Island sent
forth their strength, and were moved with zeal toward the house of God, and
the place of his Sanctuary. The greatest Princes and most heroical worthies
of this European clime, engaged their lives, their persons, their honors, their
fortunes, to redeem Sion and to recover Jerusalem from the miserable bondage
of Turkish slavery. Beloved, the remembrance hereof is as fire within my
bones, and I must needs recount with exceeding joy and exultancie of spirit,
how they rode on for the word of truth, as the Knights of Rhodes or of Malta,
till their right hand showed them terrible things, and never left before they
had hewne the enemies of God in pieces, and crowned themselves with honor and
renown. The stars from heaven in their order fought against that man of sin,
and every Christian took up that song of Deborah, Thou have marched valiantly
o my soul, thou have marched valiantly, the Lord grant that we may still
prevail against Amalek, by the inviolable faith of Christian Princes, that
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and ride on daily for the
word of truth, and of meekness, and of righteousness.

For its sake, and by its power, for it is the only prop that bears up the
thrones of Princes, and makes their crowns flourish.

Ferrum tuetur Principes, melius fides, The munition of arms does well, the
arms of faith do better: Whereupon said Nestorius the Bishop to Theodosius
the Emperor in the seventh book of Socrates, Tuin profligandis, etc. Do thou
see Gentilisme and impiety, do not annoy the Church and we will see violence
and hostility do not hurt thee: agreeable to that of Solomon, mercy and truth
preserve the King, and his throne is establish by justice. I will not argue the
translation, yet let me tell you the original is (...) not for the word of
truth, and of meekness, and of righteousness: but for the word of truth, and
the meekenes of righteousness, for the word of truth there is the Law, for the
meekness of righteousness there is the Gospel. The one as the Court of
Justice, the other as the Court of Chancery, that qualifies and mittigates the
rigor of the former; yet what is the word of truth, but the word of Christ? He
is truth, and in him are the figures verified, what is the meekness of
righteousness, but the meekness of Christ? He is righteousness, and in him
we are all justified: though he be true and just, it is not without the spirit
of clemency, and of meekness; that ye know is inseparable from a Lamb, and
must needs adhere to the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world. If he that walked in the midst of the golden candlestickes, had eyes
like fire, the head and the hair were as snow, or as wool. It was not wine
alone, nor oil alone, which that good Samaritane poured into the hurt of the
wounded, neither was God in the fire, nor in the earthquake, nor in the wind,
that brake the rocks and tare the mountains; but in the still and soft voice
which is more powerful then all the force of Periclean lightning, and
Pannicall execrations. I remember in Plutarch, a conspiracy between the Wind
and the Sun, which should take away the travelers cloak: first, the wind
blows cold and sharp, and makes him gather it close, and hold it faster: at
length the Sun pierces with the subtle heat of his melting beams: This
makes him cast away both cloak and coat. So that is often done, by the mild
insinuation of love and gentleness, which the blustering winds of terrible
threats can never bring to pass: How then do they recede from conformity with
our Savior, in life and doctrine, that speak stones, and have words as sharp
as arrows, that ever stand on the top of mount Horeb, and breath nothing but
thunder and lightning, judgment without mercy to their afflicted brethren?
well may they have the word of truth, they have not the meeknes of
righteousness, and yet the Prophet ioynes them both, and Christ rides on for
both, and with both, for we are not come to the mount that might not be touched,
nor to the blackness and darkness of a tempest, where Moses said, I fear, I
quake: but to mount Sion, the City of the living God, and to that celestial
Jerusalem, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect
men, and to Christ the mediator that rides on for the word of truth, and of
meekness, and of righteousness.

I have done with Christ the substance, I come to Solomon the type, and yet
what Solomon have we to mention, save only the son of David, and the heir
of peace, that is gone forth and rides on full of glory, and honor, that he
may spread the truth of Christ, as far as the name of Christ, beyond the
pillars of Hercules, and heal those waters of Ierico, as with the salt of his
most gracious spirit, and incontaminate holiness: envying the glory of
Iouinian, Qui exercitum paganum fecit Christianum, that made such Romans very
good Christians; as he found heathenish and given to Idols. Sure I am it is
upon the word of truth, and of meekness, and of power, and of righteousness,
that sacred chariot, I will not say of cardinal, but heroical and Princely
virtues; for they are the wings and the horses that advance and lift him up
above his fellows, how can we choose but wish him good luck, and send our
prayers after him?

Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on, for the word of truth, and of
meekness, and of righteousness: there is little Benjamin their Ruler, the
Princes of Judah, the Princes of Zabulon.

Good luck have ye with your honor, etc. O ye heavens resolve into showers,
and melt ye waters above the heavens into a dew of celestial benedictions,
crown him with the blessings of Jacob, and let all the gifts of the
Patriarchs descend on the top of him, that was separated from his brethren
from the utmost bounds of these everlasting mountains: say to him, as to
Zabulon, rejoice in thy way, as to Isachar, rejoice in thy tents: let him suck
the abundance of the sea, and give him the treasures that lie hid in the sands,
o thou which sit above the water-floud, and treadest on the sea as on dry
land, cover him all the day long, and paue the waters with thy safety; as the
hills are about Jerusalem, so let thy Angels stand about his person, bind up
all the winds, save only Zephyrus, and let none be found at his return,

Praeter Iapyga:

I mean the sweet gate of that Spirit, which moved first upon the waters; make
the stern of his ship, as the arc of thy resting place, and let that heavenly
power which came in the similitude of a Dove stand as an Eagle on the top of
his mast, whilst all the world does praise God, from the ground of the heart,
and say, Blessed is he that enlarges God, blessed is he that enlarges Israel.
As for those which make it their honor to suffer with Christ, and to ride on
in the course of spiritual warfare, that so they may advance the word of
truth, and of meekness, and of righteousness, what can they expect, but that
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, should bless them with all their
spiritual gifts of heavenly things in Christ, and make them as Ephraim and
Manasses, the one signifies increase, the other forgetfulness, till they grow
in the favor of God, and forget the troubles of this miserable life, they have
Christ and his fortune, nay Christ and his salvation, and must needs have good
luck from the Author and fountain of joy and happiness. Ride on then (I
beseech you) toward the price of your heavenly calling, and remember that of
Bernard, Incipit deficere, qui desinit proficere. He begins to fail, that
leaves to profit, let nothing stay your progress upon the scale of Jacob, from
the love of Christ, to the knowledge of Christ, from the knowledge of Christ,
to the imitation of Christ, from the imitation of Christ, to that similitude
and conformity which is promised with him in glory. In Bethlem vilescit, in
Nazareth ditescit, in Bethlem he is poor and little, in Nazareth he is green
and flourishing: but Jerusalem is the place of joy and comfort; Jerusalem
that is above, Jerusalem that is the mother of us all: there we must seek
him, till we be perfect, and receive that joyful inuitation in the Gospel.
Venite benedicti, Come ye blessed of the Father, and receive a kingdom,
provided for you from the foundation of the world, receive a kingdom that is
your honor, Come ye blessed, that is your good luck, such honor, such good
luck, have all that hear me this day, even for Jesus Christ his sake, to
whom with the Father and the Spirit, be honor, and glory, power, and majesty,
through all eternity. Amen.

MVNDI PRECIVM: The worlds ransom.

BERN. de Pass. Per torcular crucis ad cellaria regis itur.



LONDON, Printed for ROBERT ALLOT.

THE THIRD SERMON.
HEBR. 9. 12. By his own blood did he once enter the holy place, having
obtained an everlasting redemption for us.
Unction is sacred, and never used but to Kings, or to Priests. Christ was
both, and therefore a Christ indeed: the anointed of the Lord, and the Lords
anointed: anointed with the holy Ghost and with power, anointed as a King,
and fought himself for us: anointed as a Priest, and gave himself for us:
the combat with Saran, the oblation to the Father, who swear, and will not
repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. I might
resemble the Priesthood of Christ, to that of Aaron, were there not
dissimilitudes and antitheses, as well as similitudes and conueniences, both
had their temple, that earthly, this heavenly: both were to make entry, he
often, Christ once: both came with blood, he of bulls, and of goats, Christ of
his own, most dear and precious: both sought redemption, he temporal and to
be renewed, Christ eternal, and consummate, not for himself, but for others.
All which the Apostle does insinuate in this brief Synopsis.

By his own blood entered he once the holy place, having obtained an
everlasting redemption for us.

What then do we observe in the words of my text? but a joyful procession and
miraculous penetration of our high Priest into the holy of holies? Those inward
chambers of vnapproachable light, and unspeakable glory: where you must first
note the way or passage:

It is blood.

Secondly, the benefit or advantage.

It is redemption.

The blood his.

The redemption ours.

The blood once shed.

The redemption for ever purchased.

By his own blood entered he once the holy place, having obtained an
everlasting redemption for us.

By his own blood, there is the expiation, and satisfaction of our iniquities.

Did he enter the holy place, there is the elevation and prerogative of Christ
Jesus?

Having obtained an everlasting redemption for us, there is the salvation and
liberty both of our souls and bodies, from the power of darkness and the
hand of the enemy.

When Hannibal passed the Alps, he made his way with vinegar:

-- Et montes rupit aceto:

(as the Poet has observed) though our Saviors cup were mingled with gall and
vinegar, yet was it not enough: his side must be opened, and his most precious
heart blood must be spilt, that he may transce^d those heavenly Alps, and make
way for our redemption. Whence is that of Bernard, Sanguis Domini, clauis
Paradisi: The blood of Christ, is the key of Paradise. Neither may he lift up
the head, unless he taste of the brook. How shall the corn be laid in the
garner, before it be threshed on the floor, there is no entering into the
wineseller of the King, but through the wine press of the cross. Will you see
the grape the sweet grape bruised, and trod by the foot of pride, and the
malice of the adversary?

He enters by his blood.

Will you see the wine, the pleasant wine, stream and flow to the saftie of
men, and the joy of Angels?

There is redemption for us.

By his own blood entered he once, the holy place, having obtained an
everlasting redemption for us.

I have now opened the vein of my text (as it were) and let it blood, o let
not one drop fall to the ground, but water your souls with joy and gladness: it
is the sweetest oil and purest balm, that I can pour into your vessels, as
honey from the rock. And so I begin with the words in order, (...) By his own
blood.

As the natural life of man, stands in the blood of his flesh: so does the
spiritual life of the Church, stand in the blood of Christ. If that had not
been shed, we had all perished: notwithstanding, the yearly, and the
monthly, and the daily, and the hourly sacrifices, of that Leuiticall
Priesthood. I will not trouble you with their several kinds, whether
Hilasticall, of peace and reconciliation for sins committed: or Eucharisticall,
of thankfulness and gratulation for benefits received: Sure I am, they were
types and resemblances, having their virtue and acceptance from the blood of
Christ, which speaks better things, then all the bulls, and the goats, the
rams, and the calves on a thousand mountains. For Christ is our Passover,
and it is the sprinkling of his blood that must purify the vessels of our
Sanctuary. Who shall take away the sins of the world, but the Lamb of God? or
what satisfaction to be made without price of his blood, that is, (...) (as
Nissen speaks) the abolisher and destroyer of Mosaicall rites: but the
establisher and confirmer of spiritual righteousness? This made the Lord
cloathe him with a garment dipped in blood, Apoc. 19. and verify that Prophecy
of Judah, (...) He shall wash his coat in wine, and his cloak in the blood of
grapes. Caro eius, stola eius, (says Ambrosius) his coat, is his flesh, and
his cloak is the purity of his manhood: that hides our sins and couers our
infirmities. This did he wash, and rence, and purge, and cleanse, in the blood
of grapes, that he might consecrate the whole body of his Church, and present
her glorious to the Father without spot or wrinkle. Whence is that elegant
speech of learned Austin, Non vis habere maculam, lauare in sanguine, non vis
habere rugam, in crucem extendere. Will thou have no spot, be thou washed in the
blood of Christ: will thou have no wrinkle, be thou stretched upon his cross.
Oh the stain and pollution of our sins, that will not be purged without the
blood of Christ Jesus? O the bowels and compassion of our Savior, that is
prodigal of his life to purge our iniquities, he took from us the death of
his flesh, and spilt for us the blood of his life, or rather as the text is
read by Hierome, Sanguinem animae, the very blood of his soul. Hic est sanguis
noui foederis, this is the blood of the new Covenant, which is shed for you and
for many: shed and showred on the face of the whole earth in great plenty and
abundance: that it might work in us the fruit of good living, and produce
those heavenly flowers of love, charity, patience, humility, devotion,
piety, and whatsoever is most pleasing to the Lord of glory. Indeed God took
a Ram for Isaac: but if his own Son do not come with his own blood, there
will neither be entrance for him, nor redemption for us. He is the Ram that
was caught in the bush of thorns, and must be a sacrifice for all the sons
of Abraham. It is his blood that sticks upon the doors of the Isralites, and
to this day keeps away the destroying Angel from the Tabernacles of the
Christians. Well might the Jews have spared that scarlet robe which they cast
upon his loins, for before they had left him, they made scarlet of his flesh,
died and dipped in the bloody torrent of his rosy passion. The best scarlet
is but dibaphum, twice died, but his once, and again, and a third time, yea
there were seven effusions of his blood, as so many streams from the head of
Nilus. The first as soon as he was borne, when they took away the foreskin
of his flesh, and spilt his blood before it was well received. A second in the
garden, when he was cast into a bloody sweat, the curtains of Solomon were
rent, and the pores of his body were opened, whilst every part sent forth blood
and water trickling on the ground. The third in his scourging, when they plowed
his back with whips, and made long furrows on his shoulders: A fourth at his
coronation, when they placed him as a rose among thorns, and set a prickling
crown on his head, the white rose became red, and the purity of his
innocence took color from the misery of his sufferings. The fifth, in the
nayling of hands: A sixth, in the piercing of his feet, but the seventh and
last, when his side was opened, and the depth of his wounds discovered, the
tenderness of his bowels, the iron went into his soul, the spear touched his
very heart, that he might have a feeling and sympathy of our infirmities. Now
did the spouts run, and the fountains stream with the sweetness of the
grape: and though he were fastened on the cross, yet died he like Seneca in a
bath, not of water, but of blood, and that his own, once shed, but ever
springing to safety and redemption: that it might drown our sins, and purge
our souls, and quench that sierie blade which the Cherubin hangs over the gate
of Paradise, to keep us from the tree of life, the portion of our inheritance.
Where but on the cross? when but at the effusion of his blood, did he say to
that cursed malefactor, Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, this day thou shall be
with me in Paradise? Then were the gates of heaven set wide open, and there was
a way through blood to that everlasting portion which he took from the hand of
the Amorite, by his sword, and by his bow: his sword, his word, his bow; the
mystery of his incarnation: where the majesty of the Godhead, stoopt to the
weakness of the manhood, and bowed (as it were) to the strings of humane
frailty.

In vain then do men crucify themselves, and are persuaded that martyrdom is
the only way to heaven, like those Priests of Baal, and (...) of Rome, that
tear their flesh with hooks and whips, the bloody instruments of voluntary
penance: as if they would redeem the transgressions of their souls, with the
fruit of their bodies, and expiate divine justice, with the cruel butchering
and most unnatural oblation of their sons and daughters unto Idols. It cost
more to redeem souls, neither shall any deliver his brother by the execrable
practices of so great impieties. Nor by Orizons, nor by Dirges, nor by Pardons,
nor by Indulgences, or the like inventions of superstitious dotage. In this
case we may use the words of Saluianus, Semper redempti, nunquam liberi. They
are ever redeemed, but never freed. For we are not bought with things
corruptible, but with the precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb without spot: If
the Son free us, then are we free, and where the Spirit is, there is
liberty. Qui melior aduocatus says Ambrose, what better advocate, then he
which gave himself for us? Are not the figures ended, and the ceremonies
abolished? Is not the Temple destroyed? and the Priesthood of Aaron quite
extinguished? Let the Jews meet, and seek to repair their temple, fire
shall break from out the earth, as in the days of Julian, to devour them,
and root out their foundation; for we have no Priest, but Christ, no altar,
but his Cross, no sacrifice, but his flesh, no ransom, but his blood, no
incense, but devotion, no fire, but the Spirit, no temple, but heaven, no
order, but that of Melchisedech, which stands and abides for ever. And let all
such know, that wallow in flesh and blood, the blood of their sins, and the
blood of their iniquities, that delight in blood, and make no conscience how
they spill innocent blood, Christian blood, that are set upon miracles, and
labor to convert water into blood, color seas, die rivers, as if they would
sail and swim to Paradise through blood of their enemies: that Christ's blood
may witness against them, and charge them with the blood of their slain,
which he so dearly purchased: that as his blood calls for pardon, so their
blood calls for vengeance, and may one day come upon the desperate malefactor
without repentance to his ruin and confusion. Whence is that resolution of
Anastasius the Emperor, cited by Euagrius in the third book of his story,
Quod nihil velit aggredi, that he would adventure no exploit, though never so
honorable and glorious, if he thought it might cost him a drop of blood. But
such mildness requires a golden age, and that we condemn is the brutish
violence of savage fury. It were good some blood were let in us: not the blood
of our flesh, but the blood of our souls, I mean the lust of our desires, and
the heat of our affections. For (as Bernard speaks) Sanguis animae, voluntas
mea. The blood of my soul, is the will of my heart, and if there were a vent
made for the corruptions thereof, we should find a more easy passage into
heaven; for there is a spiritual galarie and milken path, that leads unto
God, even truth and holiness, purity and righteousness, our hearts being
sprinkled from an evil conscience, with the blood of Christ, and assured
confidence in the merit of his passion. O the rubricke, and witness of
eternal glory, that makes us Saints in the kingdom of heaven, and washes
our souls from their spiritual leprosy. How should we adore the Sacrament of
his blood, how should we thirst after the fountain of his blood? Crying with
our Savior in the Gospel, sitio, I am a thirst? He thirsts after our good,
let us thirst after his blood: He thirsts after our salvation, let us thirst
after his righteousness: till our bloud-thirstinesse take away our
bloud-guiltinesse, and his bloody wounds cure our bloody issue, the natural
flux of original impuritie: that it may be true in us which is spoken of the
Disciples, (...), Rivers of the water of life shall flow out of their belly.
The wild beast finds sweetness in the blood of man, and hunts for it: Shall
not we more in the blood of Christ, and thirst for it? it is milk to the
weak, and makes him strong, it is wine to the strong and makes him cheerful.
O be not slow to frequent the Temples, and to love the service, and to honor
the stones, and to worship the alters, where so grievous a vein is opened to
the house of Israel. When Vitellius came into a field of blood, died with the
slaughter, and strewed with the bodies of the dead: others were annoyed, he
only cries out, Optime hostis occisus, melius ciuis. There is a good smell in
the blood of an enemy, much better in the blood of a subject. A most inhumane
speech, and full of tyranny: but had he said, Optime hostis, melius Christi.
There is a good smell in the blood of an enemy, but much better in the blood
of Christ, that had been religious piety, which is now recorded for outrageous
cruelty. For indeed it is his blood that is the savor of life, and smell of a
field which the Lord has blessed, that fills the nostrils of our heavenly
Father, and makes him forget the stink of our wounds, and the putrifactions of
our iniquities: whilst he stands like Phineas, to mediate for us in that holy
place, where now he makes his entry, and so I pass from his humiliation to
his exaltation; from the key of his blood, to the closet of his glory.

He entered the holy place: The sons of Israel came to their earthly Canaan
through the red sea: the Son of God to that heavenly Canaan through a sea of
blood: that flowed with milk and honey, this with the sweetness of peace and
glory: that a land of holiness, this a place of holiness, where peace, and
holiness, and truth, and righteousness, have taken up their rest, and made
their habitation. For holiness becomes the house of God for ever, perfect
holiness, universal holiness, with a universality of time, it is for ever:
with a universality of subject, it is so that no unclean thing may enter. It
was a good inscription which a bad man set upon the door of his house: Per me
nihil intret mali, no evil may pass through me, whereupon said Diogenes,
Quomodo ingredietur Dominus? How then shall the master get into his own house?
I know not how it may agree with our mansions upon earth, sure I am, the first
part is most conuenable with that celestial Bethel, the gates of heaven, and
blessed sanctuary of eternal righteousness. For whatsoever is there, is
holy, the Saints holy, the Patriarchs holy, the Martyrs holy, the Prophets
holy, but the Lord himself most holy and blessed, neither is this holiness
original in those celestial bodies, but deriuatiue from the Lord of all
things. It is he that sanctifies and makes them holy: times, places, men,
Angels, names, ceremonies, vessels, instruments, things animate, things
inanimate, with the gracious spirit of his saving righteousness. They are
holy, because the Lord is holy: and must needs subscribe to that great (...),
of the Cherubins, Holy, holy, holy, Lord, God, almighty, which is, which was,
and which is to come. But wherein stands the differerence, betwixt the
holiness of God, and the holiness of his place? Deus sanctus, quia
sanctificans, the Lord is holy because he sanctifies, and is not sanctified:
that is holy, because it is sanctified, and cannot sanctify: else might Adam
have continued holy, as long as he was in Paradise: and the devil, as long as
he was in heaven: but the one was cast out, and the other was cast down: that
so the holy one might come into the holy place: and say with the Prophet, Deus
and non homo, I am God, and not man. The holy one of Israel in the midst of
thee, Hos 9. 11. For though he were humbled unto death, and lay melting on the
furnace of his cross: yet was he exalted unto life, and snatched as a brand
out of the fire, and that (as Saint Ambrose speaks) In vmbraculo nubis, vt
foueantur vulnera passionis. In the cool shade of a spreading cloud, to
qualify the heat of his bleeding wounds. Neither is there any Christian but
may discern, as far with the joys of faith, as ever Stephen did with the
eyes of his body: when he said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the
son of man stand at the right hand of God. Luke says he stands, David he
sits, yet are they both true: he sits as a Judge, for the Lord has given all
power to his Son: he stands as an Advocate, For we have an Advocate with the
Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. The
one shows the greatness of his Majesty, the other shows the obedience of
his ministry: whilst he takes the censure of his flesh, and fills it with the
coals of the altar, and presents the supplications of his Church, and makes
the smoke of those spiritual odours, ascend before the Lord, as from the hand
of an Angel. O the gracious entrance of our triumphant Savior into that
heavenly tabernacle; before he was from the earth earthly, now he is from
heaven heavenly. There be heavens corporal, there he is by the presence of
his body: there be heavens mystical, there he is by the influence of his
Spirit. For the soul of every Christian may be likened unto heaven, in the
corporal heavens, ye have a Sun to give light in the mystical heavens, ye
have Christ to be your guide in the corporal; ye have Stars that shine by
night, in the mystical, ye have virtues eminent and conspicuous, that shine in
the night of adversity, and the darkness of tribulation: in the corporal,
ye have continual serenitie, in the mystical perfect tranquillity: in the
corporal ye have an extension of parts, in the mystical of charity: the love
of God being spread abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, and our bowels
yearning with mercy and compassion toward the afflictions of our brethren. So
that God is still in the holy place, there will he dwell, there is his rest for
ever. Though we seldom frequent the place of his Sanctuary, some perhaps once
a year, as the high Priests did the inward Tabernacle, some perhaps once in
their lives, as Christ did this heavenly Tabernacle, yea I fear many leave the
holy place, and choose places most unholy and defiled: defiled with
superstition and idolatry, defiled with riot and luxury, defiled with
extorsion and cruelty, defiled with uncleanness and impuritie, where the
Sun may scarce peep without fear of darkening, or the light without danger
of infection. O the deplored estate and lamentable condition of spiritual
Gadarens, and Daemoniacall Christians, that abide in graves, and lie (as it
were) in the deep of hell: that stick in the mire and clay, or rather in the
sink and iakes of abominable pollutions and Heliogabalian filthiness. How do
they depart from the living God, and forget the footsteps of their Savior? The
place where he goes is holy, the ground where he stands holy, and as he is
holy in his words, so is he holy in his ways. O let there not be such a
distance betwixt head and members, lift up your heads, raise up your thoughts,
though your bodies lie on the earth, let your souls be in heaven, nay be ye a
heaven upon earth, shining with truth, established with hope, adorned with
righteousness, extended with lour, hung and spread with those gracious clouds
of knowledge and instruction, that Christ may bring his Father and come into
your holy place, and cast out the bond woman, and take his rest as in a
sanctuary. Vbi habitabo? (says Austin in the name of God? Where shall I
dwell? Do thou think I will abide in the ruinous building of thy collapsed
nature, and depraved affections? or in the sordid building of thy staind
actions and wicked pollutions? Surely no: I look my house should be clean
swept, and garnisht with the flowers of virtue, as the Diamond or the
Carbuncle, (...) (says Nyssen) he that is Lord of honor and glory, will not
be owner of that which is dishonorable and inglorious. If he would not
suffer the unclean spirits to name him, he shall not suffer the unclean men
to enjoy him: they cried, and were rebuked, if they cry, they may be refused.
Awake then and consider whose temples ye are, this is the will of God, even
your sanctification: This is the will of God, even your glorification. O my
brethren, me thinks I see the names of all that stand before me, written in
the book of life, and I seem to read through that sea of glass, the divine
pedigree of your sacred race and heavenly genealogy. There is Abraham your
Father, and Isaac his son, or rather Jacob, to whom the promises were made:
yea there is God your Father, in whom all the families of heaven and earth are
named, and Christ his Son, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, together
with that Spirit, by whose grace we are knit and linkt in one fellowship and
communion: there is the ring and the robe, which the Angels, which be his
servants shall cast upon us: the ring of endless bliss and interminate
happiness: the robe of perfect justice and immortal holiness. Why do not we
move as the clouds, and fly as the Doves unto our windows? Why is not our
heart together with our treasure? nay with our flesh, and with our blood, with
our strength, and with our glory? He is gone before, that we may follow after,
first by contemplation, then by conversation, till at length we be inducted
into mount Sion, the blessed Temple of our spiritual Jerusalem: having not
only quiet and peaceable, but actual and corporal possession? Now we have
Ius ad rem, then we shall Ius in re. Now we are invested with right and
power, then we shall be superinuested with immortality and honor: like those
blessed Elders that worshipped the Lamb, which does wipe all tears from their
eyes, and guide them to those fountains of living waters. Did we consider how
great and excellent things God has promised to all that love him, in the
heavens, our hearts would be turned and set more by the holy place, then by
the honorable place, or the place of custom, and of sweetness, or the place of
majesty and of greatness: there is the flower of wheat, and the abundance of
delight; Rivers of oil, and floods of peace, in comparison whereof our joy is
heaviness, our fullness vacuitie, our pleasure bitterness, our riches
poverty, our beauty ashes, our comeliness deformity; It is David's note,
that God has set the wicked as a wheel, and the reason is given by a learned
Father, Anterius cadit, posterius eleuatur; The former part turns down, the
hinder part turns up: so they incline and how down toward the glorious
brightness of that which is before and permanent: but rise, and are lifted up
toward the empty shadow of that which is past and transient, let them be as a
wheel, so we be as a Chariot, or an Eagle mounted and soaring toward the
place of vision, where Christ sits in the glory of the Father. Sequar illum,
quem mea occidit tarditas, was the speech of Cassius, when Brutus had been
slain by the stay of his aid, and the negligence of his army. I will follow
him, that my slownesse has put to death. They are our sins that have put
Christ to death, the slownesse and backwardness of our hearts and
understandings, to do any thing that is good. O let us follow him in the
bearing of his cross, and the entrance of his glory. Sequar eum, quem mea
occidit prauitas. I will follow him whom my sins has put to death, but his
own power has raised to life, that he may triumph and be exalted, and seem
wonderful in the holy places, by working our peace and obtaining our
redemption, which is the fruit and benefit of all our travel: and expects the
short continuance of our frailty and patience. (...), having found an eternal
redemption for us.

Sin is the adversary that delivered man bound to God, as to the Judge: God
the Judge that delivered man bound to Satan, as to the Iaylour. He was bound
to the devil in the service of unrighteousness: he was bound to God for the
punishment of his transgressions, but now he is redeemed from both, and this
stands (as the Schools note) in the price, and the solution, the price the
blood of Christ: the solution, at the death of Christ. In that he died, we have
the ransom of our sins: in that he died but once, we have the sufficiency of
that ransom: for with him there is plenteous redemption, and for us eternal
redemption.

Eternal, in respect of Gods decree: which is before time. Eternal, in
respect of those which are redeemed, they are immortal spirits. Eternal, in
respect of the work it self, which is perfect and absolute, never to be
abolisht or renewed: From the brick and the clay of foul acts; and more then
Egyptian servitude: but the original is more Emphaticall then our
translation. (...), Having found an everlasting redemption.

Whereby we understand that it was sought with pain, and grief, and sorrow,
and travel, under the heavy yoke of his intolerable cross, and
unsupportable agony; yet so little does he esteem whatsoever he endures, that
he counts that found, which he dearly bought: (...), Having found an
everlasting redemption.

Which indeed is full of comfort, and sounds as music to the ear, for as in
a chain, he that takes the first link, draws on all the rest; so in the
golden chain of our salvation, redemption is that which draws on all the
rest: if we be redeemed, we shall be justified, if we be justified, we shall be
sanctified, if we be sanctified, we shall be glorified: so that to be redeemed,
is all that can be imagined, to escape the fear of death, to receive a crown
of life, to put on white robes, to judge the Tribes of Israel, and to possess
that which is far more excellent, aeternum gloriae pondus: an eternal weight
of glory. It is like a cluster of grapes, where all the benefits of Christ's
death and man's safety are heaped and treasured up together: and therefore
says Chrysologus, Plura nobis parta, etc. We got more by the tree of the
cross, then ever we lost by the tree of Paradise.

What shall I mention, the dream of Saint Origin? That promises redemption
after a thousand years, to the devil and his Angels. Sure I am it is (for us)
and that it is for us alone, is manifest by his incarnation: for that is
redeemed, which at first was assumed: he took not the Angels, but the seed
of Abraham, and therefore he saues not the Angels, but the seed of Abraham.
We are the heritage which he redeemed with his precious blood, agreeable to
that of Fulgentius, Id solum in corpore regnantium, quod praecessit in capite
ad coelum: We that receive his word believe his promises, admire his love,
embrace his mercies, crying with these souls under the altar, to him that was
made a sacrifice upon the altar, how long sweet Jesus? Holy, and true, wilt not
thou avenge our blood upon those which dwell upon the earth?

I know not how this moves you, me thinks it should work upon the senseless
creature, and raise up children unto Abraham, from the very stones: or rather,
praise and glory, thanks and honor, to the God of Abraham, from the stony
hearts of most obstinate and rebellious children. If Galen made profession,
when he looked upon man in his first creation, that if all the members of his
body had been tongues they would not have been sufficient, to express the
glory of the Lord; how should we magnify the goodness of our Savior, that
beheld man in his second creation, delivered from the bondage of sin; and
translated into the glorious liberty of the sons of God: redeemed from the
curse of the Law, and clothed with the righteousness of Christ Jesus? That so
he may shine as the stars of heaven, in those everlasting spheeres of safety
and protection. When Flaminius had delivered many Cities of the Grecians, and
made open Proclamation of their liberty: they lifted up their voices, and
cried for joy till the birds of the air were astonished, and fell dead before
them: See beloved, here is a general Proclamation, of saftie and redemption,
not from the Consul of the Romans, but from the Doctor of the Gentiles, not
to the Cities of Greece, or the inhabitants of Judea only, but to all the
Nations and countries under heaven, bond and free, Jew and Gentile, they are
all delivered, and have received vnfranchisement from their spiritual
captivity. O that our hearts were enlarged rowards God, and the loud shout of
our spiritual reioycings, and doubled Haleluiahs, might be as a clap of
thunder, to fright the Prince of the air, and flat the top of vain thoughts
and proud imaginations, that nestle in the clouds, till they sink and lie dead
before us. I wish that of Bernard might be an incentiue to your devotion, and
blow the coals of true love and Christian piety in all that hear me. Quam
bonus and suauis es Domine Jesus, etc. O sweet Jesus how good and pleasant art
thou to all that seek thee! The Redeemer of such as are lost, the Savior of
those that are redeemed, the hope of such as wander, the help of those which
labor, the comfort and refreshing of every bleeding soul, that runs after
thee in the sweat of tears, and the painful anguish of their cross and
misery: Great is thy name, and most worthy to be praised, and let all the
creatures, both in heaven and earth give thanks unto thee, for the humility
of thy passion, the glory of thy exaltation, the might and power of thy
victorious triumph and everlasting redemption: Thou have saved us from death,
and installed us in the holy place, that we may stand before thee, and draw
near with boldness unto the throne of Grace, not with a few pieces of silver,
as the Jews bought thee, but with many drops of blood spilt upon the earth:
This is it that dies our robes, and turns our sackcloth into scarlet: that
annoints our souls, and makes us Kings and Priests to God the Father, or
rather a sanctuary of his Spirit, and living temples of the holy Ghost. What
remains, but since he has given himself for us, we give our selves to him,
our souls, which he has redeemed, our bodies which he has sanctified. O ye
house of Judah and men of Israel, get ye into the holy place, the closet of
your hearts, the secret of your consciences: look upon the wine that runs,
and the honey that streams from the treading of the grape, and the opening of
the rock: consider the sharpness of his death, if there were any sorrow like
unto his: the sweetness of his love, if there were any mercy to be compared
with his: and let your spirits melt, and bleed, and distill, and be power'd
forth into a sweet ointment and great libution: for the merit of his death, and
the benefit of your redemption. Martialls Fly played so long under a tree,
that at length it was wrapped in amber, and congealed in the drops that came from
the boughs.

Sic modo quae fuerat vita contempta manente,
Funeribus facta est, nunc praetiosa suis.
The best of us are but worms, let us not despise to be as this Fly; still
houering about the tree of the cross, and the ointment of his blood: till we
be wrapped, and closed, and buried, and entombed, in the precious amber of his
bleeding wounds, and the sacred gum of that tree, which grows in the midst of
Paradise. For if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, and if we be
conformed to the similitude of his death, we shall be transformed to the image
of his glory. Effundam de spiritu meo, says God the Father, I will power out
my Spirit upon all flesh. Effudi de sanguine meo, says God the Son, I have
powered forth my blood for all flesh. See the price of your redemption, and the
pledge of your salvation: by this ye enter the holy place, and are assured of
that kingdom, where neither height, nor depth, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor life, nor death, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is Christ Jesus. O Lord inflame this
love in us, and crown this hope on us, for the bitter death and meritorious
passion of thy Son and our Savior, to whom with the Father, be ascribed all
honor, and glory, power and dominion, throughout all generations. Amen.

Sanctorum GLORIA: The glory of the Saints.

GREG. Mor. lib. 6. Quia in hac vita discretio operum erit in illa discretio
dignitatum.



LONDON, Printed for ROBERT ALLOT.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
MATH. 19. 28. Ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son
of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
I Know not whether that of Theodosius do savor more of wisdom, or abound
more with the sweetness of devotion: sure I am, it is most pious and
Christian: Gaudeo magis, etc. I rejoice more to be a servant of the living God,
then to be a Monarch of the whole earth. For as his yoke is easy, and his
burden light: so is his protection mighty, and his service honorable:
witness that of our Savior, (...), if any man serve me, the Father will do
him honor. It pleased Satan to vpbraid Job with a numquid Deum gratis colit?
Does Job serve God for naught? We may hear the same and never be ashamed, or
rather pronounce without question, Non colimus Deum gratis, we do not serve God
for naught. He is our reward, our great reward, our exceeding great reward, as
he does encourage Abraham in the 15. of Genesis, and therefore let me take up
the echo of that double voice, Consolamini, consolamini, be comforted, be
comforted, all ye that labor and travel under the burden of his cross: be
it father, mother, wife, children, house, lands, or whatsoever ye leave for his
names sake, ye shall receive an hundred fold, and at length inherit life
eternal. For we have a good master, and there is joy in the expectation of the
righteous, good in his promises, good in his threatenings: whether he amend us
with his punishments, whether he strengthen us with his comforts, whether he
adorned us with his graces, whether he crown us with his mercies, every way
good unto us. Not a man of you shall depart from the Court of his tabernacle,
or the presence of his majesty, without a gladsome heart, and a cheerful
countenance. Whence is that of sweet Bernard, Non Isaac sed aries molietur,
Though we be never so much afraid, it is not Isaac, but the Ram, that must be
sacrificed: it is not the delight and pleasure of our souls that shall be
taken from us; for that indeed is Isaac: but it is the obstinacy and
contumacie of our spirits, that must be tamed in us, for that indeed is the
Ram that stuck in the bush, and is never without the prickling thorns of
anguish and vexation. Do we serve God, it is God that serves us? Do we honor
the Lord? it is the Lord that does honor us, and will do more when my text
shall be verified.

Ye that have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit
in the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel.

These words are a gracious promise made to the Apostles, but extended to the
Gentiles, and do concern the whole family of God; for as they exclude Judas,
(though present when Christ spoke) by reason of his Apostasy, so they include
us, though many generations after Christ spoke, through faith in his mercy.

Will ye know the substance of the promise, They sit and judge.

Sit upon twelve thrones. There is the state and majesty of their wonderful
exaltation.

Judge the twelve tribes of Israel. There is the eminency and prerogative of
their infinite jurisdiction.

Will ye learn the circumstance of this promise? It is (...) in the
consummation, and renouation of the whole world, when he that was in the form
of a servant, shall take upon him the form of a Judge, and that in a Throne of
glory.

But upon what terms have we so great honor? Is it given to any without
condition? No, (...): They are such as follow him, and observe his doctrine.
Not all, that leave all: but all that follow him.

Ye that have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit
upon a throne of glory, shall also, etc.

Here then we have first a president of Christian imitation. Ye that have
followed me.

Secondly, a reward of blessed enthronization: Shall sit upon twelve thrones,
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

Last of all, the determinate point and term of this glory and perfection, it
is (...), in the renouation, and instauration of the whole world: when the
son of man shall declare himself to be the Son of God, in a throne of
glory.

Ye that have followed me in the regeneration, when the son of man shall sit
upon a throne of glory: ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.

My whole text is spent in that double contemplation of the Physics, the one
Motus, the other Quies.

Ye that have followed me, shows there is a Motus.
Shall sit upon twelve thrones, shows there is a Quies.
I wish that which deuides my text, may divide both speaker and auditor, on
your part quiet silence and religious devotion, whilst I begin with the divine
Motus, and spiritual consectation, in these words: Ye that have followed me.

Careful imitation is a sure note of constant aspectation, and we ever love
those we desire most to follow. Pride and Envy step before: Love and Humility
wait behind: as Mary at the feet of Christ, when she made a bath of her
tears, and a towell of her locks. Many suffer as Christ, that shall never
reign with him, many bear his cross that shall never partake of his glory:
Many drink of the brook, that shall never lift up the head: Many grieve, and
mourn, and sorrow, and are afflicted, that shall never be comforted, and all
this, Quia sectari negligunt (says elegant Bernard) because they are exalted
in their minds, and despise to come after Christ in the humility of their
spirits. For this cause will the Lord be followed, and that with as much
alacrity as the Scribe pretends, Sir, I will follow thee wheresoever thou
go. Who so great with the Lord as Moses? of a friend he became a familiar,
of man, a God, so that he is termed, Deus Pharonis, the very God of Pharoh.
Yet was he content to look on the back parts of his Creator, and what Christ
said to Matthew, belongs to us, Veni and sequere, come and follow me. Non
passibus, sed affectibus (as Saint Austin has distinguished) not with the
pases of our body, but in the graces of our spirit, in the love of his truth,
and the practice of his virtues that came as a Bridegroom forth of his
chamber, and gloried as a Giant to run his course. That neither words, or
deeds, thoughts or designs swerue or decline from the rule of his justice, for
he is the way, and the truth, and the life. The way, that leads us to the
truth: the truth that does promise the inheritance of life: the life, that does
give us the fruition of himself: not to follow the way, is to be lost: not to
follow the truth, is to be deceived: not to follow life, is to perish: and
therefore we may say of his active obedience, as the Apostle writes of his
passive obedience, (...), He suffered many things leaving us an example. Nay,
he did many things, leaving us an example, and he spoke many things, leaving
us an example, that we might tread, and walk, in the footsteps of his
righteousness. We read of a noble General; victorious over the Turks, and
famous among Christians, that he never commanded his soldiers any thing, but
that he would do himself: we see the like in Christ: they are no strange
adventures, or new exploits, which he lays upon us, if we can but follow our
leader, or do that which he does but act before us, taste of his cup, or drink
of the Baptism wherein he is Baptized, it is as much as can be looked for. But
who is able to find the way of a serpent on a stone, or the path of an Eagle in
the air? Is not the name of Christ wonderful! and are not his perfections
inimitable? Does he not ride upon a Cherub, and make darkness his pauilion? Or
if discernable, and to be seen, does not he sit upon the hill of Sion, and
inhabit light which is vnapprochable? (Honored and beloved) we have said it,
yet may we follow as Peter did, a far off, at least cry with the daughters
of Jerusalem, Trahe nos, Draw us and we shall run after thee. For that of
Austin is most true, Quod lex imperat, fides impetrat. Faith obtaining what the
Law enioynes, and prayer makes that easy which is most hard to the corruption
of our nature. Indeed there be some things in our Savior we cannot imitate,
we may not emulate the glory of his wisdom, the magnificence of his power:
but his goodness is exemplarie, and calls for observation. (...) says the
Apostle, it is manifest, and has appeared, teaching us to deny ungodliness,
and to live righteously, and soberly, and godly in this present world: Obsecro
fratres, I beseech you brethren do not loose an example so rare and precious,
but fashion your selves unto it, and be changed in the renewing of your minds:
remembering always that of Nyssen, (...). The profession of a Christian, stands
in the imitation of his Maker. Several qualities are gathered to my hand,
imitable and spectable in our Savior: imitable with men, spectable with the
Angels. First the contempt of outward vanity, for when they sought to make him
a King, he refused their honor, and fled into a mountain: Secondly, the
meekness of inward patience, for when they brought him as a Lamb to the
slaughter, he kept silence, and opened not his mouth: Last of all, the temper
and sweetness of a charitable disposition, for when they would have crucified
the Lord of glory, he prayed for his enemies, and excused their malice with a
nesciunt, Quid faciunt: they know not what they do: these are the things we
ought to seek, and to follow, to keep, and to practice, with all diligence
and carfulness. But that every man is drawn away as Saint James speaks,
with his own lust

Et in iecore aegro
Nascuntur Domini.
Our will is our master, and we have as many lords over us, as we have
affections in us. Alius libidini, alius auaritiae (says that learned heathen,)
one is a servant unto pleasure, another to covetousness, a third to vanity,
all to fear, that we come short of our expectations, and I would to God it
were only so, but the Church has ever been pestred with sects, and heresies,
strifes and divisions, scarce greater distraction among the Corinthians, when
they cried, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, I am of the world, and I am of
Christ, then now is in many places of these kingdoms. What fantastical
spirits so idle and ridiculous, that has not many disciples? What
schismatic leader so new fangled and pernicious, that has not many
sectaries? What iugling imposter so despicable and infamous, that has not many
followers? What Atheistical ruffler so execrable and nefarious, that has not
many obseruers? Quis Monachus Daemoniacus (as S. Bernard speaks) what Ignatian
viper, or devilish Jesuit, that works mischief by the Prince of devils,
and seckes destruction of soul and body, so prodigiously wicked, and
proditoriously audacious, that has not too many favorites and adherents.
These are the men that draw legions after them to hell; and may be compared to
him that was termed legion in the Gospel. Ettam Diogenes habet suos
parassitos: the Cynicke is not without his attendants, but has a man or a
mouse to be his Parasite. Whilst Christ Jesus the Son of the living God sits
alone, as a sparrow on the house top, or a Pelican in the wilderness. Beloved,
I speak with shame to you, and grief to my self, what sometime Saint Bernard
spoke to his auditors. Quidam non sequuntur, sed fugiunt, Quidam sequuntur, sed
non essequuntur, etc. Some do not follow Christ, but run from him: they are
such as delight in wickedness, for he that does evil hates the light. Some do
not follow Christ, but go before him: they are such as resist government,
whereof Peter was an instance, Master spare thy self, it shall not be unto
thee: Some follow Christ, but do not overtake him: and they are such as faint
in their proceedings, to whom we may say, Lift up the weak hands and
strengthen the feeble knees. Some follow Christ, and at length reach unto him:
and they are such as persevere in holiness, to whom belong the Tables, and the
Covenant, the Oracles, and the Promise, the Promise of life, and the Promise of
my text, For they shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel. And so I come from the motion to the mansion, from the consectation to
the confession in these words.

They shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.
Every master has his several pay: the world pays his followers with trouble
and carfulness: the flesh pays his followers with corruption and
filthiness: the devil pays his followers, with despair and wretchedness:
But Christ pays his followers, with glory and blessedness. They shall sit
upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. I make no question
but some are like the Orator, and can sit double, having placed themselves on
two seats by the treacherous practice of dissimulation, and hypocrisy: but
they shall never be honored with the Saints, or rest upon twelve seats,
without great mercy, in the full possession of joy and felicity.

They which confine these words to the Apostles, with Saint Chrysostom make
the soul of every Christian to be as a throne, or place of residence. Such as
receive the word of John, the throne of John: Such as embrace the doctrine of
Peter, the throne of Peter But they extend further, and have respect to Christ's
tribunal, where all the elect have their several places, and sit at table
with him, in that heavenly kingdom. Here then is a certain number, put for an
uncertain: A finite, for an infinite: so that by twelve thrones, we
understand a universality of thrones, provided for the Saints in the highest
places. Saint Austin undertakes to give a reason from the mystery of this
number, but that is more Platonicall then divine. We may rest satisfied with
that general Thesis of our Savior: In my Fathers house are diverse mansions.
To search busily what these thrones are, is vain curiosity: to define boldly
is presumptuous leuitie. It is like they shall be of air: because we shall
meet the Lord in the air: and if they have conformity with that of our
Savior, it must be so: for he shall ride in the air, and make the clouds his
chariot. Whereupon says John, I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and he that
sat thereon, like the son of man, having on his head a crown of gold, and
in his hand a sharp sickle. Apoc. 14. 14. But whatsoever these thrones are,
they promise rest and tranquillity, in the bosom of Abraham. Sedebit anima,
sedebit caro, they shall find rest unto their souls, and rest unto their
bodies: to their bodies, from the pain of travel, and the mutabilitie of
corruption: to their souls, from the waves of trouble, and the conflicts of
passions: nor fear, nor grief, nor wrath, nor desire, nor any thought of
carnal affection, shall disturb the quiet of their sweet repose, but as they
are satisfied with the fullness of the Lord, so likewise shall they be secured
by the omnipotence of his greatness: and yet there is somewhat more in this
easy posture, for to sit in the presence of God, betokens infinite state, and
most incomporable majesty, worthy to be observed by all those which desire
long robes, and love the highest places of the Synagogues, because they shall
not only sit, but judge the tribes of Israel.

All judicature is most honorable, but this exceeds in glory. Quis honor
saecularis, as Saint Bernard makes the question? Is there any power in the
world to be compared with it? It is not a City, or a country, but the tribes
of Israel, and the kingdoms of the earth, that must stand before the Saints,
and be liable to their judgment. Bond and free, Jew and Grecian, for they are
all sealed with the tribes, and ranckt with their divisions. Nay the whole
world and all the creatures therein, though never so eminent and sublime in
glory. Witness that of the Apostle, Know ye not, that we shall judge the
Angels, 1. Cor. 6. 3.

There is a judgment of power and authority, that belongs to God the Father,
for he is judge of the whole earth: there is a judgment of honor and
delegacie that belongs to Christ, as he is man, for the Lord has given all
judgment to the Son: there is a judgment of assession and witness, and
consent, and allowance, that belongs to the whole company of Gods elect, for
they shall sing and rejoice, and gratulate the truth of divine justice, with
the sweetest notes of Jubilee and thankfulness, here then is man advanced, and
superexalted above the stars of the morning, and the Citizens of heaven,
indeed we read that God shall come to judgment with his Angels, as followers
and attendants: but the text says, He shall sit in judgment with men as
familiars and associats, their judgment is ministerial and serviceable, our
judgment powerful and honorable, and that upon thrones, and over thrones and
dorninions, and all the glorious host of his noblest creatures: for they have a
judgment to receive, Non condemnationis, sed manifestationis (as the
Schoolmen have distinguished) not of shame and confusion, with the devil and
his Angels: but of show and manifestation to the praise of Christ, and the
glory of their innocence. O ye mercenary worldlings and fugitive servants,
that run from your own master, and serve Pharoh in the bondage of your
spirits: that cleave to the dust and follow the way of Balaam, who loved the
wages of unrighteousness, making that a reproach to us, which the poor Indians
used to the Spaniards, when they took a piece of gold, and cried: Lo here is
the god of the Christians. Think upon the goodness of the Lord, and the
dignity of his servants, lest he that long since placed his bow in the clouds
without an arrow, call for the instruments of death, and wound ye in his sore
displeasure. (...) (says the Evangelist) This is the condemnation of the
world, that light is come into the world, but men have loved darkness more
then light. Is it not time ye should awake, and return with the Shunamite, I
would to God ye were as those Switzers, who are ready to serve for the best
pay. If Satan be able to give more, follow him: If Satan be able to promise
more follow him. Quis fascinauit, Who is it that has bewitched you (as the
Apostle writes to the Galatians, had ye rather eat husks, and feed swine
with the prodigal: then have bread enough, and sit at table with the children?
Had ye rather lie in hell as sheep, that death may gnaw upon you: then reign
in heaven as Judges, that life may abide in you? By how much it is better to
sit in a throne, and judge the tribes of Israel, then to stand at the bar and
here the sentence of condemnation: by so much is it more safe and comfortable,
to follow God, then man, Christ then Belial, (...) (as Nazian.) Let us fly the
world and the Prince thereof, but seek Christ and stick unto his mercy: the
exhortation is enforced by that of Ambrose, teneat clauus, si reuocat
infirmitas. If the weakness of our flesh, and the infirmity of our nature
draw us from him: let the remembrance of his death, and the nails of his
cross pin us to him: Who could make us but he? who did save us but he? who
but he shall adorn us with his grace, and crown us with his glory, set us
in his presence, where there is fullness of joy, and place us at his right
hand, where there are pleasures for evermore? how can ye neglect so great
salvation? how can ye leave so great felicity? ye have seen his star in the
East, and he that brings light out of darkness, has shined in your
hearts, to the light of knowledge in the face of Christ Jesus. There is no
excuse left, but the stay of his promise, and the expectation of his goodness,
that it is not yet, but shall be hereafter, in the second birth of the whole
universe, which is the term and point of this complement and perfection. My
last circumstance that knocks at the door of your hearts and ears to keep
them open.

It is stored of a Roman, that he never beheld the rubbish of old marble, or
looked upon the ruins of any ancient building: but he wept and cried,
Recordatione temporum meliorum ploro, I grieve and lament to think of the
days which are gone and past. But we are contrary, and as he looked back with
grief and sorrow on that which is past, so we look forward with joy and
comfort, toward that which is to come: the changing of our flesh, the
instauration of our nature, the renewing of the world, the transformation of
the elements, when the creature that travels and groans unto this present,
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption; for then it is we must
enjoy the right and seat of Judicature and prehemmence.

(...).

In the regeneration.

Which some call the resurrection, others call the redemption of our bodies;
when mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and this corruptible shall put
on incorruption. For the first generation and birth of man is, when he comes
into the world: the second generation and birth of man, is when he is raised
out of the world, and taken into heaven, Ad contemplandum lumen aeternitatis
(as Saint Gregory speaks) to contemplate the Lord, and to behold eternity:
and as there is a regeneration of the inward man after the image of God, by
grace and faith in the blood of Christ, and the lauour of Baptism, termed by
the Apostle (...). The lauour of regeneration: where he is begot of the
immortal seed, and borne as it were anew of water and the spirit: so must
there be a regeneration of the outward man, by the power of God, Who shall
change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body: which
extends to every creature, sublunarie as the elements: celestial as the
heavens. Behold says God, I create a new earth and a new heaven: Behold says
John, I see a new earth, and a new heaven. So that we may boldly cry with
Peter, Expectamus nouos coelos, We look for a new earth, and a new heaven,
according to his promise, wherein dwells righteousness. For he shall change
them, and they shall be changed, the earth shall be changed, and clothed with
beauty: the air shall be changed, and purged from obscurity, the fire shall
be changed, that is do not consume, the water shall be changed, that it do not
putrify: the heavens shall be changed, for they shall rest from motion, and
receive a greater perfection of brightness and claritie, the Sun shall stand
in the East, and the Moon in the West, where first they were created, that we
may behold the fair beauty of the Lord and look upon his Son in a throne
of glory.

Son of God, and yet Son of man, for he shall judge as he was judged, and
return in the same form, wherein he was despised: that every eye may see whom
they pierst: and be not afraid of him they crucified, for the greatness of
his power, and the brightness of his presence. Quid facturus (says that
notable Moralist) if his enemies went back, and fell to the ground, when he
came in weakness and humility to be judged: how shall they start, and be
confounded, when he comes in power and majesty to judge the world, and to
pronounce the sentence of condemnation against every cursed malefactor? Foelix
trembled at the mention of it, and these unhappy Foelixes shall never be able
to abide the sight of his glorious throne, environed with a guard of heavenly
soldiers. At length we see what our hope is, and when it shall be revealed,
not before the day of judgment, and the coming of our Savior. Beware then
lest ye be over hasty, to judge before your time. I speak only of private
censure, uncharitable suspicion, malicious calumny, spightfull detraction,
which is not iudicium, but praeiudicium, not judgment but prejudice,
Eagle-sighted in the faults of others, and ready to stick as flies in the
sores and ulcers of their griefs and infirmities. As for that golden pillar of
public judicature. The ground and basis of regular states and well ordered
kingdoms: it is strengthened in my text, and ministerially with subordination
derived to such as are Apostolic. For if we shall judge the tribes of
Israel, and the families of the earth, nay the whole world, together with the
blessed Angels, (...) how much rather smaller things, and such as pertain unto
life? the argument is not humane but divine, drawn from the mouth and pen of
that great Doctor and vessel of election, in the sixth Chapter and the first
Epistle to the Corinthians. Where he speaks inclusiuely, and makes himself a
Judge, as well of things temporal, as of things eternal, and let all such as
hold the sons of Zadocke most unworthy of all iusticiarie function, as most
incorruptible and repugnant, rectify their judgment, and subscribe to that of
God. They shall discern betwixt the clean and the unclean, (...) and in
strife or controversy, they shall stand up to judge according to my ordinance.
Ezech. 44. 24. Beloved, we know the sacred majesty of legal decrees and
monotheticall exercises may be well preserved, when by lawful authority from
higher powers, it is committed to religious professors. And though Aarons rod
must ever yield to the rod of Moses, and be judged by it, yet may it sometimes
bring forth ripe and pleasant Almonds. But I touch here as at the river Nile,
and that only to clear the text. My scope is to support the weakness of your
patience and long animitie, that as ye serve Christ, and walk in him, so
likewise ye would abide his leisure, and wait the time of his reward. It was a
comfortable speech which the Emperor used to Galba, in his childhood and
minority, when he took him by the chinne, and said. Tu Galba, quandoque
imperium degustabis. Thou Galba, shall one day sit upon a throne, and let it
cheer the Saints of God, how little soever in the sight of the world, that one
day they shall sit upon a throne. Et tu Galba impertum degustabis, thou Galba,
thou little one, thou Jacob, thou Israel, thou worm Jacob, thou poor Israel,
that sits in the dust with Job, or lie on thy bed of sickness; with him that
was paraliticall, shall one day sit upon a throne, and be gathered with
Princes, with the King of kings, and the Lord of lords, that reigns over the
house of David, and turns righteousness into judgment: the Carpenters son
is gone before to make room, as yet the seats are not built, nor the thrones
erected, when he shall fashion the world anew, and return in the clouds of
heaven, we shall be enstalled with him, and receive as it were Stallum in
choro, and vocem in capitulo. A seat in the quire, and a voice in the Chapter
of that blessed temple, the temple of Jerusalem. Now he cries to us, as he did
to Mary. Noli me tangere, touch me not, we may not touch the severity of his
judgments, nor the majesty of his greatness, touch me not, for though I am
gone up to the Father, I am not come down to you in power. Then shall ye sit
with me upon my throne, as I sit with my Father upon his throne, upon my
throne, for ye shall partake of my judgments, and yet upon twelve thrones, for
ye shall have your several mansions, whilst the whole world does cry with the
Antiochians, In Theodoret, vicit Deus and Christus eius, The Lord and his
Christ has got the victory, the Lord and his Saints have got the victory. Be
patient therefore, and have nothing to do with the stool of wickedness, which
imagines mischief as a law. But stand as men waiting for the Bridegroom, with
your loins girt, and your lamps burning, gird your loins with chastity, and
abstinence: kindle your lamps with charity and holiness. Blessed are the
servants whom the Lord shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, He shall
gird himself, and make them sit down at table with him, and come and serve
them, Luke 12. 37. Even so Lord Jesus come quickly, it is long since thou came
in the flesh, and wast made lower then Angels, be not slow to return in the
clouds, and approve thy self higher then Angels: do not thou hear the cry
of those souls, which lie under the altar. Quousque Domine, how long sweet
Jesus? Such is the voice of all thy loving servants, that languish and faint
with the continual expectation of thy glorious presence. Quousque Domine, how
long sweet Jesus? Will thou hide thy self for ever, and shut up thy loving
kindness in everlasting displeasure? Veni Domine Jesus? Come Lord Jesus, and
make no long tarrying, Cibus viatorium, salus beatorum, says Fulgentius: as
thou have been the strength and comfort of all that travel by the way: so be
the crown and glory of all that are come to the end of their way. The
Prophets desired to see thy coming upon the earth, to the end they might be
redeemed: We look for thy appearing in the heavens, to the end we may be
glorified. Tunc implebuntur vota (says elegant Bernard, then shall our longing
be satisfied, and our desires accomplished: we that have followed thee in
truth, shall rest with thee in peace, and we that rest with thee in peace,
shall judge with thee in righteousness; this peace, this truth, this
righteousness, this glory, the Lord of his great mercy grant unto us, for
the merit of his Son Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father and the Spirit be
praise and glory, from generation to generation. Amen.

COELVM APERTVM: THE Opening of Paradise.

HIERON. in Epist. Nihil Christiano foelicius, cui promittitur regnum coelorum.



LONDON, Printed for ROBERT ALLOT.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
MATH. 25. 21. Enter into thy masters joy.
THe best men are but Gods stewards: and as it were dispensers of his manifold
graces. Whatsoever virtues we have, they are pledges of his love, and gifts of
his spirit: or rather (as it is employed in the series of this parable) talents
and deposites of our Lord and master. Paul and David agree in one, that when
he went on high, he bestowed gifts upon men: and there is none but may
profess with John the Evangelist, De plenitudine eius, of his fullness have we
all received some strength, some virtue, some wisdom, some knowledge, some
power, some eloquence, some faith, some holiness, some tongues, some healings,
some prophesies, some miracles, for the honor of God, the beauty of the
world, the gathering of the Saints, the building of the Church, the perfecting
of our lives, the crowning of our souls in the day of our Lord Jesus. So that
we may not bury our talent in the ground, or hide it in a napkin with that
unprofitable servant, lest we be like the Jews of whom Austin spoke, Verba,
non facta legis habuerunt, They kept the words of the Law, they neglected the
works of the Law, full of leaves, void of fruit: worthy to be excluded the
kingdom of heaven, and exiled from the presence of God, with those foolish
Virgins: For he is, (as the text notes) a hard man, That reapeth where he
sows not, and gathers where he stroweth not. Though he forbid us to put
our money to use, yet does he charge us to give his into the bank, that when
he comes, he may receive it with increase: being (as Saint Ambrose notes)
Foenerator gratiae, A great usurer, and a wonderful extortioner, not of things
temporal, as gold and silver: but of things spiritual, as faith, and
holiness, the like endowments lent us for the good of others. Whence is that
of a learned Father, Augentur dona, crescit ratio, The larger our gifts, the
greater our account. He that gave us a blessing, will call us to a reckoning.
If we have gained nothing, we shall loose all: if we have been careful of a
little, we shall be rulers over much, and when that mystical traveler, that
went a far off, shall return home, he will not only gratulate our piety
with an Euge bone serve, well done good servant: but reward our fidelity with
an intraui gaudium Domini tui. Enter into thy masters joy.

These words are a gracious inuitation of our Savior Christ to the quiet
fruition of peace and rest. Whereof I may say, as King Solomon did of his
Spouses tongue, Lac and mel, sub lingua tua, Milk and honey are under thy
roof, milk and honey are under their cover, the milk of divine truth and
spiritual comfort, the honey of liquid pleasure, and most incomparable
sweetness, streaming and derived upon the heirs of righteousness, that it
may be true which David long since prophesied, Exultabunt sancti in gloria, the
Saints shall rejoice with glory: and sing upon their beds, the beds of peace
and holiness, the beds of security and blessedness, in the mount of God and
City of Jerusalem. If you please to mark the cells (as it were) of this waxen
comb, from whence the honey drops, ye shall find they are but three.

First, the right and power of the admission, they are authorized by God to
make their entry, and therefore says the text, (...), Enter.

Secondly, the nature and quality of their possession, it is joy and
felicity, and therefore says the text, (...), Enter into joy.

Last of all, the benefit and privilege of their service and relation, they
are joined with their master, and made partners with our Savior, and therefore
says the text, (...), Enter into thy masters joy.

In that we have leave to enter, I note, that private secrecy of that heavenly
kingdom: In that we must enter into joy, I note the sweet iucunditie of our
future condition.

In that it is the joy of our master, I note the wonderful dignity of every
Christian.

Lift up your heads, byee gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors:
the King of glory shall come in. Yea and all his Saints with him: the King and
his daughter, the Lord and his servants, God and his Church, Christ and his
members, to the end they may receive Denarium salutis, (as S. Austin speaks)
the hire of their labor, and the penny of their salvation. How justly may we
cry with Peter, Master whither shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal
life. It is thy life we seek, and it is thy joy we hope to enter, whilst
thou do so freely call us, and so graciously inuit us to the communion and
fellowship of thine everlasting inheritance. Intra in gaudium Domini tui, Enter
into thy masters joy.

By this ye may see, what the Text imports, and therefore since a great, an
effectual door is opened to me, from the readiness of your hearts, and the
promptness of your devotion, I will descend speedily and make entry: Me
thinks I hear your expectation say to me, as Christ unto you all, (...),
Enter.

And who I pray you, would not gladly enter the gates of Paradise, if he might?
All like the sweetness of the place, few the straitness of the way: and
though we care not to be holy, yet we desire to be happy: ever crying with
the Prophet, Amaui Domine habitationem domus tui. O God, I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwells. Yet is it
not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy. No man comes to the Son, the knowledge of the Son, unless the
Father draw him: no man comes unto the Father, the glory of the Father: unless
the Son admit him. He it is that puts some on the right hand, with a Venite
benedicti, Come ye blessed: others on the left hand, with a Recedite
maledicti, Depart ye cursed; that says unto one, enter, of another, cast him
forth into outward darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Whence is that of John, Blessed are they which do his will, and have right in
the tree of life, to enter the gates of the City. For without shall be dogs,
and inchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and every one
that loves and speaks lies, the last and the 14. of the Apoca. It is a
curious division which I read in S. Bernard, and worthy observation, Alij
mercantur, alij furantur, etc. Some purchase heaven, and they are such as make
friends, with the riches of iniquity: others steal heaven, and they are like
the woman that was healed by the secret touch of our Saviors garment: many
invade heaven, and take it by force, (for indeed the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence) and they may be compared to Jacob, that strove with God, and
wrestled with an Angel, but whether thieves, and robbers, that steal heaven
by faith: or Merchants and Factors, that purchase heaven by charity: or
usurers and intruders, that invade heaven, and take it by force, the most
gracious and acceptable force of prayers and devotion: they must all confess,
that it is in the name and mediation of Christ Jesus: by that new and living
way, (as the Apostle notes) Which he made for us through the veil, that is,
his flesh, Heb. 10. 20. So that I may say of heaven and the doors thereof, as
Saint John does of the book, and the seals thereof, Nemo dignus est inuentus,
there is none found worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof,
but only the Lamb, and there is none found worthy to open the gates of
heaven, and to loose the bars thereof, but only the Lamb: that Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world. Hence is he termed the way: and if
that be not plain and easy, the door: and if that be not open, and peruious,
life, and salvation in the abstract: that has the keys of death and of hell;
or rather of felicity, and of heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God,
and says unto us enter.

Enter friends, and take your comfort: enter servants, and take your wages:
enter children, and take your patrimony: enter brethren, and take your
portion: enter all ye that seek the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness
thereof, and receive a crown, which is laid up for you in the highest. Dives
non excluditur, the poor is not shut out for want of money, the rich is not
turned back for the abundance of his comforts, the weak is not thrust out,
for want of strength, nor the mighty refused, for the danger of their forces,
but every one has boldness, to draw near unto the throne of grace, by the
merits of Christ Jesus. For it is not (...) come toward the joy of thy master
and look upon it with desire, and greediness, as one that thirsts in the
midst of waters: but (...), Come into the joy of thy Master, and take part of
it, with delight and satisfaction, as one that does feel, and taste how good
the Lord is. Thus does one deep call upon another, Abyssus luminosa, abyssum
tenebrosam. The depth of light and claritie, upon the depth of blindness and
obscurity, the depth of power and majesty, upon the depth of weakness and
humility, the depth of goodness and mercy, upon the depth of wretchedness
and misery. And all this for the noise of the water pipes, which is nothing but
the sound and the cry of repentance and humility. He swear unto the
generation of our fathers, they should never enter into his rest, because they
provoked him in the wilderness: He says only to the generation of their
children, they shall enter into his rest: If they obey his precepts. What is
his word, as good as his oath? yes, when he that speaks is truth it self,
and he swears that has none greater then himself. For his passion was our
redemption, and if I may use the words of Bernard, Clauus penetrans, clauis
aperiens. The nails that fastened him to the cross, the spear that ran him
through, the lance that opened his side, the iron that went into his soul, is
made a key to unlock heaven, and to make us enter. Therefore do we sing
triumphantly in the Churches Liturgy, When thou had ouecome the sharpness
of death, thou did open the kingdom of heaven to all believers. Agreeable
whereunto is the vision of Saint John, I looked, and behold there was a door
opened in the midst of heaven, and the first voice I heard, was as the sound of
a trumpet, saying, Come up higher. But if God himself did not rest the seventh
day, before he considered the works of his creation, and found them good. God
saw all that was made, and lo it was very good, Genesis 1. 31. How shall we hope
to enter his rest, that eternal Sabbath of our bodies, and our spirits, before
we have done some good, examined our hearts, tried our faith, proved our
works, and found some goodness in the midst of their imperfections? we may
not please God without faith, or see God withour holiness. The bridegroom
will pass by without notice of us, if we have neither faith in our hearts,
nor oil in our vessels. The oil of grace, the oil of mercy, the oil of
devotion, the oil of charity, shining and burning to the comfort of our
brethren. As wisdom does not enter the house of an evil soul: so an evil
soul does not enter the house of wisdom. Therefore does he stand at the
door and knock, with an aperi sponsa, aperi columba. Open my love, open my
done. Open to me the gates of righteousness: that I may open to thee the gates
of blessedness. For except your righteousness exceed that of the Pharisees,
ye shall never enter the kingdom of heaven. Look upon those Elders which
stand before the throne, they are clothed with white robes, and have palms in
their hands, which is nothing but the flower and beauty of their good works
and Christian piety. It is storied of the Scythians, that once a year they
made a great feast, where none may come, but such as have slain an enemy. The
feast God makes us, is the joy of my Text, a great feast, and in the
simplicity of terms, exceeding gaudies: but there is no entrance or
admission, before we have crucified the body of sin; slain an enemy,
sacrificed a rebel, yea many enemies, and many rebels, that fight against the
soul by true confession and hearty repentance, never to be repented of.
Adiebus Ioannis Baptistae says Christ, Since the time of John Baptist, the
kingdom of heaven suffers violence. Why since the time of John Baptist? But
only to show the virtue of repentance, because he taught repentance, and was
never without a poenitentiam agite in his mouth. Repent, for the kingdom of
God is at hand. Repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Whence is that of
Gregory, Rapiamus fletibus, quod non debetur meritis. Let us snatch that by
force of tears, which is not due to the merits of works. If any be meek,
patient, humble, penitent, (...) (as Christ taught in a Sermon upon the mount)
theirs is the kingdom of heaven, and theirs only is the kingdom of heaven.

I know there be many pretend keys, and would feign lead us into a fools
paradise, by a vain conceit of their deceitful merits: witness that great
Clauiger of Rome, that usurps all power in heaven and earth, as if he alone
had the key of David, That opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man
opens. It is not enough for Christ to loose, if he bind: it is not enough
for Christ to remit, if he retain: it is not enough for Christ to say enter,
if he say be gone. O the cursed blasphemy of that open sepulcher, how do
they spoil God of his natural right and peculiar jurisdiction? And yet they
are not the keys of heaven, but of hell, which these men keep, abyssi claues
(as Saint John writes) the keys of that bottomless pit, where they lead many
by the heresy of their doctrine, and the impiety of their actions. If not by
the thunder and lightning of their fierce anathemaes, and direful imprecations.

It is a pretty story which I read of Pope Leo, when he was troubled in
conscience, and touched with the remorse for his iniquities: his Confessor
cheared him up, with a Quid times, sancte pater? Holy father, what makes you
afraid? Have not you the keys of heaven, and the merits of Christ at your
dispose? There is none in the world that has so great power and command as
your self. O says Leo, know ye not, that he which sells any thing, has no
right in that which is sold? I fear since we have so often sold Christ and
his merits, we shall have no right nor interest in them our selves. Wretched
men that ye are, who shall deliver ye from the body of despair? May we not
say to them as Christ did to others in the Gospel? Woe be unto you, ye take
the keye of knowledge, but ye do not enter your selves, and such as come ye
forbid. Woe be unto you, ye take unto you the keys of heaven, but you do not
enter your selves: and such as come ye forbid, or rather indeed ye bid all
that come, at your public Iubilies, as base Hucsters of Gods free mercy, in
the sale and market of Pardons and Indulgences. But howsoever these men abuse
that power against the truth, which is given for the truth, we are sure Christ
has left keys with his Church. Tibi dabo claues, was a grant made to the
Apostles in the name of Peter, and stands good to every Minister of the
Gospel, under the broad seal of the Cross. To thee will I give the keys of
heaven. They have all the keys of heaven, keys of knowledge, and keys of
power, to instruct the ignorant, to absolve the penitent, to remit sin, to
release punishment, to shut heaven, by the threatenings of the Law, and the
denouncing of vengeance: to open heaven, by the tidings of the Gospel, and the
ministry of the Sacraments. Whence is that of David, Diffusa est gratia in
labijs tuis, Full of grace are thy lips, because God has blessed thee for
ever. The lips of Christ are the Ministers of his Church, that declare mercy,
preserve knowledge, excite repentance, pronounce forgiveness, and are full of
grace indeed, whilst they speak comfortably to Jerusalem, saying in virtue of
their Commission, as Christ does in the fullness of jurisdiction: Be of good
cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee: I absolve thee from all thy sins, in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Arise, take up
thy bed and walk, walk toward heaven, get thee unto Paradise: the rest of
thy Savior, the joy of thy Master, which is the nature and quality of our
profession: now to be examined and discussed. Enter into thy masters joy.

Did the Lord say, enter the goods or the lands, the houses or the tenures of
thy Lord and master, for indeed the earth is the Lords, and all that is
therein. How would the greedy Harpyes of this world, fly to get possession?
Some like Zacheus, that came down hastily: others like the blouddy Farmer of
the vineyard in the Gospel, that slew the heir and took the inheritance, but
many have these things which never enjoy them. Have ye not seen great
substance, and no joy? great learning, and no joy? great victory, and no joy?
great spoils, and no joy? These things are often joined with fear, and grief,
and jealousy, and distraction, whilst many cry with the Prophet, O my
leanness, my leanness, in the midst of their brauest triumphs and greatest
ouerflowings. And therefore it is worth the observing, what a great Sultan
spoke, when he beat the Christians with the loss of many thousand soldiers.
I would be loath to overcome so very often. Multiplicasti gentem, sed non
multiplicasti laetitiam, says Esaias, Thou have multiplied the Nation, but thou
have not multiplied their joy. And be there not many, of whom we may say,
Multiplicasti the saurum, sed non multiplicasti laetitiam. Thou have multiplied
their treasure, but thou have not multiplied their joy? Thou have increased
their children, but thou have not increased their joy? thou have doubled their
portion, but thou have not doubled their joy, thou have enlarged their
dominion, but thou have not enlarged their joy? Howsoever God dispose these
things, as he does his Sun and his rain, sometimes on the good, sometimes on
the bad, without distinction: He will be sure to keep joy for his servants,
if they have it not in the flesh, they shall have it in the spirit, if they
have it not in life, they shall have it in death, if they have it not in
themselves, they shall have it in the Lord, And the bones that are broken shall
rejoice. Good reason has Christ to bid us enter his joy, for such is the
incomprehensible greatness thereof, it may not enter us. Eye has not seen
it, ear has not heard it, neither has it entered into the heart of man. For
the righteous are compassed with the goodness of the Lord, and they have joy
on every side, joy within, from the purity of their conscience, joy without,
from the glory of their bodies, joy above, from the sight of God, and the
fruition of his presence, joy beneath, from the remembrance of death, and the
torments they have escaped: but this speech is figurative, and by the joy of my
text, we conceive the place of joy, the garden of pleasure, the Paradise of
God, the fountain of living waters: where his children do not only suck the
breasts of comfort and milk them out: but drink and are satisfied with the
plenty of delight, as from a river crying to their souls, in the fullness of
security, as the rich man did in the deceitfulness of vanity, Soul, soul,
live at ease, and take thy pastime, thou have goods laid up for many years: or
rather indeed, for everlasting generations. For the Lord has promised to
create Jerusalem as a rejoicing, and the inhabitants thereof as joy. So that
Paul writing of that heavenly kingdom, says it is Gaudium in spiritu sancto,
Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. What joy the world has,
stands not upon me to examine, the world that is set upon mischief, the world
that is subject unto vanity, it is compared to the veil of tears, and a place
of Dragons: there is a curse lies on it from the days of Cain: and it is
reserved to fire, against the day of judgment. If there be any pleasure in it,
it is but (as Austin speaks) miseriae solatium, no degree of joy, but a solace
of distress, to qualify and temper the sower water of our manifold
afflictions. Like that herb, which puts us into a laugh, and depriues us of
life, Moritur and ridet, as Saluianus speaks, he that eats it smiles dying.
But the hill of Sion is a fair place, and the joy of the whole earth. Omne
quod delectat continens, (as Saint Bernard writes) containing every thing that
may please or satisfy. Let the dry and thirsty soul be judge, that counts no
joy to that of the cup, no sweetness, to that of the grape: they shall have
Vinum aromaticum, and calicem inebriantem, The King shall lead them into his
wineseller, and their cup shall ouerflow. Let the hogs of Epicurus, and the
sons of Philoxonus be judge, that measure their delight by the extent of
their throat, and the dimensions of their belly: they shall have Panem
Angelorum, and vitulum saginatum, the Lord shall spread a table for them, and
kill the fatted Calfe. There be Hinds, and Roes, that leap and skip upon the
mountains, for the brave Nimrods of this world, that love to hunt and course,
there be chariots of fire, and horses of diverse colors, the white, and the
black, the pale, and the red, (as Saint John writes) for the stately
Caualiers, and such as desire to be mounted upon their steeds. Music for the
pleasant, and that delectable riches for the worldling, and those durable:
every dish for every taste, every content for every desire without loathing or
scarcity. O what joy arises from the place, the amaenitie of the place, the
gates are of pearl, the foundation of precious stones, the streets are paued
with gold, and say Hallelu-iah: Blessed be the Lord, which has extolled it for
ever. O what joy arises from the company, the swetnesse of the company, they
are Cherubins and Seraphins, hierarchies of Angels, families of men, the noble
army of Martyrs, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, that call upon the
Lord, and rejoice before him with songs of deliverance: their organs are the
instruments of joy: their works are the acts of joy, their thoughts are the
springs of joy, their language is the voice of joy; whilst they sing and cry:
Joy within the gates of Jerusalem, and peace be on Sion. One day in thy
Courts, is better then a thousand. I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house
of the Lord, then to live at ease in the tents of ungodliness. Can there be a
feast or a bankquet without joy? there shall be the supper of the great King.
Can there be a wedding or nuptials without joy? There shall be the marriage
of the Lamb: where the Lord shall work a greater miracle then ever he did in
Cana, and convert the tears of outward heuinesse, into the wine of inward
gladness: till we be drunk with the sweetness of his love, and the
pleasures of his kingdom, having (as Nyssen writes) (...). A sober kind of
drunkenness: for if joy be an act of love, and the effect of charity, (as the
Schools have determined) there must needs be great joy, where there is so
great love: perfect joy, where there is perfect charity, joy in our own
salvation, joy in the felicity of our brethren, whom we shall love as our
own souls, by the unity of the Spirit. But we may not think to find out the
springs of Nilus, or the several grounds of these infinite reioycings: O that
I had a pitcher large enough to draw, the well is deep, and my heart is not
able to contain, much less to present you with the joys of that heavenly
kingdom. Help me with your prayers, raise me with your spirits, let not the
cry of Rome drown the cry of Jerusalem: the one calls to pain and torment,
the other calls to joy and comfort: the one calls to a Limbus Patrum, the other
calls to the garden of Eden: The one calls to the fire of Purgatory, the other
calls to the life of glory: the one calls to the trial of your works in
imaginary flames, the other calls to the crown of your works in real
blessedness: and that by the example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
Intra in gaudium Domini tui. Enter into thy masters joy.

Here then is one key more, to raise our joy a little higher, and that is a
relative term, Domini gaudium, our masters joy.

It skils much, who is joined with us in the partaking of any good: Some had
rather die with their friends, then live with their enemies: and the poor
Indians chose rather to go to hell with their ancestors, then to heaven with
the Spaniards. If then it be sweet and comfortable to be in joy, what is it to
be with our Lord and Governor? To enter his joy, to eat and drink with our
master, at his table, and in his kingdom, or rather to make him our meat and
drink, that is the bread of life, and the wellspring of salvation: Yet thus
does God entreat his servants, and there is nothing so dear to him, but they
shall have part with him. His own joy, his own secret, his own sweetness,
his own comfort, his own robe, his own justice, his own clothing, his own
righteousness, nay his very life and spirit shall be given to them, as a seal
and pledge of extraordinary grace and special favor. Much like that of Cyrus
(though humane resemblances come short of divine presidents) who never liked
any dish, but he sent part to his friends, Semesos anseres, semesos panes,
(says my Author) sometime the bread himself did eat, sometime the meat
himself did taste from his trencher, with this kind and friendly salutation:
Cyrus tibi ista, quod ipsi fuerint iucundissima: The King sends you this,
because he likes it best himself, and holds it choice and dainty. It is a
small thing for the Saints of God to rejoice, unless it be in the Lord. The
joy of the creature is transient: the joy of the Creator permanent. They must
partake of their masters joy, and rejoice in that, where his soul delights.
Quo gaudet, and quod praestat, the joy he gives, and the joy he takes, the
joy he loves, and the joy he is. Whereupon (says Bernard) Non aurum pollicetur
Dominus, the Lord does not promise gold, nor silver, or precious stones, but
himself. He will be our joy, and he will be our comfort: our substantial
joy, our everlasting comfort: our solid joy, our everlasting glory, and the
very crown of our ioycing: (...) (as Nyssen speaks) the giver of the crown,
and the crown that is given, the disposer of the treasure, and the treasure
that is disposed: the merchant that sells the pearl, and the pearl that is
sold by the merchant: from whose golden beams and smiling rays, all the
creatures in heaven and earth receive beauty and perfection. The reason is
taken from that divine master of humane knowledge: (...) the chiefest good is
most pleasant and voluptuous in himself: because most good, most blessed, most
absolute, most perfect, and as he rejoices in himself, so we must rejoice
in him. The vision of his nature, the contemplation of his Dietie, where there
is fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore. It is his brightness must
clarify our understanding: his goodness must sanctify our affections, his
fullness possess our hearts, and satisfy the vastness of our greatest
spirits. What though Adam were afraid at the voice of God walking in the
garden? we shall triumph at the sight of God riding in the heavens. Gau^isi
discipuli viso Domino (says the Evangelist: The disciples rejoiced when they
saw the Lord: but the whole world shall be ravished with joy, when they look
upon Christ, not as he is in his works, but as he is in himself: his Essence,
his divinity, with the clear eyes of love and knowledge: like those creatures
in the Apocalypse, Which are full of eyes, about the throne, and amidst the
throne: about the throne, in the sight and comprehension (as it were) of divine
greatness: amidst the throne, in the taste and fruition of divine goodness.

O thou bright Son of eternal glory, that do create the Saints, exhilarate
the Elders, diaper the heavens, serene the elements, inspire the Cherubins,
inflame the Seraphins, enlighten the temple of Jerusalem, and make glad the
City of our God: thy love is our joy, thy peace our joy, thine eyes our joy,
thy looks our joy. If thou were like a bundle of my the in thy sufferings:
thou art as a heap of Camphire in thy blessings. Thou do cheer us now, but
it is imperfectly, and (as it were) by a proxy, the proxy of thy creatures,
the proxy of thy servants. Sometimes the fatness of the earth, and the dew of
heaven, sometimes by the comfort of friends, and the abundance of thy treasure,
at most by the precious influence of thy invisible graces, but thou shall one
day cheer us by thy self, the majesty of thy presence, the fruition of thy
company, the vision of thy person, the aspect of that face, which the Angels
desire to behold, and that continually. Whereupon says David, Letificabis nos
in lumine vultus tui. Thou shall make us glad with the joy of thy countenance.
And this is it which is termed, Domini gaudium: our masters joy. For indeed we
are all servants of one master, King and Priest, shepherd and flock, Prophet
and Disciple, Magistrate and subject, which made that great Emperor
Constantine, never writ to any Christian, though never so mean, but with this
direction, (as Eusebius notes) ad fratrem, and conseruum, to his brother, and
fellow servant. Worthy to be observed, by such as are Grandes and Demigods
upon earth, lest at any time they despise the humility of others low condition.

But I would not have the name of master, take us from the joy of our master:
that is it I would imprint into you, that you may be received into it. O that
your hearts were fixed upon it, and that ye would seek after the fountain of
eternal happiness. Then would ye fly your selves, and abandon the corruption
of humane infirmity: like that good man in Nazianzene, (...) that would not
suffer the nobility of his soul to be depraved with carnal filthiness. How
does it come to pass, that so many are caught with vanity, led with
curiosity, taken with desire, inflamed with pleasure, wract with envy,
defiled with luxury, poisoned with malice, enraged with fury, stung with
serpents, haunted with maladies, troubled with cares, vexed with heaviness,
drowned and plunged in the sea and gulf of inextricable miseries, but only
for neglect of this joy; because they do not look after their masters joy, and
sing with the blessed Virgin, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit
has rejoiced in God my Savior. God forbid we should forbid any to rejoice:
the Text persuades it, the Lord commands it, and my heart is enlarged toward
you with joy and gladness. Laetemur iugiter, modo innocenter, Let us rejoice
daily, so it be without hurt in the Lord, in our master. We have just cause to
fear that many prefer the joy of the world, before the joy of the master,
mutable vanity before true felicity. And yet let me do them no wrong; they
are very desirous of their masters joy, but who is their master? Is not pride,
or covetousness, or violence, or extortion, or some domineering habit of
malicious wickedness? Lust calls to one, and says I am thy master: Revenge to
another, and says, I am thy master: several vices to several humors, with
the like claim of subjection and obedience. So that where God has many
servants created unto good works: the Devil has as many pensioners sold unto
evil works. Base slaves, mercenary hirelings, if not for pleasure, at least
for profit; they come into the devils joy: his baits, and his contentments:
the Devil comes into their joy, their souls and their consciences: into some
by a pot, into others by a sop, as he did that accursed miscreant and Apostate
Judas: but we hope better things of you, and such as do accompany salvation.
For me thinks ye are come already into your masters joy, the Tabernacles of
God, the Courts of his Sanctuary, Where ye serve him, with gladness, and
come before his presence with a song. For if there were joy in heaven for one
sinner that repents: what joy shall there be with the Lord of heaven, for so
many Christians, that move toward his Courts, and fly as the Doves to their
windows? O how beautiful are your feet! how aimiable are your doings? How is
the Lord pleased with your sacrifices and oblations? whilst ye come from the
East, and stand in the gates of the daughter of Sion, and open your treasure,
and present the Lord with the riches of your substance, even gold, and myrhe,
and frankincense? For this it is that he does open his bosom, and stretch
forth his arms, and lift up his voice, and extend the golden scepter of his
loving kindness: to the end ye may come to his royal Palace, saying to us,
as the King did to Hester: What is thy petition? and what is thy request? it
shall be given thee to the half of my kingdom. Come with me from Lebanon,
even with me from Lebanon, or rather (as it is in my Text) Intra in gaudium
Domini tui. Enter into thy masters joy. O let not the joy of man draw us from
the joy of God: O let not the joy of the creature, draw us from the joy of the
Creator: O let not the joy of the left hand draw us from the joy of the right
hand, O let not the joy of things visible and temporal, draw us from the joy
of things invisible and eternal. Could the joyful sound of Amphions harp
raise stones to the fencing of Thebes? And shall not the joyful cry of our
Saviors Spirit draw us to the building of that heavenly Jerusalem? Audite
vocantem, quia exaudit inuocantem (says Austin) be not slow to here the Lord
when he calls unto you, because he is ready to hear you when you call upon
him. Ye see the power of your vocation, ye are called by our Savior: ye see
the nature of your inheritance, it is joy and gladness: ye see the benefit of
your service, it is the joy of your Lord and master, as the Romans painted the
Graces, so has God planted his children, Semper gaudentes, semper ridentes,
they were ever laughing, and these are ever lauding, lauding and praising, and
singing and rejoicing with joy unspeakable and glorious. My prayer shall be
with Moses, Si inueni gratiam, if I have found grace in thy sight, show us thy
way, if we have found grace in thy sight, show us thy self, and show us thy
glory, bring us unto thy rest, and take us into thy joy, that Israel may be
truly Israel, and see God: that Israel may be glad in him that made him, and
Sion may be joyful in her King, even Jesus Christ thine only joy, and our
only Savior, to whom with the Father, and the Spirit, three persons and one
God, be ascribed all power, majesty, and dominion this day and for ever. Amen.

Angelorum ANTIPHONIA: The Angels Antheme.

BERN. Cant. Ser. 13. Tibi Domine gloria maneat illibata mecum been agitur si
pacem habuero.



LONDON, Printed for ROBERT ALLOT.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
LVKE 2. 14. Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will
toward men.
WHat Job prophesied, time has verified: that when the corner stone was laid,
the sons of God rejoiced, and the stars of the morning praised him
together. Christ our Savior is the stone of the corner, that lies in the
foundation of his Church: the stars of the morning are the glorious Angels
and Citizens of heaven, that shine as Jasper about the throne of God, and cry
Hosanna in the highest: Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,
Hosanna in the highest: whereupon (says Ambrose,) Laudatur in coelis, videtur
in terris. The show and manifestation of his presence is in the earth: but the
celebritie and declaration of his glory is in the heavens. For if the Psalmist
would have a trumpet blown in the new moon. Blow the trumpet in the new
moon. There is a trumpet of praise and glory, that must sound and be lifted
up, shall I say in the new Moon, or rather in the feast of Tabernacles? Whilst
the Tabernacle of God is with man, and (to speak in the phrase of Nyssen)
(...), not Israel, but the Lord of Israel dwells in a tent, or a booth: and
is received into the dark mansion and earthly Tabernable of humane flesh and
mortal corruption. Ye have a president from the Angels, though he were not a
Savior to them, but to us. (For he took not the Angels, but the seed of
Abraham:) Yet do they begin the Antiphone and teach us how to sing. Though we
may not compare with their knowledge and understanding: yet may we emulate
their piety and devotion. My prayer shall be that which the Apostle used in
the behalf of the Romans, (...) the God of patience and consolation make ye
like minded, that with one mouth ye may praise God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ: saying and singing as it is in my Text, (...). Glory to God
in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men.

That which I have read unto you, is a sacred Hymn, and divine Embasie: where
there is discovered a threefold benefit of our Saviors incarnation.

The first is (...), the love and good will of him that dwelt in the bush. Good
will toward men.

The second, (...), peace and reconciliation with God the Father. On the earth
peace.

The third is (...), honor and glory, and that from the noblest creatures: I
mean the Angels, that dwell in the height and sublimitie of eternal
blessedness.

Glory to God in the highest, on the earth peace, good will toward men.

But that which arises most clearly from this fountain, is a blessing
received, and a blessing returned.

A blessing received, and that is peace. On the earth peace.

A blessing returned, and that is Glory.

Glory to God on high.

In the first we note the Motive, (...), divine love and spiritual adoption.

Good will toward men.

In the second we note a circumstance, (...)*

In the highest.

Either local, and so by the highest, we understand the heavens.

Or personal, and so by the highest, we understand the Angels.

Glory be to God on high, on the earth peace, etc.

Glory be to God on high.

For the heavens send down, and the clouds drop righteousness.

On the earth peace.

For salvation and Justice are come forth, it brings them forth together.

Good will toward men.

For we are satisfied with the abundance of his loving kindness, Grace and
Mercy, compassion and bounty from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Who so great and eminent, that he may not honor God? it is the practice of
the Angels.

Glory to God in the highest.

Who so powerful and magnificent, that he should not embrace peace? it is the
only blessing on the earth.

On the earth peace.

Who so amiable and preualent, that he should not stand by this grace? it is
the only stay of life and happiness.

Toward men good will.

O the divine majesty of this heavenly Sacrament: where he that is despised
of his own, is the atonement for his enemies: he that lies among the
beasts, is the security of man: he that cries in a stable, is magnified in
heaven, and that by an host of spiritual soldiers, saying and singing: Glory
to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men.

Ye have now seen the notes of my song. I shall resume them in their order,
though to use the words of John, I am not worthy to untie the latchet of his
shoe. Ligatura calceamenti ligatura mysterij, (says Gregory) the latchet of
his shoe is the mystery of his birth. For the brightness of the Godhead
lies shadowed and shrouded under the veil and cover of his manhood: divinity
in humanity, power in infirmity, majesty in humility, immortality in
frailty, life in death, and Christ in the flesh. O let not that be wanting in
you toward me, which abounds in God toward all. I mean voluntas bona, a good
will and beneuolous disposition whilst I begin with my first note, (...).
Glory to God on high.

It is well the Angels set glory before peace. For there will be no peace with
man, if there be not glory to the Lord: it is one of those peculiars, which he
reserueth to himself, the first is vengeance, and therefore says Moses,
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay; the second power, and therefore says the
Evangelist, The Lord has given all power to his Son; the last and chiefest
is Glory, and therefore says Esaias, I will not give my glory to another.
Indeed the Lord made all things for his glory, and if he be not glorified in
their actions, he will be glorified in their punishment by the severity of
his justice. This made the Apostle to exclude every creature from the
fellowship hereof, To the King everlasting, invisible, immortal, and only
wise God, be honor, and glory. And the Psalmist is distinctly negative, by a
perfect abdication from himself and others. Not unto us, not unto us, but to
thy name be the glory. That we may say unto her, as Joseph unto his Mistress.
My Lord has committed all things unto my hand, and kept nothing from me, but
only thee which art his wife: How shall I do so great wickedness, and sin
against my Lord? The Lord has committed all things unto our hands, sent us his
Angels, given his Son, powered forth his Spirit, multiplied his graces, and
kept nothing from us, but this glory, which is espoused to him from
everlasting. How shall we do so great wickedness as to sin against the
Lord, and spoil him of his glory? Yet there is an inward glory wherein we
may rejoice, proceeding from a good conscience, The holy Ghost bearing witness
to our spirits, that we are the Sons of God. For glory, and honor, and
peace, shall be to every soul that does good: to the Jew first, and also the
Grecian. Yea and an outward glory too, so it be limited within the bounds of
piety and charity. I mean the honor of God; and the benefit of our
neighbor: In Deo, secundum Deum, propter Deum, (as the learned have
distinguished:) First in Deo, from God, as the Author and fountain: then
secundum Deum, not after the will of man, but after the will of God: Last of
all, Propter Deum, to the honor of God, and the advancement of his Gospel. O
gloriam licitam (says Tertulltan) such Philotimie is very justifiable, and
worthy of man, the image of his Creator. It is the only crown which the Lord
has set upon his head, Coronasti eu^, Thou have crowned him with glory and
worship. God forbid I should deter any from that spiritual ambition and
Christian emulation, whereunto the Apostle does excite, Whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, any praise, (...) Think of these things, and consider
them with understanding. Agreeable to that of Tertulltan in his Gloriam
quaerimus de quibus salutem speramus. We may glory in that, which furthers
our good, and tends to our salvation. It is the empty shadow of humane
vanity, and proud usurpation of divine equality, that is to be condemned,
when men glory, as if they had not received: and arrogate that to themselves,
which is due unto God: Like Herod that was consumed of worms, because he
delighted in the praise of men, and took that to himself which belonged to
his maker: In which sense that of Seneca may be used, Quid ni tui miserior, si
pantonimica obstrepuerint instrumenta, etc. He is much to be pitied, that is
ever received with the cry and applause of vulgar admiration. It is better for
me to die (says the Apostle) then any should cause my rejoicing to be vain.
And it were better for us to be had in execration, and to be made Anathemaes
to our brethren, then any should cause our rejoicing to be vain and empty,
without respect unto God, and the praise of his anointed: that which I read in
Saint Bernard is very good, Si ante vestrum tribunal stare oporteret, etc.

O my brethren, if I were to stand before your tribunal, I would delight in
your praises: if I were to be tried by my own sentence, I would rest satisfied
with mine own opinion. But what a vanity, yea what a madness is it? since
the Lord is to be my Judge, not to seek the approbation of his goodness, and
to make his glory the crown of my rejoicing? Remember then I beseech you, the
voice of those many thousands in the Apocalypse, Worthy is he, that was
slain, to receive honor, and wisdom, and riches, and power, together with
that general acclamation, when all the creatures in heaven and earth made a
shout, crying, Praise, and honor, glory, and power be to him that sits upon
the throne, and to the Lamb for ever.

If the Baptist decreast when our Savior increast, let our pride vanish, and
the glory of our light be darkened, as a candle at noone, when the Sun is in
his strength, that when we shall be touched with the glory of our strength,
and the glory of our wisdom, and the glory of our riches, ches, and the
glory of our power, we may say as Christ did to Mary, Touch me not, for as yet
I am not gone up to the Father: It is heaven that is the seat of glory, and
that with God, the receipt whereof is like that precious ointment, and sacred
perfume, which the Lord charged the Priests to make, and sanctify to himself
throughout all their generations. But if ever the Lord were to be glorified,
and the whole air to ring with the melodious Harmony of symphoniacall
inuitations: If ever Gabriel the Archangell were to lead us forth with a song,
and we to follow as workmen did Miriam with Timbrels and dances: If ever the
heart of man were to be made an altar of praise and thankfulness, and the
whole Church to call for the Harp, and Violl, the Psalter, and the Dulcimer:
Now is the time, whilst the golden candlestick is placed in the midst of the
Tabernacle, and that Virgin bush of Mary's womb, brings forth the light of the
whole world, and is not defiled or consumed: whilst the glory of the Lord is
risen upon us, and there is a star come from Jacob, whose comfortable rays
pierce the deep, enlighten the heavens, search the darkness of the grave, and
spread over the face of the whole earth, with radiant and shining luster. O the
gracious bounty and wonderful humility of so great dispensation. God is
become man, the word flesh, a Virgin a Mother, the Creator a creature, and (to
speak in the language of Saint Austin) Qui regit sidera, lambit vbera. He
that gouernes the influence of the stars, draws the sweetness of his
mothers breast, taking that from us, whereby he may save us, and join us to
himself in the highest places, who would not spring with John, in the very
womb, and burst with Zachary, into the voice of joy and gladness, through
the strongest bars of infant silence and natural imperfections, to behold
that Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, invested in the
golden fleece of humane nature, to see the King of righteousness, which sits
by the throne of God, forsake the bosom of his Father, and proceed from the
womb of Mary, as a Bridegroom from his chamber: without prejudice to his
Godhead, or diminution of his power, before the Lord was invisible, and we
heard the voice of God, as Adam in the cool of the garden, sometime he spoke
in lightning, sometime he spoke in thunder, sometime from the clift of a
rock, sometimes from the consuming flames of burning fire. But now we look
upon him through the cloud of flesh, and the lantern of his body, so
qualified and tempered to outward sight, and corporal apprehension: that we
may not only see, but handle the word of life in the form of man and habit of
nature. (...) (says that learned Father Nazianzene in an Oration) though we
have strayed in the desert of this world, yet now we have a cloud of direction
to go before, the white cloud of his sacred flesh to lead and guide us to that
heavenly Canaan. Hic est Dominus Jesus, this is Christ the Lord, the mediator
of God and man, the son of a Virgin, the Bridegroom of his Church, more
fair and comely then all the sons of men: that created his mother when he
was begot of his Father, and glorified his Father, when he was borne of his
mother. Jesus Christ the righteous, Yesterday and to day, and the same for
ever. For there be many things in his birth, which deserve praise and
everlasting remembrance. The first is his goodness, that he would endure the
prison of our flesh: the second his power, that he could manifest his strength
in our weakness: the third his wisdom, in finding means for our
deliverance, the last his justice, in satisfying the Law, and making himself
obedient to the actual performance: that we may cry with the Psalmist, O Lord
thy truth reaches to the heavens, and thy mercy to the clouds. If any seek
to be Authors of that, whereof they only bring tidings, they are false
Prophets, Aemulantes diuinitatem, and furantes diuinationem (as Tertullian) nor
Saint, nor Angel, nor Cherubin, nor Seraphin, nor any of that celestial
Hierarchy, may share in this honor, it is thou only which have the glory.
And that in altissimis, and ab altissimis. First in the highest, for the
heavens declare the glory, and are the stage and theater of thine everlasting
power, and triumphant majesty, secondly of the highest.

For the Angels praise thee, and the Saints give thanks unto thee, the heavens
and all the powers therein continually do cry, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
Sabbath, heaven and earth are full of thy glory, thy praise is their joy: thy
honor their comfort; thy celebritie their felicity: by whose power they are
made, by whose wisdom they are illuminated, by whose grace they stand fast,
and shall never be removed. Whence is that of David, Beati qui habitant.
Blessed are they which dwell in thy house, they will ever be praising thee.
Though I could assign many reasons of this glory from the Angels, as the
excellent dignity of their wonderful creation, for they bear the signiture
of God in their nature: the continual fruition of divine sweetness, for they
taste and drink thereof as from a river: the sure confirmation of their
eternal blessedness, for they are settled and established by the incarnation
of our Savior: Yet that which fills their hearts with praise, and their tongue
with joy, is their instauration of their decay: because thou have built up the
walls of Jerusalem, and made up their breach by the salvation of man, and the
redemption of our nature. The walls of Jerusalem are the companies of Angels:
which are built up, and made complete, by reducing man to the state of their
perfection. Therefore do they rejoice and sing, therefore do they cry aloud
upon their beds, and (to use the words of Cyprian) Gratulabundi praedicant,
they magnify the riches of Gods mercy with exceeding joy and wonderful
gratulation. O my brethren, and ye whom I tender as mine own bowels in the
Lord.) What a motive is this to Christian love and perfect charity? Shall the
Angels praise God for us, and shall not we praise the Lord for our selves?
Shall an army of spiritual soldiers triumph in the redemption of man, and
shall not we rejoice in our own salvation, and the miraculous deliverance of
our brethren? True devotion is full of compassion: and the Saints of God do not
only suffer together, but rejoice together, with Hymns and Psalms of
spiritual melody, singing to the Lord with grace in their hearts. Whence are
they termed filiae Judah, daughters of Judah: and filiae confessionis,
daughters of confession, (as learned Austin makes the exposition) such as
praise God, and offer the sacrifice of thankfulness for his love to man, and
his blessings out of Sion. Tell me then what spirit they are of, that call to
heaven for vengeance, and would have the Lord send down fire upon their
enemies, that delight in the ruin and destruction of their brethren, yea
machinate the subversion of States and Kingdoms with the devilish practices
of most hellish inventions? That curse where the Lord does bless, and cry
against the highest powers, as the Roman legions against Iouian the Emperor,
(...). Thou have escaped the edge of the sword, and the fury of battle; would
God thy flesh had been given to the fowls of the air, and the dogs had
licked thy blood, as the blood of Iezabell, by the wall of Iezrael, well may
they resemble Abaddon and Apolluon, the Devil and his angels, they are most
repugnant to God and his Angels. For their song is of glory and peace, yea and
of glory for peace: and that with man upon the earth: which is the second note
of this Hymn, and desires continuance of your devotion, (...).

On the earth peace.

Though glory belong to heaven, and peace to the earth: yet was there a time,
when neither was to be found: Man had provoked God to anger, and taken away our
peace, translated the worship of God to Idols, and deprived him of his glory:
but now they are both in their natural seat, and the coming of our Savior
is like the return of that Dove into the Arc, with the gracious branch of
peace, of mercy. When Jonah was cast into the sea, the storm ceast, and there
was a great calm: when the Lord brought his first begotten into the world, the
troubles were abated, and there was a great peace throughout the whole earth:
Fluuius pacis (as Esaias writes) A flood of peace, for a sea of misery: and that
which before was a place of exile and banishment, is now the Tabernacle of rest
and quiet: where the Lord has extended peace, and safety, and righteousness,
and glory, as a flowing stream. For that which he taught as an Oracle in his
life, and bequeathed as a legacy at his death, I mean the sweetness of
peace, and the abundance of holiness was now begun in the time of his birth,
and set as a pearl on the top and crown of his blessed incarnation: whence is
he termed a King of peace, our heavenly Solomon, yea our very peace, that made
both one, and set at peace, through the blood of his cross, the things on
earth, and the things in heaven. How can we choose but rest in peace, now the
Lord is come, who is to the whole earth, as Apollo was to Delos, that he may
settle and stablish it with an everlasting quietness? But Luke and Matthew are
at variance, and there is war betwixt the words of my Text, and that of the
Gospel. Think ye that I am come to send peace into the world, I came not to
send peace, but a sword, what a sword, and yet peace? Fire and yet peace, war
and yet peace; these things are incompatible, and as the Poet notes

Frontibus aduersis pugnantia: -- Yet may they be reconciled and stand
together: The sword of the spirit with the peace of conscience, the fire of
love with the peace of religion, war against Satan and his angels, with peace
toward God and his Angels. For as the natural body is framed of contrary
elements, so diverse qualities may perfect the mystical body of Christ Jesus.
And though we do not strive against flesh and blood, yet do we against the
Prince of this world, and against spiritual wickednesses in the highest
places: whence is that of Bernard, Inter Babilonem, and Jerusalem pax nulla,
betwixt Babylon and Jerusalem, there is no peace. Satan is the King of
Babylon, Christ of Jerusalem: which he defends with continual resistances,
though he be not the God of confusion, but of order, in all the Churches of the
Saints. What then is the peace of my Text, but sacred and divine, such as
Christ wishes to the Apostles, and the Apostles to the elect in their general
salutations? Peace with God, for we are reconciled to the Father, Peace with
Angels, for they rejoice in our conversion, Peace with men, for they shall be
gathered into one flock, Peace with the creature, for it shall be in league
with us, Peace with our own selves betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, the will
and the understanding, the reason and the affections: that all the powers and
faculties of soul and body may agree with a sweet Harmony and gracious
consent, to serve God in true love and perfect obedience. Thus does our Lord
bless us with his peace, by the wonderful expiation of our sins and
trespasses, and that (...), Upon the earth: for the earth of our hearts that
brought forth thorns and briars, does now abound and flourish with the saving
fruit of truth and holiness: whilst every one cries with the Psalmist, Praise
thy God, o Jerusalem, praise thy God, o Sion, which makes safe the bars of
thy gates, and blesses thy children within thee, which makes peace thy
borders, and does satisfy thee with the flower of wheat.

All peace is sweet and acceptable: without which spoil and rapine, as a wild
beast out of the forest surprises houses, families, temples, cities, and not
only deuoures the habitations of the righteous, but subuerts and lays wast the
greatest Empires and mightiest kingdoms, as a desert, or a wilderness. But
the interior peace which keeps our hearts and minds in the knowledge and love
of God, and exceeds the power of humane understanding, is the richest jewel
that ever was bestowed upon the earth. Like a bed and palate where the Spouse
of Christ may rest with ease and pleasure, until his second coming. O how
beautiful are the feet upon the mountains of those that bring such tidings,
that speak comfortably to Jerusalem, and say to her, that her warfare is
accomplished, and her iniquity pardoned: that she is justified by faith, and
has peace with God: that her righteousness is graven on his fingers, and her
walls are ever in his sight: that he stands behind the wall of his flesh, and
has broken down the partition wall of her offenses: That neither height, nor
depth, nor things present, nor things to come, nor life, nor death, nor any
other creature, is able to separate her from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus. Were this peace finished, where it is begun, we should have a
terrestrial Paradise, and a heaven upon earth: but that which is imperfect in
our travel, shall be perfect in our country: that we may esteem it as a
pledge of future glory, and not inuert the method of the Angels, like those in
Bernard, who seek peace in heaven, and glory on the earth, till they loose
both peace and glory. For it is peace that is our inheritance on the earth, and
that which follows her immovable center, as motion, heaven is the
tranquillity of rest and holiness. Though Christ might have promised many things
to his Disciples, and given them power over kingdoms and nations, as well as
over serpents, and scorpions, yet all that he says unto them, is In me pacem
habituri, In me ye shall have peace; as if this alone were able to
counterpoize and weigh down all the miseries, and afflictions, and calamities,
and persecutions, and disgraces, and reuilings, that ever the world might cast
upon them. That counsel of Seuerus was good unto his soldiers: In vobis
pacem, and caeteros despicite. So ye agree among your selves, ye may despise
the threats of your enemies: and it must needs advantage true Christians, In
vobis pacem, and caeteros despicite, have peace among your selves, or rather
with God, and never fear what the Devil or man can do against you. Beware
then lest at any time ye forgo this peace, yet if ye will not be pacifici,
yet be pacati. If ye will not make peace with others, yet take peace unto your
selves, from God and his Ministers: that ye be not as those against whom the
Disciples shook off the dust of their feet, and left them in their
wickedness. Seek this peace, love this peace, pray for this peace, long for
this peace, and keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: that as
Christ is knit to us, in the unity of person, we may be knit to him in the
unity of profession. O my brethren, ye are the sons of peace, and the
heirs of peace, by the gracious visitation of our heavenly Solomon, Christ
Jesus, his cradle, his infancy, his weakness, his poverty, his exhibition to
sheepeheards over their flocks, his presentation to Simeon in the midst of the
temple, are all signs of peace, and most infallible tokens of this spiritual
tranquillity. Possess your hearts with peace, and your souls with patience:
peace toward your Maker, and peace toward your neighbor. Let it rest in your
flesh, and take sanctuary in the earth of your mortal bodies: till ye feel
that in your selves, which is here published by the Angel, (...), On the earth
peace.

As for these who have neither peace with God, nor peace with man: but awake
his beloved out of sleep, and disturb the quiet of his Church, they are worse
then unbelieving Jews, or Jewish soldiers: for howsoever they cast lots for
the garment of our Savior, they would make no division of it: but these rend
and tear, I will not say the garment, but the body of Christ, which is his
Church, with open strife and scandalous division. Persecutor non fregit crura,
Donatus rupit Ecclesiam, (says learned Austin) the soldiers would not break
the legs of Christ, but Donatus tears the Church of Christ. As long as his
body hung upon the cross among thieves and malefactors, it remained whole: but
when it was received by Christians, it was rent and torn into many parts and
sections. Beloved, I fear they are more inhumane and intractable then Wolves
or Tigres, or whatsoever is of wild or savage disposition, for all creatures,
though never so fierce, were gathered in Noah's arc, and met together: but
these extrauagant Separatists will hardly assemble into the Arc of Christ's
Church, or join together in the unity of faith, and conformity of Religion.
If it be for lack of knowledge, they are to be pitied: if it be for lack of
charity, they are to be condemned. And so I leave them to the act and
complement of all that has been spoken, and that is (...), Good will toward
men.

Toward men good will.

Some have good will without peace, they are unfortunate and miserable: some
have peace without good will, they are perfidious and deceitful: but my Text
puts both together: On the earth peace, good will toward men. There be that
refer this to God, and take it for the eternal love of divine complacence,
which moved him first to the work of our redemption. There be that refer it
unto man, and make it a limitation of that which goes before, reading (...) for
(...), not peace on earth, to men good will, but peace on earth, to men of good
will. This is the sense of Austin, Bernard, Cyprian, Ambrose, together with the
most ancient and learned of the Fathers: and may not be refused. For howsoever
temporal blessings are for the most part Catholic and Universal, bestowed
promiscuously without exception, yet grace, and peace, and righteousness, and
adoption, are never given to the reprobate. For there is no peace unto the
wicked, says my God, but fightings without, and frightings within, (as the
Apostle notes) they fly when none does pursue, and are afraid where no fear
is.

Horrendum quatiente animo tortore flagellum, well are they compared to a
raging sea that never rests: whose waters cast out mire and dirt, their desires
as winds, that stir and raise their passions: their passions are as waves,
that turmoile and toss their souls: their souls are as ships, that float to
and fro, and are carried up and down with restless motion, and violent
agitation in the midst of their bodies. For as Bees are driven away with
smoke, and forsake their hiues: so the coals of wrath, and the stifling fumes
of choking envy, do remove and exterminate the divine sweetness of Christian
peace and quietness? Whence is that of Chysologus, Haeretici in ira,
Christiani in pace, Simeon is glad: Herod is troubled, the sheep of Christ are
quiet: Wolves are enraged, the Angels rejoice and are exalted, the Devils
tremble and are confounded. The Arc of Gods Church is safe, and lies at
Anchor: the bark of Infidels floates, and lies in continual danger. I
remember in the reign of Selymus, when a Persian Ambassador came to entreat
peace of the Turks, a desperate fellow discharged a shot, and would have
slain him, being taken and examined, he never changed countenance, but
replied, he was an enemy to his Lord, and most unworthy any peace: the like
answer shall be given to the wicked, when they seek for peace, and the Lord
will swear, they shall not enter into his rest. Look upon the troubles of
their heart, and consider their manifold distractions, who is able to express
the strokes, and the scourges, the wounds, and the torments, that make them
bleed within? the furies that haunt their breast, and twine as snakes about
them, the several pleits of the writhen thoughts, and perplexed cogitations.
They are cursed in the field, and cursed in the City, cursed in the fruit of
their land, and cursed in the fruit of their body: their children perish, and
never behold the Sun, their cattle are smote with lightning, and their
flocks of sheep with hot thunderbolts: their vineyards are destroyed with
hailestones, and their mulbertie trees with frosts: the Caterpiller eats their
grass, and the Grasshopper their labor: the Lord does smite them with Fevers,
and Agues, and blastings, and mildewes, and never leave till they be destroyed:
the Lord does cast upon them the furiousness of his wrath, trouble, and
displeasure, with the immission of devils, and incursion of evil spirits. For
they are enemies of God, and most unworthy of this peace: that peace which is
here published, and confined to his servants, (...), To men of good will. Not
to men of good understanding only, For knowledge puffes up: but to men of good
will, For charity buildes up. Not to men of good deeds only, for sometimes
they may be hypocritical, and Pharisaicall: but to men of good will, for they
are perfect and Angelical. Such as embrace Christ willingly, and receive his
word joyfully, with true love and hearty devotion. These are quadrati lapides
(as Saint Austin) square stones, that never fall howsoever they be turned.
Their life is like the breeding of those Halciones, which makes their nest in
the sea: as long as the one lives, and the other breeds, there is a great
calm, and wonderful serennitie. Beware then of envy, and the Lord deliver us
from hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness: (...) (says Basil) as God is
love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God: so the Devil is hatred,
and he that abides in hatred, abides in the Devil. O ye that feel the
arrows of God stick fast in you, return into your hearts, and examine your
consciences, see whether your will be good or bad, rectified or depraved. If
the Lord make way to his indignation, and give your life to the destroyer, if
your rivers be dried up, and your waters turned into blood, if the heavens be
as brass over your head, and the earth as iron under your feet: if ye have
dust for rain, and for dew ashes: if your sheep be given to the enemy, and
your labor to the stranger, if your hearts boil with anguish, and the
sorrows of death compass you round about: think it is for lack of this good
will, because ye have not (...), Good will toward your maker, good will
toward your neighbor. If ye had good will, ye would not be so much
disquieted. They are men of good will, that are the vessels of peace, and the
subject of this blessing, and the good will that dwelt in the bush, will dwell
in none but such as have good will. In this, God is like that Roman Emperor,
Odit pallidos, and macilentos. His soul does abhor such as are lean with
envy, and pale with malicious wickedness. O that, divine charity were shed
abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, and the virtue thereof spread as a
vein through the body of our Church. O that our souls were as the Palace of
Solomon, and the midst thereof paued with love toward the daughters of
Jerusalem. Then would the Lord cover us all the day long, and we shall dwell
in safety, then would he lie between our shoulders, and we should be as
Joseph, that was separate from his brethren. Beloved, I may say of these
breasts, as Christ does of the Churches, Meliora vino ^bera, Thy breasts are
more pleasant then wine. The breasts of piety and devotion, the breasts of
mercy and compassion, the breasts of true love and Christian affection. I
would to God I could see them run, and flow as spouts and conduicts in the
midst of your habitations. And me thinks I do to the honor of God, and the
abundant increase of your rest and quietness. Yet this is not enough, unless
ye add bowels unto breasts: breasts will soon dry up, if they be not fed
with the melting of our bowels, and therefore says the Apostle, (...), Put ye
on the bowels of compassion, that as Christ was invested in our flesh, so we
might be inurserated with his bowels, the tender bowels of mercy and loving
kindness. If thy heart rise against thy neighbor, remember the peace thou have
with God, if thy soul delight in honor, think of the glory that is given to
the Lord. Non venit Dominus, vt impleret aqua Hydrias, sed vt animas spiritus
sancti gratia irrigaret (says Ambrosius the Lord is not come, to fill our
water pots with wine, but to water the souls of men, with the graces of his
spirit, that we might have peace with our selves, good will toward others, and
the sacrifice of praise for him that dwells in the highest. Never was that of
the Psalmist more fitly used (...). Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be
glad, Let the earth be glad, for there is peace in it, Let the heavens rejoice
for there is glory in the highest: Let the earth be glad, for he that was
heavenly was made earthly: Let the heavens rejoice, for he that is earthly, was
and is heavenly, and let both take up that which the Angels sung unto the
sheepheards. Glory to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men: when
the Angels sang, Christ was naked on the earth: now we sing he is glorious in
the heavens. Therefore does our solemnity exceed theirs, and we may better
say: Glory to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men. I read of
one Pope that would have none read this verse, but only the Priests: but we
know that all the elect are Kings and Priests to God, A royal Priesthood, a
holy Nation, purchased and redeemed with his blood: and therefore let us join
in this dochologie, and never rest, saying: Glory to God on high, on earth
peace, good will toward men. I will shut up all in that closure of the
Apostle: Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God
that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept blameless, unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus. To whom with the Father, and the Spirit, be in
honor, and glory, in the earth as it is in heaven, till the earth move, and
the heavens forget their motion. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

