A PEACE-OFFRING TO GOD For the Blessings we enjoy under his Majesty's reign,
with a Thanksgiving for the Princes safe return on Sunday the 5. of October.
1623.

In a Sermon preached at Manitree in Essex, on Thursday the 9. of October, next
after his Highness happy arrival.

By SAMVEL WARD OF Ipswich.

LONDON, Printed by A. Math. for John Marriott, and John Grismand, and are to
be sold at their Shops in St. Dunstons Churchyard, and in Paul's Alley at the
Sign of the Gunne. 1624.

TO THE KINGS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
THe Altar of Incense was compassed aboutwith a Crown of pure Gold. Leuit. 3.
Gratitude is a rich, and royal Virtue best beseeming the best Princes, which
have the best means to express, and the most cause to excite them thereunto.
The meanest Subject following the Mill, may be as thankful as the greatest
Monarch sitting upon the Throne. But between the effects of their thanks,
there is as broad a difference, as between the Acts of a Giant, and a Creeple,
whose fortitude may yet be equal. A private man praises God upon a
tenne-stringed, a King upon a ten-thousand-stringed Instrument, upon the
lowd-sounding Organs, having so many millions of Pipes, as there be men to
whom their Authority, or Example reaches. The fruits of Constantine,
Theodosius, and such good Emperors gratitudes, have been Religion planted and
promoted, Churches erected, Idolatry suppressed, wholesome Laws enacted, and
executed, which makes Divines doubt whether such Kings were well advised,
Elesban Rex Aethiopum. Niceph. lib. 17. Fernandus Rex Castiliae, Rodoricut de
rebus Hispanicis, lib. 4. Fox To, 1. Martyrolog.
though much applauded in Story, who upon victories obtained, not laid down
only, but wholly laid off their Crowns, and resigned their Kingdoms to God,
not considering they might better have paid their thanks to him in kind, as
Kings; then in private devotions as Monks. David was therefore a man after
Gods heart, not because a King, but because a thankful King: the sweet Singer
of Israel, not for his Poetry or Music, but for his grateful Hymns composed
and sung to Gods praise upon every fresh occasion; and he calls upon Princes
and Rulers three times in one verse, because they have three times the cause
that Subjects have, who have but a single share in those blessings, which
jointly meet in the head of Sovereignty. He often puts the thorn to his
Breast, as if he found some oblivion there, or unwillingness: Aug. in Psalm.
145. quasi tacentes inuenerit Angelos hortatur qui tamen nun-quam tacuerunt.
yea, he often calls upon the Angel, either implying the worth of the work,
or else that the best alacrity may admit excitation. Aentas Syluius, lib. 4.
de dictis Alphonsi.
Alphonsus, that renowned King, in a speech to the Popes Ambassador,
professes he did not so much wonder at his Courtiers ingratitude to him, who
had raised sundry of them from mean to great Estates, as at his own to God.
How acceptable an offering shall this be to God, if it may kindle the least
spark, or rather blow those coals already flaming in your royal Breast, or
testify our gratefulness to him for his infinite, old and new favors to your
Majesty's Person, and thereby in your Kingdoms. For all defects in it, the
Title pleades Pardon, and Acceptance: Even GOD himself allowed a Female in
Peace Offerings, not admitted in other kinds. Gratitude has set a price upon
mean Presents. The form of a Sermon will not disparage the subject matter.
The best Monuments of Constantines Government, is a grateful Sermon, recorded
at large by Eusebius in his tenth, whose blessed, and much honored days, God
make yours equal and exceed in length and happiness. So humbly and heartily
prays

Your Majesty's most loyal and thankful Subject. SAM. WARD.

A PEACE-OFFRING TO GOD: OR, A Thanksgiving for the Princes safe return.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord toward you.
MAy an Herald find out a rich Coat of Arms vngiuen, then may a Divine meet
with a profitable subject unhandled. Virtutum laudatissima etc. Sen.
Gratitude, a virtue whose beauty so equally blazeth in the eyes of all, whose
name sounds so pleasantly in the ears of all, whose contrary is so odiously
censured of all, Basil entitleth an Homily of giving thanks, but the subject
matter is of bearing afflictions cheerfully.
to whom has it been beholding for so much as a small Tract or Sermon? What
Divine has bestowed so much cost upon it, as to acquaint us with the Nature,
Kinds, Canons, and Motives of it? Men I confess, had the use of Logic
before the Art was penned; and so David the King of all grateful persons with
other the servants of God in all ages have in abundant measure expressed their
thankfulness; yet no man will deny, but that rules, and directions orderly
collected, and compiled, do much conduce to a more lively and certain
practice, then wild and unguided affections; and such helps Gods Spirit in
ordinary despises not.

All that I shall upon this sudden and extraordinary cause of public thanks
undertake, is to be as the Wheel to the Bird, which with its course noise
setts better Music on work; and out of this short Text of Gratitude,
endeavor to bring some light to the duty enjoined, Give thanks.

Secondly, to show the extent of it is matter, In all things.

3. To enforce the practice from this motive of motives, For this is the will
of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Fourthly, to bring it home, and apply it, Toward you.

In handling whereof, if I shall procure any whit the more tribute of thanks
and praise to God, I shall attain that which is the Queen of all causes, the
end of my labor; yea, that which is the Queen of all ends, Gods glory.

Give thanks. The nature and grace of thankfulness consists in a kindly
reflection of Honor upon the Benefactor for the benefit received. Look what
perfection a solid Body gives to the Sun beams, which having obscurely
passed through the translucent Air, are by it made to rebound with a spreading
increase of their luster and heat. Look what such an Echo as the seven fold
porch of Thebes is to the sound of a Trumpet, such is Thankfulness to the
Benefactor. And therefore in reference to Parents is the sum of piety; to
Equals, of amity and humanity; to God, of Religion: yea, the very prime and
sum of all Virtues and Duties, because it most directly and fully promotes
and atchieues that which is the end and scope of all the Creators works and
gifts, Psalm. 50.
His glory: He that praises me, honors me: and contrariwise, Romans 1.
they glorified not God, neither were thankful.

To discuss here these School- Quaeries, Vide Thomae secunda secundae
quaestione centesima sexia.
whether it be a part of commutatiue or distributive Justice, whether a
general virtue or special, distinct or confounded with Piety and Justice:
whether voluntary or bounden; whether of debt and by Law, or mere honesty;
whether the innocent or the penitent be more obliged; whether it may ad-equate
or surpass the benefit, were to trouble your heads with frigid subtilties,
in stead of warming your hearts with profitable matter. A thankful man had
rather by ten times learn how to discharge this bond of needful duty, then
to untie these knots of curious wit.

To such a one I content my self to give the old Tripartite rule, Cord, or
^, opere, Bradwer^. lib. 2. cap. 23.
let him see that his Soul, his Tongue, and his Life bear their parts,
Conscientia, lingua, vita. Aug. in Psalm. 148.
discharge their several offices in glorifying God, that so his thanks being
Cordial, Orall, and Real, they may be complete and accepted of God. And
first let them make sure of the first, especially when he has to do with
God, the Maker, Searcher, and Judge of the Spirits, who in these kinds of
Offerings loves the fat, Leuit. 3.
and the inwards: the deeper and hollower the belly of the Lute or Violl is,
the pleasanter is the sound; the fleeter, the more grating and harsh in our
ears: By how much spring water is better then plash water, by so much handy
hearty, then wordy thanks.
the voice which is made in the mouth is nothing so sweet as that which comes
from the depth of the breast. Sing with grace in your hearts is the best tune
to all the Psalms, without which if one could descant with the voice of an
Angel, he were but as the sound of a tinckling Cymball. The very Alpha and
Omega, the principal and total of our thanks with God, is as Bernard ends his
Epistles and Counsels to one that enquired of him what God required of man,
Give me thy heart, or keep all to thy self. If Benjamin come not, all the
rest may stay behind. Unless therefore thou mean to offer the sacrifice of
fools, Tota estimatio ad animuns redit. Sen.
and the lips of calves, begin and end as David his Psalms, Psalm. 103.
My soul praise thou the Lord. Take also David's Commentary, And all that is
within me praise his holy name. The first work is of the understanding to
judge of the worth of the benefit, to consider the unworthiness of the
receiver, to study a Quid retribuam. A fool cannot, and a proud man will not
be thankful; the first, because he cannot estimate and weigh in the balance
of Judgment, the value of the favor conferred upon him, or through
melancholy conceitednesse will not see what God has done for them. The second
because he conceiues it no more, if not less then his due and desert, which
is the reason that an Heretic ouerweening the strength of his naturalls, or
the merit of his works, cannot be thankful; which taught Prosper wittily and
wisely to entitle his Poems Contra ingratos, without further naming the
adversaries of Gods grace. A rash man cannot be thankful, who for a fit only
and brunt, sends up an extemporary God be thanked, whereas he ought fixedly,
and seriously to study and devise how he might cast most honor upon his good
God for his bounty to him.

The second care must be had of the Memory, that a deep impression be made,
frequent refreshing and refrication be used with David's watchword, My soul,
forget not all his benefits; which made him write down his passions, and give
his Psalms the title of Record, or Remembrance. Oblivion is so far from
excusing, that it self is the worst kind of Ingratitude, excluding all hopes
of future thanks, and arguing a slight esteem of favors past, which so soon
have set them behind back, and out of sight, in some blind corner of the mind.
Our Memory is a natural mother to injuries, a stepmother to benefits, for the
help whereof our grateful forefathers were wont to erect Pillars and
Monuments, stamp Coins, give names to Places, dedicate Days, and keep
anniuersary Feasts, that so they might preserve a Vestall fire in their
breasts, and not serve God with a flash of joy and blaze of thanks. A third
work is the warmth of the affections, which if dead and cold, how can any
fumes of Incense ascend? Excess of joy and gladness is in stead of thanks,
which the nearer it comes to a rapture and ecstasy (such an one as Peter was
in, when he wot not what he said; or the Jews coming out of captivity,
faring as one in a dream) the more pleasing it is unto God, though it express
it self in abrupt and exorbitant passions and gestures, such as David's
dancing unseemly in foolish Micholls, but most comely and kingly in Gods eyes.

These acts of the soul are often all that God requires, but always the best
fountain and spring of thanks, which sets the price upon the Offering; and
makes the Turtle of the poor as welcome as the Ox of the rich, the Cruse and
Mite of the Widow more worth then the Rivers of Oil and treasures of the
wicked.

All this is but intrinsicall and immanent thanks; but Gods favors are too
great for one man's heart to comprehend or requite: and therefore he will not
have them die in the breast of one man, and lie buried in silent admiration,
but requires a transitiue expression and publication of them. How many aids
and witnesses does David summon to assist him in this work, the Mountains to
leap, the Floods to make a noise, the Hills to clap there hands: and which of
his musical Instruments does he not call upon? Sundry helps and signs of
thankfulness has Nature and Art found out and used; ringing of bells,
displaying of banners, pomp and feasting, lights and fires, which while some
condemn, they come near his fault that asked, What means this wast? yet are
all these but a poor and senseless kind of sacrifice performed by
reasonlesse Deputies, if the thanks determine and end in these without more
significant expression. Cheer of the countenance, gestures of the body,
leaping and dancing are but dumb shows, the best Interpretour of the mind
is the tongue, the glory of man, and glorifier of God. My tongue shall tell of
thy wondrous acts* and my lips shall never cease to publish thy praise. This
was all the fee Christ expected for his cures, Go and tell what God has done
for thee: words seem to be a poor and slight recompense. But Christ (says
Nazianzene) called himself the Word, and good words coming from a good heart
are of great account and force with God and man.

David envied the Birds that might in their kinds sing Gods praise in his
Courts, and in imitation of them, who set themselves on the highest tops of
Trees whence their notes may be furthest heard, he labored to spread Gods
praises in the greatest Congregations in Saul's Court, in all Companies he came
in, in the Temple it self. By speech one man's heart conueies into another the
cheerely conceptions and passions of his soul, and so multiplies praise, and
sets others on work to bless God wit him, and the more the merrier, and the
more mirth the more thanks; the greater the flock, the cheerelier noise; the
fuller the Quire, the louder the Music, and one cheerely Bird often sets all
the flock a chirping; one man showts, and the whole Host follows. John heard
a voice from the Throne, saying, Praise ye our God, all his Servants small and
great; and immediately a noise as of many waters, and mighty Thunderings,
saying, Hallelu-iah, for the Almighty reigns.

Yet because speech is transient, and of life for the present only, the Pens
and writings of thankful men have been of singular use to transmit and convey
unto Posterity the noble Acts of God: one generation teaching another to keep
like praises in store, that Gods thanks may be immortal in Succession, and
Propagation. Such fruit may our Statute have in after ages, penned for the
perpetuation of Gods inualuable deliverance from that Hellish-Powder-plott,
were it as duly read as it was prouidently enacted.

When we have given God good words, Gregorius moralium vltimo, e 12.
it remains that we give him not words alone, Per victimas caro aliena, per
obedientiam propria voluntas mactatur.
but our real obedience, preferred by God to all our sacrifices: slay not our
beasts, but our beastly lusts; give him not our goods, but our selves; not any
dead, but a living and reasonable sacrifice. He that in way of thankfulness
vows and performs the mortification of one dareling sin, the addition of
one good duty, pleases God better then Solomon with his twenty thousand
Beeues and Sheep. Would we know then how we should perfect our thanks,
walk we with God, let us do righteousness, abound in Alms and Prayer;
better our Piety and Charity, increase the works of our callings, bring
forth more fruit in our kinds: for with such sacrifices God is most honored
and best pleased. The Ancient and wonted thanks after victories and
blessings, were reformation of vices, remouall of Idols, sanctions and
executions of good Laws, release of debts, bounty to the poor. The life of
thankfulness consists in the lives of the thankful; Non sola vox sonet, sed
and manus consonet, verbis facta concordent, quando cantas Halleluiah manum
porrigas esurienti. Aug in Psalm. 149
otherwise it is but as one should sing a good song with his Voice, and play a
bad one on his Instrument, which would make but a black Sanctis, and become
such Saints. He that says, God be thanked with his mouth, and in his life
remains reprobate to every good work, has the show of thanks, but the power
of ingratitude, and is near the curse of the Fig Tree, full of leaves, and
empty of fruit; for God is not mocked with words. Wherefore, O thou vain man,
justify thy words by thy works, and thou shall be blessed in thy deeds,
and God, by the poor, blessed for them, who has himself no need or profit
of our works: but as great men turns over his fees and thanks to his poor
Followers and Servants, and else us in plain terms, he reckons that done to
himself which is done to the least of his; and smells as sweet a savor of
Cornelius his alms, as of his prayers, and counts himself as much honored by
a good housekeekeeper as by a Church-frequenter: but best by him that is both
in truth, and from faith. A Canticum nou^^ and vetus homo male concorda^t,
cantet canticum nouum, qui noua est creatu a qui nouam praestat obedientia^.
Aug. in Psalm. 149. cui lingua tua lauds Dei cantillat cuius vita sacrilegium
exhalat. Idem in Psa. 23.
new Song becomes not the old man's mouth, and let him sing a new song that
leads a new life, and that's the best harmony and makes the best Music in Gods
ear.

In all things. Now I have showed how thou may and must be thankful; if
thou ask me wherein, or for what, I will ask thee, what thou have of thine
own, and what of right and desert? If nothing, then In all things give thanks.
We have heard that a thankful man needs a good judgment: but we shall see
that he needs no invention, if his heart be in tune, all things will bring
matter to hand. Gratitude, is as large as Logic, that has for his object
things that are, and that are not. There be favors Privative, and favors
Positive; there be good things bestowed, and evils kept from us; yea, the very
evils that do betide us are turned to our good, and therefore we are bound to
give thanks in all, and for All. Not with a Collectiue thanks by lump and
whole sale, with a God be thanked for all his benefits, but distrioutiuely
keeping a Bill of the particulars, and duly thanking as we daily receive them.
This distribution is best made by a just gradation and Scale of discretion,
ascending in our thanks according to the degrees of his favors.

First, he will be praised in all his creatures, whereof we have the sight
or the use, even as if we had a propriety in them: for every one of us have no
less benefit by the Sun and Air, then if we saw and breathed alone. The
Hebrews have a Canon, that God would be praised in the least Emmet or Gnat,
but magnified in the Elephant and Leuiathan; admired in the Sun, Moon,
Stars, Comets, Earthquakes, Thunders, and such extraordinary works: the
praise of his wisdom and power lies asleep, Ra^mundus in Theologia naturali.
and dead in every Creature, till man actuate and enliues it. The Heavens and
the Earth, and all things therein are said to praise God; that is, (says
Augustine) when thou considerest their order and beauty, August in Psalm. 48.
tua voce clamat, etc.
and praisest the invisible Creator, they praise him with thy understanding and
thy voice, which have none of their own, but are dumb and senseless.

In all the works of his provident administration: and here let public
blessings have the precedence in thy thanks. It Is not only self-love, but
want of Judgment that makes fools prize a domestical and private welfare
before the Commonwealth, and the good of the Kingdom, which is in it self the
greater, and would in the long run be greater to the particular man. Is any
cost bestowed on the private cabin, comparable to the saving of the whole
Ship? The very Heathens rejoiced more in their countries good, then in their
own. Let Christians much more praise God for their Kings, Princes, and Rulers,
by whose wise government they may live a quiet life under their Vines and
Figtrees, and in all honesty and godliness worship God in their Chapels and
Churches.

In all thy personal favors: among which the privative challenge a place;
that is, such evils as pass by over thee. Famous is the Story of the good
Bishop, that seeing a Toad by the way, lift up his heart unto God, that made
him not such a creature. And Chrysostom wills us to walk into Hospitalls and
Lazar-houses, Chrysostom. ad Stagerium. Epist. 3.
that by the sight of others miseries, we may be occasioned to thanks for our
own freedom. Every man that seees another stricken, and himself spared, is
to keep a Passover for himself.

In all the crosses that do befall us; yea, happily more then in them we count
and call blessings; to call for afflictions we have no President, or Precept
in Scripture; but to praise God for them, store of both: To count it exceeding
joy, because of the exceeding gain; to count it an honor that we are counted
worthy to suffer, as the Disciples that leaped and sung after their scourgings;
and in this theme Basil spends all his Sermon, which he entitles giving of
thanks in all things.

In all the gifts of God, whether for necessity or pleasure, of Nature or of
Grace, temporal or eternal, more for necessities, then for delicacies, more
for thy bread and water then for thy wine and oil, for thy clothes then for
thy lace and ornaments* for thy health more then thy wealth, for thy good name
above thy Jewels, the goods of thy soul above all goods. Plato observed this
order in this thanks, that he was a man, a Grecian, an Athenian, and Socrates
his Scholar. Alphonsus* that he was a King, a Philosopher, and a Christian:
Theodosius, more that he was a member of Christ in his Church, then head of
the Empire: Paul best of all, Blessed be God that has blessed us with
spiritual blessings in heavenly things. One spiritual is better then all
corporal, and one eternal then all temporal.

In all thy spiritual blessings, preparations, preuentions, excitations,
motions, acts, confirmations, consummations, give all to the praise of his
grace by which thou art that thou art; chiefly in those thou have most wanted,
and earnestly begged, in these let thy praises answer thy prayers. Samuel and
Augustine, children of many prayers and fears, were also children of many
praises and thanks.

In all and above all, for him that is All in all, thanks and praises. For he
is worthy who has redeemed us, and made us Kings and Priests unto himself:
and if thanks be the will of God in Jesus Christ toward us, then sure I am it
is his will, that all thanks be given him for Jesus Christ, in whom all the
promises are Yea, and Amen.

In all things, in all times, and in all places; so the very Context implies;
pray always, in all things give thanks. Wish with Epictetus, thou were of the
Nightingales unwearied spirit, ever to be singing day and night, at least with
Bernard imitate the other Birds, which morning and evening, at the rise and
setting of the Sun omit not to praise their Creator. These must be constant,
set, and inviolable times. Occasional times are when benefits are newly
received, which otherwise soon wax stale, and putrify as Fish: no part of
the Thankes-offering might be kept unspent till the third day. Hezekiah wrote
his Song the third day after his recovery: The living shall praise thee as I
do this day. And if he had been as speedy in his thanks after his
deliverance from Ashur, It may be (says Lauater) his Plate had never been
carried into Babylon. All days of prosperity and mirth are seasonable for
thanks, as Birds sing more in clear days then in gloomy. Let him that is sad,
pray; and he that is merry, Isodor. in Leuit. Theodoret.
give thanks. The Jews three solemn Feasts were to be kept in three
cheerful sensons* he Passover, at the first riping of corn; Whitsontide, at
the first reaping; Tabernacles, at the end of Harvest. God loves a cheerful
giver. Christ willed his Passion should be remembered when our spirits are
refreshed with bread and wine. I will take the cup of Salvation, etc. Our joy
which otherwise is a slippery passion, is then safe and fanctified, when it
brings forth thanksgiving.

Were it hot now superfluous to say, to whom this thanks ought to be given?
To whom but to him of whom we have all things? Yet we had rather change the
name, and shift the debt to any save the right Creditor, ascribing events to
Nature, Destiny, and Fortune, Vide Senec. lib. 3.
rather then to the living God; which is as if one should say, he ought no
money to Seneca, but to Lucius Annius, which are but blind names of the same
man. What is more common the^ to rob God to pay the Instrument? The Fisher
sacrifices to his Net, the Husbandman will thank his dunghill for his crop,
rather then him that gives the increase. God allows some praise to the
Instrument. The sword of God, and the sword of Gideon: but when he hears us
give more to the means then to the Author, he is jealous, and offended more
justly then Saul with the people for singing of David's ten thousand, and Saul's
thousand. Gant. 3.
Let Saloman have his thousand, and the keeper of the Vine two hundred. Adrian
and Verus, Emperors of old, Selimus and Ferdinand of late are taxed in History
for erecting monuments of victory to their horses, forgetting the Lord of
Hosts. Let us learn of Paul in right down terms in all things to bless the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus all things inuit us to thanks; and yet Paul foreseeing our backwardness
and excuses, opposes to them all the will of God in Jesus Christ: For this is
the will of God. The ungrateful like unto the sluggard, is witty in finding
out pretexts and pretenses, making a clogge to hinder, of that which should be
his goad to quicken him. Gods name he will tell you, excels all thanksgiving,
his blessings are innumerable, and why should he attempt impossibilities? and
yet the same man in seeking of wealth and honor, will shoot at the fairest
mark, though he take up his arrow short. Here unless he may do all, he
will do nothing at all: but Gods will is thou should do thy good will, and
he will accept thy will for the deed. Nec deterior si vituperatur, nec malior
si laudatur. Bernard.
And if thou should say in thy heart, What addition shall my praise make to
his honor, that is infinite and selfe-sufficient? was he not as happy before
there was a man or Angel to praise him, as since? I might answer with a
Schooleman, Raymundus de naturali Theolog.
he counts it an increase ad extra, in the notice and glory of his attributes,
though ad intra, in the perfection and excellency of them he cannot increase.
But I had rather answer with our Apostle, It is his will. But we have need of
his benefits; if he will allow us the profit, we may well allow him the
praise; our emptiness calls for the one, and to his fullness belongs the other.
Bradwardine as thankful an English heart as ever wrote, knits and vntyes the
knot thus, Why should I go about to pay that debt which is vnpayable, and by
paying whereof I run further in debt; for the grace and heart, the will and
ability to be thankful is his gift, and for that I must be further obliged,
as David when he built the Temple. But GOD forbid, says he, that I should
entangle mine heart in this chain of Ingratitude, and break asunder this my
bond of thanks, because I cannot unloose it: let me rather know this to be
my happiness, to whom I owe much, to owe more; to be as deep in his Books
as I can, Bradvvard. de causa Dei, lib. 3. cap. 23. Gra^issimis gratitudinis
vinculis alliger vt gratior and gratior fiam tandemque in gratias gratissime
transformer.
who loves to water where he plants, to heap favor upon favor, till he
overcome us with favor; to him let me be ever owing, and ever paying, never
discharged, but ever becoming more and more thankful, till I be wholly
transformed into thankfulness, and when all is done, account my self indebted
and unprofitable.

For this is Gods will in Jesus Christ. Gods will has binding authority
enough, but he adds a winning word, his will in Christ, commending the duty
to us from God by that lovely Name. The force of the persuasion is, as if God
should say to us, Behold, I have so loved you, as to give you my Son, and
with him all things; and what return do I expect? what is my will, but that
in all things you give me thanks in his Name. Thanks is my will, and pleases
my will, as sweet odours do man's nostrills. Gratitude needs not, as other
Virtues, Letters testimonial, or commendatory. David often tells us, it is
comely and lovely enough of it self. Molestissimum Istud verbum Rogo. Sen.
Prayer is profitable, but praise is honorable: to Ask is a troublesome
thing, and a mendicant word implying want, and therefore comes hardly and
harshly from us; but praise becomes the Angels, yea the Son of God, and
therefore should be welcome to us. It is a grace and praise to him that gives,
as well as to him to whom it is given. How renowned in all Story has been the
practice of this virtue in David to Ionathans, Abimelechs, and Barzilla's
posterity; in Joseph to his parents; in Hannah (more honored for being the
Author of a Song, then the mother of a son) in Cromwels to Frescobald,
Agrippa to Thaumastus servant for a cup of cold water in his troubles, Fox Tom
1.
Egelred to a Swine-heard: yea, in brute beasts, Agell. li. 10. c. 5.
in Lions, Pierius lib. 19. Strabo lib 5.
Dragons, Philarchus apud Athenaeum. Gesnerus, etc.
Eagles, and Faulcons, in Elephants, Fishes, Dogs: the contrary, most hateful
in Judas, Achitophel, Pharaohs Butler, etc. not actionable, or finable by any
legal or set mulct, as sufficiently censurable, but deserving, and left to
excess of hatred by Gods Judgment, and so generally reputed of al, the sum
of all disgrace; the worst, yea all that can be said of a man; say this and
say all; the maine sin of the apostate Angels, and damned Spirits. Thanks the
chief, Sit illud meditatio frequens in hoc saeculo quod epus erit in futuro.
Aug. Psa. 148.
if not the whole work of the glorified Seraphims, who vent and spend all
their burning fire in the flames of GODS praise. How cheerfully should we
redeem time to this blessed work? which because it is too large to be done in
this spanlong life, it shall ever be doing in that eternity. What like
evidence has a Saint of GODS free and princely Spirit residing in his heart
and tongue to this Frankincense, and free work, wherein our ingenuitie is best
tried, not extorted from us by our own necessities, as prayer, nor exacted by
Law, or drawn by shame or penalty from us, but voluntary, and therefore best
testifying us to be of Gods willing people: which grace, where he gives,
surely he will confer more of all kinds. For where do men delight to sow,
but in fertile soyles, where they reap most? Where do Musitions delight to
sound their Instruments, but where the Echo multiplies the^ most in their
return? But our profit is too sordid a motive for this liberal virtue. Thanks
is not thanks, if bribing and eying future favor, if any thing more then the
praise of past bounty, though there should never be need or receipt of any
more afterward. But our dullness has need of all spurs. David the
Nightingale of Israel sets many a thorn to his breast, that vigilant cock
clappeth often his own wings. An ingenuous child desires no more but to know
what his father loves. Isaak, if his diet be known, shall be sure of Venison
enough: and if Saul take delight in David's Harp, he shall not want Music. A
grateful Courtier desires but to know what the will and pleasure of his
Sovereign is: and this is enough, and above all other bonds to a man sensible
of the benefits of Creation and Redemption. What else is the difference and
pre-eminence of the Gospel above the Law, but Thanks the one, and Debt the
other? Which made Vrsinus iudiciously give his Book of Obedience and Good
works the title of Gratitude: which who so sleights or neglects, undoes and
dissolues the whole bond of perfection, not of Humanity alone, but of all
Christianity. God abhorring all that we can do with other respect or end,
bidding the proud man and his merits perish, done in way of desert or pay,
only accepting that which is done in the name of Christ, in way of
thankfulness for him and his merit, who is the Altar which sanctifies and
graceth the gold and the gift to the horns whereof it is best binding with the
cords of thanks all our offerings: who is the great Master of Requests,
having a golden Vial ready to offer up, and commend to his Father all the
Incense of his Saints, and to give a sweet odor and perfume unto them, making
the least Cup of water tendered in his name of precious account, without which
all is abominable: And therefore he that would set a special gloss upon his
sacrifice of thanks, let him with the acknowledgement of his vileness (as
David, Who am I and my people?) crave acceptance in his name, in whom God is
well pleased: for this is his will in Christ Jesus our Lord, etc.

That Thanks in Thesi and general is Gods will, it is now out of question:
but there is yet another clause in my Text, Toward you, which bidds us search,
what is Gods will in Hypothesi, in particular. Toward us: even to vswards of
this Nation, this Assembly, toward thee and me, all and every one of us
jointly and severally. First, it is requisite that we take good notice of our
Receipts, and then balance them well with our Returns; and so shall we see
our Arrerages best, and what remains for us to do. Mark we advisedly what
our own Writers, Historians, Poets usually applaud in our Nation; how they
extol our Climate, our Soil, our native Commodities, our Policies, Laws,
Orders, Peace, Plenty, Prosperity, terming us Albion, quasi Olbion; Angli,
quasi Angeli. Can too much in truth be spoken to the praise of Gods bounty,
and blot of our Ingratitude? How has he lifted us up to Heaven, severed this
Island with the seas of his mercies from all the world besides, and bordering
kingdoms round about, setting it as a Queen in the midst of them, to hear
news of wars, pestilence, bloodshed, and desolations, not to feel the least
disturbance from within or without, scarce to hear a dog bark against it is
long continued peace, unmatchable in present or past examples. Above all, what
a golden Candlestick has he placed in it, furnished with oil and lamps, I
would I could say in every shaft and pipe of it; but so as I may well resemble
it to a bright sky in a clear evening sparkling with Stars, though not in
every part, yet in every Zone and quarter of it. What times can tell of the
like light, learning, preaching, knowledge? Oh that I could say practice and
thankfulness answerable. What an hedge or wall of fire and protection has God
made about us? what glorious saluations from foreign invasions, 1588.
from domestical treasons, 1605.
such as wilscarse be credible to after ages. Factum est hoe a Domino mirifico
in consilijs, magnifico in operibus, and est mirabile in oculis nostris.
Was Israel it self ever honored with more? To all these, when for a while of
late we were in a damp of grief and fear in the absence of our Prince for a
season, how suddenly has he blown over that cloud? how speedily and happily
has he returned him, that we fare as people in a dream, can scarce tell how
to believe our selves, or how to express our joys enough; how has he filled
our hearts with gladness! Oh that I may be able truly to say, our tongus with
praise, and our lives with duties. In this fresh and last favor of his, he
deals me thinks with us as Creditors with slow Debtors, where they have
adventured much, they will sometimes shoot another arrow in hope to find and
make good their former losses; as Seneca counsels his Ebutius to imitate the
husbandman, who never leaves husbanding and manuring the barren ground, till he
make it fertile, to heap benefit on benefit, till he awaken his unthankful
friend, overcome him with kindness, and in the end by some welcome good turn
excite his dullness, and extort thanks by that for all the former from him. I
would I were as sure God should speed of his end, as I am sure this is his end,
to put us to the blush for our former ingratitude, to win us at length to pay
our debts and vows unto him. Some, and sundry of all sorts great and mean he
has, I doubt not, among us, grateful obseruers and receivers of his
blessings. like a few berries after the shaking of a tree, which makes him
forbear to lay the Axe to the root for a while: but the common thanks which
he reapes at the hand of the multitude, is lukewarmnesse and Newtralitie at
the best; in many lingrings after Superstition and idolatry; in the worser
sort, desperate swearing, dissolute sabbath keeping, brutish drunkenness, and
uncleanness, falsehood in dealings till all burst again, vanity in fashion
following, without shame or modesty. These are the dregs of our times, and
blots of our feasts, which if not amended, may not a withdraught of all Gods
favors, a remoouall of his Candlestick, the worst of all plagues, be as
certainly foreseen, and foretold, as if Visions and Letters were sent us from
heaven, as to the 7. Churches of Asia? But I hope better things of our better
sort, and love as little as may be to have mine eye and finger upon these
sores, wishing we might see such a Book-fire as we read of Act. 17. made of
all our clandestine Libels, seditious and male contented Pamphlets. I speak not
against the precious balm of reproof, no not oil of Scorpions: let the
righteous smite us with plain and faithful rebukes, and such smitings shall not
wou^d the body, or break the head, but show us our defects without rancor and
malice, pouring in no poison and venom, but oil and wine to heal our wounds,
to excite us to thankfulness worthy the blessings heaped and renewed daily upon
us; and what is the best thanks, but national and personal amendment of life?
and what thanks is enough, what Hecatombs of sacrifices are sufficient for a
God that has done so much for us, and yet cease not to do us good? I would
know of the most ungrateful man what he can require of us more then he has
richly and abundanly deserved, were it to half, yea to all the wealth of the
kingdom? I take not upon me to prescribe particulars. But suppose he should
exact of us this particular, which I dare say would highly please him, and
would I am sure be a most worthy and needful fruit of our gratitude to him. I
will not mention a Ceremonial, circumstantiall, superfluous matter of form
and order, but a necessary substantial amends of what all confess to be
amiss: a provision I mean, of a sufficient maintenance and Minister in every
Parish of the Kingdom, a righting of what Popery has wronged, a Restitution
of what Religion first consecrated, Superstition misplaced, covetousness
wholly alienated and impropriated. This could not in likelihood but prove a
cure of all the maladies spiritual and temporal, a dispelling of our Egyptian
fogs, a dispersing of the Frogs that yet remain as thorns in our sides, a
quickening to all good works of piety and charity, a goad and spur to all
kinds and fruits of thankfulness that God can require of us. Have I spoken of
more then he requires, or we need, or of that which is impossible? the last
will be the only plea, but withal the plea only of our ingratitude and
infidelity, not disability. Is it harder now to restore, then at first to
give? When God stirred up his peoples affections, their Princes and Priests
were feign to set mortmaines and bounds to their bounty, and stay their hands
from giving more. What were a Subsidy or two for God and his church? If God
give us hearts, wood and the sacrifice will soon be found, and brought to
hand; and till this be done, a just brand of Ingratitude lies upon us. It Is
impossible for any application to extend to every particular. If every Soul
would study thankfulness, God would direct to the best duties. If every
English man would kindle a Bone-fire in his own heart, how would the flame
break out, and shine abroad, and the smoke ascend up to the heavens? If every
thankful man would take up his harp, and sing and play with his tongue and
hand a new Song of thanks, how loud and full melody would it make, what joy
would be on the earth, yea in the heavens to see our thankfulness and
amendment. It is but every man's labor to sweep before his own door, and
every man's Faggot to this fire, and the work were done, and God pleased. Give
unto the Lord, you Potentates, glory and strength: give unto the Lord ye sonns
of the mighty, worship and praise due to his Name! You house of Aaron, and you
that serve him in his Courts, praise ye the Lord, and stir up others to
praise him. Let Israel and all that fear him say, his mercies endures for
ever. What ever others shall do, My soul, praise thou the Lord.

A Postscript to the Reader.
A Thankful man is worth his weight in the gold of Ophir. Could I be as
thankful as I ought to be, which, sure I am, I never shall be, yet can the
thanks of a mean man procure but mean honor to God. Could I be as thankful
as is possible for any one man to be, yet single thanks is like a single voice,
which makes but simple music. But could I stir up thankful intentions and
affections in every Reader, for example in thy heart, whose eye is now upon
this advise, then would thou also endeavor to work the like in others; and
so a small number by multiplication might prove a large sum: as a great debt
is often paid by a collection from many hands, which one poor man's ability
could never have reached unto. That we may be aright thankful, it is requisite
that with one eye we observe our sins and evils both public and personal;
and with the other our favors and blessings, that the one may acquaint us with
our unworthiness; the other may prevent male contented ungratefulness. Many a
man would be much more thankful then he is, if he had but an hint of
excitation and help of direction: as many a Scholar, if he had but a few
Heads of Common places, would be rich in observations, which for want of such
a slight help vanish in the reading, and perish in the meditating. Behold
therefore, I give thee here a Register or Inventory, which I wish thee to
keep, and use as a Table of thanks due to God in kind, and negligently by thee
paid. Which when thou perusest, thou may under every Head in the space left
of purpose, record, not all and every favor, which is impossible, but the most
memorable, and thankworthy; putting a special Selah of thanks upon them, as
David upon his deliverance from the Bear, Lion, and Goliath. It cannot but
revive thy memory, and quicken thy affections, so often as thou shall seriously
reuiew it.

A Thankful man's Calender.
COnsider in what times Public.
and places the lot of my life has fallen. In what kings reign, in what
nation, in what town, under what Magistracy, and Ministry.

What Parents, Domestical.
Schoolemasters, and Tutors? what wife, children, and servants has God blessed
me withal?

What sickness have I been delivered from? Personal and privative
What dangers, casualties by sea or land? what suites and vexations by law, or
otherwise?

What measure of health, Positive, Corporal.
and strength of body?

What talents of Wealth, External.
Birth, Office, Authority, Repute?

What faculties of Understanding, Mental.
Memory? what helps of Arts, Sciences, Education, etc.

When and how my conversion to God was wrought? Spiritual,
what assurance of Gods love in Christ, what peace and joy in the Holy Ghost,
etc.

What Progress, growth, and increase have I made in grace, and in good duties
of my place and calling?

What victory over tentations, and special sins, old and inueterate
customs of evil?

When thou have written down some particulars, then minister these
Interrogatories between God and thy self, to thy conscience:

What times formerly, or now usually do I take to ponder and take notice of
Gods blessings? what daily observation make I of them? how many hours spend I
weekly, or monthly in reuoluing the memory of them? what occasion take I to
speak of them in company, to Gods glory, rather then mine own ostentation?

What gain have my talents brought in to my Masters banks?

What benefit have my brethren by them? of what use is my life, parts of mind
and body, etc. to my Country, Church, or Commonwealth?

What Alms and good deeds have I done, or intend to do?

What shall I render to God for all his benefits? how shall I add to my former
thankfulness? what good service may I do him more then I have, that men may
glorify my heavenly Father?

Bradwardini grata ad Deum Precatiuncula, lib. 3. De causa Dei.
DA mihi mendicanti and misero, qui tuus sum magis quam meus, imo non meus sed
tuus, vt tibi patri luminum, cuius dona gratuita sunt omnes boni motus, actus,
habitus, carentiae malorum actuum, bona positiua, priuatiua, gratias, quae mihi
possibiles sunt agam maximas gratissimus. Da vt facilius cord and opere faciam
quam ore proferam. Da iterum atque iterum precor, nihil vt mihi dulcius sit and
delectabilius quam haec effectuosissime affectuosissime adimplere, incessanter
semper and vbique ab aete no in aeternum. Amen.

Quoties tentatio superatur, periculum declinatur, vitium subiugatur, annosa
and inueterata animi passio sanatur laqueus deprehenditur, aut multum cupita
virtus obtinetur, toties personare debet vox laudis ad singula beneficia.
Bernardus in Cant. Sermon. 1.

August in Psalm.

Quid est, tota die impleatur os meum laudibus? Sine intermissione te laudem,
in prosperis quia consolaris, in aduersis quia corrigis antequam essem quia
fecisti, quum essem quia salutem dedisti, quum peccassem quia ignouisti, etc.

FINIS.

