All in All.

Alpha

Christ
Joseph Iaakob Isaac Abraham. Melchizeilech. Noah. Adam.
Lion of Iu: Rose of Sharo^ Vine. Branch. Corner stone. Morning starr. Sun.
Archprophet High priest King of Kings. Mighty Counselor. Messiah Emmanuell
Jesus.
Shewbre. Sacrifices. Lamps. Manna. Rock. Pillar of fire. Brazen Serpent.
Moses. Aaron. Joshua. Sampson. David. Solomon. Zorubbabell.
Bread. Water. Light. Door. Way. Truth. Life.
Word of God. Bip^ of Souls. Advocate. Mediator. Suerty. Head. Spouse.
Lauer. Paschal la^be. Altar. Mercy Sent. Tabernacle. Noah's Ark. Tree of Life.



Omega

Types and figures of Christ.

Nothing Besides without Nothing

By Samuel Ward



TO THE KING OF KINGS, AND Lord of Lords, Jesus Christ.
EVery good name is as precious ointment; but unto the (oh CHRIST) has God
given a name above all names in heaven and earth, anointed thee with oil
above all thy fellows. All thy garments smell of Mirrhe, Aloes, and Cassia;
because of the sent of thy perfumes, thy name is a bundle of Mirrhe, cluster of
Camphire, and as the smell of Libanus: But we the sons of men, have dull
senses stuffed with earthly savors. Oh therefore that thou, whom my soul
loves, would show thy servant, where that fragrant Spikenard is to be
found, which will cast a savor all over thine house; and help him so to power
some smell portion thereof upon thine head, as might draw us in the savor of
thine ointment to run after thee, Had he all the treasures and Jewels of the
world, would he not bestow them upon Altars and Crucifixes to thy honor, if
thou likedst of and such services? But these vanities, he knows full well,
thy Jealousy abhors. This thou have showed him, that he that prayseth thee,
honors thee. Accept therefore, and prosper the Office of him that desires
not hereby to gain a name on earth, who wishes all his thoughts and works
may either honor thee, or dishonor himself; feed thy flock, or mothes; who
reckons himself unworthy to be as one of thy whelps, is willing to be of
no name or number, so thou may be ALL IN ALL.

Guide thou my Pen, and it shall show forth thy praise.
Colloss. 3. 11. Christ is All in All.
A Magnificent title, a most ample and stately Style, too transcendent and
comprehe^siue for any creature, Man or Angel, due and fit only for him, upon
whose head it is here set, by his elect vessel, chosen of purpose to be the
Ensigne-bearer of his Name among the Nations, worthily honored by Augustine
for the best child of grace, and faithfullest servant of the Lord, because in
all his writings he affects nothing more; nothing else in a manner, then to
advance his name, as here in the former part of the verse, to cry down and
nullify all other excellencies whatsoever, that he might in the latter,
magnify, or rather as you see omnifie his Lord and Master Christ, giving the
Collossians to understand, that how ever there be many things with men, of
great and different esteem, the advantage of a Jew being much above a Gentile;
the dignity of a Grecian, above a Scythian, or Barbarian, many the privileges
of a freeman, above a bond-slaue; yet all these with God, are nothing set by,
who has so set all his love and good pleasure on his Son, that besides, or
out of him, he regards no person, respects no circumstance, but slights all
as Ciphers of no value. Only look what there is of Christ in any man, either
by imputation, or infusion, so much is he in Gods Books, with whom Christ is
All in All.

The extent of which praise, that we may the fullier comprehend, we may not
measure Paul's phrase by our own ordinary language, in which by common abuse
of speech, we lend it to every thing we mean to commend a little above the
fellows: As Solomon, speaking after the sense and fashion of worldlings, Bread
(says he) nourishes, Wine refreshes, but Money is all in all. Eccles. 10.
It is not true of Christ only, as a byword, or prouerbiall commendation, but
in the fullest rack, a Proposition can be strained unto in our apprehension:
and that in a twofold relation of God and Man. (...).
Look what God can require for his satisfaction, or we desire for our
perfection, is so completely to be found in Christ, that it need not be sought
elsewhere.

With God, its true that worthy Patriarchs and Saints have been some bodies;
Abraham his friend, Israel a potent Prince with him, Moses a faithful Steward
in his house, Noah, Samuel, and Daniel, prevailing favorites, that could do
something with him, but all through, and for the sake of the Messiah, the
Heir, the son of his desires, and good pleasure, in whom he has heaped up
the fullness of grace and treasures of all perfection.

Unto us sundry things be of some stead and use in some cases in their
several times, places, and respects, but unto all intents and effects of
Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation, in prosperity, in adversity, in
life and death Christ only is All in All.

This All-sufficiencie of Christ as it cannot be easily conceived, nor
possibly at once expressed, so has not the Spirit of God, thought fit in one
or a few Texts, after one or a few ways, but throughout the Bible, at sundry
times and manifold manners to set out the same unto us in types real, in types
personal, in prophesies, in plain terms, in parables and similitudes, Philip
Camerarius in vita Comitis Anb^ldini Pastoris and Principis, etc.
in so much that Count Anhalt that Princely Preacher was wont to say, that the
whole Scriptures, what were they else but swaddling bands of the child Jesus? he
being to be found almost in every Page, in every verse, and line.

Many renowned persons, (...) ille qui in front libri cer^itur collectus est
ex Cyrilli. Alexan. (...) libris 5. ex prosperi praedictionibus, ex Eusebii
(...), lib. 10. ex Andronici Constantini Dialogo contra Iudaeos. and ex Guill.
Sc^^to.
and things we read Stories of, but the Spirit speaks not so much of them, as
Allegorizeth of another, means them on the by, and Christ on the maine, who
is the Center, at which all of them, as several lines aim, and directly point
at.

The tree of Life, the Arc of Noah, the Ladder of Jacob, and the rest of the
like kind, what were they but Christ, whom because the world was not worthy so
soon to see, nor God willing at once to show so rich a Jewel: he therefore
inwrapped obscurely in these shadows, till in the fullness of time he saw
fit to reveal him in open Mirror, directly by his Forerunner, pointing at
him, Behold the Lamb of God, etc.

And because these were but dead types, not resembling to the life, him that
was the Life of the world, and Lord of life, therefore all the Prophets, Kings
and Priests of note, and the redeemers and benefactors of the Jews, what were
they but Pictures sent before of this Prince of Glory to follow after in his
due time, and as Stars extinguishing their borrowed light at the appearance
of the Sun of Righteousness, Glossa Hebr. in Easy 52.
to whom Moses, and Elias, in the persons, and stead of the rest, Vide
Pellicanu^ in Deuteronomy. 34.
did their homage on Mount Tabor, as unto the Sun, and accomplishment of the
Law, and Prophets.

To say nothing of the imaginary Gods, and proud Monarchs of the world, all
whose swelling titles, which they usurped in their coins Columns, and Arches
of Founders, Preseruers, Repayrers, Dictators, Consuls, etc. properly and of
right belong to him, who alone is the Savior of his people, King of Kings,
mighty Counselor, Prince of Peace, Righteousness, Immortality, only
blessed for ever.

In a word, this whole Universe, this same great All, and all the things of
mark and use in it, as they were made by, for, and through him, and but for him
should not have been, could not continue. So do they all willingly tender
their services to illustrate his worth, as so many Gemmes to adorn and
embroyder his apparel withal. The glorious Sun, the bright morning Star,
bread the most necessary, wine the sweetest, water the most refreshing, the
Rose of Sharon the fairest, all serving in Scripture to adumbrate pieces and
parcels of his infinite perfection; and do not all jointly compounded, make up
an Idea of him, that is light indeed, bread and water of life indeed, the
only good, the chief good, the Sun, the Author, and Perfectour, the Root,
and Branch, the A, and (...), which two Letters, as they are the principal,
initiall, and final of the Alphabet, Vide Eglinum Iconium in Apocalysin.
and comprehend in their Compass all the residue, so are they Emblems of him
that is eternity it self, perfection it self, first and last, All in All.

Hear this, all you that worship the Beast and his image, and tell me whether
there can be two Alls in all; and if this be Christ's just and incommunicable
Title; what is to be thought of him that shall arrogate or assume it to
himself? what else can he be but that Man of Pride, Son of Perdition, even
that Antichrist. Vniuersalis Sacerdos. Epist. 30. ad Mourit. Regist. b. 6.
The swelling Titles, whereby your Gregory foremarked out the Successor, are
but modest ones in comparison of this blasphemy.

Yea, but was there ever mouth so full of abomination, that durst belch out; or
ears so Herodian, that durst put up such stuff? Search and peruse your own
Records, and tell us to whom these acclamations were used by your Laterane
Fathers. Vide orationem Gnat^onicam Episcopi Patris Vacensis ad Leonem X. in
vltimo Council. Later^nensi.
To thee is given all power in heaven and earth, thou art all in all. Was it
not your Lion at his entrance into the Council? And did that Beast either rend
his garment, or stop his ears? at which its wonder the earth opened not to
swallow quick both speaker and hearer, as the Chair of Hildebrand rent asunder
on a less occasion. Too little belike it was to be styled by ordinary
Parrasites, the Shepherd of Shepherds, Bellar. de Pontifice Romans lib. 2. cap.
31.
Spouse, and head of the Church, Oecumenicall Bishop, Prince of Priests,
unless he might be advanced above all Augusteitie and Deity in this most
Hyperbolicall manner. What need we any further evidence of an Antichrist?
shall there ever come a prouder monster out of the Tribe of Dan? or can Lucifer
himself be more Luciferian? And yet forsooth this wretch to blind the eyes of
such as will be deluded, will be called the Servant of servants, and al is made
whole again, as if the Scriptures, and ancient modern Writers had not
forepainted out such an Antichrist, Aug. lib. contra aduersarios legis cap. 12.
as should by all fraud of unrighteousness climb into the Chair of universal
pestilence, Hylarius contra Anxentium pa^eus in Apoc. Gratserus in regia plaga.
under the color and vizard of Christ, Faith and Piety, (without which the
world would have abhorred him, as the Devil himself) undermine Christ, and
subvert the Faith, and overthrow all Religion, under the names of Christ's
Vicar, and Vice-God, become in effect Antichrist, and Anti-God.

Somewhat more tolerable of the two, Tuspes certae ^^^serorune, Vere Matter
Orp^ano ^um, Tu leuamen oppressorum, ^edic-men Iusi^norum, omnibus es omnia.
(...) Deuteronomy.
and yet blasphemously enough, do they give it to the blessed Virgin, in the
Closes of their riming Marials, of whom I doubt not with Calvin to say, That if
one could spit in her face, drag her by the hair of her head, or trample her
under feet, she would count it a less injury, then to have ascribed unto her
the divine attributes of her Lord and Savior, Ambros. de Isaak and anima, cap.
8.
who alone is the Eye by which we see the Father, the mouth by whom we speak
to him, the hand by which he distributes all his treasures of grace unto us,
from whom so much is sacrilegiously detracted, as is superstitiously given to
Saint, Angel, Man, Work, Merit, or Creature what ever. Mad and blind
Idolaters are they, wittingly ignorant, that Christ of purpose trod the
Winepresse alone, F^xin Apee.
shed his blood alone, shed his blood alone upon the Cross, implying to us,
that if we shall mingle therewithal, his mothers milk, the blood of any
Martyr, else it loses its healing virtue, and turns into bane and poison to
our souls. This Eagles feathers will not abide blending with others; (...)
this Sovereignty will not endure either paritie or prioritie; no Jupiter will
Christ be, but a Jehovah; no Helper, but Author and finisher of our salvation.
To all He Saints and She Saints, Merit and Freewill-mongers, shall he not in
his Jealousy break out and say, What have I to do with you? If you can do
all, Aesopus in vita.
or ought at all without me, then let me alone, let me either be Savior
alone, Mediator alone, All in all, or none at all.

But to leave these selfe-cousned, and selfe-condemned Idolaters, whose whole
Church and Religion holds more of her Lady, then of our Lord; leaves Christ
the least of all to do in matter of Merit and Salvation, well were it with
many of us, who profess and hold the precious faith of Christ aright in
judgment and doctrine, if in affection and practice he were, I say, Erasmus
in Euangelio.
not All in all, but some body, and some thing. In our tongue, terms, and
countenance, he may be heard and seen, but in our lives and deeds, where is
he to be found? Sine Christa Christiani Bern.
As a Savior and Benefactor, many will own him, but as a Lord and Law giver,
few do know him; the prime of their loves, joys, services, their back and
belly, their Mammon, or any thing shall have before him. He that should be
both Alpha and Omega, its well if he be the Omega of their thoughts and
cares. May it not be justified of too too many, that an Hawke, or an Hound, a
Dye, or Card, a Flower in the Garden, a new Suite and fashion of apparel, and
such other nifles and trifles are their All in All: with most and such as are
of the wiser sort of this generation, that which Solomon justly calls Nothing,
(for so he peremptorily terms that, which miserable men of this world place
all their confidence in) call their Pandora, August. de Ciuit. Dei.
their Jupiter, worship as the great Diana, Empress, and goddess of the whole
world, take away that from them, and take away All: the having of it makes
them, the loosing of it undoes them. Great I confess is the power, and ample
the command that Mammon has in this world for many purposes, and in many
cases. But in the hour of sickness let Naball call and cry unto it and see
if it can deliver him in the evil day, and in distress of conscience. Let
Judas see what comfort his money will afford him; in the day of Death and
Judgment, what does a penny and a pound, an empty purse, and a full purse
differ? Does not too too late experience teach them to cry out, All is vanity,
and force them with the Emperor Seuerus to say, I have been all things, and it
auailes nothing; if I had a thousand worlds, I would give them to be found of
God in Christ. Worthily therefore did Charles the Great, Sie vetus illud,
Nummus regnat, nummus vincit, nummus imperat, mutauit Carolus magnus apud
Rensureum.
change that old Byword of money into his Christian Symbol, Christ reigns,
Christ ouercomes, Christ tryumphs, Christ is All in All.

All then let him be in all our desires and wishes: Who is that wise Merchant,
that has heart large enough to conceive and believe this? let him go sell all
his nothing, that he may compass this Pearl, barter his Bugles for this
Diamond; verily all the Haberdash stuff the whole pack of the world has, is
not worthy to be valued with this Jewel, worthy of him thou can not be,
unless thou counts all dross and loss to gain him, that is gain in life
and death, unless thou can as the Apostles, forsake all to follow him; yea,
as diverse of the common sort of his followers lay down all at the Apostles
feet for him, who laid down himself for us, emptying himself of his glory,
to fill us with grace and glory: yea, unless thou can make nothing of thy
self, and thine own righteousness, which is the hardest thing in practice
that may be. Few or none I think there be in the sound of the Gospel, but
have some faint and languide wishes, oh that Christ were mine. But would they
know the reason why they attain not the sweet fruition and rauishing
possession of him, I am his, and he is mine. The reason is because he will not
be found, and had of such as seek but lasily, and coldly for him, that
enquire not through the streets, as undone without him; as had rather then
want him, want all the world besides, and crying as the Spouse, Where art thou
whom my soul loves, whom have I in heaven like unto thee? Men and brethren,
what shall I do that I may enjoy him? Give me Christ, or I die, draw me that
I may run after thee.

These are the affections that befit them that are like to be speeders. The
sluggard lusts, and wants. He that desires any thing above him, equally
with him, or without him, shall never obtain him; he will be wooed in the
first place with all thy soul, strength, and might, with all that is within
thee, or not at all of thee.

All let him be in all thy loves, and above all other beloueds; when thou have
gotten him, think not enough to make much of him, but remember he well
deserves to be and must be All in all. Take him not by the hand, but embrace
him with both thine Arms of love, and hold him with all thy might, love him
till thou be sick of love for him: such as will suffice any one ordinary
object, wife, friend, health, or wealth, will not give him content; nay, not a
compound of many, but a Catholicion of all; as he has deserved, so he
deservedly challenges. All thy weak Riuerets united, will scarce make one
current strong enough for him. He that did all, suffered all, took all thine
infirmities, finished all for thee, is it not reason he should be all in all,
without any corriuall in all thy affections? Such as entertain Princes, can
never think they show love enough unto them, and shall any thing be enough
for this Prince of our peace and salvation? I cannot but reverence the memory
of that reverend Divine, M. Welsh.
who being in a deep muse, after some discourse that had passed of Christ,
and tears trickling abundantly from his eyes before he was aware, being urged
for the cause thereof, confessed ingenuously it was because he could not draw
his dull heart to prise Christ aright: A rare mind in Christians, who think
every little enough, and too much for him.

ALL let him be in all our references and respects to others, yea in all our
elections and valuations of wife, friends, companions, servants, only to prize
Christ, and his Image, his Faith, and Graces, not kindred, not wealth, not
greatness, not other parts, but only the whole of a man, which is his
Christianity; dare not to yoke thy self unequally with any untamed heyfer,
that bears not his yoke: Spouse not but in the Lord; call none Father, Mother,
or Brother, but such as he did, that is, such as do his Fathers will: set not
poor Lazarus at the footestoole of thy heart, and Dives with his Gold Ring,
and his Purple, in the throne of esteem, lest Christ be offended for having
his glorious Gospel in respect of persons. Oh what a difficult virtue is this
when it comes to the practicing, to ouersee and neglect all glistering lures,
and stales of the flesh, and to know no man for any such carnal Caparisons,
but to consider him as a new creature in Christ, and delight thy self in them
as the most excellent of the earth, the only true Gentile, Noble, Worthies of
the World. How royal and memorable was that practice of Ingo, an ancient King
of the Draues and Veneds, who making a stately feast, not as Ahasuerosh, to
show the bounty of his own, but the glory of Christ's Kingdom, set all his
Nobles, which were at that time Pagans, and unconverted to the Christian faith,
in his Hall below, and certain poor Christians in his Presence Chamber with
himself, with kingly cheer and attendance; at which they wondering, he told
them this, he did not as King of the Draues, but as King of another world,
wherein these were his consorts and fellow-Princes: these he saw with a
spiritual eye, clad in white Robes, and worthy his company, to them he would
give Civil due in the regiment of the Commonwealth, but those he must love
and honor in his heart as beloved, and honored of God. Aeneas Syluius cap. 20.
Europ^ Auentinus, lib. 3. Annalium Bauarie, G^u^.
A rare and noble Art recorded by three Historians worthy to be read, to the
shame of our times, wherein men of mean greatness, know not how to show the
least respect to a Christian, or a Minister in the name of Christ, to account
them worthy their company, whom they ought to have in singular respect, and to
account their very feet beautiful, for their Lord and Embassage sake, only
with this Prouiso, that divine and nimious adoration be not given, a fault on
the other hand, common in Popery, to their spiritual Fathers and Founders of
orders and rules whom they obey and reverence above Christ, Gualtan 1. Cor.
as Gualter gives instance in a doting Abbot of Germany, who snibbed a Nouice,
for talking of Christ, and the Gospel, and nor of the Rules of Saint Francis,
and his own Order; a common fault among Sectaries, who hold, vaunt and
denominate themselves of this or that Man, of this or that Faction, whereas
with God I dare boldly say, there is neither Caluenist nor Lutherane,
Protestant nor Puritan, Conformitane, or Non-Conformitane, but faith and love
in Christ is All in All.

All let him be in all our joys, in stead of all other contents unto us; good
reason is it, that he should fill our hearts, that fills All in all things:
If he be ours. Apollo is ours, Cephas is ours, Life and Death, things
present, and to come, the world and all is ours, we Christ's, and Christ Gods.
In him let our souls rest and rejoice; Pau^inus Nola capta a Barbaris
pre^abatur ad dommum ne ex^^^eier ob aurum and argentum, tu enim es mihi omnia.
I say again rejoice always in him. If he be our Shepherd, what can we
want? If he be our Host, shall not our Table be furnished, and Cup ouerflow?
If we err, is not he our Way? If we doubt, is not he the Truth? If we
faint, August. de Ciuit. Ve^ lib. 1. c. 1. Fas tibi non est saluo Caesare de
fortuna quert. Hoc incolani nihil perdid^sti non tantum siccos oculos, sed and
laeto esse oportet. In hoc tibi omnia bie pro omnibus est. Seneca in
consolatione ad Polybi^m, qua^to aptius de Christo ad Christiam m, etc.
is not he the Life? What loss should disturb us, what want distemper us, so
long as we loose not Christ? What if God take away all, and give us his Son,
how shall he not with him give us all things requisite? What other mystery
enabled Paul to want and abound, but the fruition of him, whose goodness and
greatness is such, that all accessions add nothing, all defects detract
nothing to the happiness of him that enioyes him, who is All in All.

Above all, All let him be with us in the maine of All, that is in the point
of Justification; there (be sure) we repose all our confidence in him alone,
bewaring least we share and part stakes with any act of our own, yea, with
any grace or work of his in us, lest he be in vain and of none effect unto
us. This glory will he by no means endure, should be divided with any
coadiutor, concause, or copartner what ever: nay, he takes it ill and indignely
at our hands, if having him, we hold not our selves completely righteous in
Gods sight, if for want of this or that grace we mourn overmuch, hang down
our head, and will not be comforted, as if his grace were not sufficient for
us, as if he were not better then ten, yea, then ten thousand graces unto
us, if we stand upon this or that measure of grace, twenty to one if we had
that we desire, we would be full and rich, and stand in no need of him, who
is the giver of all grace, or that we would be prouder of the gift, then of
the Author of every good gift, and not rest in him that is our wisdom, our
righteousness, and redemption.

All let him be in all the graces of Sanctification, who only indeed is the
very life and soul of them all. What is knowledge but Heathenish science, if
he be not the object, whom to know is eternal life? What is faith, and
trust, and hope in God? if not in and through Christ, but a Jewish wild
ungrounded confidence? Patience, but a Stoicall blockishnesse? Temperance, and
all the whole beauty of virtues, but either natural qualities, or moral
habits unacceptable to God, unprofitable to our selves, sour Grapes, glistring
vices, if Christ be not the form of them, without whom there is no quality
that God relisheth in us, whereof Christ is not the root: wherefore as
Apothecaries sweeten all their Confections with Sugar, and perfume their
Cordials with Musk; so let us grace all our graces in Christ, without whom,
fools we are to pride our selves in any thing that Nature. Custom, or
Education has done for us, in comparison o^ that influence we receive, and of
those rays that come from this Sun of Righteousness. Fools are we, when
wanting grace, power, or strength to overcome ill, or do well; to seek supply
any where else, save of him, of whose fulness all the Saints that ever were
received grace for grace. Who would go to the Pack, when he may go to the
Warehouse, who would fetch water at the Cestern, when he may have it at the
Spring head better cheap.

All let him be in all our deeds, whether we eat or drink, whether we pray,
read, or meditate, give Alms, or work in our callings, let all be done in
the name of our Lord Jesus, begun with his leave, performed with his aid, and
concluded to his glory, without whom we can do nothing, Macarius.
no more then the bird can fly without wings, the Ship sail without wind or
tide, the body move without the soul: what ever good works we do with an
eye from his, and a skew unto our own names; the more pain we take, the more
penalty of pride belongs unto us, the more cost, the more loss; we and our
moneys shall perish together, whereas the least Cup of cold water given for his
take, who knows our works, and the intent of our works, shall not loose the
reward: Verily, who would be so foolish as to do any work to any other
play master, or who so ungrateful, that would not do any work that he should
require that has so well deserved to command more then all we are, or can
do. Is he All in All with us, If we dare deny him any thing. I commend not the
discretion, but admire the fidelity and zeal of that renowned Fox, who never
would deny Beggar that asked in his Name: Then are works good works, When the
love of Christ constraines us to them, and when Christ's eye is more then all
the world besides; especially, If when all is done, all the thanks and praise
of the Deed redound to him. That policy is remarkable in the Apostles cure of
the Creeple, and in Saint Paul, in that he would never suffer any part of the
repute or honor of any his acts or labors, rest upon his own head, but
repells it forcibly from himself, and reflects it carefully upon his Lord
Christ: Not I, not I, but the grace of Christ in me, I live not but Christ in
me. In which Not, says Bradwardine, there lies a great deal of subtlety,
like that of Ioab, that when he had fought the Field, and gotten the upper
hand, sent for David to carry away the credit of the Victory. Oh how difficult
is this for us, not to lurch some part of the praise, and suffer pieces of the
Sacrifice to cleave to our own nets and yarne. Whereas in truth, our deepest
wisdom and strongest policy lay in this, not to glory in our wisdom or
strength, but to glory in the Lord, who works All in All things.

All, let him be in all our thoughts and speeches, how happy were it if he
were never out of our sight and minds, but that our souls were directed
toward him, and fixed on him, as the Sunne-flowre toward the Sun, the Iron
to the Lodestone, the Lodestone to the Pole-starre. Has he not for that
purpose resembled himself to all familiar and obuious objects; Musculus and
Brentius in Iohannens.
to the Light, that so often as we open our eyes we might behold him; to
Bread, Water and Wine, that in all our repasts we might feed on him; to the
Door, that in all our out and ingoing, Bernard.
we might have him in remembrance; how happy if our tongues would ever run
upon that name, which is Honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, Iubilee in the
heart. Let the Mariner prate of the winds, the Merchant of his gain, the
Husbandman of his Oxen. Be thou a Pithagorean to all the world, Nolanus.
and a Peripatecian to Christ, mute to all vanities, and eloquent only to
Christ, that gave man his tongue and his speech? How does Paul delight to
record it and harp upon it eleven times in ten verses, which Chrysostom
first took notice off, 1. Corinthians. 1. 10. And how does worthy Fox grieve to
foresee and foretell that, I^ prafated con^ionem de Christo crucifixo.
which we hear and see come to pass, that men's discourses would be taken up
about trifles and nifles, as if all Religion lay in the flight and pursuit of
one circumstance or opinion; how heartely does he pray, and vehemently wish
that men would leave iangling about Ceremonies, and spend their talk upon him
that is the Substance; that learned men would write of Christ, unlearned men
study of him, Preachers make him the Scope and Subject of all their preaching.
And what else indeed is our Office, but to eleuate, not a piece of Bread, as
the Romish Priests, but Christ in our Doctrine; to travel in birth till he
be formed in a people, to crucify him in their eyes by lively preaching his
Death, Philip Melan^^. in Rhetor.
and Passion. The old Emblem of Saint Christopher, intending nothing else but
a Preacher wading through the sea of this world, staying on the Staff of
Faith, and lifting up CHRIST aloft to be seen of men. What else gained John,
the name of the Divine, and Paul of a wise Master Builder, but that he
regarded not as the fashion is now adays, to have his Reading, Memory, or
Eloquution, but Christ known, and him crucified, and to build the Church
skilfully, laying the foundation upon this Rock of which if we hold our peace,
Lutherus.
the rocks themselves will cry. This being the sum of our Art and tasks, by
the help of Christ, Perkins. in Prophetica.
to preach the Gospel of Christ, to the praise of Christ, without whom a Sermon
is no Sermon, Preaching no preaching.

The sum of the sum of All is, that the whole duty of all men is, to give
themselves wholly to Christ, Nagie^ze^^^ de Spiritis.
to sacrifice, not a leg, or an arm, or any other piece, but soul, spirit,
and body, and all that is within us; the fat, the inwards, the head and hoof,
and all as an holocaust to him dedicating deuoting our selves to his service
all the days and hours of our lives, that all our days may be Lords days.
To whom when we have so done, yet must we know we have given him so much
less then his due, as we worms and wretched sinners are less then the Son
of God, who knew no sin. To him therefore let us live, to him therefore let
us die. So let us live to him, that we may dye in him, and breathe out our
souls most willingly into his hands, with the like affection that John of
Alexandria, surnamed the Almoner, for his bounty is reported to have done, who
where he had distributed all he had to the poor, and made even with his
revenues, as his fashion was yearly to do in his best health, thanked God he
had now nothing left but his Lord and Master Christ, whom he longed to be
with, and would now with vnlymed, and vnentangled wings fly unto: or as in
fewer words Peter of old, and Lambert of later times; Nothing but Christ,
nothing but Christ.

A concluding Supplication to CHRIST.
THou oh Lord Christ alone, that know how little account I make of this
little honor and service I have done unto thee. How far it is from me to
think I have said or written any thing worthy of thee, and yet do nothing
doubt but thou likest and acceptest well of what I have done, because I know it
came of thee, that I should have the least will or skill to do it. Now
therefore what is it I have to petition unto thee for, but that as thou alone
art worthy of that poor all that I am and can; so thou would please to take
possession, not of any corner, or limme, but of the whole temple of my soul,
and tabernacle of my body. Thou who scourgest out of thy Fathers House buyers
and sellers, who turnedst out the mourners out of Iairus his doors, chase out
of my heart all carnal desires and delights, troublesome passions, root out
all thorny cares, cause every proud thought, and high imagination to fall as
Dagon before thee, that thou may inuest thy self in thine own Throne, rule
and reign as sole Commander of my will and affections, dwell in thine own
Shrine, adorn it here with thy grace, till thou replenish it with thy glory,
even till thou thy self resignest up thy Scepter to thy Father and God, become
All in All.

LVTHERS Prayer at his death.
THee, O Christ have I known, thee have I loved, thee have I taught, thee have
I trusted, into thy hands do I commend my spirit.

Augustinus. Omnis mea Copia extra Christum egestas est. Paulinus Nolanus
Augustini coaetaneus and familiaris. VIta Deus noster-ligno mea vita pependit,
Vt staret mea vita Deo: quid vita rependam
Pro vita tibi Christ mea? nisi forte salutis
Accipiam calicem, quo te mea dextra propinet,
Vt sacro mortis preciosae proluar haustu.
Sed quid agam? neque si proprium them corpus inignes,
Vilescamque mihi, nec sanguine debita fuso
Iusta tibi soluam, quia me reddam tibi prome.
Quis tibi penset amor? Felicis Notali 9.
Dominus mea forma fuisti,
Vt seruus tua forma forem, sic somper eroimpar, etc.
Haec tibi Christ tamen tenui fragilique paratu
Pronobis facimus, toto quem corpore mundus
Non capit, Augustum cui Coelum, terraque punctum est, etc.
Tu precor oh fons Christ meis innascere fibris, Idem de celso puero.

Vt mihi viua tuae vena resultet aquae.
Qui te Christ bibent dulci torrente refecti,
Non sitient vltra sed tamen and sitient
Totus enim dulcedo Deus, dilectio Christ es,
Vnde replere magis quam satiare potes
Iugifluus semper biberis, turbamque sitimque,
Potantum exhausto largior exuperas.
Te Domine ergo Deus panem fon^ emque salutis,
Semper and esuriant and sitient anima.
Quod enim tenere, vel bonum, Idem ad Ansonium.
aut verum queant,
qui non tenent summae caput,
Veribonique fomitem and fontem Deu^?
quem nemo nisi in Christo videt.
Hic veritatis lumen est, vitae via,
vis, men's, munus, virtus patris,
Sol aequitatis, fons bonorum, fles Dei,
natus Deo, mundi sator;
Mortalatatis vita, nostrae mors necis,
magister hic virtutis est.
Deusque pro nobis, atque pro nobis homo
nos induendo se exuit etc.
Totoque nostra iure Domini vendicui
et corda, et ora, and tempora;
Se cogitari, intelligi, credi, legi^^*
se vult timeri, and diligi, etc.
Cum multa sint quibus per vitam egemus, aere, inquam, lumine, alimento,
vestibus, ipsis naturae facultatibus et membris, fit tamen vt nullius vsum ex
omnibus semper and ad omnia desideremus, sed nunc illud, nunc istud adhibeamus,
alias alio ad praesentem in seruiente necessitatem; vestem quippe induimus quae
alimoniam non praebet, sed cibum appetentibus aliud quaerendum est* contingere
seu tractare cupientibus manus sufficit, sed cum dufcultare oportet nihil
commodat. At Saluator in ipsoviuentibus sic semper and omnimodis adest, vt
quibuscunque eorum necessitatibus consulat, and ipsis sit omnia, nec alio se
vertere, nec aliunde quaerere quidquam sinat, non enim egent aliquo Sancti quod
ipse non sit: generat nimirum ipsos, educat, alit and lumen ipsis est and
oculus idem, altor simul and alimenium, panis, aqua, vnguentum, vestimentu^,
via, et vie terminus, membra nos-sumus, ipse capur, certandum est? Ipse certat
vna; praeclare certamus? praeses and arbiter certaminis; vincimus? ipse mox
corona est, sic vndecunque mentem nostram ad seipsum aduertit, suaui tyrannide
ad se solum trahens, sibi soli copulans and astringens, nec ad aliud effundi,
nec vllius rei amore implicari patitur: ipse domum cordis implet, qui coelum
and terra^ implet, et omnia in omnibus.

Nicolaus Cabasilas de vita in Christo lib. 1. Bibl. Patrum, tom. 13. Quid
obsecro summum bonum in omnibus et per omnia quaeritis, eo vno neglecto qui
omnia est in omnibus? Quaere requiem animabus vestris quaeritis, and non
inuenitis? nisi quia perperam ibi quaeritis vbi non est; extra Christu^ quod in
eo solo est. Ideoque carbones pro the sauro, arcam pro pretio, munusculum pro
amica, gaudiola pro Amasio, vestigia pro ceruo, phantasmata pro rebus,
nubeculam pro Iunone, ancillulas pro Penelope, vmbram pro corpore, viam pro
patria, media profine, stillas tenuissimas pro suauitatis abysso, vanitatem pro
veritate amplexamini.

Hugo de Sancto Victore in Ecclesiastem. Vana salus, and nulla salus confidere
mundo,
Vera salus Christo credere, and vna salus.
Christ all alone Salvation brings,
All other are deceitful things.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Aug. Mathewes for John Marriott, and John Grismand. 1622.


