THE Homilies or familiar Sermons of M. Rodolph Gualther Tigurine upon the
Prophet Joel.

Translated from Latin into English, by John Ludham Vicar of Withersfielde.

Imprinted in London for William Ponsonnby. 1582.

To the Reader.
I In Joel the prophet etch creature may see,
O Of our days and times a plain platform to be:
H He displaieth the judgments of God against sin:
N Next notes the plagues that the people were in.
L Letting them see how for their excess,
V Universal destruction did sore them distress.
D Declaring how yet if they would repent,
H High mercy from God to them should be sent.
A And this he concludes in Christ to consist,
M March this way the^, Reader, so shall thou beblist.
To the right worshipful and godly disposed Gentleman, M. John Wentworth,
Esquire, John Ludham wishes continuance of health, with the increase of much
woorship and felicity.
THe good opinion which I long since conceived of your woorship, joined with an
infallible experience of your courtesy and friendlines toward me, has been
(as it were) a continual spurring of me forward to render again some token of
a duetifull remembrance, and of a well meaning mind toward you. Which was
the cause, that when I had gone through with the translation of these short
Sermons upon Joel, I thought with my self, that I could not better bestow the
fruit of this my labor (such as it is) then upon your worship. And as
touching the argument of the Prophet (to speak in a word what I think)
because it contains nothing else (in effect) then an earnest and vehement
exhortation of al estates of men unto repentance (a thing very necessary to be
practiced and put in ure in these our days) I was persuaded it would be to
some purpose, if the same were given forth and declared in as plain and
familiar a method as was possible. Which thing (being accomplished in this
treatise) may (as I trust) minister occasion both of good liking to your
worship, and also of increase of spiritual knowledge and comfort to so many,
as shall not disdain the advised reading and perusing of the same. I might
enter here (I confess) into some larger discourse of and concerning the
seue^rall circumstances apperteyning to the summary declaration of the argument
of this Prophet as the time, place and occasion, when, where, and for what
cause, he took upon him this prophesy, the matter and substance of the
doctrines which he handles, etc. But because all that is sufficiently touched
and expressed in the preface of the author following, and also in the work it
self, the godly reader may there find whatsoever is requisite to this purpose.
only (to end withal) I am to crave of your worship, that according as god has
enriched you with many singular ornaments both of mind and body, not only
beseeming a gentleman of your calling, but also far surmou^ting many other of
like estate and degree, so you would again dailye more and more carefully
apply the^ to the furthera^ce of his glory, the benefit of his church and the
common weal of this your native country. And thus (briefelye) praying pardon
for my boldness and resting my self upon hope of your favorable acceptance of
this my poor present, proceeding only of good will to your woorshippe, I
betake most humbly the success of al to the most highest, who together with
the temporal peace, which he has given you in great measure, grant you
also the fruition of that peace that passes all understanding.

Written at your town of Wetherfielde the.xvii. day of January. 1582. Your
worships always at commandment in the Lord, John Ludham.

To the noble and worthy Gentleman, sir Eberhard of Broich, Lord of
Friddeburge, Rodolphe Gualther Tigurine wishes grace and peace from God the
Father through Jesus Christ our Lord.
AS often as I call to mind our old friendship and familiarity (right noble
Eberhard) which first springing up at Marpurge within a while after grew more
strong at Regentspurge in the assembly of the states of the Empire there, which
was holden in the year of Christ's incarnation 1541. I feel my self
delighted with a singular pleasure. You were at that time conversant among the
noble young Gentlemen, which were of the chamber to the most famous prince of
the Hessians, and I (for my part) by the liberality of your prince, had an
honest place of allowance with those excellent learned, D. Pistorius,
Draconite, Melander, and Cor^inus. All good men loved you for your free-hearted
courtesy, and cheerefulnes and for the excellent qualities that were in you,
But I above the rest deemed that very noble towardnes of your mind worthy
especially of praise and comme^dation, whereby you were provoked even amiddest
the noise and shufflings of the court, and during those affairs and dealings
which were furthest off from the studies and exercises of good letters, to give
your self oftentimes both to reading and writing: yea, and you proceeded even
then so farrefoorth in the knowledge of the Latin tongue, that you might seem
to be brought up, not in the court, but in some famous schole of learning. And
further if at any time we commoned more familiarly together, I remember you
would reason many things very gravely as touching the exercises of good
learning, and complain not seldom times that the same were neglected of
those, whom the nobility of their stock had accustomed in princes courts to
advance to the highest places of dignity and honor. Wherefore at your request
I wrote an Elegy [or lamentable Posie] touching the studies of our German
nobility, which not long after, was put forth in print, together with our
books of the order of Syllables and verses. That was then very acceptable unto
you, and the same signification of love which you showed me at that time, has
even now also moved me to presume to publish these mine homilies upon Joel
under the authority of your name. For I thought it an unlawful thing, if
there should be no other testimony of our friendship publicly extant, then
that which is contained in a few verses, and the same poured forth at adventure
rather then written among the thronges of the assembly and concourse of the
court. Again the state and condition of us both seemed to require, that this
our ancient friendship and familiarity should be notified and made known as well
unto others, as also to our posterity (whom I greatly desire to become heirs
thereof) by some monument of grauer argument and not strange from either of our
callings. For you from the time, wherein we lived together, had not the lowest
place in the court of your prince, and that your industry and diligence did
notably well like the prince and does even still like him, I oftetimes perceive
by my friends: and as for me, the lord called me to the ministry of his church
the selfesa^e year, that I departed from you from Rege^tspurge wherein according
to the grace given unto me) I hitherto serve I supposed therefore that I should
do neither unaptly not vnsittingly, if so be I dedicated this our Joel
especially unto you. Neither in deed do I weigh their judgments, who as they
think the state and condition of those men that are conversant in princes
courts, to be very far disagreeing from the ministry of the church: so are
they of opinion, that nothing can be done more absurdly or inco^ueniently, the^
if any thing be offered unto head men in the common weal, that sauoureth of
divinity, and of the word of God. For mine opinion is far otherwise, who do
judge the states of men to be esteemed and accounted of rather according to the
end, whereunto they aim and leuel, then after the outward pomp and show: when
as no wise man will deny that among those that tend to one and the selfsame
end, there ought to be a most near bond and conjunction both of minds and
studies. But the very same end is propounded as well to those that are
conversant in the common weal, as also in the ministry of the church,
namely, the safety and preservation of their common country and church: which
the one sort ought diligently to promote and defend by their counsel and
authority, and the other by doctrine and exhortations. There ought therefore
to be a most sure knot and conjunction betwixt these two orders: such as we
read was in times past between Moses and Aaron, also the Prophets and most
holy kings David, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and others like unto these. But
for so much as God is the only author of the public welfare, as also of all
other good gifts beside, it behooves either of them (as well magistrates as
ministers) to look into his word, and out of it to derive the fountains both
of their counsels and doctrine, and al to this end and purpose, that the people
committed to their charge may have God favorable unto them, and in him enjoy
true peace and felicity. In which behalf the ministers forsooth ought to be
present and at hand with the Princes and magistrates to teach and admonish
them: and these again ought to defend their authority. For so comes that
thing to pass, that Plato long ago judged to be very necessary in a common
weal, namely that both Philosophers should have the chief rule of things, and
they that have the chief rule should play the Philosophers in deed. For why?
that the true philosophy cannot be fetched from any other where, then out of
the word of God, it appears abu^dantly, when as this alone contains the
mysteries of the heavenly wisdom, and teaches men to judge rightly of things
as well human as divine. In consideration whereof God in times past said: that
the Israelites only were a wise and understanding people, because that unto
the^ alone he had committed his laws and the oracles of his word. But with how
great care and industry the will of God ought in these days to be sought after,
I suppose no man to be ignorant, that does not ydlely mark and observe the
tokens of Gods wrath now every where imminent and at hand. Doubtless al sorts
and degrees of men complain very much of the perils of our time, and there is
also great consultatio^ every where, how and by what means both the church and
common weal may best be provided for. And we see no small number utterly to
despair of the success of things, and to cast of al care and consideration of
the public safety, when as they perceive abroad open enemies to be at hand,
and at home al things to be out of order through discords and debates: and
again public discipline through the unbridled liberty of many miserably
broken and plucked in pieces. But if so be they would hearken to the scriptures,
they would by and by even in the most perilous times of al, minister most
certain and assured persuasions of health and preservation. And that we may
omit al other writers of Gods mysteries, only Joel may suffice us in this
behalf. He prophesied under the reign of Ezechias, what time the church was
assaulted with the power of the Assyrians, and now brought into extreme
hazard: neither wanted there such as by blowing the bellows of new sins
daily kindled the burning wrath of GOD more and more. Nevertheless Joel
wills the people not to despair, neither does he forsake the office of
teaching committed unto him: But perceives that he has with so much more
diligence to apply himself, if by any means he might find a remedy for
the afflicted state. And this remedy he shows to consist only in
repentance and in the true conversion unto GOD, whereunto he exciteth and
provoke al men, but especially he exhorts the Priests, and with these the
other states also of the kingdom, that they would become the leaders of the
people hereunto. To whom being converted unto God, he promises a joyful
change and alteration of things, and shows them that the wrath of God shall
be turned upon the wicked enemies themselves, and finally prophesies of the
blessed instauration of Christ's kingdom. Neither in deed wanted his holy
counsel happy success. For by the fearful judgment of God the host of the
Assyrians was overthrown by an Angel, and the grand captain thereof
Sennacharib (that the unworthiness of the fact might increase the sorrow of his
death) cruelly thrust through and slain of his own sons, being in the
temple of his God, and there busy in offering of sacrifice. And from that time
sprang up among the continual afflictions of Gods people, the kingdom of
Christ, which being long ago by the Apostles happily spread abrod through the
whole world, and afterward again oppressed with the darkness of Antichrist,
God has in these last times restored with mighty success, and daily amongst
the most cruel ragings and devises of the enemies, still wonderfully
preserves it. Seeing therefore even amidst the extreme corruptions of manners
and horrible idolatries, we may see so notable tokens of Gods grace and favor:
shall we doubt of his goodness, if so be that embracing the counsel of Joel,
we turn unto him with our whole heart, and casting far away al superstitions
and alurements of sin follow the purity of faith and innocence of life?
These things therefore ought the ministers of the word and Sacraments to
urge, these things should be handled in the counsels of princes, yea these
things are oftentimes to be propounded of those, that wish well to the public
welfare and would have things restored to a better state. You see therefore
(worthy Eberhard) that the argument of the Prophet agrees very well to us
both. And albeeit I doubt not, but that the matters by him handled are
especially well liked of you, yet have I thought good somewhat more largely to
debate of the same with you, to the intent that the Gentlemen of your place and
calling, being stirred up by your example may do the like, and so endeavor to
procure a remedy to the desperate and almost forlorn estate of things in our
time. And I beseech you by our ancient friendship, right worshipful sir, that
you would vouchsafe with your accustomed favor to accept this slender
signification of my good will and affection toward you: wherein if any thing be
amiss, you shall attribute all that to the love that I bear you, and to the
remembrance of our ancient familiarity. Farewell. Yeouen at Tigury, the xvii.
of August in the year of the incarnation of the son of God Jesus Christ.
1560. At what time two thousand two hundred nienty and one years past, Joel
executed the office of teaching, and God miraculously delivered his church out
of the jaws of the Assyrian tyrant. He grant that the same also amongst us
in Germany may be preserved safe and sound. Amen.

The Argument of the Prophet.
THe Prophet Joel first rebukes them of Judah, that being now punished with a
great plague of famine and scarcity, remained still obstinate. Secondly, he
threateneth greater plagues, because they grew daily to a more hardness of
heart, and rebellion against God notwithstanding his punishments. Thirdly, he
exhorts them to repentance, showing that yt must be earnest, and proceed
from the heart, because they had grievously offended God. And so doing, be
promises that God will be merciful, and not forget his covenant that he made
with their fathers: but will send his Christ who shall gather the scattered
sheep, and restore them to life and liberty, though they seemed to be dead.

CHAP. 1.
1. A prophecy against the Jews. 2. He exhorts the people to prayer, and
fasting for the misery that was at hand.

1. The word of the Lord that came to Joel the son of Pethuel. The text.


2. Hear ye this, O Elders, and hark ye al inhabitants of the land, whether
such a thing has been in your days, or yet in the days of your fathers.

3. Tell your children of it, and let your children show to their children, and
their children to another generation.

4. That which is left of the Palmer worm, has the Grasshopper eaten, and the
residue of the Grasshopper, has the Canker worm eaten, and the residue of the
Canker worm has the Caterpiller eaten.

Sermon. 1.
WHo Joel ye son of Pethuel was, The authority of Joel.
is no where expressed in ye holy scriptures. Norwithstanding that his credit
and authority was great, it appears by the first sermon of the Apostle
Peter, Acts 2.
wherein he uses the testimony of Joel against the blasphemous scorners of the
holy Ghost, and proves that his sending down was promised and prophesied of
long before. Again Paul alleges the selfsame Prophet, Ro^. 10.
when he disputes of the chief and principal points of our faith and
salvation. But when and in what time he prophesied, The time.
ye opinion of ye interpreters are diverse and sundry. I for my part agree with
them, that deem him to have flourished in ye time of Esaias ye prophet and to
have executed the office of teaching in the kingdom of Judah: and even the^
verily, when as that most bloody war first began, which we read was holden
by Sennacharib the tyra^t of The assyrians against Ezechias. For albeit the
same Eezechias had restored the true service and worship of God, 2. King. 18.
2. Cro. 29.30.31.
yet notwithstanding (as we may see in Esaias) there wanted not some, which
labored to keep still their old superstitions, and withal brake forth by
unbridled liberty into all kind of sin and wickedness. Hereunto was added ye
Egyptian league or covenant, Esaias. 30.31.
into which Ezechias, being otherwise a most excellent and religious prince,
was drawn through ye crafty conueiance of some: Insomuch that such was then
the condition of the Iewishe kingdom, as is now adays for the most part the
state of the Church under Christian Magistrates, when as some stand openly in
defense of superstitions, and other some under pretense of ye gospel, live too
too licentiously, Esaias. 36.37.
and repose their whole trust and co^side^ce in ye help of man. Which was the
cause, that God sent unto them the Assyrians, to destroy the ingrate and
unthankful rebels, to the intent they might learn by experience of their own
calamity to submit themselves unto God, The argument of the prophet
that had hitherto over malapertly despised his word. Nevertheless he sent his
prophets before, to admonish them of the danger to come, and the same being
now at hand, to comfort and instruct the people in the doctrine of repentance:
amongst who^ is Joel numbered, who inueigheth against sin not so severely in
deed, as the rest commonly are wont to do (inasmuch as they were now rather
to be taught and comforted, then chidden and rebuked) but with singular gravity
he recou^teth unto them what they had hitherto suffered, and what they were
like hereafter to suffer. Further he shows them the way to escape, to be
repentance, the whole order and manner whereof he diligently declares. Last of
all, least any should be offended with the prosperous successes of the e^emies
of God, he foretells unto them also their punishments, and upon that occasion
prophesies of Christ's kingdom and of the happy instauration thereof. And
these things he accomplisheth altogether in two Sermons, whereof the former
summarily comprehe^deth, whatsoever serves to the denouncing of the
punishments and the course of repentance: the other declares the self same
things more at large, together with those points that belong to the
punishments of the enemies and ye promised kingdom of Christ. And in these
things forsooth conmeth the wonderful goodness of God to be considered, who
punishes not even those that are most wicked and ungodly, except he first
admonishes the^ before. Yea, and he so lays his plagues upon them, that in
the mean time he has a special consideration of his own, whom he susteyneth
with fatherly comfortes: for why? look what he did long a go in the time of
the Prophets, and the self same us we feel also to be true by experience in
these days. Would God we might as well remember our duties, and not by our
incurable stubburnnes against God, willingly and willingly pluck destruction
upon our own heads.

The title of the prophecy.
Furthermore these things being thus premised, let us go in hand with the
words of the Prophet, who according to the common manner of the Prophets,
prefixeth a title to his prophecy in this sort: The word of the Lord that
came to Joel the son of Pethuel. In these words he both avouches his
calling, and also procures authority to his doctrine, least they should
think him to utter forth the conreytes or dreams of his own brain. This
thing the Prophets are accustomed every where to do by reason of the
boldness of the wicked; with whom it is a very common and ordinarye matter,
to seek on every side occasions, whereby they may call the doctrine, that
reproves them, into question, and bring it into batted. Against which men
there can no other authority more ryghtly or conveniently be objected, then
the authority of God him self: for albeit for the present time they laugh it
to scorn, and abuse it with their unseemly scoffs and iestes, yet
notwithstanding in their season they find those things to be true, which
they will now by no means believe, and then being convicted in their own
hearts, they feel horrible boylinges in their consciences. In the mean time
we are admonished, that in the Church, which (as Paul says) is the house
of the living GOD, 1. Tim. 3. In the Church the word of God is only to be
taught.
there ought nothing to be taught and set forth but the word of God. For if
so be this thing were so diligently observed of the Prophets and Apostles,
whose calling GOD confirmed by infinite arguments and testimonies: how much
more then ought the same to be regarded of those that are by no means
comparable unto them: Detestable therefore is their boldness and unpudence,
which in these days think every thing to be lawefull for them, and that
which either they them selves have devised, or else received from their most
superstitions fathers, they thrust into the Church for undoubted oracles. As
for us, let us be mindful of Christ, who says: My sheep hear my voice,
and they follow me: a stranger will they not follow, but will fly from him,
because they know not the voice of strangers. etc. John 10.

In the beginning of this first Sermon, he procures attention, The procuring
of attention.
which is very needful in conceiving the word of God. And first he stirs
up the Elders, who as they are furnished with the experience of things, and
therefore more apt and fit to give judgment: so by authority of their example
they may draw the younger sort to follow their steps. Notwithstanding, least
he might seem to speak only to the Elders, he eftsoons calls upon all the
inhabitants of the land of Israel, and exhorts them not so much to a vain
and idle hearing as unto a diligent consideration of those things, which they
had hitherto suffered, and which they were like afterward to suffer: yea he
commands them to commend the same to their posterity, to the end they might
serve for a perpetual instruction unto all. Hearken ye (says he) all the
inhabitants of the land, whether such a thing (that is to say, any thing like
unto this) has happened in your days, or in the days of your fathers. Tell
your children of it, and let your children show their children, etc. The word
of God belongs to the instruction of all. 1. Cor. 2. Psalm. 119.
Where we are admonished first of all, that the word of belongs to the
information of all sorts of men: for in as much as by the fall of sin we
have all of us lost that true light of reason which was in our first Parents,
we now stand all in need of a new light, which God uses to offer unto us
by his word. And hitherto serves it, that he wills the Elders especially
to give their attendance, whom we said even now to go before others in
experience of things and in giving of advice. For albeit we be never so
diligently instructed, nor never so well seen in the long use and experience of
things; yet shall we nothing at all profit in the things belonging to Gods
kingdom, unless we be enlightened from above, and hearken to God speaking
unto us by his word: Which is the cause, that the Scriptures do every where
exhort us to the study of the word, and also do reprove the insolency of
those, that neglecting it, will needs be wise of themselves, and follow the
swindge of their own brain.

How we must be occupied in Gods word.
Moreover we are taught, how and after what sort we ought to be conversant
in the word of God, so as we may reap some fruit by the exercise thereof.
First, it behooves us not only to be hearers of it, but also to mark the
singular examples of Gods judgments, whereby he uses to add credit to his
threatenings and oracles. For unless we so do, we shall evermore flatter our
selves, and not think that those things will ever happen unto us, which he
threatens to the breakers and transgressors of his law. As often therefore as
we hear his threatninges, whereby he denounces his indignation against
Idolaters, Fornicators, Adulterers, covetous persons, mansleaers, drunkardes,
etc. Let us withal consider what he has decreed in times past against such,
and besides let us mark how even in our days he punishes not a few, that
defile themselves with the said enormities. Further let us not think it
enough to hold these things our selves, but let us also commend the
observation of them to our posterity, This thing our duty requires, whereby
God has bound us unto our children, and the selfsame does the honor and
glory of God require also, which as it ought to be most highly regarded of all
men, so can it no other way more be enlarged and set forth, then by the
diligent instruction and information of our posterity. Exodus 13. Dout. 6.
Psalm. 78.
There are extant as touching this matter, peculiar precepts and commandments
of God in the Law, and in the Psalms whereas it is written how GOD ordained
amongst his people, that fathers should declare unto their children his
wondrous works, to the end that they also might learn to put their trust
in God, and become obedient unto him. And for this cause it is, that GOD
commends Abraham's soundness and synceritie, saying: I know that he will
command his sons, Gene. 18.
and his household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, and do
righteousness and judgment. etc. They therefore do hyghlye deserve of Gods
glory, religion and public welfare of men, that either privately instruct and
bring up their children in the knoweledge of gods works, or publicly lay
before them the histories of their own country, or also of other nations, to
the intent yt out of them their posterity may fetch examples of Gods
judgments, and be admonished of their own duties. But greatly is the
wretchedness of our time to be lamented, wherein the exercise of Gods word is
of the most part neglected, the judgments of God marked of very few,
histories corrupted through the perverse affections of men, and as for our
children, they either not regarded at all, or else trained up in those things,
that it had been much better for them never to have known. This negligence
of ours must God needs punish, to the end we may learn to be wise by our
own harms, that would not be warned by other men's.

He calls to remembrance the evils Past.
But the Prophet goes on, and tells them what the things are, in the
consideration whereof he would have them to be so carefully occupied. And
he recounteth unto them diverse and sundry calamities, which had hitherto
deprived them of the fruits and increase of the earth, so as even a blind man
might well see the tokens of Gods wrath, and perceive them to be foretellings
of a greater misery. We read of the like thing in the Prophet Amos, Amos. 4.
where God by rehearsing the former plagues, shows, how little or nothing he
had profited with the stubborn and incurable. For so does he cast their
blockishnesse in their teeth, which of things past would not learn or
foresee that which they now did suffer. That which is left of the palmer worm,
has the grasshopper eaten, and that which is left of the Grasshopper, has the
canker worm eaten, and that which is left of the canker worm, has the
caterpiller eaten. The sense is this: If one only calamity had destroyed the
increase but of one year alone, it might have seemed to come by chance, or at
least not to deserve so great observation. But seeing there have now certain
years together, one following in another neck, succeeded in a manner
whatsoever is wont to be hurtful and noisome, to the fruits of the earth, and
that of the later plagues is devoured and corrupted, whatsoever was left of the
former: you must of necessity be very blockishe, yt have not acknowledged the
manifest and singular judgment of God, who would not only punish you with
scarcity and hunger, but also teach you by those worms, what should shortly
come to pass, unless by these smaler punishments you amended your lives:
namely that foreign enemies with an incredible multitude of soldiers should
ouerrunne the whole land, and in manner (...) Caterpillars or canker worms wast
and destroy all that ever is both far and neer^ And yt this is the meaning of
the Prophet appears sufficiently by his woorde^ following.

Small plagues forerunners of greater.
This place teaches us, that less plagues are as it were forerunners an^
proclaimers of greater. And there be^ in histories every where examples, which
testify that by the swarms of Grasshoppers or unknown birds, or also by the
unaccustomed floods and ouerflowings^ waters, have been signified and
denounced ye invasions of foreign enemies. Su^ a like thing as this in ye
year of our Lord 1545. has Germany seen, when as^ kind of Grasshoppers,
altogether unknown before, came out of Italy alongest the countries bordering
upon the Alps by the selfsame way, which the year next following the
soldiers sent from the Pope directly held. We ought therefore to mark^
whatsoever belong to this kind, least at any time we say with the Poet in vain.

Oftetimes the trembling trees,
I do remember well,
(If so bewitched we had not been)
This mischief did foretell.
Here appears also the invincible power of God, and how little the forces of
men can do against him, when as he is able by such small and feeble creatures
to vanquishe and overcome them. For why? he is called the God of hosts, not
only for this cause, that all creatures do serve him, but for that also he
can (according to his good pleasure) arm them with strange forces, so as they
may be sufficient to overcome even the most fell Tyrants and most mighty
nations. A notable example of this thing we have in Pharao, whose fiercenes
god tamed diverse times by mice, frogs, flies, worms, lice, so that he was
feign to stoop and crouch unto Moses. The same happened to the Philistines.
when as they were in their chief pride for the Arc of the covenant which they
had taken. In like manner we read of Antiochus, Herod, Sylla and diverse
other eaten and gnawe^ of worms and of most mightle monarchies utterly
su^uerted and overthrown by people that we^^ before obscure and unknown. As
for ye fruit of the earth, whereupon our life dependet* God can take them away
either by wind or unseasonable rain, or by every little change of weather:
that we may speak^ nothing now of hail, frost, and other^ bruntes of more
grievous te^pests. Whe^^fore being mindful of these things, let^ observe ye
examples of gods judgments and humble our selves under his might^ hand, who
will bountifully bestow h^^ grace upon those yt turn unto him, that (...)
they may prevail over all dangers by faith in Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom^
be given blessing, honor, glory and do minion for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon 2.
The text.
5 AWake ye drunkardes, and weep, and houle all ye drinkers of wine because of
the liquor, for it is pulled from your mouth.

6 Yea a nation comes upon my la^d mighty, and without number: whose teeth
are like the teeth of a Lion, and he has the jaws of a Lioness.

7 He makes my Vine waste, and pilleth off the bark of my figtree. He
makes it bare, and casts it down, the branches thereof are made white.

8 Mourn like a Virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.

9 The meat offering, and the drink offering is cut off from the house of the
Lord: the Priests the Lords ministers mourn.

10 The field is wasted, the land mourns, for the corn is destroyed, the new
wine is dried up, and the oil is decayed.

11 Be ye ashamed O husbandmen, howl O ye Vine dressers, for the wheat and
for the barley, because the harvest of the field is perished.

12 The Vine is dried up, the figtree is decayed, the Pomegranate tree, and the
Palm tree, and the Aple tree, and all the trees of the field are withered:
surely the joy is withered away from the sons of men.

ALbeit God being provoked by the incurable malice of men, The argument and use
of this present place.
do sometimes correct and chasten them, yet he being perpetually mindful of
his goodness, even amiddest their punishments teaches and admonishes them by
his word: that even then they might search out the causes of their
sufferings, and endeavor to return unto him. An example hereof we have in
Joel. For at yt time the Jews sinned sundrily, notwithstanding that they had
Ezechias for their king, a most excellent and religious priuce, as we said of
late. God had reproved them by Esaias, Micheas, and others, and that very
bitterly and often. But when as he prevailed nothing thereby, at the length
he moved War against them by the Assyrians. And being in danger, he gave
Joel unto them for to exhort them to repentance, and to put them in hope of
pardon if they converted unto him. He therefore to the intent he might the
more easily obtain this at their hands, is very plentiful in describing the
punishments, which he so lays before them, that they might understand that
they came not to pass by haphazard, but were sent by the just judgment of
God. Whither especially serves this present place, wherein he stirs up all
sorts of men to mourning: intending thus much, that they that had hitherto
careleslye concenmed the judgments of God, might now every of them enter
into their own hearts, and seek for the causes of the present war in them
selves, and having found them, go in hand with ame^dment of life. Where we
learn, how that in public calamities no man ought to be careless, as
though he him self were no part or cause thereof. For albeeit some sin
more grievously then other, yet is no man altogether without fault: yea and it
comes commonly to pass by the sins of the people, that either wicked
princes are given unto them, which bring all things out of order by their
desperate counsel, or else that there is no good done by the wholesome
cou^sailes of the best and most godly princes. Every one therefore ought to
enter into themselves, and to bewail not only the common calamity, but also
their sins, whereby they have caused it, and to seek the amendment of them,
which is the very best and only way, whereby they may provide both for the
safety of themselves and of that which they have.

He provoke the drunkardes first to mourning.
But let us come to the words of the Prophet who beginning with the Drunkards,
exhorts the^ first of all to mourn: namely because they were the chief and
principal authors of al ye misery. For it is evident by the sermons of Esaias
and Micheas, Esa. 5.28.56 Mich. 2.
that at that time drunkenness reigned in all sorts and degrees of men, both
high and low, yea and even in the priests and Prophets them selves. Hereby
it came to pass, that the Peers of the realm neglected the common wealth,
the Priests dealt carelessly in their office, the Prophets by their flattering
and fond sermons hardened the wicked more and more, and the people, as well by
their own intemperance, as also provoked by the example of the states, ran
headlong without check into all kind of sin and abomination: The Prophet
therefore does not without a cause range them first of all in array, and
applies his speech very fittingly to their manners. Awake (says he) ye
drunkards, and weep, howl all ye drinkers of wine. etc. For why: Drunkards
and winebibbers are wont to spend the greatest part of their time in slothful
sleep, and although they sometimes wake, yet differ they little from sleepers,
since they have no certainetie of any thing, and want the use both of reason and
senses. Moreover they sleep securely in their sins, they rejoice in them,
yeathey fill al things with their mad music and frantike iollitie, and
outrage in all kind of wanconnesse. Now therefore the Prophet wills them to
awake, to weep and to howl: intending thereby to vpbrayde them with these
their wicked manners and conditions. As though he should say, Ye have slept
hitherto through stitch O ye drunken rioters, Esaias. 50
in whose feasts (that I may use the words of Esaias) are the harp and viole,
timbrell and pipe, but in the mean time ye have not regarded the work of the
Lord, Amos. 6.
nay (as Amos says) ye would seem to be like unto David, and yet could he
nothing at al prevail with you by his godly admonitions. But now is it time as
I suppose, that you also should awake and fall to weeping. For albeit the
public calamity of the whole nation do not as yet move ye, yet at least
mourn for the liquor of life, which is plucked away from your mouth. By liquor
he understands nothing else then wine: but yet he would use this word, to the
intent he might taunt the scurrilitie of the Drunkardes, which are wont to
give sundry and unusual names to their wine, that eue^ by yt means they might
testify their insatiable love of wine. Examples of this lightness we have over
many with us every day to be seen. But he teaches the^ by this means yt they
should even now be compelled in spite of their teeth, to become more sober,
when as God had taken from them this liquor, wherewith they had hitherto been
overmuch moystend and made frolic. Neither wants it great force, in that he
says it is plucked from their mouth, to show, that all hope was now quite gone
from them, seeing that God had smitten the very cups out of their hands,
which they were even now about to set to their lips. And to the end he might
the better rouse them up, he lays before them a description of the enemies
and of the desolation by them made very fearful and terrible, saying: For a
nation comes upon my land, a nation (I say) mighty, and without number,
whose teeth are like the teeth of a Lion. etc. And by teeth he signifies the
invincible strength and we apons of the Assyrians, such as are in the teeth and
jaws of Lions very incredible. That nation makes my Vine waste, and pilleth
off the bark of my fygtree. etc. In which words he signifies a more the^
ordinary cruelty of the enemies, who not contented to have wreaked their fury
upon the bodies of men, and to have spoiled the fruits now laid up in the
field and left still on the trees, should exercise their cruelty also, even
upon the land it self, and upon the very trees, that all commodity of
dwelling in that land might quite be taken from those, that had happily
escaped their hands. Neither does God say without a cause, that these things
were done in his land, in his vineyarde, in his figtree: that so he might teach
them, that he would never have suffered these things to come to pass except
their wickedness had enforced him, which had hitherto profaned that land,
that ought to be consecrated to him alone and the very seat of his true
worship.

We are admonished therefore by this example, The punishment of drunkards. etc.
how common drunkardes and unthankful wasters of Gods benefits are like to
speed. These men are wont by their intemperate living to seek for praise and
glory, and as though they were borne to consume the good fruits of the earth,
they devour all things through their insatiable throats. Thus doing, they
abuse GOD himself with horrible blasphemy, whose gifts they shamefully waste
and consume. They are well worthy therefore to be plagued at Gods hand
either with tempests, or with sundry sorts of worms and vermin, and at the
length with most cruel enemies, that the fruits of the earth being taken
away, they may either hunger and thirst, or else he flaine down to rightes
altogether. For it is much better, that wine and all manner of fruits perish
at once, and that the land it felfe be made waste and desolate, then that
there should be given matter and occasion to these filthy hogs of Epicures
heard, whereby to offend both against the common comlines of manners and also
against the Glory of GOD himself without ceassing. The Prophets foretold that
these things should happen unto them, but they would not believe them. That
therefore came to pass which loel rehearses in this place, and they, that
before would not hear the Prophet, were afterward compelled to hear
Rabsaketh, who with most shameful words casting in their teeth the hunger,
that they suffered in the time of the siege, said: Esaias. 36.
Am I not sent to these caytifes that keep watch upon the Walls: That they
may eat their own doung and drink their own piss with you: And truly this
was a horrible judgment of GOD, whereby he would have his own land thus to be
afflicted. Neither yet happened these things at that time alone, but when as
afterward they returned to the self same manners, they had the desolation of
seventy years brought upon them by the Babylonians. And at length both the
City and Temple being utterly subverted by the Romans, God (according as
he had threatened in the Law) wholly removed his blessing from that land,
Liuit. 25.
so as now it might seem to be of Brass, and to have a firmament of iron,
yt before flowed altogether with milk and Honey. Would to GOD they would
consider these things now adays, which do so addict them selves to the
practice of Drunkenness, that they will be reformed neither by admonitions
nor examples, whereof there are store yet every day both privately and
publicly. Well, there hangs over* them also undoubtedly a public and
universal calamity, which will pluck the Wine and fruits from their
mouths, and bring deserved destruction upon their own heads.

But omitting these Drunkardes, the Prophet turns his speech to the Church
of the Godly, The Church of the godly is willed to mourn.
and wills them also to mourn. Mourn (says he) like a Virgin girded with
sackcloth for the Lord of her youth. So calls he the husband, whom GOD
him self has commanded to take the rule and government over the wife. And he
compares the Church of the Godly to a wife or spouse, which parable is every
where to be met with all in the Scriptures. But in this place it signifies
most bitter mourning. For like as the love of new married folks is most
tender and fervent, so can there not be but most grievous mourning, if even
in the first beginning it be interrupted by the death of the husband. But he
prescribes to the Godly a far other cause of mourning, then unto the
Drunkards. For he willed these to mourn because of the wine taken from them,
for as much as they make account of nothing to be so sweet and pleasant unto
them as wine. But to the other he says: For the meat offering and drink
offering is cut off from the house of the Lord, the Priests that serve the
Lord mourn. And in these words he signifies the subversion of Gods
worship, which was grown by the terror of the war and destruction of the
Land, as that which immediath follows does testify, when he adds* The
field is wasted, the land mourns, for the Corn is destroyed, Leuit. 2. and
23. etc.
and the wine is dried up, and the oil is decayed. For they used daily in
their meat offringes corn and oil, and when they offered their first fruits
they cook also a certain quantity of wine. And in these kinds he
comprehends the whole external worship, which in the time of war was for
the most part intermiteed, when as they could neither go up to the temple that
dwelt in Judea, neither also were the fruits sufficient for the daily
sacrifices in that horible desolation of the whole land. This thing was most
grievous unto the priests, whom he says therefore to have mourned, when namely
they compared the present confusion of things with the former concourse of the
whole nation unto the holy rites. But for the same cause the Prophet bids
also the rest of the godly to mourn. For although it be lawful for us to
lament our domestical and private miseries (so that it be modestly done) yet
for so much as the worship of God ought before all other things to be most
dear unto us, it behooves us to mourn, for this also especially, if at any
time we perceive the same to fail or decay: and so much the more bitter ought
this grief to be unto us, for because this thing happens by our default,
whose duty it was by our continual practice of godliness and innocence, to
mamtaine and defend the true service and worship of GOD. It is a grief to the
child, if he hear the honor of his father to come in danger. But if he see
the same to happen by his own oversight, that seems indeed unto him a thing
intosterable.

The like consideration is to be had of Gods children, who are wont to
prefer the glory of God before all manner of riches, and even before their
own proper life it self. This thing bewrays the great wretchedness of the
people of our days, who are at a point, whatsoever the state of Gods worship
and religion be, so as they may keep revel route and enjoy their goods
after their own hearts desire. But they shall one day be compelled to lament
their own destruction, that would not bewail the loss of Gods glory and
religion.

Thirdly, he speaks to the husbandmen and vinedressers, He provoke all the
common people to mourn.
under which he comprehends all the residue of the vulgar people. And because
such for the most part are led only with present things, and have no regard to
those things that belong to the worship of God: he produces the selfsame
causes, which he did before to the Drunkardes, and yet not so bitterly, for
that they sinned more through blockishnesse and ignorance, then through malice.
Be ye ashamed O husbandmen (says he) Howl O ye vine dressers, for the wheat
and for the Barley, because the harvest of the field is perished. And
forthwith he reckons up diverse and sundry kinds, and shows that all is
now quite taken away, which was wont to be a joy and comfort unto men.
Neither ought this so often a repetition of one and the selfsame thing to be
thought superfluous. For there is no question but that they all wept
abundantly, when they saw the cruel enemies to destroy all that ever was on
every side. But they mourned no otherwise then like brute beasts, for that
they wanted those things, which served their necessity and delight: in the
mean time as touching the pacifying of Gods wrath, they cared not much for
that. Which blockishnesse to the end he might drive from them, he efte
soones heapeth together and inculketh whatsoever was done contrary to the
common manner of warfaring by the unaccustomed fury of the soldiers: that so
they might acknowledge the singular judgment of God, and beginue by that
occasion to consider of their sins.

These things therefore ought to serve also for our instruction. For this
blor^^shnesse or stupiditie sticks fast in all men, so as they cannot even
with most grievous plagues be brought to the acknowledgement of their
transgressions, for in as much as we stick commonly in second causes, we
acknowledge not these things to proceed from Gods wrath. Our mourning
therefore being joined with a beastly astonishment, conteyneth nothing else
then outcries and howlings, witnesses of our impatiencie and desperation,
whereby we cause both our punishments to be more grievous, and also provoke
Gods wrath so much the more against us. Let us remember therefore, that we
have so to mourn in the time of our troubles, that we may diligently observe
the causes of them, and be unfeignedly grieved for yt same through faith to
Godward: which grief or sorrow (as Paul says) causes repentance to salvation,
2. Cor. 7.
not to be repented of. For it brings us to Christ Jesus, who as he
reconcileth us to God his father, so does he prepare us to every good work,
that finally having escaped all the miseries of this world, we may reign with
hun for ever in heaven. To him therefore be given, blessing, honor, glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon 3.
The text
13 GIrde your selves and lament ye Priests, howleye Ministers of the altar:
Come, and lie all night in sackecloth ye ministers of my God: for the meat
offering and the drink offering is taken away from the house of your God.

14 Sanctify you a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders, and all
the inhabitants of the land, into the house of the Lord your God, and cry
unto the Lord.

The argument and use of this present place.
Joel the Prophet is wholly occupied in this, namely, that he might rouse up
the people of his time, whom the dangets of The Assyrian war on every side
oppressed, to repentance. Which to the intent he might the better bring to
pass, he begins with the description of the punishments, which being
amplisted with a diligent rehearsal of all the circumstances, he lays before
them: and this he does partly to show, that the evils which they had
hitherto suffered came not at all adventure, but were sent of GOD: and partly
to prove that repentance and conuertion unto GOD was very requisite and
necessary for them. For why? men are wont commonly to fail in these two
points, that first they acknowledge not the hand of GOD in afflicting them,
but persuade themselves that all things come to pass by chance, or at
haphazarde: Whereupon straight ways follows the other: namely, that they
think they have no need of repentance. Which two things forasmuch as they
reign every where now adays, the diligence of the Prophet, which he
presently uses, ought by no means to be deemed superfluous, for to these he
adioyneth now the doctrine of repentance, to the which he duly exhorts
them, and in few words comprehends all those things, which, whysest we
be chastized of God, are necessary of us to be observed and done.

The priests by their own example ought to be guides unto other to repentance.
But he begins with the Priests, whom he admonishes, that they would
become leaders of the people to repentance. For he says: Gyrde your selves,
and lament ye Priests, howl ye Ministers of the altar, that is to say: you
whom God has appointed to be administers of the Sacrifices and of the whole
outward service, Come, to wit, into the temple, neither put ye on your
solemn and mystical garments, but apparel your selves with, sackcloth, and
lie there all night O ye Ministers of my God. And he wills them to put on
sackcloth, after the custom and manner of the people of the East, who were wont
in their greatest heaviness, and in ye time of their public repentance to
change their garments, and to use a more streighter kind of weed, and more
fit to mourn withal.

But the end of all is this, that they should not only require repentance of
others, as though they themselves were void of all blame, but rather to be
the first that should return unto God, and to become guides unto other in
returning to him, whom before by their negligence they estranged from him. And
he alleges the selfsame cause, as before, when he adds: Because the
meat offering and drink off^ring is taken away from the house of your God.
And he adds weight unto the cause, in that he calls them the Ministers of
the Altar, and of God himself. For if so be the religion and worship of God,
be highly to be tendered even of private persons, how much more then ought
the same to be regarded of those, whom God himself has made Presidents of
religion, and which live by the ministry thereof?

The duty of the chief peers in common calamities.
But from hence we have to gather a general doctrine, that as well the
Ecclesiastical as Temporal Magistrates when public calamities are at hand,
ought first of all to be think them of repentance, and to go before others
by their example. For although GOD punishes also the offenses of the common
people, yet for the most part is the sin of the Magistrates and Prelates more
grievous, who oftentimes either through negligence do foreslowe their office,
or else do offend others by their most perilous example. Whereby it comes
to pass, that in every of their sins is a manyfolde giltinesse. For they
both transgress the commandment of GOD, and neglect the salvation of those
whom GOD has committed to their charge, and besides are the authors of
offense, which is so much the more grievous and hurtful, as it takes more
weight by their authority. As therefore they ought more carefully to bethynke
them of reconciliation with GOD for their own saluations sake, so is it meet
and convenient, that they should give example of repentance to the very same,
whom before they offended by their example. Whereupon we may gather, that
they do worst of all provide for their own, and for the Public welfare,
which least they should seem at any time to have done amiss, persevere and
go forward in their purpose of sinning, and so ween they only their honor
and dignity may be provided for, if they admit no man's warninges or
admonition.

But here must we observe also, that the Ministers of the word have
received this commandment from GOD himself, It is lawefull for Ministers to
admonish and reprove the Magistrates.
that they should no less provoke such to repentance, then the base and
common people. This does Joel here in this place, and that he did well
therein, it may appear by those words, which the Lord speaks unto
Jeremy: Behold this day day do I make thee a defenced City, Iere. 1.
an iron pyller, and a brazen wall against the whole land, against the kings
of Judah, and against the Princes thereof, against the Priests, and against
the people of the whole land.

Lo even to Kings, Princes, and Priests ought Jeremy to preach, whom it is
euidente to have preached no other thing then repentance, namely, that
forsaking their sins they should turn unto GOD, and be made partakers of
salvation in Christ.

This self same thing observed the rest of the Prophets, as in their Sermons
is to be seen. And that there is no other order of teaching prescribed in the
New Testament, the precepte of Christ declares, who commands the Gospel
to be preached to all people of all sorts and degrees, Mark. 16. Luke. 24.
and of this preaching he appoints two parts, to wit, repentance and
remission of sins.

The very self same also do ye examples teach, which are set forth in the
Ministers of the new Testament. Certesse the first of them John Baptist dealt
more hardly and severely with none, then with the Pharisees, whose authority
at that time was greatest in matters of religion. The same thought good not to
spare even Herod himself, Math. 3. Luke. 3.
when as having forgotten both his own dignity and public honesty, he kept
to himself his brothers wife.

What should we say of Christ, Mark. 6. Math. 15. 21.23. Luke. 11. Joan. 8.
Act. 2.3. etc.
who being wont to deal very gently with the people, yet against the Priests
and Scribes inueigheth (as I may so say) with full sail? And the Apostles
following his example, do publikelye in their Sermons hitte the Priests in the
teeth with their sin of murdering the Son of GOD. Neither did the dignity
of their order defend them, which they were not ignorant was long before
ordained of GOD, and full of the Mysteries of Christ Jesus. Look distinct. 40.
cap. Papa.
Detestable therefore is the pride of the Romish Bishops, which will be
checked and controused of none, although they both neglect their office, and
carry away innumerable souls to hell. Yea, when as they tread all holy
things under foot, make all religion their own gain, and offer the same to
the Jews and Turks to be laughed to scorn: they persesecute all those with
fire and sword, that covet the restitution of sound doctrine, and the pure
Service and worship of GOD. Comp^^^ns of these men are all those princes and
magistrates made, which whilst they openly sin, will yet also suffer
themselves to be admonished and reproved of none. But we read how David,
Ezechias, Josias, and afterward Theodosius were far otherwise minded, who in
this behalf procured to them selves most excellent commendation, and to their
kingdoms assured peace, for that they set the word of God before their eyes to
be followed, and patiently suffered the rebuke thereof, etc.

He instituteth public repentance.
But after that he has taught, what ought privately to be done of every of
the Priests, now he tells them what they should do publicly, and so
compriseth in few words whatsoever belongs to public repentance, a thing
very needful in common calamities. First, sanctify (says he) a fast. That
is to say, 1. A fast.
proclaim such a fast, as all men at once forsaking al their profane studies
and delights, may bend themselves only to those things, that serve to Gods
glory, and the leading of a holy and Christian conversation: for by the name of
Fasting, the Scripture understands not a superstitious abstinence, which
consists in the difference of meats, and observation of certain days, such
as of late times was brought in by men's traditions: but it requires a
discipline, where by the pride and lust of our flesh may be tamed and kept
under. This discipline is extended to all those things, that cause the flesh
to become more proud or fierce, whether the same be meat, or drink, or
apparel, or also company with our wives, asit shall appear in the second
Chapter. There can therefore here no certain laws be prescribed, but every
man must be a law to himself, whilst he observes the nature and disposition
of his own flesh, and withdraws the nourishments of lust from the same.
Neither also are these things required to this end and purpose, as though
they merited any thing of themselves: (for the kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, Romans 14.
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And ye saying of the
Lord is well known in the Prophet: When ye fast ye fast to your selves, and
when ye eat, Zach. 7.
ye eat to your selves, etc,) But that the spirit might have and enjoy this
power and dominion in us, least that the flesh preuayling over it, should
disturbbe and put bye the exercise of repentance. Which also is the cause,
that it is not tied or bound to any certain days, but is then commanded,
when either we stand in need of public repentance for special causes, or
else we our selves privately feel the power of the spirit to decay and wax
weak in us, so far forth that Christ, which in the brydegrome of our
souls, may seem to be departed and gone fromvs: of which thing he him
self in the Gospel inueyghyng against the Pharisaical fastes, Math. 9.
puts us in mind.

Joel therefore prescribes no superstitious thing, but he vegeth this at
their hands, that reiectyng the baits and entysementes of sin, they would
prepare them selves unto prayer and amendment of life. But some man may say:
Why wylleth he a fast to be publicly proclaimed, Math. 6.
when as Christ commands us to hide also conceal our fastes: where we must
mark and observe, that some fastes are private, and other some public. And
those that are taken in hand for private causes, ought, as Christ teaches,
to be closely handled, least we should seem to seek our own private glory,
and a vain estimation of holiness with the people. There is another
consideration to be had of public fastes, which serve to the public
confession of sins and repentance: such as in this place Joel commands,
and such as that was also, which we read the king of the Ninevites caused to
be proclaimed. And that these should be done openly, Ion. 3.
it is requisite for many causes: for so are men's minds the more stirred up by
the examples of other, and those are even for shame of the world kept from
sinning, which were before touched with no religion: again, it is meet and
convenient, that such as were not ashamed to sin openly, should also not be
ashamed of open repentance, whereby they may crave mercy at Gods hand.

Secondly, 2. Holy assemblies.
he says, Call a solemn assembly. And immediately he sets bow^ who they
are, and whither they should be called. Gather the Elders, and all the
inhabitants of the land, into the house of the Lord your God. He will have
the Elders to be called, by the name of whom are understood, as many as being
placed in any dignity do surmount other in authority. And he has a
special eye unto these, because that by the example of such publik asse^blies,
repentance is greatly furthered. Yet he adioyneth unto the^ al other states and
degrees whatsoever: for why, it is convenient, that seeing al together have by
sinning provoked God unto anger, all likewise should be careful how to
appease the same. But he will have these assemblies to be made in the Temple,
and that because it had excellent promises, as appears in the first book of
the Kings: 1. King. 8.
not verily for the gorgious building thereof, but for that as well the Temple
it self, as also the things that were done in it by the appoint^^ (...) of the
Law, represented the mysteries of Christ Jesus, who alone is able to pac^^e
Gods wrath, and reconcile us unto him. Thus therefore he sends them to the
promised Savior of mankind, least they should attribute any glory of merit
either to their fasts or outward asse^blies. In the mean time this place
makes much to the commendation of holy assemblies, for although neither the
worship of God, nor prayers ought to be tied to any certain places (because
that the true worshippers do worship every where in spirit and truth) yet
for orders sake, Joan. 4.
and to avoid confusion, it behooves us to have aplace certain, wherein
congregations may come together to hear the word of God, and unto public
prayers. For that even these also are most effectual with GOD, appears by
the promise of Christ, Math. 18.
saying: Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I am in the
midst of them: and whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be given them of my
Father, which is in heaven. For seeing God would have us eipecially to be of
one mind in religion, their consent can not but greatly please him, that meet
together to pray that his wrath may be turned from them.

Where upon in times past Tertullian In Apologet. Cap. 39.
wrote: We come together in the congregation, to the intent that making as is
were a hand unto God we may compass him with our prayers. This force is
acceptable and pleasing unto God. And hereof it came (as it seems unto me)
that the ancient Fathers appointed certain hours of prayers, whereof there
is mention in Daniel and in the Acts: Dani. ^. Act. 3.10^
to the end that such as could not come to the Churches, might at least
join their private prayers at home with the public. Now adays the
superstition, which by this occasion have grown in force, there are many that
set against it (and that worthily) but as touching the restoring of public
prayers, few or none make any question.

Furthermore, 3. Publik^ prayers.
to what end the assembly or congregation should come together, the prophet
him self shows when he adds: And cry unto the Lord. So he provides,
least any should think repentance to consist in a certain vame and stagelike
oste^tation: for he wisteth them to pray, nay to cry, that he might commend
unto the^ an earnest and fervent desire of praying. And he will have them to
direct their prayers unto the Lord, least after the manner of the Gentiles and
superstitious sort, they should crave aid and help of the creatures. As for
the form of prayer, which they must publicly use, he will prescribe that in
the Chapter following. In the mean season it is our parts, to learn hereby
what we ought to do in these days, when as the tokens of Gods wrath are
every where seen: and the wicked euenues of God do most grieuouslye oppress
his church. Many there be in deed, endewed both with wisdom and authority,
that consulte about this matter. But the only way of appeasing Gods wrath and
atteining unto saving health must this be, which is here taught and set
down. For it is confirmed with infinite promises and examples, even from the
beginning of the world to this day. The Prophets do thunder out this every
where. Math. 3.
With this does John begin the doctrine of the New Testament, and with the
same commands Christ his Apostles to begin. Luke. 34.
As many as have refused this in time paste, have always been punished with
most grievous plagues. But O the wretched state and condition of our time: for
how few shall a man find, that consider any thing at all of fasting and of
brideling of the flesh? when as we abstain not even from unlawful and
ungodly pleasures? There reigns now among all sorts of men Iustfulnesse
insatiable, pride outrageous, and more then beastly rage of drunke^nesse. Holy
assemblies and meeting es are of the most part neglected, and what time soever
is bestowed in them, is supposed to be onerlong and tedious. Which is a token,
that our prayers also are very cold and fr^sen. And if there be any that
deal with repentance, it is such as is counterfeit and momentany, Hosee. 6.
like unto that that Hosee wh^^ does ye Israelites withal* What do we then
marvel at the wrath and displeasure of God, hanging every where over our
heads, and daily threatening more grievous plagues unto us? God grant for his
mercies sake, that we being even softened and mollified with scourges may
return unto the Lord, who has given us free access unto the throne of his
grace in Christ Jesus our only Savior: to whom be given blessing, honor,
glory, and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon. 4.
The text.
15. ALas for that day: for the day of the Lord is at hand, and it comes as a
destruction from the almighty.

16. Is not the meat cut off before your eyes? and joy and gladness from the
house of our God?

17. The seed is rotten under the clods, the garners are destroyed, the barnes
are broken down, for the corn is withered.

18 How have the beasts mourned? the herds of cattle piue away, because
they have no pasture, and the flocks of sheep are destroyed.

19. To thee O Lord will I cry, for the fire has consumed the pastures of
the wilderness, and the flame has burnt up all the trees of the field.

20. The beasts of the field also shall cry unto thee: for the rivers of
waters are dried up, and the fire has devoured the pastures of the desert.

The argume^^ and use of this present place.
MOst men in deed do confess with one consent, that repentance and conversion
unto God is needful, if at any time even private calamities be upon them: but
the same notwithstanding do very hardly admit ye true doctrine of repentance:
for inasmuch as they suppose it to consist only in a certain outward and stage
like behavior, it seems unto the^ to be superfluous, whatsoever they hear
spoken of the mortifiyng of the flesh, of man's renewing, of the ame^deme^t of
life and manners, also of prayers, and other such like exercises of true faith
and religion. Therefore Joel, when as he had of late diligently taught and set
forth ye manner of true repentance: now he exhorts the^ very gravely to
embrace ye same, seeing they could no other way be provided for: and with al he
sharply reproves their more the^ beastly blockishnes, which were so hardened at
ye sense of gods wrath, that they were nothing at al moved with the evils yt on
every side oppressed the^. The use of the place unto us also may be this,
namely, yt we may draw arguments from it, how to cas^ off al blockishnes, and
to stir up our selves to the exercise of repentance.

He teaches repentance to be needful.
But he begins with a reason or argument which he deriueth from the
necessity of the matter, and denounces it by an exclamation very pathetical
and full of passions. Alas for that day (says he) for the day of the Lord is
at hand, and will come as a destruction from the Almighty. And the Scripture
calls the day of the Lord the time of vengeance, wherein he punishes the
ungodly: because he then especially proves him self to be God, who seems to
be none, when he suffers sins to go unpunished. The sense therefore of the
words is this: Hitherto forsooth our gracious and merciful God has of long
time deferred the punishments, which you have deserved. But for so much as you
have shamefully abused his long suffering patience, now is the day of
judgment at hand, and that such, as even now when I think of it, it
causes me to shake and quake for fear. For it will come as a certain
desolation from the Almighty. That is to say, it will come much like, as if
God should bend all his forces at once to destroy those that would not
hitherto be amended.

Where we are admonished, that they do in vain trust in the long sufferaunce
of God, which cease not to provoke his wrath by their continual custom of
sinning. For such do heap up to themselves wrath, as Paul says, Romans 2.
and do even arm all the forces of God against themselves, and shall feel
the same one day to be their destruction, in which they ought most of al to
have hoped.

He repeateth things past and present. esa. 30.31.36.
But because he knew them partly to be so blockish and senseless, and partly
so proud and desperate (to wit, by reason of the confidence they had in the
Egyptian League, as is to be seen in Esaias:) that they were not terrified with
the threatenings of the punishment to come, he returns again to the things
past, and eftsoons repeateth what they had suffered, and withal sets before
their eyes the countenance of their present state and condition, that by the
consideration of all these things, they might understand the same to be
preambles of greater mischiefs. And he frames his speech with an
interrogation, to the intent, they might be convicted by the testimony of their
own consciences. Is not the meat (says he) cut off from before our eyes? Is
not joy and gladness departed from the house of our God: for why? the sacrifices
of the Jews were full of reioycement and comfort, as well because they renewed
the memory of Gods ancient benefits toward them, as also for that they
were types and figures of the redemption to come in Christ, and confirmed the
promises thereof. Deuteronomy. 14.16
Hereunto were added the holy feasts, wherein they rejoiced (as Moses
commanded) before the Lord, and relieved also the poor with their
liberality. Because therefore there could no such thing be done or
accomplished in all the time of the war, the Prophet mencioneth these
things. And the sense is this: If your matters be so cocksure, that you think
ye have no such great need of repentance, neither are ye terrifyed with the
threatenings of calamities to come, at lestwise consider what things ye have
hitherto suffered. For why? you can not deny, but that even before your faces
are cut up, and as it were stricken out of your hands, whatsoever serve to
your living and welfare. Neither is penury alone entered into private houses,
but it has invaded also the Temple, wherein are to be seen no manner of
printes at all of the former joy and gladness. There is now no resort unto
this, as has been in times past from all places round about. There are now
no sacrifices, no holy days, no feasts, no remembrance of Gods old and
ancient benefits, to cheer your hearts withal, but all things are full of
mourning and heaviness. And can you think that these things are come to pass
without a special cause? or would God have suffered them thus to be, if his
wrath had not been kindled even to the uttermost? It appears by this, Gods
woorship for sin is taken away.
how great the heynousenes of sins is before God, when as he punishes the^
in such sort, that he spares not even those things that belong to his own
service and worship. Yea we are taught here, how vain the confidence of
outward profession and religion is, except the mind and manners be answerable
thereunto: for he takes from the unthankful creatures al external helps,
least he might seem to be a fauorer of their sins. Examples of this severity,
we may set at this day throughout Greece, Asia, and Africa, when as in those
places do reygne the detestable impiety of Mahomets sect, wherein in times
past were the most flourishing Churches of Christ. The consideration whereof,
ought to move us also, least that we puffed up with a vain profession, do
one day fall into the selfsame punishments.

He takes a^ the hope of Poison to ^^me.
Moreover, because the Jews promised to themselves better things hereafter,
and were not a little comforted with the hope of their harvest to come, the
prophet takes even this also from the^, saying: The feeds are rotten under
the cloddes, whereunto they were committed. And what hope then can you have of
them? But there are some barnes you think still stored and replenished. Nay
whatsoever was laid up in any place, is all together spoiled and destroyed of
the enemies: yea and the very barnes themselves are not only robbed and
spoiled, but also subverted and overthrown, insomuch that out of them can now
nothing at al be looked for. We are ^^monishe^ he by the way, what they are
like to find, that do not use the fruits and other gifts of God, as
becomes them. The Jews grievously offended in this behalf, as may appear
in the Sermons of the Prophets, partly by intemperancie in eating and drinking
(as we said of late) and partly by coueteousnes, wherthrough they hoi^ded up
the fruits of the earth, to the end they might sell them the dearer
afterward, being in the mean time no whitmoued with the misery and outcries
of the hungry and needy. It came to pass therefore by the just judgment of
God, yt both those drunkardes hungered and thirsted, and also the covetous were
brought to extreme need and necessity, so as they were constrained to leave
that for a pray unto the enemies, which they could not find in their hearts
to bestow upon the poor. The like examples we have every where in histories,
whereof this ought to be the use unto us, that we may be thankful unto
God, that we may moderately and soberly use his gifts, but especially that
we may endeavor to be liberal to the poor, whom he has so carefully
commended unto us, etc.

By the example of the brute beasts he reproves their blockishnes.
But that which he had said as touching the hope of the year to come already
taken away, he amplifieth by an example, where withal he so much the more
reproves their blockishnesse. How do the beasts mourn: how do the heardes
of cattle pine away? because they have no pasture, yea and the flocks of
sheep are destroyed. The meaning is, that such and so great is the force of
Gods wrath, that the sense thereof is come even to the brute and savage
beasts. The beasts mourn in ye woods for hunger. The wild Hearts bray for
want of waters. The hungerstarued Oxen wot not which way to turn them. The
sheep for want of pasture are scattered abroad. And are not you ashamed in
the mean time not to acknowledge the hand of Gods wrath, neither as yet
mourn ye for your sins, wherebye you have deserved this so great a misery:
But that which the prophet vpbraydeth this people withal, is now adays too
too common and usual. And this is a great token of man's corruption. All
creatures feel and perceive the blessing of the Lord, they rejoice in it, and
are thankful unto God their good benefactour, whilst they constantly execute
and discharge their duties. The same mourn and are grieved when God is angry.
For even the brute beasts do percetue Gods wrath, and bewail it: the signs
and tokens hereof appear in all ye Elements, yea and this whole frame of the
world being grieved with the weight of our sins and malediction, Romans 8.
groneth and wayteth for deliverance. Only man neither acknowledges God his
benefactour, nor yet perceives his wrath and scourges, but as a block only
poareth and poddreth about second causes. For although he desire to be
delivered from evils, and is grieved for them, yet does he very seldom think
of GOD and of his sins, whereby he has proudked his wrath.

Let us he ashamed therefore of this unthriftiness, and let us be inflamed
with the study of the word, which alone is able to cure this malady.

Heerewithall the Prophet now interlaceth his own example, He stirs the^
up by his own example.
and whilst he tells them what he himself will do, he admonishes them
also what they ought to do. I will cry unto thee O Lord, says he. As though
he should say, Let them do as they list, and if they will, let the^ with their
blockishnes exceed even the very bruit beasts themselves, yet shall they never
cause me to fail in my duty. For I will cry unto the Lord that he may
both give them a better mind, and also mercifully remove these calamities. And
here again he repeateth the self same causes, to the intent he might both
stir up himself the more, and also reprove them once again for their
blockishnesse. For the fire has consumed the pastures of the wilderness, and
the flame has burnt up all the trees of the field. And in these words, he
betokens the rage of the enemies, or rather the horrible vengeance of God,
which should show forth it self even in wild and desert places. But we are
admonished by the example of the prophet, that Bishops and Ministers ought to
pray continually for the people committed to their charge, so long as they be
not forbid^en by the express commandment of God, as once Jeremy was. Ier.
7.11.14.
For why: it does not easily appear unto us, who they are that sin against
the holy Ghost, 1. Joan. 5.
and therefore unmeet to be prayed for. And the greater that men's
blockishnesse is, in not acknowledging their misery, so much the more
fervently have we to labor, to provide for their health and safety. Moses
observed this thing, Exodus 32.33.
who never ceased to pray for the Israelites, although they oftentimes offended
in the selfsame manner. The same did Samuel for the children of Israel, 1. Sam.
8.1^.
not withstanding that the Lord had said unto him. They have not rejected
thee, but me, because I should not reign over them. And the Apostle Paul
prayed for the Jews day and night, Romans 10.
when as he had none gricuouser enemies then they. This duty ought also to
be transferred unto other states and degrees, as Magistrates, fathers of
families, and whosoever it is have any charge enjoined them of the Lord. Let
these also do their duty. so long as occasion ferueth, though they see that
they little preuaple. There will once be a time, when they shall see them
selves to have profited more then they would think. But if all other things
fail, Eze. 3.33.
at least they shall deliver their own souls, etc.

The beasts cry unto the Lord.
Last of all he repeateth, that which he had said of the beasts crying unto
the Lord. As though he should say, Why should not I cry, when as the very
beasts are enforced to cry, from whom this destruction have taken away not
only the pastures, but also the rivers and fountains of wateres: The brute
beasts are said to cry unto GOD when as by their braying or roaring they
testify that they have need of Gods providence. So do the young Ravens
forsaken of their dammes cry unto ye Lord for help, Job. 38. Psalm. 47. Luke
12.
when as they are fed with ye deawe of heaven.

And this consideration of Gods proiudence is very full of comfort, which
extends it self even unto beasts, and withal it reproves the detestable
distrustfulnesse of men, who refuse, to depend upon God, though his fatherly
care toward us do on every side appear. Let these things therefore serve
for our instruction also as touching the matter of repentance, whereof is
presently entreated. And albeit we see due plagues for our sins hanging over
us already, yet let us not despair of Gods goodness, but turn unto him with
our whole hearts. For he that hears the voices of Ravens crying unto him, and
the waylinges of hungry beasts, cannot neglect us unto whom he has given
free access to the throne of his grace by our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom
be given blessing, honor, glory, and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

CHAP. II.
He prophesies of the coming and cruelty of their enemies. 13. An
exhortation to move them to convert. 18. The love of God toward his people.

1 Blow the trumpet in Zion, and shout in my holy mountain: The text.
let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord is
come, for it is at hand.

2 A day of darkness, and of blackenesse, a day of clouds and obscurity, as
the morning spread upon the mountains, so is there a great people, and
mighty: the like where of was not from the beginning, neither shall be after it,
unto the years of many generations.

3 Before his face is a devouring fire, and behind him the flame shall burn
up: the land is as the garden of Eden before him, and behind him a desolate
wilderness, so that nothing shall eseape him.

4 The beholding of him is like the sight of horses, and like the horsemen, so
shall they run.

5 Like the noise of charrets in the cops of the mountains shall they leap,
like the noise of a flame of fire that deuoureth the stubble, and as a mighty
people prepared to the battle.

6 Before his face shall the people tremble: all faces shall gather blacknes.

7 They shall run like giants or strong men, and go up to the wall like men
of war, and every man shall go forward in his ways, and shall not stay in
their paths.

8 No man shall thrust his brother, but every one shall walk in his path: and
when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.

9 They shall run to and fro in the city, they shall run upon the wall,
they shall clime up upon the houses, and enter in at the windows like a
thief.

10 The earth shall tremble before him, the heavens shall shake, the Sun and
the Moon shall be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining.

11 And the Lord shall utter his voice before his host: for his army is very
great, for he is strong that does his work: for the day of the Lord is
great and very terrible, and who can abide it*

Sermon 5.
The argument of the second Sermon.
Joel begins now his other Sermon, wherein he handles the same that he did
in the former, but he entreats more largely and evidently of every point,
adding also some things, which are not there mentioned, yet serve they
excelle^tly well to ye present treatise. For he exhorts them to repentance,
that were oppressed with a grievous war by the Assyrians. And there are three
parts of his discourse. In the first, he again describes the danger, to the
intent that they being wakened by the consideration thereof might perceive that
they had need of repentance. In the second, he teaches the manner of true
repentance, and shows in what points it consists. In the last, he
declares the effects or fruits thereof, and by that occasion prophesies of
the happy state of the Godly and destruction of the enemies, which finally is
fulfilled in the kingdom of Christ. Now these things are so to be considered
of us, that we being distressed with adversities and afflictions, may from
hence fetch those things that serve to our instruction and comforce, at this
time we will only examine the first part.

A Tragiea^ beginning wherein chiefly he stirs up the Prophets.
The beginning of his Sermon is very tragical and warlike, wherein he rouzeth
up the secure and careless, that they might prepare themselves for the
punishments now ready to light upon them. And because they were to be
punished with war, he alluding to afeate of war, wills the watchmen or
spies to sound out Alarm and proclaim the batteil. For he says, Blow the
trumpet in Sion, and shout in my holy mountain. He makes mention of Sion and
of the holy hill or Temple, partlye least they should think themselves to
he safe for the holiness of the place, and partly that they might understand
this thing especially to be enjoined to the. Prophets, whom GOD had
appointed watchmen to his people: Ezech. 3.33.
as we may read in Ezechiel. He adds: Let all the inhabitants of the land
tremble. He names all, least any should think him self to be without
fault. And he bids them tremble, to the end they might perceive God to
deal in good earnest, and therefore that they also must not dally. Whereunto
serves the cause which he by and by adds: For the day of the Lord comes,
that is, the time is at hand, which God has now long since appointed for
ve^gea^ce, which even now also waits at your doors.

Here comes the goodness of God to be noted of us, who like a kind father
first deals in words, The goodness of God in giving warning before he
punishes.
before he adds stripes. Neither doubtless are such prophesiynges in
vain, or appointed to stir up a vain fear or terror. For as many as
being terryfied with them, are converted to GOD, do escape the punishments,
as GOD himself promises in Jeremy. But if in case the number of the wicked
do prevail, Jeremy. 18.
unto whom these things seem but as toys and trifles, and therefore GOD
cannot defer the punishment: yet do the Godly receive great comfort
hereby. For when they call these prophesiynges to mind, they understand also
that all these things are ordered by Gods government, who because he is
faithful and loves us, suffers not his to be tempted above their strength,
but that for his mercies sake he causes, that all things work for the best
unto them.

God uses his ministers as watchmen.
Further we have to mark, that God oftentimes by his Prophets and ministers of
his word does foretell his punishments, and that (as before we have said)
he ordained them, to the end that as watchmen they should sound the
Trumpet, and stir up the people committed to their charge unto that
spiritual fight, which consists especially in the exercise of repentance,
and word of GOD, and which alone is able to turn away the plagues imminent
and at hand. The consideration hereof admonishes as well ministers, as also
the whole people, and every creature particularly of their duties. For it
belongs unto them to attend upon their flock, and to mark the state and
condition of every one, and with all the dangers that either publicly or
privately ^ang over their heads. Moreover, to reprove and denounce the same,
so as every man may perceive what he ought to do. This did the holy Prophets
in times past, and the selfsame does Paul very grauelye require of the
Ministers of the new Testament. Acts. 20. 2. Tim. 4. Mat. 24. and 25.
And they that do their duty in this behalf shall enter into the joy of
their Lord. But as many as are careless and negligent, at their hands shall
be required the blood of them that perish. Again it shall be the part of
all those that will be numbered amongst the people of GOD to tremble at the
sound of Gods word, Ezechi. 33.
and with speedy repentance to preuente the day of the Lord. The Prophet
admonishes us thereof, when he says, it is at hand. For by that threatening
he puts them in hope, that they may as yet escape the punishments now
ready to light upon them, if they will apply them selves unto GOD giving them
warning. These things were of us to be considered, O Brethren, when as
turmoylinges and dangers do every where arise. And GOD truly for his part
executes his office, neither want there faithful watchmen by him raised up,
which reprove sin and denounce the plagues hanging over us. But in the
mean time there want not such as are negligent also, Esaias. 56.
who either by diminishing Gods threatenings do favor and maynetayne
wickedness, or else by the lewd example of their life do shamefully prostitute
the authority of the word and ministerye. This occasion every lewd and
wicked verlet catches hold of, and heerevppon it comes that the careless
liberty of sinning does every where prevail, and the warninges of the
faythfuller Ministers are wicke dly scoffed at and laughed to skorne. But Gods
judgment shall not slack, who will raise up most cruel enemies, that shall
with their Alarm both terryfie those dumb Dogs, and also their partakers.

Now follows a description of the vengeance which he first propounds in
general, A general description of Gods vengeance.
to the intent he might signify how great and grievous it was like to be, A
day of darkness and blackenes, a day of Clouds and obscurity. By darkness
and blackenes are understood inextricable troubles and calamities, which cause
men to be uncertain what to do, and even at their wits end. He threatens
therefore that this also shall happen unto them: and adds. As the morning is
spread upon the mountains. By which similitude is betokened the unavoidable
necessity and celeritie of an incredible vengeance: and the sense is this.
That like as no man can forbid the morning, but that she will rise, and
stretche forth her rosecoulered fingers (as the Greek Poets use to speak)
suddenly to the very tops of the mountains, and from thence with wonderful
swiftness throughout the whole earth: so shall no man let God, but that he
will stretch his wreakefull hand unto you, whereby he will sooner then can be
told afflict and destroy all your whole land. For there shall come (namely,
co^ducted by the Lord) a mighty and strong people, the like whereof was never
seen in the world before, The power of the Assyrians incomparable.
neither shall be hereafter. He means the Assyrians, who in continuance of
government, in victories and puissance far surmounted all peoples beside.
For their kingdom began in the hundredth and one and thirtith year after the
floode, Gene, 10.
which was from the creation of the world the seventeen hundredth fourscore
and nienth. 2. King. 14.
There are reckoned from that time, unto the fourteenth year of Ezechias,
wherein this war was made, a thousand four hundred and two and forty years.
And although a little after the Babylonians began to reign, yet was not the
Empire of the Assyrians overthrown, but rather the Kings seat was removed,
and the name of the Assyrians continued still until the Monarchy came to the
Persians and Medes. The Prophet therefore does not without a cause say, that
this people excelled all others. Where we have especially to observe how he
says, that these shall be the executours of Gods vengeance. For hereby it
appears that GOD will never want such, as by whose aid he may punish the
wicked and ungodly, when as he can use the most mighty nations and those that
are furthest of from the knowledge of his name according to his own good will
and pleasure. For that which is here done, comes oftentimes to pass, and
there are examples every where in Hystories. But more of this the Prophet him
self will add in the words following.

A particular declaration of the punishment.
For that which he propounded in general, he declares by a diligent and long
rehearsal of all that they (namely the Assyrians) should do: where it is not
needful to stand upon the words, since they are plain and evident of
themselves, but rather the matter it self is to be considered.

For the end and scope of all, is this, namely, that he will show, that
nothing can possiblye let, but that Gods vengeance shall proceed, and
therefore he takes from them all things, wherein they might put any hope or
confidence. The chief among these were, the fertility and plenteousnesse of
the Land, the great distance of places between Judea and the countries of
the Assyrians, the hard passages through the mountains, a huge number of
strong and valiant men, together with most strong towns and fortifications,
which seemed to be such as might easily stop the coming of the enemies. But
he tells them that none of all these things shall profit them.

For first of all the Assyrians shall come like a fire, and shall so hideouslye
waste and destroy all things, that the Land which now florisheth as a
Paradise, shall after their departure become like unto a huge and desolate
wil^ernesse.

Secondly, they shall come very cruel and swift, and shall even run through
the tops of the Mountains, where there seemed to be scarce any place for
Horsemen to pass.

Yea, and look how soon the fire catches and deuoureth the stubble, even so
soon shall they over run the whole land.

Thirdlye, as touching men of war, all your warriors surdaunted only with
the fame and report of their enemies, shall fear and tremble, and shall with
the palenesse of their faces testify that they are afraid: on the other side
your enemies shall run hither and thither like Giants, they shall scale the
walls, they shall keep their order with wonderful diligence so as none shall
be a let unto another: Moreover setting a part the fear of death they shall
rushe even into the midst of the swoordes, and yet shall not be wounded.

Fourthly, albeit strong Cities be set against them, yet shall they suddenly
pass through them, even as through the open fields, and having broken up the
gates or battered down the walls, they shall enter in at the very windows.
Finally so great shall be the rage and astonishment of your people, that the
earth it self shall tremble, the heavens shall move, the Sun and Moon
shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their light. And in these
words his meaning is nothing else, the^ that in every part of the world
shall appear tokens of Gods wrath, and nothing shall be any safegarde unto
them. That these things were fulfilled, we may gather by the history,
especially out of Esaias chap. 10. Where it is declared what way Sennacharib came
to Jerusalem. And so GOD performed in deed, that which he had threatened
before in the Law, to the wicked transgressors of his commandementes. In the
consideration hereof we have so to be occupied, that we be not carried
away with the confidence of our own strength or munitions, to rebel against
the Lord. For to let pass all old examples, we have in our time seen many
of this forte, which may teach us how vain the Fortes and Defenses are,
that men do provide against GOD etc.

Furthermore least any should attribute these things to the power or rage of
the enemies, he teaches expressly, that God shall be the Captain of this
War. God the captain and Emperor of war.
For he says, The Lord shall utter his voice before his hoaste. That is,
all things shall come to pass by his conducte and assignemente, he shall
encourage the Assyrians, but shall terryfie you, as I said even now. For Gods
army is exceeding great, and he that executes his commandment (namely the
Assyrian) is strong: Terrible therefore and great shall that day be, so as
none shall Be able to abide it.

We have here to observe and mark that he calls expressly the Host, and
Camp of the Assyrians Gods host and Camp, and he acknowledges the Tyrant
Sennacharib to be the executioner of his word and commandment. Esaias. 10.
So in Esaias he calls the same the staff of his wrath or furye.

Therefore GOD uses also the aid of the wicked whylest he will execute his
judgments. And yet for all that are not the wicked excused whilst they
destroy Cities and Towns, and make havoc of all with fire and swoorde. For
by their own proper malice they are carried unto mischief, and the ambition,
or covetousness, or wrath, or cruelty that dritteth them forward, is of
their own growing, neither is GOD to be charged with it. But GOD by his
wisdom and justice uses their evil and malice to a good end and purpose,
to the intent he might either exercise the faith of his chosen, or be avenged
on the wicked and vugodlye.

In these things shyneth forth his providence, which serves greatly both for
our instruction and consolation. For it teaches that no evils or calamities
do happen unto us without his counsel and determination, whose judgments are
Justice and Truth: and therefore that we must not hold plea against him.

Again it is for our comfort that we know him to be faithful, who will
not suffer his Children to be tempted above their strength, 1. Corin. 10.
and that in the mean time, he prepares a pit for the ungodly (as the
Psalm says) whilst by their help he chasteneth his own. Psalm. 94.
They that weighe not these things as they ought, thruste God from his
gouernmente and Soueraintie, whilst they are afraid least they should make
him the Author of some evil, and besides, unto those that are afflicted and
in miserye they become Authors of impaciencye and desperation.

Let us acknowledge therefore his providence, which extends it self even unto
Sparowes and the heirs of our head. Matthew. 10. Luke. 12.
and let us know it to be his hand, if at any time we be afflicted: again,
let us take it patiently, and turning unto him embrace his saving health, which
he offreth unto us in his son Jesus Christ: to whom be given blessing,
honor, glory, and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon 6.
The text.
12 Therefore even now also says the Lord, turn you unto me with all your
heart, with fasting, and mourning.

13. And rent your heart, and not your garments: and turn unto the Lord your
God, for he is gracious and merciful, flow to anger, and of great kindness,
and repents him of the evil.

14 Who knows, if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind
him, even a meat offering, and a drink offering unto the Lord your God:

The argument and use of this present place.
Joel has declared in the first part of this sermon the great danger, which at
that rune hung over the Jews by reason of The assyrian war. The end of this
declaration was, to rouse by the secure and careless, to the intent they might
see repentance to be necessary for them, and therefore prepare themselves unto
it. He adds therefore now the second part, wherein he entreats of true
repentance, and first verily he teaches in this present place, what every one
ought privately to do, intending afterward also to speak of those things,
that serve to public and solemn repentance. But we have first and foremost
especially to observe, that he expressly testifies that these things were
prescribed unto them of the Lord himself. For thereby we may gather, that a
perpetual rule is given unto us, which ought to be observed in all ages, and
which is the only and sole way, whereby God may be pacified, and the
punishments at hand auerted and turned away. It shall be expedient therefore
diligently to consider of every point.

He begins with a noting of the time, He declares that there is yet hope
and time of repentance.
when he says: Therefore even now also says the Lord. These words have a
certain Emphasis or force in them, which may easily appear, if we consider
the things, that went before. For he has described the horrible vengeance of
God, which no man was able to abide. And now thereunto he adioyneth these
words, as though he should say: I would not have these things so to be
taken, as though there were no hope of grace left. For albeit ye deserve
utterly to be destroyed and rooted out, and god has decreed no common plague
against you, yet is this his decree co^ditionall: insomuch that if you will even
now, whilst your matters stand as it were upon the rasers edge, turn and
convert unto him, he will graciously and lovingly receive you into favor. o
repentance too late so it be unfeigned.
By which place we are admonished, that no repentance comes too late, so it
be true and earnest. For inasmuch as God in the Scriptures will be called our
father, he resembles good and faithful fathers, who seek nothing so much as
the conversion and amendment of their children, as Christ abundantly
teaches in yt parable of ye prodigal child. Luke. 15.
Yea and he himself by his Prophet says, Ezeche. 18.
Have I any desire that the wicked should die? and not rather that he should
turn from his evil ways, and live? Again: If your sins were as Crimsyn,
Esaias. 1.
yet shall they be whiter then snow: if they were as red as skarlet, yet shall
they be as white as woll. And John says: 1. John. 1.
If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our
sins, etc. But with infinite examples are these promises confirmed, among
which yt ought not to be lest accounted off, wc is here set down. For when the
Jews embraced the counsel of the prophet, by and by the Lord was their
helper, and by his Angel smote the Assyrians with a mighty slaughter. Esaias. 37.
To the same end also belongs Manasses, who after all sorts of sin and
iniquity turning unto the Lord, 1. Chro. 33.
was of him heard and restored to his kingdom. The like mercy and favor have
that sinful woman in ye Gospel, Magdalen, Zacheus, the Thief crucified with
Christ, and many other more felt and tasted off. Of all which this ought to be
the use unto us, that they may serve for our comfort against the terrors and
temptations of conscience, wherewith Satan is wont to weaken our faith: for
every one ought to apply this unto him self, and to say with himself: Yea
even very now turn unto the Lord, and let not the remembrance of thy life
past dismay thee: but the more heinous that it has been, so much the more
earnest let thy conversion be, and thou shall straight-wayes perceive Gods
ears to be open to thy prayers, etc.

A summarie doctrine of repentance.
But we ought more deeply to consider, what it is that God commands in this
cause. Turn (says he) unto me with all your heart, with fasting, weeping
and mourning: and rent your heart, and not your garments, etc. He
comprehends in these words all, that may be spoken of repentance, which we
have oftentimes said, to be properly a turning or conversion unto God. But to
the intent the manner of this conversion may the more plainly appear, four
things in order are to be considered of us.

1. From what we must turn
First, from whence this turning or conversion ought to be. Namely from those
things, that have turned us from God. These are generally our sins, whereby
that we are divided and separated from God, he himself testifies in Esaias.
Esaias. 59.
But under the title of sin are reckned, not only those gross words and
deeds, which by the common consent of men are accounted for filthy and
unlawful, but also the Iustes of the flesh, Galath. 5
which (as Paul, says) strive against the spirit and will of God, and
therefore ought earnestly to be brydeled and restreined. To the same end
belong false and erroneous opinions of God, superstitions also which grow out
of these unlawful worshippings, and whatsoever else is of this sort. All these
things they must leave and forsake, which will truly convert and repent: For
in as much as for these things sake, Col. 3.
comes the wrath of God upon us, we cannot look for an end of punishment so
long as we continue in the same. They therefore are reproved in this place,
which when they will seem penitente, do not only not forsake their
superstitions, but rather daily heap up new: which also suffer the desires of
the flesh to boil in them, which amend not their manners, but are occupied
about vain ceremonies, and in the mean time (which God condemns in Esaias)
bring their hands full of blood into his presence. Esai. 1.
And such commonly is the popish penance, which consists in the Lent fast
and fantastical satisfactions. etc.

2. To whom we must turn.
Secondely we are to consider, unto whom we must turn. Even unto me, says he.
Our turning therefore, must be unto god, and truly unto God alone, because he
only is the truth and fountain of all goodness. But we must beware, yt we go
straight unto him, and not cease before we have laid hold of him. And this
must be done by faith, seeing God, which is a spirit, can no other way be
apprehended or taken hold off. They then do err first, which turn not unto
God, but unto creatures, or to the inventions of men, or to their own merits.

Secondly, which begin in deed to turn, but stay in the midst of their
course, before they come to the mark prefixed unto them. 2. Tim. 2.
They verily strive for a time, but they are not crowned because they strive
not lawfully: and that saying of Christ agrees unto them: No man that puts
his hand to the plough, and looks back, is fit for the kingdom of God.
Luke 9.

3. By wha^ means we must turn.
But forasmuch as there is no communion betwixt God and us, and we do no less
fly from him, then did our first parents when they had sinned: we have need
of a Mediator, which may make us away unto him, and reconcile him unto us, who
is angry with our sins.

The same is only and alone Christ Jesus, the son of God the father,
coeternall and consubstantiall with him, who in the time appointed was of ye
virgin Mary made man, to the end he might become a mediator between God and
us, and pacify his wrath. Of him the father himself witnesses from heaven:
Math. 3.17.
This is my dearly beloved son in whom I am well pleased. And he himself in
the gospel cries out: Joan. 14.
I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man comes to the father, but by
me. For he alone by the sacrifice of his body and blood, purges and purifieth
our sins, Joan. 1.3.
and there withal by the seed of his word begets them again into the
sons of God, and prepares them unto every good work, 1. Pet. 1.
which were by nature the children of wrath, for which cause the apostles
affirm, Act. 3.
that he was exalted of God, to the intent he might give repentance unto Israel
and remission of sins. And himself commands them both to be preached in
his name. Luke 24.
They therefore are deceived that preach repentante without Christ, and place
it in men's works. They may in deed talk much of good works and of ye
christian discipline of manners: but except we have Christ, we shall never
perform any thing yt good is. For without me (says he) ye can do
nothing. Joan. 15.
Yea they that think they have done any thing, go so much the further off
from God, by how much they repose their trust and confidence in their own
works and merits.

4. The manner of our turning.
Fourthly, the Prophet diligently declares the manner of our turning or
repentance, and touches all the things as well internal as external, which
are here to be observed of us. And first he would have us to turn unto God
with our whole heart. By mentioning of the heart, he excludes hypocrisy,
Esai. 29.
least we should draw near unto God only with our mouth and lips.
Secondly, he requires the sincere study of godliness and true religion, and
that, to the end ye forsaking all things which are repugnant unto God, we may
consecrate unto him our hearts and all the powers both of our mind and body,
according to that which is said in the Law: Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength.
There is nothing therefore left unto us here, which we may give unto the
world, or to the desires of the flesh. For inasmuche as the heart is the
fountain and welspring of all actions, they do live unto GOD alone as many as
are turned unto him with their whole heart. Neither do they yet truly
repent, which halting on both sides, one while obey God, and another while
think it lawful for them, to set him aside and to serve the world and the
flesh. But for so much as we are here let and hindered by the pride and
natural corruptions of the flesh, he inioyneth fasting, whereby he means
not a superstitious abstinence, or difference of meats, but a discipline of
the flesh, wherethrough the nourishmentes of lust and pride or stubbornenesse
are withdrawn, as we said before. He adds unto this weeping and lamenting
or mourning, which contain an outward profession of repentance, whereof we
have need, partly, that we may testify Gods righteousness, whilst we
confess by this means that we have deserved punishment: and partly that we
may remedy the offense, which is publicly given to the weak. This did David
perceive, who not contented to have bewailed his sins privately, would
publicly also in Psalms testify his grief and heaviness, Psalm.
25.32.51.130.143 etc.
to the intent he might both celebrate the righteousness of God, and also
restrain those, that might abuse his example to the liberty of sinning. They
are therefore very far off from true repentance, whosoever will not
acknoweledge their sins, and are so far from bewayling them, that rather
they glory in them, like unto Doeg the Idumean, against who^ David for this
cause inueigheth. Psalm. 52.
But least that any should think repentance to consist in outward weeping,
he repeateth that, wherein the substance of the whole matter stands, when
he adds: And rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn to the Lord
your God. For they of the East country were wont to tear their garments, if
any thing had happened unto them, which seemed to be intolerable. But the
hypocrites abused that gesture as though the whole order of repentance had
co^sisted therein. He avouches therefore that there is a far other matter
required: namely that they should he broken in their hearts, and unfeignedly
detest their sins, and so utterly retecting them return unto God, from whom
before they were departed. For why: God is not delighted with outward
ceremonies, but (as we said in the beginning) he requires the heart, and
the same contrite and humbled he does not despise, as David admonishes. Psalm.
51.
And of outward matters there is no other use, but so far forth as both we
are stirred up by them, and the same serve to Gods glory, and the edifiyng of
others, where again they are reproved, which are wont to place all their
repentance in most cold and frozen Ceremonies.

That our repentance is not unprofitable.
But to this doctrine or exhortation he annexeth reasons derived from the
person of God, whereby he teaches, that our repentance shall not be
unprofitable or unfruitful. For as in every business our hearts do fail
us, if in case we think that we labor in vain: so here in this
especially. For hereupon comes either sudden desperation, or else an
unbridled liberty of sinning, which at length ends in desperation. Least
therefore any such thing should happen also unto these, he assures them of
Gods grace and goodness who will receive them into favor that turn unto him.
And this he proves by the self same titles or Epithets, wherewith God
describes himself in Moses: saying: Exodus 34.
For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great goodness, and
repents him of the evil. First. Secondly, he attributes unto him mercy,
Hebrwe word) the bowels of mercyes, whereby are signified the natural
affections of parents toward their children. This David declares in the
Psalms, saying: Psalm. 103.
As a father pitieth his children, so does the Lord Pity them that fear him.
For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but dust, etc.
Thirdly, he says that he is slow to anger, is to say, long suffering, and
one that is not lightly provoked. Fourthly, of great goodness or
bountifulness. For he is the bottomless fountain of all goodness, who is
delighted to do good unto us, since for this cause especially he created men,
that he might have some, whom to make partakers of his benefits. Fifthly, and
it repents him of the evil: that is to say,
Examples hereof are every where extant. For hitherto belongs the whole
history of the Israelites, if we consider what was done with them in the
desert, and afterward under their Judges and Kings. To these are added the
private examples of David, Peter, and others, whom we read to have been
converted from many fold and most grievous sins, and to have returned into
favor with God again. Let these things serve to comfort us, least we rashly
despair of Gods goodness. For since he suffers with much lenity the
vessels of wrath (as Paul says) he will much more pardon their
infirmities, Romans 9.
yt acknowledge him, and long to be reconciled unto him. In the mean season
these very things ought to stir us up to repentance, least we abuse his
goodness. For their fault is inexcuseable, which refuse to come unto God, so
willingly offering himself unto them.

The faithful speak modestly as touching the remission of Gods punishments.
Further we have diligently to observe here, with what words the Prophet
infers the conclusion, wherein he puts them in hope of pardon: who
knows (says he) whether he will turn and repent, and leave behind him a
blessing, even a meat offering and drink offering to the Lord your God:
Which words are not so to be taken, as though they proceeded from one
doubting of Gods grace and the remission of sins, which we with constant
faith must believe: but first they resemble the nature and disposition of
faith, which although it sticks with undoubted trust to the promises of God,
yet is it modest, and not malapert or importunate, neither does it rashly
presume upon God. Secondly they ought to be expounded rather of the punishment
then of the remission of sin. For albeit we be sure and certain of this,
neither in deed is it lawefull to doubt: yet is there an other consideration
to be had of the punishments, which God sends in the way of chastisemente,
neither does he take them away before, that he sees us to be amended, and
the pride of our flesh to be crushed and broken. But here is the obedience
of faith needful, which both patiently submits it self to Gods will, and
even then also hops well of his mercy, when the tokens of his wrath seem
still to appear. And that hitherto also these things ought to be referred,
it appears by the words following, wherein he says: And leave behind him a
blessing, that is to say, give a plentiful increase of the earth, so as we
may again celebrate his Sacrifices, which for want and necessity have for a
time ceased. Where again appears the nature of faith, which that it is
chiefly careful of Gods worship we have often said already. For they crave
the fruits of the earth, not to guzzle, and glutte themselves, or to pamper
their bodies with the pleasures of the flesh: but to the end they might serve
God and yield unto him his due worship. They are therefore a great way off from
the nature and property of faith, who, so they may abound in delight is and
ydlenes, do seldom or never bethink themselves, either of the conservation
or instauration of Gods worship and glory. It shall be our parts to
acknowledge the goodness of God, and forsaking our sins and errors to turn
unto him by faith in Christ, who, both gives us repentance, and also pardon
and forgiveness of sins. To him be given blessing, honor, glory, and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon 7.
15 Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, The text.
call a solemn assembly.

16 Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, gather the elders, assemble
she children and those that suck the breasts: let the bride groom go forth
of his chamber and the bride out of her closet.

17 Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord weep between the porch and
the altar, and let them say: Spare thy people O Lord, and give not thine
heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should
they say among the people, where is their God:

The argument and use of this present place.
AS God has been accustomed to punish men's sins with wars, famine,
pestilence, and other plagues innumerable: so do the scriptures teach no
other way of escaping out of afflictions, but repentance, whereby men return
unto God, from whom by sinning they went away. But for so much as in repentance
it self there is much wandering and straying, the holy Ghost also boeth every
where set down the order and manner thereof, but of all other most diligently by
Joel, who is altogether in this, yt he might couze those up to repentance that
were in extreme danger and withal declares at large, how the same ought to
be ordered and accomplished. And of late forsooth he admonished what every one
ought privately to do. But by cause they were altogether infected as ye
would with one malady and disease, and therefore had need of public and
solemn repentance, he now preseribeth in like manner the order of this: which
as it ought to be observed of every one, so it especially admonishes them of
their duty, whom God has appointed keepers and defenders of ye public
welfare.

He will have repentance to be appointed by public authority.
For he begins with them, when he says: Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify
a fast, etc. For this place must be understood of the holy trumpets, by the
sound whereof the feastfull days were proclaimed, and the holy assemblies
gathered together as Moses had commanded by Gods ordinance. Numb. 10.
But for because the Prophet requires here a certain extraordinary matter,
which must be ordered not by any private ma^s authority, but publik, he
speaks this unto those, especially unto whom belonged the chief government,
and whose commandments it was no light matter to despise: namely to the
kings and states of the realm, whom here he will admonish of their
duty. For inasmuche as unto these was committed the safety of the people,
unto the same especially do appertain the things which serve for their
preservation, and whereby the plagues at hand may be driven away, to wit the
true worship of God and repentance. This thing saw all the excellent
princes, whose faith and godliness is commended in the scriptures. For in as
much as they knew how that God in teaching and delivering the manner of his
worship would use the help and ministry of Moses, who bare the chieft rule
and authority among the people: they thought not without cause that the care
thereof belonged most especially unto them. ^. Sam. 6.7. 1. Chro. 29. ^. Chro.
19.20.29.34, etc.
Therefore David began his reign with the restoring of Gods worship, and
caused his son Solomon to do the same. Whose steps we read afterward
that Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias followed, who were not only careful as
touching the outward worship, but also provided, that public repentance
should of all men be embraced and taken in hand, if at any time they
perceived Gods wrath to be kindled. Yea, and the Scripture for this cause
commends the king of Niniue, Jonas. 3.
for that the Ninevites repented by his commandment. And that this thing
belongs as well to the times of the new Testament, Psalm. 2.
it may appear by this that David exhorts kings, to kiss and embrace
Christ, and to submit themselves unto his dominion: and God promises the
selfsame in Esaias, namely, Esaias. 49.
that kings shall be nourses to his Church. For how shall they embrace
Christ, or preserve his church like nourses, if they neglect those things,
without the which neither the worship of God nor the public welfare can
consist: Al flouthful Magistrates therefore are reproved, who either think
this charge to belong nothing at all unto them, or else are persuaded that
civil laws in this behalf will do no good. For albeit they cannot enforce
or change the minds of men, yet may they take away public offenses, and by
their example provoke others, yea and bring many back into the right way,
before they be altogether past recovery. Hereupon grew the imperial laws as
touching divine matters, for the reviving whereof in these days the princes and
magistrates ought to be careful, that are desirous of the safety of the
common weal.

The parts of of a public and solemn repentance.
But let us see, what the Prophet would have instituted by public authority,
and the whole order of public repentance will appear unto us which is
contained altogether in four heads. First he wills them to sanctify a
fast. We have spoken of this in the first chapter. 1 A Fast.
But ye shall observe again, that by the word sanctifiyng is betokened the
true end and use of fastings, which is, that they may both be holy unto God
and also serve to the mortifiyng of the flesh, least it should hinder the
devotion of the mind and the duties of true christianity: which also is the
chief and principal point in private fastes. But here he will have a public
fast to be summoned, which may answer to the profession of a solemn
repentance, and be as it were a witness and testmonye thereof. This place
therefore does nothing at all help the superstitions professors of fastes. For
if we take away from fastings the things which we spoke of eueu now, there
will be no more use of them, neither can they be approved unto God.

Secondly, Call a solemn assembly, 2 Solemn assemblies.
says he. The same he touched also before, where we showed, that holy
assemblies are therefore required, for that they make to the mutual
preuocation and devotion of minds, and for that they help and further
prayers, which by the consent of many do after a forte gather the greater
strength. But here are two things to be observed. First the way and end which
it behooves to keep in gathering of assemblies. How holy assemblies ought to
be handled.
The prophet also expresses this by the word sanctifyng. For albeit he had
respect to the law which would have those that were to offer sacrifices, first
to be purged, least they should come unto them unclean: yet does he rather
require that, which was meant and signified by these washings and purifiynges of
the Law, namely the pureness and holiness of the heart, Heb. 12, Leuit, 19.
Psa. 15.
without the which (as the Apostle says) no man shall see God. For in deed,
it cannot be that they should keep company with the holy God, which are not
themselves also holy. And although it becomes us continually to be in love
with this thing, yet is the same most chiefly necessary for us when we come
together to the hearing of Gods word and unto public prayers, and do enter
into the holy congregation as it were into the presence of God himself. Then
therefore ought we to go down into our selves, to examine our dealinges, to
correct our vices, and especially to embrace Christ Jesus, who is made unto us
of God holiness and sanctification. This except we do, neither shall we hear
Gods word with any fruit, 1. Corinthians. 1.
neither shall our prayers be accepted of God, which are accompanied with
hands full of blood. Esaias. 1.
We see therefore what we have to judge of those, that show forth their
pride and superfluity in the very temples them selves, and do not only give
over them selves to most vile thoughts and cogitations, but also minister
matter unto others of the like vile thoughts and desires. They are of the
number of those, of whom the Lord speaks by the Prophet: This people
draws near unto me with their mouths, Esaias. 29.
and honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me.
etc. But what shall we say of the assemblies of our time, such as are
gathered together in the dedications of Churches and in very many feasts of
the Christians, where a men shall see nothing but riot and superfluity, and an
unbridled liberty of drinking, dancing, playing and reuelling: They
sanctify their assemblies, not unto God, but unto Bacchus and Venus, and shall
one day be punished of God, whose name they so shamefully and and impudently
abuse.

Who they be that must assemble and meet together.
Secondly we have to observe, who ought to assemble and come together. First
he wills them to gather the whole people. And by and by least any man should
suppose himself not to be contained under the name of people, he specefieth
two fortes or kinds, wherein he comprehends all estates and degrees of men
whatsoever. For like as all folks ought to run together to the quenching of
a common and public fire: even so to the quenching of Gods wrath it becomes
all and every one to set to their helping hands, that will be called and
accounted good citizens. Wherefore he names the elders together with the
children, and even the sucking Babes also, or such as hang upon the breasts:
the elder sort, that by their example they might go before others, whom either
through their negligence or evil example they had before corrupted, and the
infantes, that the parents being provoked by beholding the^, might acknowledge
their offense, whereby they procured destruction not only to themselves, but
also to their infantes, and by remembrance thereof might be stirred up to the
more effectual and fervent desire of repentance. For (like as we have seen in
Hosee) Gods wrath is wont to stretch it self even unto infantes, Hosee. 13.
and brute beasts also, as is declared at large in the first chapter. Which
only reason ought to be sufficient to awaken us from sinning: since it is so
provided by nature, that al men wish well to themselves and to those that
belong unto them. In the mean time we are admonished, that no man ought to be
exempted from repayring to the church or resorting to holy assemblies. For why?
all the sort of us have need of the instruction of Gods word and prayers,
and it is a joyful thing to the Godly to be conversant among those, with whom
they know God to be present. Grievous therefore and shameful is the error of
those, that either never come themselves, or do not enure their children, to
follow the exercises of godliness and religion. Men offend every where now
adays in this behalf, so that even hereby it may appear, how little
Christianity there is in them, that do glory in the name of Christ.

Thirdly he says: Let the Bridegroom go forth of his chamber, 3. Public
mourning
and the Bride out of her closette. By which words he proclaims a public
mourning, and commands them to abstain even from lawful delights. For
under the name of marriage and the company between man and wife, he
comprehends all other things of like sort, the use whereof is otherwise
lawful. But because in the time of peace we do commonly abuse our lawful
and honest pleasures, it is convenient, that we afterward abstain from the
same, and even by this means punish the wantonness of our flesh. 2. Sam. 11.
This thing Vrias observed, who thought it unlawful to company with his wife,
so long as Israel was entangled with a grievous and dangerous war. Heerevpon
therefore let us gather a general doctrine, that there is no pleasure or
delight so honest and lawful, that ought not to be laid aside, if at any time
God publicly requires vengeance for sins. For first of all there is no man
without fault since it is plain, that even the just man falls seven times a
day. Prou. 24.
Again, albeeit some peradventure be void of those crimes, for the which
Gods wrath is especially kindled, yet shall it be their parts to weep with
the^ yt weep, Rom, 12.
least they should seem utterly to renounce the fellowship which we have all
of us in Christ Jesus. Further seeing the corruption of our nature is such,
that the things which are lawful do withdraw us from the exercises of faith
and prayer, even for this cause ought the same to be intermitted, that we may
the more fervently be occupied in those things, that concern Gods glory and
our ^wne salvation. 2. Corin. 7
So Paul wi^^e^ married folks to go aparte some times by co^^^t, that they
might the more conveniently give them selves to fasting and praye^* How then
shall we think of those, who when afflictions do every where hang over them,
seek their own private pleasures: yea and abstain not even from things
unlawful, but break forth into all kind of lust and licentiousness? This
is too too common in these days, so as even by this argument a man may well
discern the manners and conditions of the last time.

Fourthly, he instituteth public prayers, 4. Public prayers.
where he sets down the form of a Letanie, not such a one as the
superstitious sort, and men, given to their own gain do use, but such as
being joined with true faith, seeks only the glory of God. The ringleaders
hereof he appoynteth the Priests, not that other ought to hold their peace,
but for that he might put them in mind of Christ the Mediator, a Type
whereof they did represent, and without whom their prayers could not please
GOD. Let the Priests (says he) weep between the porch and the altar. etc.
The porche was the place of the people, and the altar resembled the presence of
God himself, unto whom there the sacrifices were offered: and that the Priests
bare the person of Christ, it is better known out of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Heb. 2. 5.9. etc.
then that it needs with many words to be proved. In the mean season the
ministers of churches are admonished of their duty, namely that they put
themselves between the people and God being angry. For although the glory of
intercession or atonement do belong properly unto Christ alone, yet is it
their parts never to cease praying, whereby they may assuage the wrath of
God, and reconcile the people unto him. So we read Aaron intermingled
himself, umb. 16.
and stood in the midst between the quick and the dead, when the plague of
GOD grew hot among the people. 1. Sam. 12.
And Samuel thought it a great offense, if he should cease to pray for the
people, which had cast off Gods yoke and government. For seeing GOD
complains of this in the Prophets more then in one place or two, that no man
would offer himself or stand in the breach of the wall, Ezech. 22. Esaias. 59.
to stop the course of his wrath and fury: it cannot but exceedingly
displease him, if the ministers themselves be in this case forgetful of their
duties. etc.

Now he prescribes the prayer in this sort: Spare thy people, O Lord, A form
of public prayers.
and give not thine heritage to reproach. etc. The petition is brief: Spare
(say they) thy people. These words have in them a confession of sin, and
with all they show that all hope of salvation is to be sought only in Gods
mercy. As though he should say: We have sinned, O Lord, and are utterly
unworthy of any better success: but spare us we beseech thee, and enter not
into judgment with us. etc. Unto these words they adioyne reasons, and the
first they draw and allege from their own person, whilst they call
themselves Gods people, and add: Neither give thine heritage into reproach, for
ye sense is this, Exodus 19.
whatsoever we be, we are thy people, thine inheritance, thy chosen, but who I
pray thee will suffer his inheritance to perish, if he may save it: And thus
he sends the^ to the free covenant of god, who had made the^ his peculiar
people. The other reason they fetch from ye person of god, whose glory they say
should be called into question: why shall they say among the people, where is
their god? for as the ungodly acknowledge no God at all, but visible: So are
they wont to judge of the true God and of his worship only according to the
present success. As Soon therefore as they see the professors of the true
faith and religion to be in danger, by and by they cast them in the teeth with
their faith and worship of the true God: as in these days, alas for sorrow, is
every where to be seen. But we are taught in this place, how prayers as well
public as private ought to be ordered, Public prayers how they are to be
made.
when public calamities do urge and oppress us. First, and before all
things we have need of the confession of sins, which must be joined with
faith, so as we may have the hope of our salvation fi^ed only in the grace
and mercy of God. Because, if we look upon our selves, we must perish without
remedy, seeing our sins do on every side bewray them selves, and even our
righteousnesses are nothing but uncleanness. Esaias. 64.
Secondly least this hope should waver as a thing uncertain, Gene. 17.22. etc.
we must have recourse to the covenant of God, which being made with our
fathers and confirmed by the death of Christ, cannot at any time become void
or frustrate. For if no person by his own private authority may abolish the
testament and will of a man, Gala. 3.
which is lawfully written and confirmed: then perdy must the authority of
Gods will and testament of necessity be greater, wherein he has enrolled
and made us his heirs.

And as the Prophet calls these folk still the people and inheritance of
God, notwithstanding that they were presently to be punished for their sins:
even so at this day the Lord does not by and by reject his Church, although
some spots and infirmities do cleave unto it, (...) that she hold-fast ye
seed of faith, and be desirous to be reconciled with him. But especially we
must be careful to promote gods glory, which ought to be more here unto us,
then our own proper welfare and salvation. For this thing does the order of
the Ten commaudementes, and the course of the Lords prayer teach us, and even
the common sense and experience of nature, which causes children to be
vigilant and careful for the fame and honor of their parents. This thing saw
Moses, Exodus 32. Nu^. 14. etc.
who as often as he makes intercession for the people, alleges chiefly god^
glory, least God should give it up to the reproach of the Heathen. And the
godly cry out in the Psalms: Psalm. 115.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give the glory, etc. Most
detestable therefore is their sin and iniquity, who when they are not
ignorant how Gods glory is blasphemed of the wicked by reason of their
enormities and most corrupt manners, yet can by no means be brought, to
consider of ye amendment of them. Moreover it is full of comfort, in that we
see our salvation coupled with Gods glory. For in as much as God is a ielous
God, he will not suffer the glory of his name to fall to the ground, and
therefore his chozen, in who^ the same is in hazard, he will never forsake.
Let us be mindful of these things in these most dangerous days, and return
unto God, who will be merciful to so many as convert unto him, through Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord: to whom be given blessing, honor, glory, and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon. 8.
The text.
18 THen will the Lord be ielous over his lands, and spare his people.

19 Yea the Lord will answer, and say unto his people: Behold I will send
you corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be satisfied therewith: and I
will no more make you a reproach among the heathe.

20 But I will remove far off from you the Northren army, and I will drive
him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the East Sea, and
his end to the uttermost Sea. And his stink shall come up; and his corruption
shall ascend, because he has exalted him self to do this.

21 Fear not, O land, but be glad and rejoice: for the Lord will do great
things.

22 Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the wilderness
are green: for the tree bears her fruit, the figtree and the vine do give
their force.

The argument and use of this present place.
GOD uses indeed to punish men's sins with sundry and grievous penalties,
and yet so many as return unto him, he graciously receives into favor.
There are extant of this matter many promises, which are confirmed with
in^umerable examples, amongst which that is very notable, that is propounded
and set forth by Joel. For he in the first part of this Sermon terrified the
Jews with a grievous denuntiation of the punishments, to the end they might
the better be stirred up to repentance. Secondly he declared the true way and
manner of repentance. Whereunto now in the third place he adds a
consolation, whereby he tells them that they shall not looze their labor,
if they turn unto God: for why he is gracious and merciful, so as he will
hear their prayers, and deliver them out of danger. The history agrees very
well with the promise, which testifies that all this was performed with
singular fidelity. These things ought to comfort us in temptations, and
therewithal to awaken us, least we despise Gods goodness, wherthrough he
inuiteth us no less in those day^^ of repentance. But it shall be p^^^^table
to consider every thing in o^der.

The cause of reconcilem^^ with god. etc.
First he shows the cause, wherefore GOD would be reconciled unto them:
namely his free mercy and goodness. The Lord (says he) will be ielous over
his land, etc. Now jealousy is that love, whereby the husband through the
secret prou^cation of the spirit is so affected th^^^^es his wife, that he
cannot abide that she should either be subject unto other ^e^, or
injuriously dea^^ withal of others. This jealousy the S^^^pture attributes
unto God, not that any such affections or passions do light upon him: but that
it ^^ght express the vehemency of Gods ^oue toward us, which is such and so
great, Ephe. 5.
that took what is done to his Church, whereof he accounts as of his
spoust, he deemeth done unto himself: which he himself witnesses in
Zachary, saying: Zach. 2.
He that touches you touches the apple of mine eye. And hitherto makes it,
that he calls the land of the Jews his land, and the people his people:
namely, that as he had made them his people, so had he consecrated their land
to himself, to the end is might be, a^ yet would say, the certain seat of
his worship and religion according to that saying of the Psalm, God is known
in Jury, etc. Psalm. 7^.
But if ye ask, from whence that zeal or jealousy of God comes, and why he
chose, the Jews before other people: We can render no other cause, then his
mere love and free mercy: whereof Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.8.9. Ezech. 16.
also oftentimes admonished them, and himself in Ezechiel under the parable of
a marriage expressly testifies. The Prophet therefore by the mention of
jealousy sends them back to Gods goodness, least for the doctrines sake of
repentance, which he had premised, they should attribute any thing to their
own merits. But the self same is the state and condition of us all. For why?
if GOD did not with most fervent zeal maintain and defend our salvation, it
were impossible among so many and grievous assaults of the Devil, and of the
world, for any man to be safe either in body or soul. And have we deserved,
that he should burn with so great zeal for us? No verily. For what can
they deserve, Psalm. 51.
that are conceived and borne in sin, and that have with themselves drawn
the earth and even this whole frame of the world into cursednesse? Gene. 3.
For albeit we being wakened sometimes either by the admonitions of Gods
word, or by punishments do convert unto him, yet is there no merit or
worthiness of this conversion before God, since he himself is the author and
chief cause thereof in us.

It becomes us therefore to acknowledge the grace of GOD, and to ascribe unto
this alone, whatsoever good is in us, which is want to be any furtherance to
our salvation. This thing serves for our instruction, that we also may love
GOD again, and with no less zeal and feruencie propagate and set forth his
glory. But especially hereupon ought a comfort to be raised in temptations:
in as much as we hear that GOD keeps still his zeal men toward those,
and acknowledges them still for his people, whom he afflicts and punishes
for their sins. For thereby it appears, hew that afflictions are in no
wise the tokens of an enemilike ^unde in God, but rather do testify of his
fatherly good will toward us. For this does the corruption of our nature
require, which cannot otherwise be brweled and tamed. For why? if he teach us
by his word, we understand not the teacher. If he admonish us, we suppose
this belongs not unto us. Pro. 3.
If he reprove us, we complain that we have wrong offered us. If he
threaten us, we scoff and abuse his long sufferance. He is enforced
therefore to imitate trusty and faithful fathers, who do use to correct their
stubborn and disobedient children so much the more sharply and severely, least
they should perish and come to naught. Let us therefore patiently abide his
hand, and immediately the things will further us to saluat^^^, that seemed
(...) the first to be intolerable, See Paul to the Heb. 12. and 1. Co^inth*
11.

The effects of our reconcilement with God.
Howheit unto this promise he adioyneth the effects or fruits of the said
reconciliation, to the intent he might prove in very deed, that they should
have God favorable unto them. And that the promise might be the more
certain, he brings in God himself answering to the prayers and complaints
of the people, as we heard of late. First, Behold (says he) I will send
you corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be satisfied therewith. These
things are set against the penury and hunger, which they suffered in most
gree^ous wise: and in three fores he comprehends all that belongs to man's
sustenance. And the particle, Behold, signifies a sudden and vnlo^ked for
plenty of things. By which place we are admonished, that sustenance and all
the fruits of the earth are given unto us of God. Gen^. 3.
For although it ^eho^eth the earth to be tilled by the labors of men's
hands, yet shall it be tilled in vain, unless God bless both it and our
labors. For why? 1. Cor. 3.
neither is he that planteth, nor he that waters ^^y thing (says Saint
Paul) but God that gives the increase. Let us therefore acknowledge Gods
grace and goodness, and modestly and soberly use the gifts that he gives
us. Again, let us not despair, if at any time we be pinched with penury,
and the peril of hunger hang over our heads. Math. 6.10. Luke. 12. Psalm. 147.
For he that by his liberality provides for the wild beasts and fowls of
the air, and feeds the young Ravens that call upon him, will by no means
neglect those, whom he has bought with the blood of his own son. The same
GOD can also beyond all expectation help and suceour them upon the sudden
that stand in need, if it so seems good unto him. For why: if you consider
the things that are here spoken, I doubt not, but they will seem incredible
to a great number: but that the matter fell so out, in very deed, we may
gather out of Esaias also and the whole discourse of the history. Esai. 37.
Hitherto makes it, that God nourished the Israelites forcie years together
after a wonderful manner in the wilderness, to the end he might teach us by
that example, that we^ live not by bread only, Deuteronomy. 8.
but by every word that proceeds out of his mouth. And in the reign of
King Ioram we read how that after a horrible and more then desperate
scarcity suddenly there was given an unlooked for and most plentiful foyson of
corn and vitaile. 2. Kin. 8.
Many examples like unto these we may see every year both publicly and
privately: of all which this ought to be the use unto us, that we may trust
in GOD our father, and humbly obey his commandments, etc.

Secondly he says: 2. Glory and honor.
I will no more make you a reproach among the Heathen. For they had complained
of this, chiefly because his glory was in hazard. He promises therefore that
they shall no more be troubled with any such matter. They therefore do best
provide for their own glory, that make most of Gods glory, so as they can
prefer this before all manner of riches of their own. For this is Gods
promise: 1, Sam. 2.
I will honor them, that honor me, and again contrariwise.

Whereby it appears, what we have to do in these days as well privately as
publicly, if in case we desire to be delivered from reproaches and ^^aunders.
Let us be inflamed with ye zeal of gods glory, and i^^uour our se^^e^^^
a^uannce the same, and even forthwith we shall perceive that God also will
provide for (...) same and glory.

3 Victory against the enemy.
But for^omuch as the huge power of the Assyrians made them astonished, so as they
cou^^ scarcely give credit to these things, he tells them in the third
place what shall be come of that matter. And he calls them the Northren
army, for because the Assyrians have their situation Northwar ^e from the
Jews. I will drive (says he) this Northren army far away from you. By the
word [ driue] he Theweth how easily, and with how (...) a (...) he will
d^ing this thing to p^^^e, even like as if a man with a ^^^^^lappe wou^^ drive
away flies, or as the gras^^^^ us are driven away with the ^ittde, which before
oc^^^^ed all places both far and neete. Neither is there any cause why ye
should think that there will be no place left whither to drive him. For I
will drive him into desolate places, so as one part of so great an army shall
be dispearsed even to the East Sea, and another part shall fly to the West.
And truly it is to he thought, that so many as eseaped from the slaughter made
by the Angel, being distressed with horrible fear and perpleritie were
scattered by flight into diverse and sundry places. But he adds: And his
stinck shall come up, etc. He means the infamous memory of his name, which
only and alone of so great attempts Sennacherib should leave behind him. The
cause: For that he has magnified himself to do this: that is, he has proudly
and unpiously exalted himself, as though he would after his own lust and
liking over rule both God and men. To the exposition of this place make those
things, Esai. 10.36. The pride and end of tyra^ts.
that are recited at large in Esaias as touching his outrageous boasting. But by
this example is finely set out the pride of Tyrants, and the unhappy end of
the same. They are wont to conce^e mighty matters in their minds, and can
scarcely in the whole world find any place fit to receive them. Yea and
being advanced above the clouds in their conceits they promise to them
selves everlasting memory, and vaunt forth themselves amongst men for some
gods upon earth. But as soon as they have finished their course, God even in a
moment scatters their forces and enterprises, so far forth that of all
their glory and triumphs, they conueigh over nothing else to their posterity,
then a shameful remembrance of their tyranny, which like unto stink rising up
from a rotten carcass fills and infecteth the whole world. Examples hereof
we have in Histories every where plenty. For to this rank belongs the
first author of tyranny, Genc. 10.
Nimroth, with all those that have followed his steps, of which forte for the
most part were all the Babylonian and Assyrian princes, the Egyptian Pharaos,
the Chananites, Antiochusses, Herodes, Romayne Emperors, Ezech. 32.
and as many as being like unto these have caused their fear (as the Prophet
says) to be in the land of the living. Let no man therefore be afraid of
their attemptes and threateninges, but rather let us fear GOD, and then being
safe under his protection we shall leave behind us a holy and renowned memory
of our names, howesoeuer the wretched world devise all kind of reproach
against us.

4. The joyful restitution of the land and of the creatures.
But to the intent he might provide for their infirmity, whom the present
danger held still in doubt and perpleritie, he ampli^eth at large the happy
condition of all things, which by Gods reconcilement should immediately
follow. And like as in the beginning he had threatened that the sense and
feeling of Gods wrath should reach even unto the earth it self and brute
beasts also: so now be promises that GOD with his favor will rejoice the
earth, and likewise the beasts. And he uses a feate figure, whereby he
speaks to the earth and beasts, as though they were endued with sense and
reason: Fear not, O land, rejoice and be glad, for the Lord will do
great things. As though he should say: God seems now to lie along and
sleep, seeing Sennacherib so proudly exalts himself: but even forthwith
God will cast him down, and show forth his own power, and restore a glad
countenance to the earth. And you, O beasts, whom famine compels as yet to
wander about and mourn, now lay aside all fear. For the pastures of the
deferr shall floorish, and so shall al trees, and Likewise the figtrees, and
vines shall bring forth their fruit, whereby food shall be ministered both to
you and unto men. And thus would he comfort the people, and stir up the
same to the consideration of Gods benefit, that from thence forth, they might
yield themselves thankful and obedient unto God. For as we said of late, a
foul shame it is, for men not to acknowledge the hand of God, which even the
gross earth, and brute beasts do perceive. But more of this shall be said in
that which follows. It shall be our parts in the mean time, to awaken our
selves by the consideration hereof, and to give thanks unto God without
eeasing. Who has given us greater things then these in Christ Jesus, who
has destroyed the power of the devil, defaced his kingdom, and restored us
men unto happiness, which we had lost by the fall of our first parents. To him
therefore be given blessing. honor, glory, and dominion, for ever and ever.
Amen.

Sermon 9.
The text.
23 BE glad then, ye children of Sion and rejoice in the Lord your God: for
he has given you a teacher unto righteousness, and he will cause to come down
unto you the rain, even the first rain, and the latter rain in the first
month.

24 And the barnes shall be full of wheat, and the presses shall abound with
wine and oil.

25 And I will render you the years that the Grasshopper has eaten, the Canker
worm, and the Caterpiller, and the Palmer worm, my great host, which I sent
amongst you.

29 So you shall eat and be satisfied and praise the name of the Lord your
God, that has dealt maruellously with you, and my people shall never be
ashamed.

27. And you shall know, that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the
Lord your God, and none other, and my people shall never be ashamed.

The argument and use of this present place.
AS men that abound in peace and ydlenes, do for the most part account all
things to be cockesure unto themselves, neither think they it ever likely,
that any adversity should happen unto them: So if at any time they perceive
Gods wrath to be kindled, and that all things begin to go against them,
then by and by casting away all hope they fall to trembling, and can hardly be
persuaded with any comfortes. This thing the Prophet Joel did well perceive,
and therefore to the doctrine of repentance he adioyneth manifold matter of
consolation, whereby he confirms the^, whom a little before by declaring the
danger he had made afraid. And of late forsooth he descibed the zeal or
jealousy of God, who will so graciously receive them into favor that turn
unto him, that the tokens of his goodness may be seen even in the brute beasts
them selves, and in the very earth. But now he applies all that matter unto
the people, whom he does not only comfort, but also teach, what it becomes
them to do, when by Gods benefit they are delivered. And so he sets
forth a general doctrine, what the godly have to observe, when either they
are exercised with adversity, or find Gods deliverance toward them.

He wills the godly to rejoice for the promised deliverance.
And first coupling this present place with that yt went before, he says: Be glad
the^ ye children of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord your God, etc. As though he
should say, Seeing the earth it self is to rejoice and the beasts to cast
off al fear, how much more becomes it you to rejoice, which are the children
of Sio^, to wit of the church, which God has chosen as peculiar to himself,
and for whose sake he blesses the earth, and the rest of the creatures. And
thus he asswageth ye sharpnes of ye present danger, with ye promise of joy to
come: and teaches, yt such as are ye children of ye church have a perpetual
cause of rejoicing, albeit they be beset on every side with dangers. Where
notwithstanding we have diligently to observe, what manner of joy it is that
he inioyneth unto the^. For in as much as he had promised abundance of fruits,
and was to say yet more of that matter, some might conceive in their hearts a
carnal joy, and by that occasion break forth into all licentiousnes, which
thing commonly is wont to be the cause of greater misery and mourning. He
says therefore: Be glad and rejoice in the Lord your God: The godly ought to
rejoice in the Lord.
and so he points the cause and matter of their reioycement only and alone
in God, whom they should find favorable and merciful unto them. He puts
therefore a feate distinction betwixt men and beasts. For these because they
can conceive no further, he willed to rejoice in the happy forzon of the earth
and in the abundance of fodder: but men he sends unto God the fountain and
giver of all goodness. After the same manner the Apostle wills the faithful to
rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 3.4.
which is diligently to be observed, if at any time we feel our prosperity to
increase. For then they that being mindful of the Lord their God, do
rejoice in him alone, the same also do compass about their joy with the fear
and reverence of God, least it should break forth into the liberty of the
flesh: yea they so much the more earnestlye give themselves unto godliness, by
how much they feel the clearer testimonies of Gods goodness toward them. As
for the ungodly it is not so with them, for they like brute beasts do stick
only in things present, and filthily abuse the same with the loss of their
salvation.

But the Prophet goes on, He declares the causes of their joy.
and declares more diligently the causes of this holy reioycement. The first
is, because he has given you a teacher unto righteousness. The Hebrew word
signifies both a teacher and rain. For as it behooves the earth to be
watered with rain, so is it necessary that the rivers of heavenly doctrine
should flow into the minds of men being otherwise barren and out of kilter,
to the end they may be made fit for those things, that are prescribed unto
us of the Lord. Whether it belongs that God compares his word in Esaias to
the rain. Esaias. 55.
But the Prophet uses a doubtful word, because he would allude to the
calamity of the present war, which like unto a sodeine storm of rain
ouerflowed the whole land. And he tells them that this was sent from GOD, not
that they should perish, but yt they should be instructed hereby unto
righteousness, and be made more ware and circumspecte hereafter. For as we
said in the beginning, the Jews under Ezechias, a most excellent and godly
prince, sinned diverse ways, when as they both followed a most dissolute trade
of life* and also clean contrary to the threatenings of the prophets trusted to
the league of the Egyptians. Therefore God sent unto them the Assyrians, to the
intent that being by them driven into extreme hazard they might be taught,
how vain and hurtful and that confidence is, which is reposed in the
external helps. The Prophet therefore bids them to rejoice for this very
cause, that God by such afflictions vouchsafed to instruct them, whom he might
have altogether destroyed, if he would have used his own advantage.

These things teach us what we ought to judge of the afflictions, wherewith
God exercises us. Afflictions are as teachers unto righteousness.
They are as Teachers, which instruct us unto righteousness. For when all
things fall out as we would wish, we become more careless in the things that
concern our duties, neither also do we apply our minds unto those points,
that are taught us by the word of God. We have need therefore of
affliction, which (as the Prophet says) may give us understanding, and
provoke us to the duties of godliness. Esaias. 28.
The Saints do acknowledge this, and say with David, Psalm. 119.
It is good O Lord, that thou have humbled me. Again: Thy rod and thy staff
comfort me. For why: Psalm. 23.
they acknowledge the fatherly hand of God in chastising the^, and therefore
they rejoice in afflictions, which they know will work for the best unto
them. This thing is to be observed of us, when either we are tempted publikly
with wars and famine, or priuatelye with disseases and other adversities. For
so being made partakers of Christ in bearing his cross, we shall reign for
ever with him in glory.

Nevertheless least they might think yt this affliction should always last
and continue, God testifies his favor by outward benesites.
he repeateth yt wc he had said of ye fruitfulnes of ye earth and of ye most
ple^tifull increase of corn and victual, wc is another cause of rejoicing in
the Lord: namely that they should acknowledge the favor of God by his
external benefits, and even in very deed have experience thereof. For he
says: He will cause the rain to come down unto you, even the first rain and
the latter rain in the first month. That is said to be the first rain, which
in the month of September after seed time waters the fields, that the
seeds may grow and take root. The latter rain, which when the Corn is now
in riping causes, that the Grains in the Ears are not scorched with overmuch
heat, but are made more plentiful. And in these two kinds he comprehends
all other influences of the heavens, which make to the happy increase and
foizon of the earth. Neither does he promise these only, but te^heth also,
that they shall be effectual, wh^^ he adds. And the barnes shall be filled
with wheat and the presses shall abound with wine and oil: and I will render
and make good unto you the years, that is, those yearly fruits, which the
Grasshoppers have devoured, the Canker worm, and the Caterpiller, and the
Palmer worm, my great host, which I sent amongst you. Victual and
sustenance comes only by the blessing of God. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Psalm.
104. 145.147.
In which place we are admonished, that seasonable weather and the fruits of
the earth do come to pass, only and alone by Gods blessing. There are extant
as touching this matter promises in the law, and David oftentimes makes
mention thereof in the Psalms. As often therefore as we inioye those
benefits, let us acknowledge them to be testimonies of Gods grace and
goodness, and use the same soberly and with thanksgiving. 1. Tim. 4.
For by this Paul witnesses that our meats are sanctified. But if we be
unthankful and intemperate, then they turn unto our destruction, which ought
to have served our necessity, and withal God takes away his gifts, and
punishes them with penury and hunger, which would not acknowledge his goodness
and bounty. Neither is this any hard matter for him to do, when as by most
vile worms he can suddenly cut short the whole hope of the year. Neither
does he without cause call these here in this place his host or army. For
albeit these seely creatures seem to be most weak and feeble things, yet
do they make huge swarms, whereby they destroy all that ever is both far and
near, in so much that a man may more easily defend the fields from the
inuations of enemies then from them. Examples are every where extant in
hystories, Exodus 10.
and we have seen some in our tune, in the consideration whereof, would GOD
we were more diligently occupied, and then remembering our own weakness we
should have less cause to be proud against GOD, who is able with most vile
and wretched creatures to subdue even the cruelest Tyrants and fiercest
nations that be.

Hitherto makes that which he adds, saying: How Gods benefits ought to be
used.
And you shall eat and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God,
who has dealt maruellously with you. In which words he shows the^ how they
ought to use peace and the plenty of things belonging to man's sustenance. For
God would yt we should enjoy the^ and be satisfied with the^. But withal he
will have us to be mindful of him, and to praise his name, that is, his power
and bountifulnes. It was miraculous to behold, ye sodeine deliverance and
felicity, which happened to the Jews after the Assyrian war. But no less
admiration deserve the things yt we daily have experience of, and that al
creatures are occupied about ma^s liuelihood and welfare. Therefore a more then
beastly blockishnes it is, if in case we being satisfied with Gods gifts, do
neither acknowledge his liberality our selves, nor praise and comme^d the same
unto others, etc.

He promises the present aid and protection of God.
Hereunto he adds in way of co^firmatio^: And you shall know that I am in the
midst of Israel, that is to say, so great and so notable shall your happiness
be, that if you will not believe my words, yet shall you find by experience and
indeed, that I am conversant amongst you, and that I stand in defense for you
with mine aid: and how that I am your god, and that only, and alone. Because I
will the^ deliver you, when as being forsaken of al men, there shall no where
appear any hope of health or safety. To be short, I will bring to pass, that
my people shall never be co^fou^ded. And so he shows the^ that ye fountain of
al good things consists in the free promise and covenant of God. For in that
that God had chosen his dwelling place amongst them, it was of no merit or
desert of theirs, but of his own mere grace and favor, wherewith he embraced
them being unworthy, and deserving no such matter, Exodus 16. Leuit. 26.
as Moses himself more then in one place or two witnesses. But in that the
Jews are at this day horribly confounded, and made a laughing stock to the
whole world, it derogateth nothing at al from Gods promise. For why? this is
restrained to the people of god, Therefore inasmuch as they ceased to be Gods
people, and are rejected by his just judgment, the same belongs no more unto
them. In the mean season we ought to apply these things to our instruction
and comfort. For as in times paste the Jews, Ephesians. 1. 2. Corin. 6. 1. Pet. 2.
Ephesians. 1. 2. Corin. 15. Romans 8.
so has God by grace chosen us in Christ Jesus. Who has not only redeemed us
by the merit of his death, but also made us a living temple unto him self,
which he vouchsafes to dwell in by his spirit and word. Yea and he has
engraven his spirit in our hearts, as a sure and certain pledge of our
salvation, whereby we cry, Abba Father. Of which grace there appear sufficient
trials and clear testimonies, whilst among so many treacheries of hypocrites
and horrible enterprises of Tyrants, he maruellously defends and preserves
his Church. It shall be our parts therefore to depend upon him alone with a
strong and unshaken faith, to fear and worship him in spirit and in truth.
Whosoever shall this do, can never be confounded. For this is the voice of
Christ Jesus: Matthew. 28.
Behold I am with you even to the end of the world. To him be given
blessing, honor, glory, and dominion. for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon. 10.
The text.
28. ANd after this will I pour out my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons
and your daughters shall prophesy: your old me^ shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions.

29 And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in tho^se days will I
pour my spirit.

30 And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth: blood and fire,
and pillars of smoke.

31 The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the
great and terrible day of the Lord come.

The argument and use of this present place. Gene. 3.
AS God promised unto our first parents his son Jesus Christ, for a redeemer,
who being made man of a woman should crush and break in pieces the head of ye
serpent: so did he afterward oftetimes repeat ye same promise, yea and would
have al other to be grounded thero^. For inasmuch as in him he is reconciled with
us, 2. Corin. 1.
for his sake alone also is given to us, whatsoever good we receive from him.
As often therefore as ye prophets promise to ye ancient people either deliverance
from enemies, or peace, or plentiful increase of ye earth, or other te^porall
benefits of like sort, they always for ye most part enterlace in their
promises prophesies as touching Christ, to ye end yt by the^, the godly may
understand yt god will not be wanting to his people, of who^ it behooved the
promised redeemer of mankind to be borne, nor that they should doubt of the
promises of common benefits, when as God would perform greater matters in
his son. The selfsame thing does Joel observe here in this place, who being
about to comfort those, yt were altogether dismayed by fear of ye Assyrian
war, hitherto he has promised many things, which make to the happiness of
this life, as plenty of corn and grain, victory, peace and tra^quilitie, so
far forth yt they might understand yt god would ratify and confirm his
covenant, and dwell even in the midst of the^. These things yt he might ye
better warrant and withal warn the Jews, least sticking fast in these
earthly commodities they should neglect the more excellent testimonies of Gods
grace: now he comes down unto Christ's times, Acts. 2.
of which yt this place ought to be expounded, the Apostle Peter expressly
teaches. And there is in this place together with the things that follow to
the end of this chapter a very notable prophecy of Christ's kingdom: which
ought of us diligently to be considered, for that it contains many things,
the knowledge whereof is necessary unto us, both to the attayning and retaining
of salvation. For first he prophesies of the sending down of the holy Ghost,
and so teaches what manner of kingdom Christ should have upon earth, and what
we ought to seek for in it. Secondly what the stat and condition of this world
will be, when Christ shall be exhibited, and he instructs ye godly against ye
offense of ye cross. Thirdly he co^priseth ye order of our salvation in a short
sum, and shows what we ought to do, if we mind to hold fast the
salvation, which Christ has purchased for us. At this present we will declare
only the two former parts, and speak of the third part in the Sermon
following.

Prophesiyng of Christ's kingdom, he begins with the sending down of the
holy Ghost.
First and foremost he prophesies of the sending of the holy Ghost, which
should be both more common and plentiful, then ever at any time before. Where
first of all we have to observe, that being about to prophecy of Christ's
kingdom, amongst the innumerable benefits, which God has given us in him,
he chiefelye celebrateth the gift of the holy Ghost. The cause is, for that
next after Christ given unto us, there could nothing be given more excellent
and more necessary, then that spirit, of who^ here he speaks. For albeit all the treasures of Gods grace and goodness be given unto us in Christ Jesus, yet
can we by no means enjoy them without the gift of the holy Ghost. 1. Cori. 2.
Romans 7.
For why? naturally we abhor from Gods kingdom, we perceive not the mysteries
thereof, we are vanquished with ye entiseme^ts of sin, we yield and give over
to temptations and to the cross, and therefore we either apprehe^d not
salvation in Christ, or if we do apprehend it, yet we hold it not fast But al
these things the holy Ghost remedieth, who by the seed of the eternal word of
God begets us again, 1. Pet. 1. Joan. 3.
illuminateth our minds, and inflameth them with the love of heavenly things,
resists the affections of the flesh, in temptations is a most certain
pledge of salvation, 2. Cor. 1.5.
and mourning under the cross confirms us with most effectual co^solatio^s.
Not without cause therefore does the Prophet chiefly commend his gift: yea and
by this means he assures the^ of everlasting salvation, unto whom hitherto
he had promised earthly and temporal benefits. In the mean time this order
of the prophet admonishes us, The condition of Christ's kingdom, and what
ought to be sought for in it.
what the state and condition of Christ's kingdom is upon earth, and what we
ought to hope and look for in it. This thing is very necessary to be observed.
For in as much as a great number do gape only after earthly things, and
under color of Christian liberty, hunt either for riches and promotions, or
else seek the liberty of the flesh and freedom of sinning, the faith
commonly, which they profess with their mouths, they deny in their lives,
and in ye time of trial and persecution shamefully shrink and fall away. But
the kingdom of Christ is not of this world (as he himself protests unto
Pilate) but consists in joy of the holy ghost, Joan. 18. Romans 14.
and offers those things unto us, which make to ye inheritance of ye
heavenly life. Let us therefore covet after Spiritual gifts, to the end that
being renewed and borne again in him, we may live a life worthy the profession
of our faith, and by ye cross courageously wrestle forth to the heavenly
kingdom.

The holy ghost is promised unto al.
Moreover the Prophet expresses the manner of this sending, and who they are
that shall be partakers of the holy Ghost, I will power out (says he) my
spirit upon all flesh, etc. By the word of pouring out, he promises a
large and ample grace of the spirit. Joan. 3.
For as he is not given to Christ himself by measure, so also in his members
is perceived a certain ever flowing power of the same spirit. And whilst he
names all flesh, he makes the promise universal: namely as touching the
elect and faithful, which it behooved to be gathered from amongst all people,
and to be borne again by the spirit. And immediately he sets down as
specialties, sons and daughters, young men and old men, servants and
handmaydes: to show that in Christ there is no difference either of sex, or
age, or condition, or also of country and nation, as Paul more then in one
place or two has noted. Galat. 3. Col. 3. The difference of the old and new
testeme^t.
And here appears the diversity of the old and new Testament. In both of
them indeed is set forth one and the same Christ, one and the same faith,
and one and the salvation. Yet differ they not a little in the number of
believers, and in the manner of teaching and knowing of Christ. For in old time
the number of believers was very small, and the knowledge of salvation might
seem to be shet up only within the borders of Judea. For these are the
words of God to ye Israelites, saying: Exo. 19.
You shall be my people before all nations. Again: you only have I known of
all the kindreds of the earth. Amos. 3.
Of which sort are those which we have in the Psalms: Psalm. 76.147.
In Jury is God known, his name is famous in Israel. In Salem is his
tabernacle, and his dwelling in zion. He declares his word unto Jacob, his
ordinances and judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with every nation,
etc

But in the new Testament ye spirit of God is powered forth upon all flesh,
and the doctrine of salvation is preached throughout the whole world, and they
are called from the East and from the West, which shall sit down in the
kingdom of God with Abraham, Math. 8.
Isaak and Jacob: yea and there is fulfilled that saying of the Prophet, who
foretold that the barren should have many more children then the married wife.
Esai. 54.
Further albeit there are in the old Testament notable and renowned examples
of believers, yet is the knowledge of salvation much more glorious and
plentiful after the coming of Christ, then it was in times past. For in the
old world the faithful depended only upon the promises and figures of the
law and oracles of the Prophets, which now are seeue to be clear and
evident enough, but in those days no doubt they seemed obscure and dark,
considering the truth of them was not yet fully known. But after that Christ
came into the world, he utterly removed all the veyle, I^an. 1. Mat. 13.
and brought in the light, which enlighteneth every man: so far forth that
even fishermen and Publicanes might see those things, that in times past the
Prophets desired to see and hear. Again, in the days of old there were but
few that could execute the Priests office: but in these days as many as
believe, Apoc. 1.5. Romans 12. Hos. 14.
the same are made Priests by Christ, which give themselves a quick
sacrifice unto God, and offer the calves of their lips in the name of
Christ. It shall become us therefore, to acknowledge Gods liberality, and to
yield our selves thankful unto him, who voucheth safe to shed forth (as ye
would say) the gifts of his spirit upon us: least if we remain stubborn and
obstinate, we be one day convinced to have finned against the holy ghost.

The effects of the holy ghost.
After these things Joel rehearses the effects of ye holy ghost. And omitting
those things which we touched in the beginning, and which are very necessary
for us all to know, he now sets down that by the which as by a peculiar
token, the more plentiful grace of gods spirit may be known. That is to say
prophecy, under which that the gift also of tongues is comprehended it
appears by the interpretation of Peter. But they are properly said to
prophecy, which treat of the secret will of God and of things to come. And
Paul stretching more largely the signification of this word, 1. Cor. 11.14
says that they also do prophecy, which either expound the Scriptures
themselves, or that attentively hear the interpretations of other.
Notwithstanding in this place Joel speaks of the gift of prophesying, and of
a more profound knowledge of ye mysteries of ye scripture. Your sons and your
daughters (says he) shall prophecy. That is, from them shall every where
arise such, as shall foresee things to come, and by drawing forth the secrets
of the Scripture, apply them to the common instruction and consolation of all.

Again, Your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions. For by these means commonly in times past God revealed his will to
the Prophets, Numb. 12. 1. Sam 9.
whereupon they were called Seeres. But the things that are here promised,
began immediately after Christ's ascension to be performed: what time the
holy Ghost coming down upon the Apostles in a visible shape did so adorn
them with the knowledge both of the holy Scriptures and the tongues, that they
were an admiration even to their enemies also, Act. 4. Act. 10.16.20.27. 1.
Timo. 4.
which knew them to be Idiotes and men unlearned. And that the same saw
visions, and were in their dreams admonished of grave and necessary matters,
the examples of Peter and Paul do sufficiently testify. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
The self same also foretold of things to come, namely, what the manners and
conditions of the last time should be, and how the tyranny of Antichrist
should after a horrible manner wast and destroy the Church: 2. Pet. 2.3.
whither ought to be referred the whole book of the Apocalypse. And do we
not read, I pray you, Act. 21.
how that Philip (as Luke records) had iiii. daughters which prophesied?
Neither did the gift of prophecy florishe only in the Apostles time, but
also certame ages after, as histories do witness.

And Theodoret. bishop of Cyrus writes that in his time there were some, who
being instructed with a singular gift of the spirit prophesied of things to
come. But because this gift was singular and for a time only, and the things
now abundantly taught in the Scriptures, which are requisite for us to know,
this gift (as many other more besides) is ceased. Nevertheless there remains
yet still a certain and clear knowledge of the truth, the certainty of our
salvation, the effects of our regeneration, adoption, and other things of like
sort, without the which our faith can by no means consist. In the mean season
they are reproved in this place, which will not have the holy scriptures
published in these days, and yt covet to suppress the oracles of the
Apostles, as touching the last times, seeing God would have the knowledge of
salvation to be common unto alhis people, and therefore behooued the Apostles
to be endued with the holy ghost, that they might put us in mind of the things,
that come to pass at this day in the Church, etc.

The perilous estate of the ^^tt^r time.
But least any man at the springing up of Christ's kingdom should promise to
himself all things joyful and prosperous, Joel consequently sets down
what a huge mass of mischiefs and dangers should every where arise: partly
to the end he might remedy the offense of the cross, and that he might
commend and set forth faith in Christ, which alone is able to save us in
these dangers: and partly that by rehearsing of these things he might
terrify and dismay those that should come after, least otherwise they should
refuse the redeemer given unto the^ of God. I will show (says the Lord)
wonders in heaven and in earth, blood and fire and pillars of smoke. The Sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great and
terrible day of the Lord come. And because he makes mention of that great
day, wherein Christ shall come to judgment, it is evident enough, that he
comprehends all the time from Christ's manifestatio^ in the flesh even to his
last coming, in which he will accomplish his kingdom in his elect, and
punish his enemies with the pains of eternal death and damnation. And he
shows that there will every where appear tokens of Gods wrath, and that such
shall be the countenance of the whole world, as that all the parts thereof
might seem to have conspired together to the destruction of mankind.
Heereunto agree those things, that Christ foretells in ye gospel of the
later times. Mat. 24. Mark. 13. Luke. 21.
And they began to be accomplished by and by after his ascension into
heaven, as touching the nation of the Jews. For there were seen wonders of al
sorts, after the which followed immediately the destruction both of their
city and nation.

But under the Roman Empire, whereunto the whole world was then subject,
there raged in horrible wise seditions, wars, pestilences, famines, and all
manner of mischiefs whatsoever, and the histories are full stuffed with the
rehearsal of strange tokens. These things have continued even unto our time,
neither as yet are they come unto an end. For who is ignorant of the Cometes
and blasing stars, of the Swoordes, Spears, and other like things, which
have now certain years past been seen in the skies: As for Earthquakes and
Inundations of waters we have seen very many. And in some places great
quantities of blood have gushed out of the earth, and else where it has rayned
blood from heaven. I let pass the monstrous shapes and birthes, which if I
should stand to recount, the day would scarce be sufficient.

And that these are no vain scarecrowes the thing it self testifies, when as
the wretched world is vexed and disquieted with wars, famine, pestilence,
and other plagues innumerable.

The cause of the calamities of the latter time.
But some man may ask, what the cause is of these calamities, and why GOD
seems now to be more offended with all mankind, then he was in times
past, before Christ was given unto us in the flesh? This question is not
superfluous, considering that in times past the enemies of the Christian faith
took hereby occasion to slander it, in that after the rising thereof, they
said whole swarms of mischiefs brake into the world. And among the
Christians there are not a few that are greatly troubled with the
consideration hereof. But if we consider ye thing it self, it will appear
that the cause of these evils comes not of the Christian faith or religion,
but proceeds from the people. For among these the greater part is of the
wicked and ungodly, who either as hogs of Epicures heard, give themselves to
the lusts of the flesh, and despise all religion, or else being superstitious
and Idolaters do daily devise and heap up unlawful worshippinges. And both
these sorts hate and persecute the light of the truth: so as notwithstanding
that they follow diverse practices of life, yet in this one thing they
egregiously agree, and by their wickedness it comes to pass, that there
seems no enormitie worthy of greater punishment, then if any make a fyncere
and free confession of the truth. Is it therefore to be thought any marvel or
a thing un worthy, if God punish the desperate boldness of these men with all
kind of plagues, which wilfully refuse the salvation offered: This doubtless is
the cause, for the which Christ himself foretold that the nation of the Jews
should be rooted out, Mat. 21.23. Luke. 19.
and for which also the Roman Empire was manifoldly afflicted, as Orosius in
diverse places witnesses. But for so much as a number in these days follow
and imitate the wickedness of the Jews and Emperors, it is nieete and
requisite that they should suffer and abide the self same pains and
punishments with them. Where, if so be we look upon those, that have given
their names unto Christ, although they be of a right judgment as touching
faith and religion, and also do refreine themselves from the grosser sins and
superstitions, yet concur there many things in them, which deserve ye
sharper kind of discipline and chastizemente. For some blinded with the love
of this world, covet after honors and riches, othersome having too good an
opinion of themselves are made secure and careless, others there be that
become slaves to their affections, and follow without measure their own
lusts and pleasures. As therefore it is necessary that these should be
brydeled and provoked to a more fervent desire of Godliness, so the justice of
God requires, that in punishing the sins of the wicked world, 1. Pet. 4.
he should begin first with his own house, least he might seem to allow
those things in his own, which he so severely punishes in others. No man
therefore has any cause to complain of GOD. For in as much as the state and
condition of the world will be always alike, it is good reason also that the
same should be vexed with the like punishments and afflictions, until that
great day of the Lord appear, which as it will be terrible to the wicked as
the Prophet signifies, Luke. 21.1. These. 4
so will the same be joyful to the Godly, and bring unto them their full and
perfect redemption. Hereby are confuted the Chiliastes, and as many as in
these days do restore again their dotages, whylest they promise to
themselves a certain golden world upon earth. And withal the goodness of
GOD is to be observed, The use of strange tokens.
who before he bring forth the punishments, which we have deserved, is
accustomed to forwarne us not only by his word, but also to awake us by
signs and wonders. Examples of this forte are extant in the histories of all
ages, and as we said even now, there appear great store of them in these
days. It shall be our parts, to be moved with these things, and to fly
unto Christ Jesus, who will give salvation to all that call upon his name, as
shall be said in the Sermon following. To him be given blessing, honor,
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon 11.
32 But whosoever shall call on the name of Lord, shall be saved: The text.
for in mount zion, and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has
said, and in the remnant, whom the Lord shall call.

The argument and use of this present place.
Our Lord Jesus Christis the universal redeemer, not only of those that after
his incarnation believed in him, but also of all those, that embracing the
ancient promises, have reposed the hope and confidence of their salvation in
him alone. This he himself witnesses, when as he says, that Abraham saw
his day, Joan. 8. Apoc. 13.
and reioyed in it. And John calls him the Lamb of God, which was stain
from the beginning of the world, yt is whose merit reaches unto all those yt
have even from the first beginning of the world believed in him. Therefore all
the Prophets are wont to prophecy of Christ, and in him they fix the
foundation of all other promises. This thing does Joel also. For after he had
promised that God would deliver his people from the hands of the Assyrians,
forthwith by way of confirmation he adds an evident prophecy of Christ,
who having accomplished the work of our redemption, should send forth his
spirit, and spread abrod his kingdom by the Gospel unto all nations. But
because also he foresaw the wickedness of ye Jews and other people, whereof
the greater part despises and retecteth Christ, he denounced unto these
likewise, gods wrath and horrible punishments. Heereunto now he annexeth the
third part of this prophecy, wherein he instructs those, that are desirous
to escape the said dangers, and withal in few words comprehends the whole
order of our salvation. Where appears a wonderful token of Gods goodness, who
in the midst of our afflictions does so mercifully show unto us a way of
escaping. For the selfsame thing does Moses in the Law, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 30.32.
where after most grecuous threatninges, he adds a comfortable doctrine as
touching the true conversion unto God. Luke 21. 1. Tim ^. etc
The like order do the Prophets observe, and also Christ and the Apostles,
when as they entreat of the most trouble some state of the latter times. It
shall be our parts therefore, to acknowledge this fatherly care of God for us,
and to obey his precepts, etc.

The way, whereby men may provide for themselves in adversity.
But as touching the words of the Prophet, first he teaches the manner and
way, wherebye men may provide for themselves among so great dangers, saying:
But whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. And so he
knitteth this sen^^^^e with that which went before in so much that it is to be
taken not without a singular force and emphasis. For it is all one, as if he
had said. Howsoever the whole world is troubled, and the signs of Gods wrath
do every where appear, yet these things oght by no means to abash the godly.
For whosoever in the mean time shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall find
him to be their deliverer and redeemer. Paul cites this place in a cause of
great weight, Romans 10
where he avouches the calling of the Gentiles against the Jews: wherefore
every part thereof is deligently to be discussed of us.

First let us see, to whom this way and manner of salvation is prescribed. The
way of salvation is promised universally to all that embrace it.
But (says he) whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord. etc. This promise
therefore reaches unto al, so far forth yt neither the difference of nation,
nor sex, nor state or degree shall exclude or debar any. So Paul expounds
this place, when as by it he proves the calling of the Gentiles, and teaches
that the preaching of the Gospel belongs also unto them. For he says: There
is no difference either of Jew or Grecian. For there is one Lord of al rich
unto all that call upon him. For whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord
shall be saved. And in another place. Glory honor and peace to every one that
does good, to the Jew first, Romans 2.
and also to the Grecian: For there is no respect of persons with God. Whether
also belongs that saying of Peter, speaking to like effect: I perceive in
very deed that there is no respect of persons with God, Act. 10.
but in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him. Yea and the Scripture also makes the promises of salvation
universal, to the end that every man may apply the same unto himself, and
conceive by them a sure and certain hope of salvation. These things do
commend and set forth the goodness and bounty of God, and bring with them a
most effectual comfort in temptations: and withal do admonish us of our
duty, that we also without any envious respect of persons, should embrace
those with Christian love and charity, whom the fellowship of one faith has
joined and knit together with us, The way of salvation is assigned to
invocation.
and upon whom God pours forth his favor with so great liberality.

Secondarily he shows what those should do that desire to be saved, when
he says. They that call upon the name of the Lord. Hereunto agrees the whole
Scripture, which assigns unto us every where the port of salvation in the
calling upon and invocation of the Lord.

Certes the Lord himself in the Psalms says: Psalm. 50. 145 and 34.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee. Also: He is
near unto all that call upon him. And again: The eyes of the Lord are over
the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers. Salvation therefore
is to be sought for, from without us, and nothing to be attributed unto man's
strength. For if it were either in our selves or might be attained by our own
strength, we should then have no need of invocation. For seeing invocation
belongs only unto God, it remains that all saving health is to be sought
and hoped for in him alone. Salvation is attributed unto invocation by reason
of faith.
Howbeit we must mark that salvation is promised to invocation, not for the
very work of prayer, but rather for the faythes sake, out of which true
invocation springs. Paul gives an inkling of this, when to the same effect
he infers: How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed?
For as none craves aid of a man, unless he be persuaded that he both can
and will help him: so no man calls upon God that has not already conceived
an undoubted hope and assurance of his will and power. This the Prophet means,
when as he plainly expresses the manner of invocation. For why? he does not
simply require them to call upon the Lord him self, but upon the name of the
Lord: teaching thereby, The manner and confidence of praying.
what the true manner of praying is, and whence the confidence of prayer ought
to be conceived; for in very deed God has no name, whereby his nature may be
comprehended or declared. In consideration whereof to Jacob in times past,
enquiring after his name, he said: Why ask thou for my name? Genes. 32.
And to Moses demanding the same question, he answered: I am that I am. Exodus
3.
Wherefore the Scripture speaking of God after the fashion of men, calls all
that his name, whereby he may be known: as namely his goodness, mercy, truth,
wisdom, omnipotency, justice, and if there be any other titles like unto
these, which are partly gathered out of his word, and partly out of his
works. This thing God himself teaches, when as to Moses, desirous to see him,
he heapeth up a sort of words, whereby he described his own nature saying.
The Lord, the Lord, Exodus 34.
strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and
truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin and not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, and upon childrens children. etc. But for as much as all
these things are found especially in the son of God, Heb. 1.
Jesus Christ who is therefore called the brightness of his glory and the
express image of his substance, the same also is the very true name of GOD,
in and by which invocation ought to be made. Of this thing God himself
admonishes, when as he witnesses of him from heaven, Mat. 3.17.
That he is his dearly beloved son in whom he is well pleased. And he
himself in the Gospel, when he had said that he was the way by which we
come unto the father, immediately adds: Joan. 14.16.
Verily I say unto you whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will
give it unto you. Heb. 14.4.
For which cause Paul affirms ye same to be our altar, by whom we may offer
up the sacrifice of praise: yea and he testifies that by him we have access
and entrance to the throne of grace. Whereupon also that most ancient usage of
the Church prevailed, whereby prayers for the most part are ended in the name
of Christ. Whilst therefore the prophet wills us to call upon the name of the
Lord, he inioyneth no other thing the^ faith in Christ, which both commends
us unto God, and also makes our prayers graceful and acceptable unto him. But
he expresses this faith by the name of invocation, least we should imagine a
dumb and idle faith. These things serve for our consolation and do
meruellously confirm our confidence in praying. For albeit we are unworthy
(as we must needs confess) yt God should hear us, yet cannot he pass over
our prayers with deaf ear, when we bring before hun his son Christ, 1.
Corin. 1.
which of him is made unto us righteousness, and satisfaction.

The fruit of the invocation of faith.
This confidence is increased by the fruit of invocation, which the Prophet
adds in the third place. For he says: Whosoever calls on the name of
the Lord shall be saved or delivered. He uses the word of saving or
delivering, to the end he might show that salvation should happen even unto
those also, that seemed already to be utterly perished, yea and quite fallen
from al hope. There are many examples of this sort to be found. For hither
belongs that which is written of the children of Israel, trying out at the red Sea with infinite things beside, Exodus 14.
that happened unto them whilst they were in the wilderness. And in the time of
the Judges we reads that they were heard and delivered, as often as they cried
unto the Lord. Psalm. 107.
David in like manner as he confesses himself to be heard oftentimes, so
heapeth he together very many examples of them, whom God delivered when they
called for his aid. But especially this ought to be transferred to the safety
and prefernation of souls, the certainetie whereof is here proved and
declared, for they that faithfully call upon God through Christ, receive in him
remission of their sins.

But where sins cease or be abolished, there the wrath and punishments of
God, which flow from sins, must of necessity cease likewise. Whereupon
true and perfect safety follows, which has no manner of need of any thing
to be added to it. These things teach us what we ought to do at this day. The
tokens of Gods wrath do every where appear, and all sorts of calamities
break in on every side, which Christ and the Apostles foretold, should come
to pass in the last time. Many there be that acknowledge these things and
consult by what means the dangers may be avoided. But how vain their
consultations are, which challenge to themselves the chief praise of wisdom,
the event and success of things does abundantlye prove.

Let us therefore (omitting our own reasons and devices) go that way to
work, which the holy Ghost prescribes in this place. For in as much as it
leans upon the promise of GOD, who is the truth it self, we can by no
means err or go astraye. Let us acknowledge our sins, and casting away all
confidence of our own works, let us implore and call for the grace of God
alone through Christ Jesus, who as he has reconciled his father unto us, so
also woorketh he true repentance in those, whom he regenerateth by his
spirit. etc.

A confirmation of the promise comprehending the whole order of salvation.
But he makes a further confirmation of that which he said, when he adds: For
in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said,
that is to say, albeit the church may seem even now to be utterly perished yet
in Sio^ shall salvation be had, and there again shall be gathered together the
remnantes, which the Lord having chosen from everlasting shall call by his
Gospel, as he has promised, And these promises are every where extant in the
prophets. God doubtless had said to David as touching Jerusalem, yt the same
should be his rest, Psalm. 123. Esaias. 10.
and concerning the remnantes to be saved Esaias expressly speaks. And to
these certes the histories agree very well. For this war of the Assyrians being
ended the church under Ezechias flourished notably by ye space of fifteen years
together. Further albeit the people falling again unto wickedness their city
was of the Chaldeans together with their temple utterly burned and consumed,
yet after they they were returned from Babylon they builded again and reedified
their city and temple, Esaias. 2. Mich. 4.
and there at length by the Apostles the church began to be gathered, and the
word of the Lord coming out of Sion in a very short space spread over the
whole world. Salvation only to be had in the church.
We are admonished here that salvation is to be fofid only and alone in ye
church, a type and figure whereof in times past was Jerusalem wc was situate
upon mount Sio^ famous and renowned through ye temple of ye Lord, for that
these things are not to be taken literally or according to the sense of ye
letter, that we should tie the grace of God and our salvation to the
terrestrial Sion and Jerusalem, it appears abundantly by this, that Christ
called the same city afterward a den of thieves, and threatened vengeance
unto it, Math. 21.23.24.
such as was never showed the like since the foundation of ye world. These
promises therefore ought to be extended to the church, in the bosom whereof do
lie safe, Luke. 19. Psalm. 48. Psalm. 84.
as many as shall have recourse unto it. For there the Sparrowes find a nest,
and there the Swallows lay their young ones: because there florisheth the
merit of Jesus Christ, who offering himself on mount Sion for our sins, has
pacified God his father toward us. This Church shall always endure, howsoever
the world storm and rage. For why: it can by no means reele or stagger,
because it is grounded upon Christ, which is the rock, against whom the gates
of hell shall never prevail, Matt, 16. and 28.
and who has promised himself to be present with us, even unto the end of the
world. It behooves us therefore to have an eye unto these promises, if at any
time we be tempted, and not to measure the stabilitie of the Church, or the
certainty of our salvation, after the attempts and enterprises of this world.

Salvation belongs to the elect.
But we have to mark with singular diligence, unto whom that salvation
belongs, that God has prepared in Sion. Namely, to the remnants whom the
Lord shall call. He names these expressly, to intent he might exclude
hypocrites, which trust in the merits of their own works, and to the end he
might show unto us the foundation of salvation only and alone in the grace and
favor of God. For we have been all of us subject unto sin, and by reason
of sin to everlasting damnation, Romans 3.
and have been destitute of the glory of God: in so much that if the Lord
had not reserved unto us certain small remnants we should have been as
Sodom, and should have been like unto Gomorrha. Esaias. 1.
These remnantes he has chosen by his everlasting purpose before this world
was made, and the same moreover, Epes. 8.
when it pleases him, he calls, and being called justifies them, Romans 8.
and being justified glorifieth them, as Paul teaches. To these David
consents, Psa. 65.
who comprizing the whole order of our salvation in the selfsame heads,
says: Wicked deeds have prevailed against us, But thou will be merciful unto
our transgressions: Blessed is he, whom thou choosest, and causest to come to
thee: he shall dwell in thy courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures
of thine house, even of thy holy temple. For so much therefore as out of the
corrupt mass of mankind some are saved, that is only of mere grace, by the
which we are elected in Christ: and by this it comes to pass, that like as
in tunes past, when the Tyrant of the Assyrians wasted and destroyed all yt
ever was both far and near, God saved his people in Jerusalem: even so in all
ages he delivers his out of the snares of the Devil, and by ye preaching of
the Gospel calls the^ into ye fellowship of his church, and makes them
partakers of salvation in Christ. In ye mean season ye words of remnantes and
relics betoke^ ye fewenesse of believers, which if they be compared with the
multitude of ye ungodly, The fewness of the faithful believers.
may be accounted very few, as we are admonished every where in ye scriptures.
Christ verily calls his a little flock, and he says yt many are indeed
called, but few chosen, wc do pass by ye strait gate into ye kingdom of God.
Luke. 12. Math. 20. 22. and. 7.
There is no cause therefore why we should be moved at this day with ye
slanders of such, as do cast in our teeth ye fewnes of the^ yt believe ye
Gospel, and gloriously vau^t of ye gay show of their own party. Neither also
let us hearke^ unto those yt conte^d and avouch yt every man may be saved in
and by his own religion. For in ye church only salvation betideth unto ye
elect and chosen, who being called by ye gospel apprehe^d and embrace Christ
Jesus, Acts. 2.
without who^ there is no name, wherein men may be saved, To him therefore be
given blessing, honor, glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

Chap. 3.
Of the judgments of God against the enemies of his people.

Sermon. 12.
1 FOr behold in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again the
captivity of Judah and Jerusalem.

2 I will also gather al nations, and will bring the^ down into the valley of
Iehosophat, and will plead with the^ there for my people, and for my heritage
Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land.

3 And they have cast lottes for my people, and have given the child for the
harlot, and sold the damsel for wine, that they might drink.

4 Yea, and what have you to do with me, O Tyrus and Sidon, and all the coasts
of Palestina? will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me, I will
swiftly and speedily render your recompense upon your head.

5 For ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into your Temples
my goodly and pleasant things,

6 The children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have you sold unto
the Grecians, that ye might send the^ far from their borders. The argument
and use of this present place.


THe Prophet Joel has with many arguments and persuasions comforted the
people of his time against the terrors of the Assyrian war, and amongst
other things he enterlaced a prophecy of Christ's kingdom, to the end they
might understand that God can by no means neglect that nation, of whom it
behooued the promised redeemer of mankind to be borne, who should spread
abroad his kingdom through the whole world. And upon that occasion he
entreated of the most perilous estate of ye latter time, and withal
instructed the godly with wholesome counsel, unto whom he promised a most sure
haven and refuge of salvation in the Church. But whilst he propounded these
things, the faith of a number was not a little tempted, when they saw the
power of ye Assyrians to be in a manner invincible, and yt ye near nations had
either co^spired, or otherwise taken part with them. Wherefore by way of
confirmation, he entreats: now more largely of the punishments of their
enemies, to the intent he might show, that there should nothing let, but that
GOD would restore them into liberty. These things ought so to be considered
of us, that we may gather from hence a general doctrine and consolation
against the attempts as well of our exterior as domestical enemies. For God is
evermore like unto himself, and as he in times past defended ye cause of his
people and Church, so also will he not neglect the same at this day, yea and
they shall feel Christ to be their judge, that will not acknowledge him to be
their Savior.

He denounces punishements to the outward enemies of the Church.
First he deals with the outward enemies, such as at that time were the
Assyrians: and the sum of the words is this: I will not only deliver you
from the present danger of war, but also I will render to the Assyrians, your
enemies such punishments as their deeds have deserved. And that the credit of
the promise might be ye greater and more certain, he touches diligently all
the circumstances of the whole business. For beginning with the time: In those
days (says he) and in that time, when I shall bring again the captivity
of Judah and Jerusalem, etc. The captivity he calls partly the said Assyrian
war, wherein they were shut up as captives and prisoners, so as no hope of
deliverance appeared: and partly that misery, which they should at the length
suffer in Babylon. And because it seemed scarce possible, yt any man should be
delivered from the tyranny of so mighty and puissant enemies, he declares yt
at the selfsame time ye same also shall be crushed and subverted, to ye intent
they might understand, yt this should be no let, but that they should be
delivered. But let us remember yt these things belong especially to the times
of Christ, in whom is fulfilled indeed, whatsoever was shadowed long ago by
the deliverance from the tyranny of the Assyrians or Babylonia^s. For we were
all of us captives under the dominion of sin and the Devil. Therefore
Christ came at the time appointed, and set us at liberty. But forasmuch as
no man can take away (as he himself says) the weapons of any strong man,
Mat. 12.
except he first bind him and strippe him: Christ also, that he might become
our permanent and perfect salvation, has subdued all the power of sin and
Satan, and likewise broken in pieces all those forces, which the Devil used to
hinder and let the common salvation of mankind: Of which sort at that time
were especially the Jews and Roman Emperors, and at this day are such, as
persecute the preaching of the Gospel with swoorde and fire. But seeing
Christ's time does still last and continue, and the same is to reign in his
Church even to the end of the world, from hence also have we to fetch our
comfort in these days. For as he by the preaching of the Gospel brings
again daily the captivity of his people: Psalm. 2^
So will he in all ages break them in pieces with his iron Scepter, that
refuse to obey and how down their necks unto him.

But the Lord himself goes on, and shows what he will do, God is the
revenger of his people.
when he says: I will gather all nations, and bring them down into the
valley of Iehosophat, and there I will plead with them. etc. In which words
he protests, that he will be the deliverer of his people* and they have every
of them a certain force or Emphasis. I will gather (says he) all nations. As
though he should say, They now conspire and flock together against me, and
trusting to their own multitude and power, think to bring every thing to
pass as they list themselves. But I will gather them together for an other
end and purpose, and will carry them even against their wills whither they
would not: namely into the valley of Iehosophat, and there will I reason the
matter with them, there shall they render an account of their doings, and
suffer the punishments, which they have deserved. And he calls the valley
of Iehosophat appellatiuely the judgment it self. For Iehosophat in Hebrwe is
the same, that the Latins say, Dominus iudicat, and we in English, The Lord
judges. But he would use this word, as though he had appointed a place
certain, that so he might bring back to remembrance the ancient history,
and show, that it would be a very easy matter for hun to bring to pass,
that which here he promises. For at what time many nations had conspired
against king Iehosophat, 2. Chro. 20.
whose power seemed to be unvanquishable, it came to pass by the singular
benefit of God, that they falling out among themselves were slain and
enriched the Jews with their spoils. He would have them therefore to be
mindful of this example, and not to think that Gods power is now spent or
exhausted, who in times past could without any labor destroy even most cruel
and fierce enemies. And verily we have also to observe and mark, that Gods
judgment is by no means removed or taken away, although he now and then
suffer his enemies to range beyond their compass. For he beholds their
counsels and enterprises, and registreth in his book of reckoninges,
whatsoever they do and say. Again, he has already long since appointed the
time and place of reuengement, neither can he want executioners of his
judgment, since he is the Lord of hoastes, unto whom all creatures obey.
Examples in Histories are every where met withal, which teach, how vain and
frivolous all their endeavors are, that seek to escape the judgment of God.
And what shall we say to this? 1. Cor. 5. Romans 14. Dani* 7. etc.
that in the last day all men must be summoned before the tribunal seat of
Christ, that they may there receive rewards according to their deeds? Let us
be mindful of these things, and giving our selves to the study of
godliness, keep and hold fast astedfast and unshaken hope of salvation
against the attempts of the wicked and ungodly.

Further God expresses the cause, for the which he will plead, God
acknowledges the Church for his people and inheritance.
For my people, and for mine heritage Israel. For so he names ye Jews by
reason of the covenant, whereby he had consecrated them unto him self, and
withal admonishes them by these titles, that howsoever they were privy of
their own unworthiness, yet they should not despair: but have respect to the
promises of God, who would never foresake his own inheritance and peculiar
people. But we ought to transfer these things unto our selves also, to the
intent we may learn from hence, what they do, whosoever they are that
persecute the Church of Christ. They think they rage against men of no valor
or estimation, and so much the more cruelly do they take on with us, because
they suppose we are neither regarded of God nor men. But in the mean season
they invade and make havoc of Gods people, and of Gods inheritance, then the
which the whole universal world has nothing in^t^more excellent and
glorious. For why? God makes so great account of his elect and chosen, 1. Pet.
1. Act. 20.
that he would purchase them unto himself, with the blood of his only
begotten son, because there could no where be found any other price
sufficient: and further having purchased them, Psalm. 2. Ephesians. 5.
he allotted them unto his son for an inheritance, yea he would have them to
be his spouse, which he might make partaker of his heavenly kingdom and of
everlasting happiness. They are injurious therefore not against men but against
God himself, as many as lay violent hands upon his Church, and they shall
undoubtedly feel him to be their judge and reue^ger. For ye threatening of God
is well known, speaking by Zachary. Zach. 1.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eyet and ye saying of Christ,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.
Which as they strike a terror unto the wicked, so are they a comfort to the
godly, when they understand that God will be a revenger of their cause.

He declares the causes of the punishments.
But least God might seem to have taken any thing rashly in hand, he
rehearses in order, what they had done against his people, and against his
inheritance. First, they have scattered them among all nations. For they had
both led away the people, and dispearsed them throughout their provinces, and
also had brought of their own nation into the land of Israel to inhabit,
according as the sacred history evidently testifies of Salmanazar: 2. King.
17.
and that Sennacherib the tyrant attempted the like, it may appear by the
words of Rabsaketh, wherewith he solicited them of Jerusalem to surrender
their City. Esaias. 36.
And this does the Lord object unto them as a great and heinous crime, when
yet notwithstanding Sennacherib chiefly glorifieth herein, Esa. 10. Act. 17.
Deuteronomy. 32.
that he had removed the bounds of kingdoms and nations. And because it is
plain that God has appointed to every people, their several limits and
borders, they sin in like manner, whosoever without great and urgent cause
invade the countries and dominions of other. Albeit the Prophet does not here
only accuse this kind of injustice and cruelty, but also the ungodliness,
whereby they both profaned the people consecrated unto God, and also the land
that was the seat of his worship. Which self same thing (in effect) do the
persecutors in these days, when as they compel the professors of Christ to
deny the faith, and to set up idolatry in those places, where the Gospel was
taught before. Moreover, they have cast lottes for my people. And so he
betokens an extreme contempt, and that they accounted them for most vile,
whomsoever that took in that battle. He adds: And they have given the
child for the harlot, and have sold the damsel for wine. The former member
may be taken two ways, that we may understand them either to have abused the
children to their abominable lust, or else to have given them for gifces to
their harlots. But in the latter member he reprooueth their practice of
gluttony and drunkenness: and withal puts the Jews in mind, how justly
they had hitherto suffered extremities, that had so carelessly neglected Gods
glory. For doubtless a fearful thing it is, if we consider yt these things
happened to gods people and inheritance, and even then happened too, when God yet
acknowledged the^ for his own people. But the like things intimes past the
Christians also suffered, and at this day in some places they are feign to
suffer the self same. We ought not therefore to be offended, but rather to
consider of the faults and corruptions of the Church, which it behooves by
this means to be corrected and resereined. In the mean time here also are
expressed the manners and practices of the enemies and persecutors of the
Church. The manners and conditions of the enemies of the church.
They will seem, as though they handled gods cause, and were desirous to
preserve and defend religion: when commonly being given to most foul and
filthy pleasures, they run headlong through a desperate and insatiable
liberty into all kind of lust and villauie. Such we read were in times past
the Herodes, the Neroes, the Domitians and many other. Such also in these days
are seen to be the Romish Bishops together with their protectors and
defenders, and the whole rabble in a manner of the anointed and shaven crewe,
who when they burn with an unquenchable practice of dice play, venerie, and
gluttony, and are not eshamed of any enormitie whatsoever: yet forsooth will
be counted the only patrons and defenders of Gods glory and religion. But
even they also shall feel at the length, what it is to mock God, and the
Church of Christ. And these things be spoken as touching the outward enemies.

He thretneth punishments to their domestical and neighborlike enemies.
He passes now to the neighbor nations of the Jews, which in the time of the
Assyrian war, joined themselves with their enemies, when before they were
either their subjects, or else by leagues and laws of friendship bound and
united unto them. For it is evident that the Philistines were subdued by David,
and that the Tyrians were confederate with David and Solomon. And they forsooth
(namely the Philistines) thought they had now occasion given them, whereby they
might revenge their old wrongs: but these other (I mean the Tyrians) be
wrayed the lightness and inconstancy of their minds, when as they became
enemies unto them in adversity, whose parts they had taken before in
prosperity. But they are an example or figure of the domestical and homebredde
enemies of the Church, who either against their wills, or allured by the
success of happy conclusions, do for a time counterfeit the love of true
religion, but at last as soon as occasion is given bewray the privy poison of
their stomachs. Of which sort seeing there is now every where a huge number,
that ought diligently to be marked, that the Lord denounces here unto
these. Yea, and what have you to do with me (says he) O Tire and Sidon, and
all the coasts of Palestina? As though he should say, Go to, admit the
Assyrians had some cause of war against me, or at least could pretend some
excuse, that they being far off from my land, were also void and destitute
of the knowledge of my laws and manner of my true worship. But tell me, what
moved you, to join your selves unto these, and to be drawn into the society
of the battle? What, will ye render me a recompense? that is to say, have
ye suffered any injury by me, that might deserve such a recompense?
Certainly you can alleddge no such matter, when rather ye owe thanks unto
me, who would have you to be my people, or my co^federats or subjects, that
by this occasion ye might come to the knowledge of the true faith and
salvation. But go to, seeing it likes you so well, it will be a very easy
matter for me, to recompense you upon your head, according as you have
deserved. The sum therefore and effect of the accusation is this, namely that
they rashly and provoked with no wrong or injury at all, had risen and
rebelled against the people of GOD, etc.

The manners of the domestical enemies of the church.
And by this example are expressed and laid open the manners of the Domestical,
or household enemies of the Church, who are for a time compelled to forsake
their superstitions and most vile trades of living, and to submit themselves to
the discipline of the Gospel. They feign a love of the truth, as long as the
truth has the upper hand. But in the mean while, there remains deep settled
in their mind, a hatred of Christ and a love of their Pope so kind: yea and
they think themselves very heynously and intollerably dealt withal, and
therefore upon occasion given they rise up, that they may follow and pursue
the same their title and quarrel to the uttermost. Examples of this sort we
have seen many in our time, which because they are well known unto all, shall
not need to be any longer stood upon. Let us consider, that God permits
these things unto the wicked for our sakes, who for the most part do over
mildely and gently handle such men, yea even filthily flatter them, whilst
either we seek by carnal wisdom to win them, or else in seeking again by
them, forget our duties unto God, etc.

He lays open the sins of the said parties.
But he recounteth also the sins of these men, and in two kinds
comprehends all, wherein they chiefly offended: First, ye have taken my
silver and my gold, etc. He accuses them of Sacrilege, and how they had
wickedly taken away perforce the riches consecrated unto him, and had carried
them into their temples or palaces, where they abused them either to
superstition, or to riot and superfluity as they sisted themselves. Secondly,
ye have sold the children of Judah and Jerusalem unto the Grecians, or unto
foreign nations, that being banished far off from their country, they
might be void of all hope of return. Both these sins reign openly at this
day. For after that the Romish Bishops have once usurped to themselves the
gouermnent of the Church, by and by they convert the goods of the Church, which
aforetime were consecrated unto God and his service, partly into superstitions,
and partly to the maintenance of their own pomp and prodigality. And albeit
their sacrilegious holdnesse be every where reproved by the light of the
Gospel, yet want there not false Gospellers, which catching the said goods
out of their claws do not restore the^ to ye Church, but either scrape the^
together to ye common bancke, or else challenge them privately to themselves,
that they may the more inordinately revel and make good cheer. Either of these
fortes have their colors, whereby they excuse their iniquity, and the true
children of Judah, which accuse and find fault with these things, they either
cast into exile, or kill them with sword and fire, that so they may cease to
be troublesome unto them. But let these men remember, that this is Gods gold
and silver, who will not suffer their holdenesse to go unpunished, as shall
appear in the Sermon following. In ye mean time, let us also be mindful of
these things, and patiently take this unhappy lot and condition of the
Church, trusting only in Christ Jesus, who will never suffer his own cause
to quail. To him be given blessing, honor, glory and dominion for ever and
ever, Amen.

Sermon. 13.
The text. 7
BEhold, I will raise them out of the place, where ye have sold them, and will
render your reward upon your own head.

8 And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children
of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabees, to a people far off: for the
Lord himself has spoken it.

9 Publish this among the Gentiles, prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let
all the men of war draw near, and come up.

10 Break your plough shares into swords, and your siethes into spears: let
him that is weak, say, I am a strong champion.

11 Assemble your selves, and come al ye heathen and gather your selves
together round about: there shall the Lord cast down thy mighty men.

12 Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Iehosophat: for
there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.

13 Put in your siethes, for the harvest is ripe, come, get you down, for the
wine press is full: yea, the presses run over, for their wickedness is great.

14 O multitude, O multitude, come into the valley of threshing, for the day
of the Lord is near in the valley of threshing.

15 The Sun and Moon shall be darkened, and the Startes shall withdraw their
sight.

ALbeit God loves deerly his church, and will have it to be perpetual
^^^reserued, The argument and use of this present place.
yet suffers he the same to be diuersely exercised and afflicted under wicked
and ungodly enemies, so far forth that the godly sometimes think themselves
to be forsaken of him, and the wicked promise to themselves perpetual
success. Here therefore we have need as well of diligent doctrine as
consolation, to the end we may perceive these things to come to pass by the
just judgment of God, who chastineth his that they may be saved, and finally
renders to the wicked according to their deserts. Hitherto makes the last
part of Joel. For he so comfort the people of his time against ye terrors
of the Assyrian war, that look what he says unto them ought to be applied
unto al ages. And of late forsooth be promised in general, that God would
take in hand the cause of his people against their enemies, whose cruelty and
pride he declared at large. But now he diligently describes the judgment of
god which ha^geth in like manner over the heads of al those that in these days
imitate the said ancient enemies of the church. Let us therefore consider every
thing in order.

The enemies of the church are punished by the law of like for like.
First, he threatens unto them Talions Law, that is, such pain, such
punishment, or, so do, so have, and declares that there shall nothing let, but
that he will deliver his people. For he accused the^ before that they had sold
the children of Judah to the Grecians, and to a people far off. Therefore he
infers: Behold, I will raise them out of the place, etc. As though he
should say, You in deed go about to scatter my people, so as no hope of
restitution should be left unto them. But you shall never bring this to pass.
For albeit it may seem a thing impossible, that they should ever return to
their own country: yet will I raise them up, and gathering them together out
of all places, bring them back again. And as for you I will reward you
according to your deserts, and that upon your own head. For I will sell your
soones and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, who shall also
sell them to the Sabeans and to other nations a far off. He a^^^th by way of
confirmation: For the Lord himself has spoken it. But yet we never read,
that the Tyrians and Sidonians and other the enemies of the Jews were sold by
the Jews themselves. Yet so the Lord speaks, that these things should
happen unto the^, by reason of ye disluyaltie and cruelty, which they had used
against the Jews. The execution therefore of Gods judgment is attributed to
the Jews, for as much as God would send it, to revenge the injuries offered
unto his people. But these things were fulfilled, when the selfsame Assyrians
and Chaldeans, which had afflicted ye Jews, did also within a while after
subdue and ouerrunne these nations, together with other the near neighbors of
the Jews, Esa. 14. and 32 Iere. 47. Ezech. 29.27.28. Joan. 11.
as we may see in the sermons of Esaias, Jeremy, and Ezechiel. Nevertheless
these things ought chiefly to be referred to the times of Christ, who as he
has gathered together in one the children of God, which were before dispersed
and sold under sin: so takes he most grievous punishments upon the wicked
enemies of his church, whereof the Jews first of all tasted. For when these
had after a sort sold Christ, and shamefully denied him before Pilate, God
sold them also into the hands of the Romans, and scattered them throughout
the whole world, so as the tokens of Gods wrath are every where seen in them.
The like happened not long after to the Romans, whom God sold into the hands
of the Gotthes, Vandalles, Herulians, and other most cruel nations, when they
had once atmed the^ selves against Christ, neither is it to be doubted, but
that all they also are to taste of the self same cup in these days, that are
false and injurious against the church. And withal let the^ also observe this
thing whosoever beside the cause of religion, live by oppression of the poor,
shedding of blood, and by rauine and extertion: such as are those, that
addicting themselves unto mercenary warfare, seek their chief praise in this,
if they may spoil, kill, and destroy as many as is possible. Well, God will
one day punish them wick even dealing: neither will Christ be found false,
Matt. 7.
who said sometime. With what measure ye mete, with the selfsame shall others
also mete unto you. Apoc. 13.
Again, He that leads into captivity, goes into captivity. He that
kills with the sword; shall perish with the sword. These things are approved
by the examples of all ages, so as we have by no means to doubt of the truth
of them. etc.

The wicked and ungodly destroy themselves with fiting one against another.
But for so much as God punishes the wickedness of the world with diverse and
sundry penalties, he now expressly shows, what punishment he would use
against them: namely war, which in manner of an herrault, he deuounceth with
many grave and weighty words, to the intent he might both awaken the
careless contemners of Gods judgments, and also minister hope and comfort to
the godly, who thought it would scarce ever come to pass, that these nations
should be punished, which as they were most mighty and puissant, so also did
they as stubbornely defend their superstitions against the church of God. He
publicly therefore denounces war unto them, and whilst he raises up al
nations, he shows it would come to pass, that all the whole world should be
troubled, and that they should fall by wounding one of another, that had now
conspired to the destruction of Gods people. Publish (says he) this among the
Gentiles. For god is the Lord of all nations, ^^nctifie and prepare warret by
which speech he signifies, yt this war should be accomplished by the
furtherance and assistance of God, albeit the profane Gentiles understood not
so much: and withal he commends unto the^ an earnest care and endeavor to go
through with it. Wake up also all the mighty and valiant men, and let as many
as are furnished with any martial prowess draw near, and come up. Yea break
your plough shares into swords, and your siethes into spears. And thus he
expresses the incessa^t practice of warring, which should bring with it a
forgetfulness of husbandry and of all other businesses, which are wont to
florishe in the time of peace. For Esaias by diverse speeches expresses the
exercise of peace, when prophesiyng of the kingdom of Christ he says: They
shall break their swords into mattockes, and their spears into siethes, etc.
Hereunto Joel adds: Esaias. 2.
He that is weak, let him say, I am a strong champion: and let him show
himself courageous in executing Gods judgment. What need many words: Assemble
your selves and come together all ye heathen round about. The cause: For the
Lord shall there (namely in the sight of his Church) cast down all the
mighty men of the earth, that have hitherto afflicted her. These things
admonish us how greatly. God cares for his Church. The Church how much it is
set by of God.
For as he made all things for this, and therefore prosecuteth all other
creatures with his favor, that they might do service unto her: So for the
same his Church he meserueth kingdoms and commonweals, to the end they
might minister things necessary thereunto, and again overthrows those
nations and kingdoms, which would have his church banished and destroyed. For
example the Sodomites whom God preserved a long time for Lots sake, and
delivered by Abraham from their enemies, but the same he^ struck with fire from
heaven: when Lot could no longer dwell amongst them in safety. Likewise upon
Egpyt, God powered many benefits by Joseph, when as he had appointed it the
resting place of his Church, but incontinently he both most grievously
afflicted the land of the Egyptians, and also destroyed their king with his
whole train of horsemen, by a very fearful and terrible judgment, what
time they began to persecute his Church. In like manner dealt he with the
Chananites, with the Moabites, with the Madianites, with the Palestines,
Syrians, Idumeans, Babilonians, Medians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans, as
the histories, do every where tostifie. And at this day we see the wicked
run together by the ears one upon another, and to turn the weapons to their
own destruction, which they had provided to oppress the Church: and so is it
true in all ages, that the very earth (that is to say, earthly minded men, and
such as are given over to the world) drink up the floodes of water, which
that old Oragon, the Devil, Apoc. 12.
vomitech out against the Church. Let these things serve for our comfort, least
we despair at any time of Gods help.

Under the figure of Judicial process he denounces punishment to the enemies.
But the Lord goes forward, and under ye figure of a judicial process
threatens ye self same thing, and withal teaches, that he will do nothing
contrary to right and equity. And hitherto makes the very diligent rehearsal
of the circumstances. For first are summoned and ascited the guilty, whom it
behooves to stand forth to judgment. Secondly, the judge also is described.
The^ next he recites the sentence, and at length declares the horrible
execution thereof. As touching the first. Let the heathen (says he) be
wakened, I As guilty he cyteth all the heathen.
and come up to the valley of Iehosophat, that is, to the place of Gods
judgment, where they may be punished for their wickedness. Where we are
taught, that the judgments of God are extended to al nations, neither can they
be avoided by any shifts or forcible attemptes of men. For so great is the
force of Gods summoning or citation, that the wicked do even willingly after a
forte come forth when the time of vengeance is, and no man compelling the^
stand forth before God to be punished. So Pharao willingly ran headlong into
the bocome of the Sea: and in these days we see it no rare matter, that the
wicked desperately pluck perils upon their own pates, wherein they miserably
perish. Let no man therefore either be deceived by his own security, or
dismayed by the success and temerity of the ungodly.

Secondly, God bewraieth also the judge: to witee himself, 2 God is judge.
who elsewhere chalengeth to himself all judgment, and is said to be the
judge of the whole earth. Deuteronomy. 1. Psalm. 82. Genes. 18.
For I (says he) will sit to judge all nations round about. As though he
should say, This will I do, who hitherto might seem as though I had neglected
both mine own cause, and the cause of my people. etc. This thing is well to
be observed of the wicked, and even of as many as are securely besotted in
their sins. They for the most part think, that God regards not mortal
men's matters, and with those fools say, There is no God, Psalm. 14.53.
the Lord sees not, neither does the God of Jacob understand. etc. But would
to god ye same would hear ye Prophet making answer unto the^. Psalm. 94.
Understand ye unwise among the people, and O ye fools when will ye be wise:
He that planted the ear shall he not hear: he that formed the eye, shall he not
see: he that chastises the nations, and teaches men wisdom, shall he not
reprove you? The Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are but vain
etc. And that these things are most truly spoken of the Prophet, as well old,
as new, and even daily examples do so manifestly prove, that they are
wittinglie and willingly beside themselves, that dare call the same into
question.

3. The sentence of the judge is expressed by similitudes.
Thirdly he declares the sentence or verdict of the Judge by similitudes drawn
from vintage and harvest, whereby he both shows the cause of the punishment
and also the vprightnes of the judgment. For he compares the wicked enemies
of his kingdom to a field and vineyarde, wherein the fruits of all kind of
sin, have hither to grown: which God as yet indeed through his wonderful
long sufferance has borne withal, but now he will reap and cut the^ down,
because that being come unto ripenes, they had filled up the measure of their
iniquity. Therefore he cries. Thrust in your siethes, for the harvest is
ripe: come, get you down, for the wine press is full, etc. And thus
speaks he unto those, whom he had now constituted executioners of his
judgment. Apoc. 14.


The selfsame parables John heard aleadged of the Angel, when he described ye
proceeding of the last judgment. But for our parts, let us learn hereby,
how dangerously they are deceived, that by the long sufferance of God, promise
to themselves an impunitie in sinning, and in the mean season, think not of
Gods justice, who distributeth unto every thing his proper time and season. The
husbandman wayteth for the time of harvest and vintage, neither gathers he
his fruits before they be ripe: and shall we think that God will rashly and
unadvisedly hasten his judgments: But although he sometimes defer the
punishments, yet he forgets not the sins, which if together with a settled
and incurable liberty of sinning and contempt of Gods word they come unto
ripenes, then by and by he displayeth his judgment; Whereby it comes to
pass, that such as seemed of long time to have committed most heinous
transgressions without check or controlement, at length by adding one sin
more, have provoked Gods wrath against the^. For as the harvest being already
white one day or two brings it unto ripenes, and as ye measure filled up to
ye brim one only drop makes it run over: even so ye sins yt seem to be
small, provoke ye judgment of God, if through an incurable malice and profane
contempt of ye word, they be added to ye former transgressions. Let every one
observe and mark these things, neither let the^ look only upon yt which is
presently committed, but call to mind also their sins past, and examine
their hearts, least ye wicked and careless contempt of god, cause yt to be
pernicious unto the^, which unto ye godly and to such as sin of infirmity is
pardoned and forgiven.

4 The horrible execution of the divine sentence.
But ye prophet persisting in ye parable describes ye horrible execution of
Gods judgment, and as though being rapt out of himself he saw al things done
before his face, he exclauneth: O multitude multitude, come into the valley of
threshing, etc. For this is peculiar to ye prophets, yt being rapt and ravished
out of themselves, they look upon things to come, as though they were present:
which thing the Poet observing brings in Sibyll crying out.

Wars O most fearful wars, I say,
And slaughters manifold,
And Tyber foming froth of blood,
Great plenty I behold.
And he calls the place of Gods* judgment the valley of threshing. As if he
should say, They would not hitherto acknowledge the judgment of God, and devise
how to escape it, but have brought their sins unto ripenes: therefore they shall
come into the valley of threshing, and there be broken in pieces: and forthwt
he adds ye cause. For the day of the lord is nere in the valley of threshing.
He calls ye day of ye lord ye time of vengeance, which he expressed before by
ye na^es of harvest and vintage. And yt he might be token ye greeuousnes
thereof, he says yt ye Sun and Moon with the rest of ye stars shall forgo their
brightness, insomuch yt the tokens of gods wrath shall appear in the^: let these
things serve for our comfort against ye assault of ye wicked; who, howsoever
they rage and take on for a time, yet shall they one day be brought before ye
judgment seat of Christ, and receuie rewards according to their deeds. And
wtal being mindful of these things, let us embrace the grace of God, which he
offers unto us in Christ Jesus, who at the length having removed us from all
dangers, will finally translate us into ye fellowship of his kingdom, to him be
given blessing, honor, glory, and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Sermon. 14.
16 THe Lord also shall roar out of Sion, The text.
and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and the earth shall
tremble, but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of his
people Israel.

17 And you shall know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Sion, mine holy
mountain: and then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers go
through her any more.

18 And in that day shall the mountains drop down new wine, and the hills
shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall run with waters: and a
fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord and shall water the valley of
Sittim.

19 Egypt shall be wast, and Edome shall be a desolate wilderness, for the
injuries of the children of Judah: because they have shed innocent blood in
their land.

20 But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.

21 For I will cleanse their blood, which I have not cleansed: and the Lord will
dwell in Zion.

FOrasmuch as all the promises of God are founded in Christ Jesus, in whom
alone the father is well pleased with us: The argument and use of this present
place.
Joel (as also the rest of the Prophets) does so entreat of the deliverance of
the Jewish people, that withal he co^prehendeth ye mysteries of ye vnuiersal
redemption, which we have in Christ. These things therefore ought so to be
considered of us, as yt we insearch those points with a deeper and profounder
sense, that are fulfilled and accomplished in Christ. And of late he spoke of
the punishments of the enemies: whereunto now he adds those things, that make
to the safety and happiness of the godly, as well in this world as in the world
to come. Whereof we ought to reap this use, that reposing our trust in the
aid and assistance of God, we may valiantly vanquishe and overcome all that
stands against us, and withal endeavor to be such, as God may acknowledge
and defend as his own.

How God will be affected toward his people. I He fraieth the wicked.
But Joel begins with the person of God, and shows, how he will be
affected toward his people. First, The Lord (says he) will roar out of Zion,
and utter his voice from Jerusalem. He compares GOD to a Lion roaring after
his pray, which he will not suffer to be taken from him. And so he teaches,
that God will be a deliverer and defender of his people, not only faithful
and just, but also strong and valiant, which will never permit them to be
purloyned from him. Therefore he adds: The heaven and the earth shall
tremble. Amos 3.
For if so be (as Amos says) all men stand in fear of the Lion when he
roareth, who doubts but that all creatures will tremble, if in case God utter
forth the tokens and threatninges of his wrath? Howbeit, as we admonished in
the beginning, these things belong especially unto Christ, which is that strong
Lion of the tribe of Judah, Apoc. ^.
who as he has delivered his own out of the tyranny of ye Devil, so will
he by no means suffer them to be taken from him. Joan. 10.
My sheep (says he) can no man take out of my hand, etc. Let these things
comfore us in our temptations. For if we abide in Zion, that is, in the
fellowship and society of the Church, no man can separate us from the love of
God. Romans 8.
For why, he that has instructed the Lions with terrible roaring, and he
that causes the thunders to astonish men's minds and to bellowe out of the
heavens, the same by the secret power of his spirit can cast down the
courages of the wicked, so as will they nill they, they shall cease to hurt
and endammage his people, etc.

2 He is the hope and strength of his people.
But least any man should think that God would also become fearful to the
godly, he adds: But the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the
strength of his people Israel. In that therefore he shows himself terrible
to the ungodly, in that he shakes heaven and earth, all this he does to the
benefice and welfare of his Church, that namely ye wicked may be abashed, and
the godly have a steadfast and vntemoueable hope and confidence in him. And
here it appears how notable the fruit of faith and godliness is, when as
these alone cause god to be sweet and amiable unto us, whose Majesty and
power otherwise is intolerable. For as good and virtuous children are
delighted with the port and magnificence of their father, which they know will
be honorable and profitable unto them also, but the undutiful and rebellious
are dismaide with the same, because they know well enough they have deserved
punishment: even so the power and glory of God does wonderfully cheer and
comfort the godly, when as they acknowledge him to be their father and
protector, the wicked and ungodly in the mean time miserably trembling at the
mention of him. But we have to observe, that he says that God will not only
be the hope, but also the strength of the godly. For as he protecteth and
defends his people, so also he furnishes them with new force, that they may
be able to abide and do all things. These things have in like manner their
accomplishment in Christ. Mat. 16.
For he is that invincible rock, against which even the gates of hell shall
not be able to prevail. The same commands us to trust in him, Joan. 16.
and says that he has overcome the world and the prince thereof. The same
encourages the faithful with his spirit, so far forth that being prepared
unto every good work, they manfully subdue al adversary power, and even glory
and rejoice in their afflictions. Whereupon Paul said: I am able to do all
things in Christ that strengthens me. See Romans 5. Philip. 4.

3. He is a present helper and defender.
He adds heereunto in the third place And you shall know, that I am the Lord
your GOD, dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain. He opposes this to the
dangers, which they had hitherto sustained, and by reason whereof they supposed
that they had been utterly forsaken of God. The sense is this: I will show my
self so favorable unto you, yt you shall feel by experience in deed, that I
remembering well my covenant do dwell amongst you, neither will I ever depart
away from you. 1. King. 8.
But he does not without cause make mention of his holy mountain. For albeit
he has respect to the promises, wherewith he had adorned his temple, yet he
does wtall admonish them of their duty: yt we might understand, that God will
then be present with us, if we consecrate our selves wholly unto him, and study
to retain that holiness which he gives unto us. These things therefore
belong nothing at all to the hogs and dogs, which by their uncleanness and
profane contempt of God, do utterly bereave themselves of the fruit of the
heavenly promises, and even of all good graces whatsoever: as shall abundantly
appear also in that which follows.

The happy condition of the Church.
For there follows now a description of the most happy estate and condition,
which the Church should have and enjoy under Gods protection, where in five
members he comprehends, whatsoever make to the true happiness hereof. The
first is, Jerusalem shall be holy, and there shall no strangers go through it
any more. In which words he says two things at once, namely, that they
should both be consecrated wholly unto God, and also that God would defend
them from ass profanation and defilement of enemies. Neither are these two
things joined together without great cause, considering it is impossible that
the one should be divided from the other? For inasmuch as God has consecrated
unto himself his Church, Ephesians. 5.
purged and purified in the blood of his son, he will by no means have the
same stained with the difilements of sin, neither allows he any place unto
such as are unclean in it. For these sayings are well known: Be ye holy,
Leuit. 19. 20 Psalm. 15.
for I the Lord your God am holy. Again: Who shall dwell in thy tabernacle?
Who shall rest in thy holy hill? He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, etc. And Christ also said unto Peter: If I wash thee not,
Joan. 13.
thou shall have no part with me: and there he gives in charge, yt such as
are washed by him, should in like manner wash their feet. As long therefore as
ye citizens of ye church do observe and keep these things, God is not absent
from his promises, neither suffers he them. to be subject to the lust of
their enemies. And as often as that comes to pass, it is certain and sure
that it happens by our default, as will easily appear, if we examine the
Ecclesiastical histories. For even now from the beginning sins and
enormities have made way and passage unto persecutions, which creep also into
the Church it self, when as abounding in peace and idleness, it is occupied
rather about earthly things then heavenly. Eusebius testifies this thing in
diverse and sundry places, but of all other most manifestly in the beginning of
the eight book, when as he takes in hand to describe and set forth that
horrible and cruel persecution, which under Diocletian afflicted the Church by
the space of whole ten years together. And if we compare the persecutions of
our time with the manners of those, that glory in the profession of the Gospel,
we shall soon see that we have no cause at al, to complain of any severity
in GOD. Wherefore let us endeavor to offer our selves pure and undefiled unto
God, and then will he not suffer us to be trodden under foot of the wicked,
neither to become a pray unto them, etc.

2. Abundance of blessings.
Secondly he promises the abundance of Gods blessing and all kind of benefits,
saying: And in that day shall the mountains drop down new wine, and the hills
shall flow with milk, etc. These are hyperbolicall or excessive speeches,
whereby is betokened the great and ouerflowing plenty of Gods gifts, which the
Prophet opposes against the famine and scarcity, that went before. And albeit
God granted this plenty unto them under Ezechias and after, Ephesians. 1.
yet are these things truly fulfilled also in Christ, in who^ we are enriched
withal spiritual blessing, Mat. 9. Luke 5.
as the Apostle witnesses. For in his kingdom flows that most sweet new
wine of the Gospel, which being put into new vessels, cheereth and gladdeth the
hearts of men. In ye same is offered the sincere milk and void of guilt (as
Peter says) which ministers nourishment unto the little ones and weak in
faith. 1. Pet. 2.
The same waters the whole field of his Church with rivers, that is to say,
1. Cor. 3.12.
with diverse and sundry gifts of his spirit. To be short, Joan. 4.
in the selfsame is opened that most wholesome and health bringing fountain yt
washes away sins, and quenches ye thirst and boiling heat of consciences,
and waters the valley of Sittim. Number. 25
This was in ye borders of the Moabites, as appears by Moses, who writes
that in ye place the Israelites committed whoredom with the daughters of ye
Madianites and Moabites and were partakers of the Sacrifices of Baalpeor.
Whilst therefore the Prophet makes mention of this, he teaches ye the
grace of God shall flow also even unto foreign nations, and be sufficient,
to wash away even most grievous and heinous sins. These things as they bring
comfort to afflicted consciences, so do they admonish us, that being
contented with Christ alone we avoid the superstitious inventions of men,
which dare show us salvation any other where. For who so follow those, they
leaving the fountain of living water, dig unto themselves pittes, Iere. 2.
even broken pittes, that can hold no water, yea and although they draw daily
and drink thereof, yet do they always thirste, as Christ witnesses in the
Gospel.

Thirdly he promises that they shall be safe and free from the fear of
enemies, 3 A sure safety.
when he says: Egypt shall be wast, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness,
etc. These were the ancient enemies of the Iewishe nation, and the Idumeans
forsooth being descended from Esau, burned as it were with a native and
hereditarie hatred, and the Egyptians mindful of the departure, which the
Israelites had made from them, never ceased to persecute them. But under these
he comprehe^deth al other enemies, which he says shall be so far off from
hurting hereafter, that rather they shall be cut off, and together with their
lands miserably perish. The truth of this promise is avouched also in this
world, Psalm. 10^*
when as Christ rules in the midst of his enemies, and defends his people
amongst their daily and continual afflictions, and shows forth horrible
examples upon his enemies: but yet it shall be fully accomplished in heaven, when
as we being set free from all gunshot, shall reign everlastingly with
Christ.* But we have to observe, why the Lord threatens destruction unto
these. Namely, because of the injuries offered unto the children of Israel, and
for they have shed innocent blood in their land. Therefore the wicked are
punished for their tyranny, whereby they oppress the godly: neither in deed
will Christ suffer this to escape unrevenged, who testifies himself to be
afflicted in his members, as we said of late. From hence therefore let us fetch
comfort in persecution, neither let us be offended with the success of the
wicked, who shall one day (we reigning in the heavens) be cast into utter
darkness and there tormented for ever.

4. A perpetuity.
he promises a perpetuitis, which thing, alone sufficiently teaches, that
this place, ought not to be understood of the carnal Judah, but of the
spiritual or Church. For it is evident that the people of the Jews were cast
out of the land of promise, and had lost all form both of Church and Common
weal. The Prophet therefore says: But Judah shall dwell for ever, and
Jerusalem from generation to generation. Which may be meant only of the
Church, unto whom Christ being about to conueigh his body from the earth into
heaven, Mat. 28.
said: Behold I am with you even unto the end of the world. And that the same
shall never die, Math. 24. 1. Cor. 15. 1. These. 4.
the prophesyinges of the same Christ, and Apostles as touching the last day,
do abundantly teathe: when as they testify that then there will be some, who
being caught up in the air to meet Christ, shall enter into possession of the
heavenly kingdom. Forasmuch therefore as the Church shall be upon the earth
even unto the end of the world, and the same then being translated into
heaven, shall be endued also with the immortality of the body, it is plain
perdy (as the Prophet speaks) that the same shall dwell for ever. Why
therefore do we fear the attempts of persecutors: Why tremble we at the
dangers that hang on every side over us? In times past forsooth most mighty
Kings and Emperors have assayed to subvert and overthrow the Church, but
they have bin so far off from atchieuing their purpose, that in so doing they
have gamed nothing but perpetual shame and ignominy and an vurecouerable
loss as well of their goods, as also of their bodies and souls. The like lot
also shall light upon those, that do in these days follow their steps.

5. A cleansing from sins.
But forsomuche as the conscience of sins calls into question all the
promises of God, in the fifth place the Lord adds: And I will cleanse their
blood, which I have not cleansed, and the Lord will dwell in Zion. By blood the
scriptures understand al grievous and heinous sins. The meaning therefore is
this: Whatsoever filthiness remains in them, which might seem as yet not to
be cleansed and taken away, all that will I cleanse and purge. This was
performed also in Christ, whose blood (as ye Apostle says) cleanses us from
all sin: and of who^ the Baptist witnessed, Behold the lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the world. But especially this seems to be
referred to ye calling of the Gentiles, who, where before also they wanted the
purifiyngs of the law, and God had suffered them (as ye Apostle says) to walk
in their own ways, Act. 14.
yet the same being brought to the knowledge of him, he delivered and set free
by the merit of Christ from their sins and from comdemnation. Our sins
therefore being cleansed, and done away, which alone separated us from God, it
follows necessarily, yt God will dwell in Zion, that is, the Church, and that
he will never leave it destitute of his fouour and protection. Hitherto makes
the place of Paul, writing to the Romans: Romans 5.
God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his son: much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life, etc.

And thus does the divine Joel conclude and shet up his prophecy with a
promise of the Gospel: nay if you consider more advisedly of him throughout,
ye shall find him to be an Euangelical Preacher. For he began with the
rehearsal of the punishments, which he shows they deserved by their sins.
And immediately he exhorted them to repentance, and gave forth the true form
and manner thereof. Then heereunto he added promises touching the penalties of
ye enemies, and perpetual happiness of the godly. Let us therefore transfer
these things to our times, and from hence take advice as touching the avoiding
of plagues and calamities: whereof the sum is this, that we forsaking our
sins and the cares of this wicked world, do with our whole heart (...) turn
and convert unto God, through Christ Jesus, who as he has cleansed us from
our sins and reconciled us to God his father, so does he protect and defend
those that believe in him amiddest the dangers of this life, and finally
causing them to escape and surmount all calamities he will translate them into
his own kingdom, (...) to the places of eternal happiness. To him therefore
with the father and the holy ghost three persons and one eternal and
everliving God, be all blessing, honor, glory and dominion for ever and ever,
Amen.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
William Ponnsonby. 1582.


