ALBIONS England: A Continued History of the same Kingdom, from the Originals
of the first Inhabitants thereof: And most the chief Alterations and Accidents
there happening: unto, and in, the happy Reign of our now most gracious
Sovereign Queen ELIZABETH.

With variety of inuentiue and historical Intermixtures.

First penned and published by William Warner: and now reuised, and newly
enlarged by the same Author.

BY WISDOME^PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by the Widow Orwin, for I. B. and are to be sold at her shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bible. 1597.

To the right Honorable, my very good Lord and Master, Henry Carey, Baron of
Hunsdon, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter: Lord Chamberlain of her
Majesty's most Honorable Household: Lord Governor of Barwick: Lord Warden of
the East Marches for and anenst Scotland: Lord Lieftenant of Suffolk and
Norfolk: Captain of her Majesty's Gentlemen Pencioners: and one of her
Highness most Honorable Privy Counsel.
THis our whole Island, anciently called Brutaine, but more aunciently Albion,
presently containing two Kingdoms, England and Scotland, is cause (right
Honorable) that to distinguish the former, whose only Occurrents I abridge,
from the other, remote from our History, I entitle this my Book ALBIONS
ENGLAND. A subject, in troth, (without vainglory be it spoken) worthy your
Honorable Patronage: had it passed from the Pen of a more countenaunced Author.
But for great Personages gratefully to entertain the good wills of mean
workmen, is answerable to themselves, and animating to feeble Artists. I
therefore secure of your Honors Clemency, and herein not unlike to Phaeton,
who at the first did fearfully admire eue^ the Palace of Phoebus, but anon
feareles adventure even the presence of Phoebus, (having dedicated a former
Book to him that from your Honor deriueth his Birth) now also present the like
to your Lordship, with so much the less doubt and so much the more duty, by
how much the more I esteem this my latter labor of more Value, and I owe,
and your Lordship expects especial duty at the hands of your Servant. And
thus (right Honorable) hoping better than I may offend, desirous to please,
desperate of praise, and destitute of a better Present, I make Tender only of
good will, more I have not, for your Honors good word, less I hope not.

Your Lordships most humble and dutiful Servant, W. Warner.

To the Reader.
Well know I, that Pearls low-prised in India are precious in England, that even
Homer was slightly authorized in Greece, but singularly admired elsewhere, and
that for the most part, the best Authors find at home their worst Auditors:
howbeit, whatsoever Writer is most famous, the same is therefore indebted to
his native Language: Neither prefer I above three speeches before ours, for
more sententious.

Written have I already in Proese, allowed of some: and now (friendly Reader)
offer I Uerse, attending thine indifferent (ensure. In which, if grosely I
fail (as not greatly I so fear) in Ueritie, Brevity, Invention, and
Uarietie, profitable, patheticall, pithie, and pleasant, so far off shall I
be from being opinionate of mine own Labors, that my self will also
subscribe to prescribe the same for absurd and erroneous. But in Uaine is it
either to entreat or fear the Courteous or Captious: the one will not cavil,
nor the other be reconciled.

My labor is past, and your liking to come: and things hardly founded, may
easily be confounded; Arrogancy is Linx-eyed into advantages: Envy and
selfe-conceited Readers capable of the least error. But such are good Minds,
and the Contraries of these Men in reading of Books, as were the Paganes in
reuerencing their Gods, sacrificing as devoutly to a wooden Jupiter, as to a
golden Jupiter: to an Ox, a (at, or vnreuerent Priapus, as to the Sun, the
Stars, or amiable Venus: devotion and discretion being evermore senceles in
detraction. Of the latter sort therefore I crave pardon, presupposing their
patience; to the former, presupposing impatience, I offer pardon: resting to
either, and to you all, in good will such as I should.

Yours. W. W.

A Table for every of the several Books, to find out the special Stories and
matters: directing from their Chapters and Pages.
The first Book.
OF the division of the World after the general Flood: And of the confusion of
Tongues. chap. 1. page 1 How and under whom the first Monarchy began. page 2
Of the debate betwixt Titan and Saturn, for the kingdom of Crete: and of
their conditional Atonement. page 2 How Jupiter at his birth, by
commandment of Saturn his Father, should have been put to death, and how he
was preserved. chap. 2. page 4. Of the cruelty of Lycaon: and how he was
driven out of his kingdom by Jupiter. chap. 3. page 7 How Jupiter delivered
his Parents being imprisoned by Titan. pa. 7 Of Aesculapius, and of his death.
page 8 How Saturn, wilfully enforcing his Son Jupiter to Arms, was chaced
out of Crete, and Ganimaedes taken prisoner. page 9 How Jupiter on the Sea,
overcame the cruel Giant and Pyrat Aegaeon. page 10 How Juno pretending the
death of Hercules and hismother (being in travail of him) was prevented. chap.
4. page 11 How Hercules, vanquishing the Giant Philoctes, fetched a booty out
of the Isle of Hespera. page 12 How Hercules rescued fair Hesione King
Laomedons Daughter from death: and of Laomedons treachery toward him. page 13
How Hercules sacked Troy, and put Laomedon to flight. page 15 How dangerously
Hercules overcame three fierce Lions in the Forest of Nemea. chap. 5. page 16
How Hercules in Agypt subdued and sacrificed the Giant Busiris. page 17. How
Hercules rescued Hippodame the Bride of Pirithous from the Centaures that would
have ravished her. page 18 How Proserpinc was rapted by Pluto: her delivery
attempted, first by Orpheus, then by Theseus and Pirithous, and how she was at
the length rescued by Hercules. chap. 6. page 19. How Androdamus overcame
Philoctes, spoiled Thaebes, slew King Creon. How Lycus usurped in Thaebes,
imprisoned Megara the wife of Hercules: and how he and Megara were lastly
slain of Hercules. page 23 How King Laomedon was slain by Hercules, and Troy
by him the second time spoiled, etc. page 25
The second Book.
OF the war and fierce Combat betwixt Hercules and Antaeus: and of King
Atlas. chap. 7. page 26 How two Amazonian Ladies challenged the Combat of
Hercules and Theseus, and of the brave performance thereof. page 29 Of the
war, contention, and Combat betwixt Hercules and Achelous, for the love of
Deianira. page 30 How the Centaure Nessus would have ravished Deianira: of his
death, and malicious treachery toward Hercules. chap. 8. page 32 How Hercules
slew the subtle and cruel Monster Hydra. page 34 Of Gerion subdued, and slain
by Hercules. page 35 How the Tyrant Cacus (driven out of his kingdom by
Hercules) lived in a Cave with three Ladies Daughters to King Pi^us. page 36
The tragical Story of Queen Daphles and Doracles. chap. 9 p 37 The Tale of
the old woman and Battus. chap. 10. page 45 The Story of Jupiter and Calisto.
chap. 11. page 49 Of Cacus his secret Thefts and Tyrannies: and how he was
lastly discovered and slain by Hercules. page 53 Of the honor done to
Hercules in Italy: and of Queen Marica, on whom he was supposed to beget
Latinus Grandfather to Brute. chap. 12. page 55 How Hercules vanquished King
Picus, and fell in love with Iole. p. 56 How Hercules overcame the Tyrant
Diomedes, and gave him to be eaten of his own horses: and how in Lycia he
betook himself to ease and effeminacie. page 57 Of the tragical end of
Hercules and Deianira. chap. 13 page 59 The occasion and circumstances of the
third and last war at Troy: The destruction thereof: and banishment of
Aeneas. page 61 Brute his petigree from either Parent: his Exile from Italy,
and ariuall in this Isle, then called Albion. page 62
The third Book.
HOw Brute named and manured this Island: built Troy-nouant or London, and at
his death divided the Isse between his three Sons. chap. 14. page 63 How
Locrine overcame Humbar and his Hunnes: fell in love with Estrild: and of
Queen Guendoleine her revenge on him, Estrild, and Sabrin. page 64 Of King
Leir, and his three Daughters. page 65 Of Porrex and Ferrex, and how Queen
Iden murdered her son Porrex. chap. 15. page 67 How and when the Scots and
Pichts first entered Brutaine, and of their Originals. page 68 Of Belinus and
Brennus: their Contention: Atonement: renowned Acts: and death of Brennus.
chap. 16. page 69 Of the kindness showed by King Elidurus to his deposed Brother
Archigallo. page 76 How Julius Caesar, after two Repulses, made the Brutaines
tributarie to the Romans. chap. 17. page 77 The Fable of the old man, the
boy, and the Ass. page 80 The Birth of our Savior Jesus Christ. chap. 18.
page 81 How Guiderius and his brother Aruiragus overcame the Romans: how
Aruiragus was reconciled to the Romans, and married the Emperors Daughter.
page 81 How Queen Uoada vanquished the Romans: and of hers, and her Daughters
deaths. page 82 Of the first Christian King in Brutaine: how the Crown thereof
became Imperial: and of the Marriage and Holiday in Hell. page 85 Of the
extreme distress and thraldom that the Brutaines were brought unto by the
Scots and Pichts: and how they were relieved by the King of little Britain.
chap. 19. page 87 How King Vortiger entertained Hengistus and his Saxons: how
they drove* Uortiger and the Brutaines into Wales, and planted themselves in
Britain. page 88 Of King Arthur and his Chivalry. page 90 How after the death
of King Arthur, the Saxons altogether subdued and expelled the Brutaines: and
of Cadwallader their last King. page 91
The fourth Book.
THe Story of Curan and Argentile. chap. 20. page 93 Of King Sigibert his
tyranny and miserable end. chap. 21. pa. 98 Of the amorous King Osbret slain
by the Danes, who under Hungar and Hubba did war and win much of England.
page 99 Of the politic and courageous Kings Alured and Adelstone: and how they
vanquished and chased the Danes. page 100 How Egelred by treason of his mother
became king: and how all the Danes were murdered in one night. page 101 Of the
extreme thraldom wherein the English lived under the Danes. How Swayne king
of Denmark and Canutus his son wholly subdued England to themselves. chap.
22. page 102 Of the precepts that King Egelred on his deathbed gave to his son
Edmond Irneside. page 103 Of the noble war betwixt Edmond Irneside and
Canutus: of their Combat, Atonement, and friendly partition of England betwixt
them, etc. page 105 Of the holy king Edward, his virtuous and valiant
government. Of the treacherous Earl Goodwin, and of his End. How king Harold
was slain, and England Conquered by William Duke of Normandy. chap. 22. page
107 Of the holy king Edward, and of his sayings. page 111
The fifth Book.
HOw king William Conqueror altered the laws and government in England. Of
Edgar, Athelstone, and of his mother and Sisters entertainment in Scotland.
And of the restoring of the English royal blood. chap. 23. page 113 Of King
Henry the second: of Thomas Becket, and of his death. page 114 Of King Richard
the first: his Victories: his imprisonment in Austrich: his revenge therefore:
and of his death. chap. 24. page 117 Of King John: and how he was poisoned by a
Monk. page 118 A Tale of the beginning of Friars and Cloysterers. page 119 Of
a blunt Northern man his speeches. page 120 How king Edgar wowed the Nun:
and of his penance therefore. page 121 Of the wars betwixt King Henry the
third and his Barons. chap. 25. page 123 Of the virtuous and victorious Prince
king Edward the first: and of his counsel given to his Son, etc. page 124 Of
king Edward the second his evil government. Of good Thomas Earl of Lancaster,
and of his conference with an Hermit. pa. 125 How lecherous Turgesius the
Norwegane, having conquered Ireland, was by certain young Gentlemen in the
habites of Ladies slain, and Ireland so recovered. chap. 26. page 126 Of
amorous king Dermot, and his Paramour the Queen of Meth in Ireland: and of
Ireland conquered to England. page 129 Of the Hermits speeches to Earl Thomas
of Lancaster. chap. 27. page 131 How King Edward the second for his evil
government was deposed, and his Parasites put to death. chap. 28. 136 Of King
Edward the third his Victories and noble Government. page 137 Of the
magnanimity of a Scottish Lady Sir Alexander Seitons wife, at the besieging of
Barwicke. page 138 Of the troublesome Reign of king Richard the second: and
how he was deposed by Henry, surnamed Henry of Bolingbroke, Duke of Hertford
and Lancaster, etc. page 140
The sixth Book.
OF king Henry the fourth: of the Rebellions in his time: and of Richard the
seconds death. chap. 29. page 142 Of the victorious Prince king Henry the fifth.
Of Queen Katherine and Owen Tuder. page 143 Of the wowing and wedding of
Vulcan and Venus: and of the strife betwixt Venus and Phoebus. chap. 30. page
146 How Pan wowed, and was deceived. chap. 31. page 152 Of Mercury his
successes love. page 154 Of Mars his Censure of love and women: and of Jupiters
Sentence and sayings. page 156. and 157 Of the troublesome Reign of King
Henry the sixth: how he was lastly deposed: And of King Edward the fourth.
chap. 32. pa. 158 Of King Richard the third, and of his Tyrannies. page 160 How
Henry Earl of Richmond overcame and slew King Richard the third. chap. 33.
page 161 Of the uniting of the two house(...) Lancaster and York by
intermariage. page 163.
The Seventh Book.
OF the great difficulties ouerpassed by Henry the Seventh heir of the Line
of Lancaster, or ever he attained to the Crown. chap. 34. page 164 Of the like
great difficulties ouerpassed by his wife Queen Elizabeth heir of the Line of
York, or ever the same two houses by their intermariage were united. page 166
Of a great Rebellion in England, occasioned by a Priest. Of Queen Elizabeth
wife to Edward the Fourth. chap. 35. page 168 Of Perken Warbeck and his
rebellious Complottors. Of the malicious Duchess of Burgoine. Of the great
Constancy of a chaste Lady wise unto the same Perkin. page 169 Of a Scottish
Knight distraught through his Ladies disloyalty. Of his mad passions and
speeches: of his Death: and of her evil ending. chap. 36. page 171 A Tale of
the Bat and the Moole, etc. chap. 37. page 179 Of the Cuckooe and the Owl,
part of the former Tale. page 185 Of Perken Warbecks End. Of a Third rebellion.
page 187 Of Empson and Sutton alias Dudley. page 188
The Eight Book.
OF King Henry the Eight. Of his Sister Mary the French Queen, and Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk. chap. 38. page 190 Of Queen Katherine Dowager. etc.
page 191 Of King Edward the sixth his virtuous Reign, etc. chap. 39. page 192
Of Edward Seimer, and Lord Protector, Duke of Somerset. chap. 40 page 195 Of
John Dudley Duke of Northumberland. page 195 Of the Lord Gilford Dudley and
Lady Jane his wife. page 196 Of Queen Mary. chap. 41. page 198 Of fair
Rosamund and King Henry the second. page 199 Of a Lady, who by patience and
quiet policy reclaimed her Lord from wantonness. chap. 42. page 202 A Catalogue
or Epitomie of all the most valiant and famous Kings of this Land, and of their
Acts, from Brute to her now Majesty's most blessed Reign. chap. 42. page 206
An observation touching the letter H. page 208
The ninth Book.
A Fiction, alluded to our now most gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth her
Persecutors, Persecution, and her passage thereout. chap. 44. page 212 More of
her Majesty's Troubles, and wonderful delivery. pa. 212. etc. Of the untimely
Ends of most our English Dukes since the Conquest: by way of Caveat to
Parasites, Rebels, and Conspirators. chap. 45. page 214 The Tale of Narcissus
and Echo. chap. 46. page 216 A Fiction of their Authority from Hell. Their
present corrupting of Mankind, and wherein. page 218 Of the Chat passed betwixt
two old Widows, concerning new Fangles now used by women. chap. 47. page 220
More of their Chat. chap. 47. page 222 Of Spaynes ambitious affecting
Kingdoms. chap. 48 What the Spaniards in Council concluded, touching English
Papists at their pretended Invasion of England: and of the small security
wherein Spain stands. page 225. etc. The overthrow of the Spanish Armada,
that anno Dom. 1588. threatened the Conquest of England. chap. 49. page 227 How
Satan by the only sin of Pride has ever prevailed. cap. 50. page 229 The
Legend of S. Christofer. Of the Popes Drifts, and Infirmities. page 230. and
231 Of the Spanish Inquisition. chap. 51. page 232 Of the beginning of
Iesuists. An admonition to such of them as be our Natives. Of chief points
wherein the Papists dissent from us in Opinion. page 233. and 234 Of the Combat
betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit. chap. 52. page 235 How our Religion is
autenticall. Of the chief points wherein we dissent from the Papists. page
236. etc. A Commendation of our prosent Government. With a remembrance of
somewhat that in some Persons faulteth. cap. 53. p. 239 Of the Hypocrites of
our time. page 240. etc.
The Tenth Book.
HOw the King of Spain and Pope first quarrelled us: received, armed, and
abetted our Rebels and Fugitives. Of the Popes arrogant Bull: and of the
Scottish Queen, etc. page 242. etc. Of the Scottish Queen he. Pretexts and
intemperate affecting the Crown of England. Her many and most dangerous
Conspiracies: with a Catalogue of most her traiterous Complottors. etc. chap.
55. page 245. etc. Of her lawful and orderly Trial. Of the most deliberate
and merciful handling of her cause. etc. chap. 56. page 248. etc. Of her
Death. etc. page 250. etc. Of what Council the civil wars in France had
Original. chap. 57 The beginning of the same civil wars. By whom: and
against whom. page 253. etc. How the Spanyard in those Tumults drifted for
France. The Popes incharitable acting therein. Of our Queen her charitable and
necessary succors to the oppressed French: and the Progress of those civil
wars, etc. chap. 58. page 255 The tragical history of King David's Children
applied, etc. chap. 59 page 256 More of the same History. chap. 60. page 263.
etc. Of the wars in the Low Countries. etc. chap. 61. page 265. etc.
The Eleventh Book.
OF Sir John Mandeuil and fair Elenors love: his Prowess for her sake
performed: and his departure to travel strange Countries. page 296. etc. Of
Sir Hugh Willough by his Voyage, and death. Of Chancellor performing the same
Voyage. page 273 Of Discoueries by Chancellor: his stately Intertainment, and
succesfull dispatch of affairs in Russia. page 274 More of Mandeuil and
Elenor: and of his Letter sent unto her. etc. page 275. etc. A description of
Russia. Somewhat of their Manners, Religion, and Policy, etc. chap. 65. page
278 More of Chancelors laudable Actions: and of his death. page 279 Of Elenor
her speeches to one Stafford, in answer of Mandeuils Letter, etc. chap. 66.
page 281 Of Borough his Discoueries, etc. chap. 67. page 283 Of Ienkinson his
Discoueries, and succesfull employments. page 284 More of the same. page 285 Of
Mandeuil offered a great Marriage in Egypt. Of Women, and Marriage: and a
Censure of Either. chap. 68. page 286 More of Ienkinson laboring our affairs
in Persia, etc. chap. 69. page 289
The Twelfth Book.
OF the means whereby Elenor (thereof before ignorant) had notice that
Mandeuil was her Knight beloved. cap. 70. p. 292 Of East, South, and Southeast
Discouerers and Discoueries, etc. chap. 71. page 295. etc. A Woman simply
delivering the Soothe concerning her own Sex, etc. chap. 72. page 297 Of the
Seventeen Kingdoms in Times by-passed, whereof her Majesty is now sole
Monarch, etc. chap. 73. page 300. etc. Old Rome discribed in her Ruins. chap.
74. page 302 Of Romes politic Government from the Originals, unto
Constantines Donation. etc. page 304 Of the Governors, and Government of Rome,
since the Papacy. chap. 75. page 305 Of the free-States in Italy. page 306.
etc. A new Reuiuer of an old Merriment, of one crossed in his amorous
drifting. chap. 76 page 307. etc. Of Mandeuil and Stafford met at Rome, etc.
page 309. etc. The residue of the former Merriment. chap. 77 page 312 Mandeuil
and Elenor met, and of their loves Event, etc. pa. 304 etc Aeneidos in Prose.
page 317. etc.
FINIS.
ALBIONS ENGLAND.
THE FIRST BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. I.
I Tell of things done long ago, of many things in few:
And chiefly of this Clyme of ours, the Accidents pursue.
Thou high Director of the same, assist mine artlesse pen,
To write the gests of Brutons stout, and acts of English men.
When arked Noah, and seven with him, the emptyd worlds Remain,
Had left the isntrumental mean, of landing them again:
And that both man and beast, and all, did multiply with store,
To Asia Sem, to Afric Cham, to Europe Iapheth bore
Their Families. Thus triple wise the world divided was:
One language common unto all: until it came to pass,
That Nembroth son to Chus, the son of Cham, O(...)d Noah his son.
In Caldea (never seen before) an Empire had begone.
As he and his audacious crew, the Tower of Babell rear,
Pretending it should check the clouds, so to anoyd the fear
Of following flouddes, the Creator of creatures beheld
The climing tops of cloud-high Towers and more to be fulfilde.
To cut off which ambicious plot, and quash their proud intent
Amongst a world of people there he sundry speeches sent,
So that, unable to confer about the work they went,
The Tower was left unfinished: and every man withdrew
Himself apart, to join with those whose language best he knew:
And thus confused tongues at first, to every nation grew.
THe Babylonian Saturn though his buildings speed was bad,
Yet sound the means that under him he many Nations had,
He was the first that ruled as King, or foreign lands subdude,
Or went about into the right of others to intrude:
Ere this aspiring minds did sleep, and wealth was not pursude.
His son Jove Belus after him, succeeded and puruaide
For dreadful wars, but awlesse death his dreadful purpose staide.
Then Ninus prosecutes the wars, prevented Belus sought,
And filled the wronged world with arms, and to subjection brough*
Much people, yet not capable of such his nouile fight.
From Caldea to Assyria he translates the Empire quite:
And caused fire on horses backs, before him ever borne,
To be adorned for a God. Thus out of use was worn
In Caldea and Assyria too the honor rightly due
To high Iehoua, God indeed. Idolatry thus grevv
From Ninus first: he first of all a Monarchy did frame,
And bewtified Niniui^, that bore the Builders name.
His warlike wise Semir amiss, her husband being dead,
And son in nonage, faining him, long ruled in his stead:
Delating in a males attire, the Empire new begone:
The which, his years admitting it, she yielded to her son,
Thus Cham his brood did borgeon first, and held the world in awe:
But Iapheths Line to Iauans land from Assure does us draw.
MVch praise is spoke of Thessalie, and Pegasus his Springs,
And how the Nymphs of Meonie, in Tempe did great things,
And how that Cecrops and his seed did honor Athens so,
As that from thence are said the Springs of Sciences to flow.
Not only Arts but Cheualry, from Greece derive we may:
Whereof (omitting many things) my Muse, alonely say
How Saturn, Jove, and Hercules, did fill the world with fame
Of justice, prowess, and how they both men and Monsters tame:
And so from these derive the mean how Brute to Albion came.
In Crete did flourish in those days (the first that florisht so)
Vranos: he in wealth and wit all others did out go.
This took to wife (not then forbod) his Sister Vesta fair,
That crooked Titan did to him and comely Saturn bac^.
The elder for deformities, in making and of mind,
With parents and the people too did lesser liking find:
The younger by the contraries, gave hansell in his prime
Of many virtues, honoring their Owners elder time.
Away slips age: death spares none: Vranos leaves the stage,
His body (now deprived of pomp) interrd, the worms do gage.
Well may a rich man's Hearse want tears, but heirs he shall not m^s,
To whom, that he is dead at length no little joy it is.
How beit, at the least for form, Vranos Sons lament:
But scarce their patted fathers Ghost to heaven or hell was sent,
When that his heirs did fall at odds about the vacant Reign:
And Titan chafes, disabled then the Scepter to sustain.
Each eye did follow Saturnes form, each heart applaudes his fame,
And to conclude, with whole consent, he winnes away the game.
Yet, for because the Birthright should inure to Titan still,
In Mars his Church did Saturn vow his Issues males to kill.
Not meanly glad was Saturn then his head possessed of Crown,
When, of his building, he was Lord of many a peopled Town.
He gives laws, his laws are kept, he bids, and all obey,
And equally beloved and feared he wealds a kingly sway.
He teaches men (untaught before) to ear the lusty land:
And how to pearse the pathlesse air, with shaft from Bow-mans hand.
God Dis did quail to see his gold so fast co^uayd from hell,
And fishes quakte, when men in ships amidst their floods did dwell
Who loves not him? Wherein did not the King of Crete excel.
But what avail or Towns, or Laws, or what do subjects move?
Sheaues, Shasts, or Ships, or Gold, or all? king Saturn is in love.
He loves, and is beloude again: yeat so might not suffice,
In former vow to Titan made his pain of pleasure lies:
But no man from the Monarke Love by wealth or weapons flies.
Cybella, fair Cybella is espoused to her brother:
And as do Venus billing Birds so love they one another.
In Coiture she does conceive: one son is borne, and slain:
And Saturn of the hansell hard, does malcontent re main.
CHAP. II.
THe Sun had compast all the Signs, and Cybell brought to light
Her second breed, a smiling boy, and Jupiter he hight:
Together with the Queen of Gods (so Iunos style we wright.)
The infant smiled at his birth: but Cybell, ioybereft,
And Vesta, whom Vranos had an heavy widow left,
Did both lament: for Saturn wild the newborn babe should die,
Both to acquit him of his vow, and frustrate Destiny.
For at the Oracle he had, his wife a son should bear,
That should e^ect him from his Realm: his vow therefore and fear
Did hasten on (unwillingly) the slaughter of his son:
For which (his sorrows granting speech) his moene he thus begone.
And want not stately Crowns their cares? With pomp have princes pain?
Ah, die he must, and die he shall, else may not Saturn reign.
Yeat, might a Scepters want suffice, I gladly would resign:
But sworne-by Stix and wreakfull Mars at periuries repine.
Then far be it that they repine, least I too late repent:
It doubles sin, if sin by sin we practice to prevent.
From this time forth, Melancholy, for Surname Saturn had:
No mirth could wrest from him a smile, each smile would make him sad.
His servants fear his solemn fittes, when if they ought did say,
He either answers not at all, or quite an other way.
Unpeopled rooms and pathlesse ways did fit his humor best:
And then he sighs and sheadeth tears when all things else did rest.
Who so could cite a Tragedy was foremost in his creed,
For, balking pleasant company, on sorrows did he feed.
Death likes him that mislikes himself: in gesture roabes and all
He shows himself like to himself: and hence it does befall
That men to Melancholy given, we Saturnists do call.
His Wife and Sister kissing ost her Nephewe and her Son,
(For she his Aunt and Mother was) with Vesta seek to shun
The voted Fathers deadly doom: to kill so sweet a Child
Their eyes and very souls abhor: who (nothing so vnmilde)
Do weeping kiss his laughing mouth, in mind the Babe to save:
Howbeit fear of Saturnes wroth contrary counsel gave.
But when in haste the Babe his heart was sent for by and by,
So Saturn wild, so Cybell must, and Vesta not de(...)e,
It was a woe to hear their woe and death to see them die.
Vnhollowed wretch, then Cybell said, in womb why did I bear
This double Burden? happy Twins, save that my Twins they are.
So that my teeming with these throws had ending well were I:
Or would I might not give them life, that living forth with die.
Thy Scepter (Saturn) is not worth Perfourmance of thy vow:
Thy conscience does a scruple hold that Gods nor men allow.
From Gods, from men, from brutish beasts, from nature naught does grow,
But fosters what it brings soorth: thou only do not so.
Thy Sons alone for slaughters serve, and I mean while their mother
Am Saturnes Wife, less proud of it then that he is my Brother.
Unhappy Cybell borne to bear, and therefore borne to woe,
And fruitless fertile to a man that sows not to mow.
Now tears had drowned further speech, till she as one bestrought
Did cry that with a knife the Babe should to her bed be brought:
My self (quoth she) will be his death, with whom my self will die:
For so may S^turne save and shun his vow and destiny.
But Vesta countermaunds her charge: yeat Saturnes will must stand,
For Jove must die, or they not live. A Damsel theare at hand
Was then enforced to that charge. Thrice touched her knife his Skin,
But thrice his smiles did cause her tears: she fourthly did begin,
And fourthly ended as before. Betide me death or life,
Live still (at least for me) she said: and casting down the knife,
She kissed that sweet and pretty mouth that laughed on her lips:
And brings him back to Cybels bed. Her heart, revived, skippes,
Reuiewing life where reckned death had wrought repentant tears.
The Father fronted with a guile, at length the Damsel bears
The Infant unto Oson Town: and in her Ladies name,
Intreates Melissus Daughters twain to nourish up the same.
Up to a Mountain bear they him, and in a secret Cave
A Mountain Goat did give him milk, and so his life they save.
His Nou^ses, sounding Simbals once to drown the Infants cry,
A many Bees (the Muses birds) into the Cave did fly,
Where making Honey, Saturnes Son did long time live thereby.
CHAP. III.
IT does remain of Jupiter, as how (but then a Lad)
From Epire to Pelasgis him the Lords Epyrote. had,
To fetch their pledge Lycaon held, when times of truce had end.
Lycaon fayning to consent, that did not so intend,
Next day, as though he would dismiss the Legates with estate,
Did make to them a solemn feast: when, having slain of late
The noble pledge, he brings his limbs and sets them before
His Countrymen to feed upon in saused dishes store.
The Strangers and his Subjects too abhorring such a sight,
Sit gazing each in others face, bereft of speech and sprite,
Until that lusty Jupiter, a stripling to behold,
Did take the limbs dismembered so, and with a courage bold
Did show them throw Pelasgis streets, declaring by the way
The murder of their bloody King: which did so much dismay
The Citizens, that even they, detesting such unright,
Did rise in arms against their King, where youthful Jove did fight
So valiantly, that by his force Lycaon took his flight:
And after did by Robberies, by blood, and Rapines live:
For which to him a Wooluish shape the Poets aptly give.
IN Epyre and Pelasg^s thus Jove first his honor won:
But greater things untouched are by this same Worthy done.
And partly, in the monstrous war that Titan and his Crew
Did hold with Saturn, when by search of Issues males he knew
The which his brother had alive, against their covenant made:
When, Titan Victor, fast in hold was vanquished Saturn laid,
Together with his wife and friends: where sorrow much they past,
Till Jupiter did understand his parentage at last.
He therefore landing took in Crete, with well provided men:
And ^lew his Uncle Titan, and the Giant Tiphon then,
With most part of the Titanoies, and sets his Father free;
By means whereof they reconcile* and well a while agree.
NOt brooking then Apollos fault, in that he ente^tainde
The re^naunt of the Titano^es, that after wars remainde,
Ap^ll^ was by Jupiter enforced for to fly
His kingdom Paphos, and to live exilde in Thessalie.
There love, but chiefly penury, constrained him to keep
(Until he was restored home) the King Admetus sheep.
And for his Son disdainefully envied Jove his praise
Jove was the same Physicians death that dead to life could raise:
Whose same grew thus. As Aesculap an heardsman did epsy,
That did with easy fight enforce a Basiliske to fly.
(Albeit naturally that Beast does murder with the eye.)
Apollos Son perceiving him with Garland on his head,
Imagins (as it was indeed) some herb such virtue bred:
And for a proof, he caused him to cast the wreath away,
When strait the beast her only eyes the silly man did slay.
Then Aesculap himself did take the wreath and puts it o^,
And by that means he overcame the Basiliske anon.
In herbs that deeper force is hid then Science may contain
I find, said he, and herb by herb into his mouth did strain
That lay for dead, an herb at last reviving him again.
Henceforth, men thought him more the^ man, when by his wondrous skill
He rendered life to many like, so winning great good will.
But as he waxed famous thus, he famous waxed proud,
Disdayning all, yea Jove himself for Peer he disalowd:
Until that Saturns angry Son revenged his pride by death:
Correcting justly each abuse, as Rector on the Earth.
THe Sons renoune thus added grace, unto the Fathers name,
But shadows wait on substances, and envy follows fame.
Even Saturn, pompous Saturn, rid by Jupiter of Foes
And fear of Titan, did renew his supersticious woes,
As touching former Oracle: and hasty sommons sent
Throughout his Realm to muster men, in purpose to prevent
By death of Jove his destiny. The men of Crete repinde
To put on armor to his ill whom they had found so kind:
But will they, nill they, so they must, for so their King assignd.
And Saturn with his armed troops into Arcadia went,
Where Jupiter, forewarned of his Fathers ill intent,
Entreated peace, to him denide, so that perforce he must
Defend him from his froward Sire, or rather foe unjust.
Theare might ye see King Saturn fight like to a Lion wood,
Whilst Jupiter did bear his blows and spares his Fathers blood:
And him that foe-like would him sley, he friendly did defend,
Desiring Saturn to retire, but words were to no end.
The wilful man pursuing blood, Jove cease to persuade,
And rushing in amongst his foes so hot a skirmish made,
That every blow sets blood abroch, and so in little space,
Even he who late he did entreat is followed now in chase
By Arcas and his company: for Jove resraind the flight,
Because against his country men he had no will to fight.
Whilst lucklesse Saturn did escape by flight and fortune then,
And wandered long in uncouth Seas, depriude of wealth and men,
Victorious Jupiter was crownde with glory King of Create:
And Saturn, now ariude at Troy, for succor did entreat.
Ganymedes, King Troys son, was sent in Saturnes aid:
A worthy Knight, and valiant war to Jupiter he made.
But he and his were chased back even to their City walls,
For whosoever stood with Jupiter, by Jupiter he falls.
And theare the Troyan Paragon Ganymedes was taine,
Twixt whom and Jupiter thenceforth sound friendship did remain.
Then Saturn did the second time to Seas with shame retire,
And never after durst by war against his son conspire:
But sailing into lower Realms, in Italy did dwell:
And hereof it is said, his son did chase him into hell.
Mean while, less joyous of his fame then ielous of his freakes,
Her wrong Queen Juno on the Truls of Jupiter she wreakes.
Which was the cause that, all too late, he (purposing return
To rescue Danae (in whose love he amorously did burn)
Was cast by storms into the Seas, that forthwith took the name
Of him whom for his Piracies Jove vanquished in the same.
Ye might have seen Aegeon theare, with wreakfull wrath inflamde
At sight of Jove, at whose decay he long in vain had aimd.
And how that Jove had now the worst, and in a trise again
The Giant with his twice three Barks in hazard to be ^aine.
The Centaures show them valerous, so did Ixeon stout,
And brave Ganymaedes did deal his balefull dole about:
But when courageous Jupiter had beaten to the ground
Aaegeon, and in the selfsame Chains wherein he often bound
The harmless souls that crossed those Seas, himself in fetters lay,
Ye might have said, and truly said, that then did end the fray.
So many were his high exploits, whereof such wonder bread,
That for the same the Heathen folk do deifie him dead.
Which since they are so manifold, I many ouerpasse:
And though Amphitrio blush to hear how he deceived was,
And that Alcmena pinch my tongue, possessed with bashful shame,
Yea though that Jupiter himself my lavish tongue shall blame,
Yeat since that jealous Juno knows already of the same,
I dare to tell how Jupiter so cunningly beguilde
His love Alcmena, that by him she traueled with child
Of Hercules: whose famous Acts we orderly shall tell,
Whereof the first, but not the least, in Cradle-time befell.
CHAP. IIII.
QVeene Juno, not a little wroth against her husbands crime,
By whom she was a Cockqueane made, did therefore at the time
In which Alcmena cride for help to bring her fruit to light,
Three nights and days inchaunt her throws* and (of a Devilish spite)
Intended both the Ladies death and that wherewith she went:
Till Galinthis vnwitching her did Iunos spells prevent.
Howbeit cankered Juno, still pursuing her intent,
Two poisoned Serpents, got by charms, into the chamber brought
Where Hercules in cradle lay, and thinking to have wrought
A Tragedy, did let them loose: who smelling out their pray,
Skaerd Hercules his brother that in self same cradle lay:
But Hercules, as Children use with little whelps to play,
Did dally childishly with them, and no whit did dismay:
Until at last his tender flesh did fecle their smarting stings,
And then displeasd, betwixt his hands the Snakes to death he wrings.
Amphitrio and the Thebanes all of this same wonder tell:
And, years permitting, Hercules did with Euristeus dwell.
This King, by spiteful Iunos means, did set him task on task,
But Hercules performed more then both of them could ask.
Yea, yet a Lad, for Actiuenes the world did lack his like,
To Wrestle, Ride, Run, Cast, or Shoot, to Swim, to Shift, or Strike,
As witness (his invention first) those solemn active Plays,
That were on Mount Olimpus tried, where he had prick and praise.
For which his Novel, and himself (in those not having Peers)
The Graecians by th'Olimpides kept reckning of their years.
KIng Atlas daughters in the Isles of Hesperae did hold
A many Sheep: and Poets feign their fleeces were of Gold:
(For rarenes then of Sheep and Wool in figures so they feign)
Euristeus pricks his Puple on this nouile Prize to gain.
The Greeks apply their sweating Oars, and sailing do persist
Until they reach the wished shore: where ready to resist
Their entrance to the closed Isles an armed Giant stayed,
Whose grim aspects at first approach made Hercules afraid.
Now buckle they, and boisterous bloes they give and take among:
A cruel fight: But Hercules had victory ere long.
The Giant slain, Philoctes took the vanquisher in hand:
An harder task had Hercules then pausing now to stand,
Most dreadful was their doubtful fight, both lay about them round,
Philoctes held the harder fight by keeping higher ground.
The Son of Jove perceauing well that prowess not auail'd,
Did feign to faint: the other thought that he in deed had quaild,
And left the advantage of his ground, and fiercely smites his Foe:
But Hercules, whose policy was to contriue it so,
Renewing fight most eagerly, so strikes and strikes again,
That to endure the doubled force his valiant Foe had pain.
Who, yielding to his Victors will, did find in him such grace,
As Hercules did thenceforth use his friendship in each place.
Hesperides, the goodly Nimphs, their Keepers chance lament:
But Hercules did comfort them, and cure their discontent:
And shipping then of Rams and Ewes a parcel thence he went.
IN coasting back by new-built Troy, he saw a monefull sort
Of people, clustering round about their yet unconquered Port.
He musing much, and striking Sail, did boldly ask wherefore
They made such dole: Laomedon, then standing on the Shore,
Did tell the cause: the cause was thus. Laomedon ere than
To rear the stately walls of Troy (a costly work) began,
And wanting pay to finish up the work he had begun,
Of Neptunes and of Phoebus Priests (the Gods of Sea and Sun)
He borrowed money, promising repaiment of the same
By certain time which thereunto he did expressly name.
The walls are built, the time is come, the Priests their money crave,
Laomedon forsweares the debt, and naughty language gave.
Forthwith the Sea (the Devil then did many wonders show)
Began to swell, and much of Troy with violence ouerflowe:
And thereupon the swealtie Sun (the wastfull Sea retierd)
So vehemently did shine upon the Oosie plashes myerd,
That thereof noisome vapors rose, and of those vapors spread
Such plagues, as scarce the living might give burial to the dead.
Repentant then, their wretched king to diuell-god Delphos goes
Where at the Oracle he knew his wrongs to cause such woes:
And how the Gods of Sun and Seas, offended, do require
Each month a Virgin, to appease a seaish Monsters ire.
Wherefore to save their common weal, the Troyans did agree,
One Virgin, as her Lot did light, should pay that monthly fee.
Now after many murdered Maids (for monthly at one day,
The fearful Monster at the Port expects his wonted pray)
The lot fell to Hesione the daughter of the King,
Whom to the Port to be deuourd with tears the Troyans bring.
When Hercules thus understood the hard occasion why
The guiltles Lady should have died, he purposing to try
His valiantness, (for what was it that Hercules would fly?)
Did ask the King what gift should grow to him that should both free
His Daughter and his kingdom of that bloody monthly fee.
The king, whom now a doubted hope of proffered help made glad,
Made promise of two milk-white Steedes as chiefest gemmes he had.
Brave Hercules, whose ventrous heart did only hunt for fame,
Accepts th'assumpsit, and prepares the fiend-like fish to tame.
Anon the dreadful Devil drives the Sea before his breast,
And spitting mighty waves abroad, disgorgde from monstrous chest,
Lifts up his ugly head above the troubled waves to catch
The trembling Lady, for which pray his yawning jaws did watch.
But he, whose strength exceeded sense, with iron Club in fist,
Did bootlesse long with brusing weight the boistrous Whale resist.
The greater strokes, the fiercer was the monsters awlesse fight:
So that the Greeks and Troyans all misdoubt their dreadlesse knight.
Still Hercules did lay on load, and held the fight so long,
That in the end the Sea retirde, and left the fish among
The bared sands: and so for want of water, not of strength,
Good fortune honors Hercules with victory at length.
Now when the King, his Troyans, and the Grecians had behild
The substance of the ugly shape, even dreadful being killed,
They bring the Champion to the town with triumphs, gifts, and praise:
And who but he beloved in Troy, whiles that in Troy he stays?
Alone the King (a man no doubt predesinate to ill)
Observing how his Subjects bore to Hercules good will,
And fearing least their love to him might turn himself to hate,
And seeing now himself and land in prosperous estate,
Unfriendly did exclude his friend from out his City strong,
Whilst with his Greeks he hunts abroad, mistrustlesse of such wrong,
And when the Champion and his men did from their sport return,
Not only did gain say in Troy that longer they soiourne,
But also (impudent in guiles) withheld the Corsers twain,
Which Hercules so dearly won, in hazard to be slain.
Alemenas Son abashed then to find so lewd a meede,
In lieu of well deserved love was chollerick indeed:
And made a vow (if life gave leave) he would such vengeance take
On Troy, that even the stones thereof for dread of him should quake,
And that the living Troyans then should say, and justly say,
That they were happy whom the plague and Monster made away.
And threatening so the trothlesse King did leave the hated Port,
And shortly did ariue at Thaebes, and feasts in Creons Court.
THence brought he war and wrack to Troy, and in his army Kings,
And by the way Larnessus walls unto the ground he flings,
And sets Tenedos on fire, whose fearful flames espide,
Gave Sommons unto careless Troy for worser to provide.
Before the Greeks had reached Troy, the Troyans by the way
Did bid them battle: many men on either part decay.
The sounding armours crack with blows, whilst piercing arrows fly,
This lies dead, that same is maimde, and more at point to die.
Heads, arms, and armor fly about, and bodies swim in blood,
And fresh supplies did fall with them on whom they fighting stood.
But Hercules, above the rest, bestird himself so well,
That still before his balefull Club by Shocks the Troyans fell.
Who, fainting now, seek to retire into their fensiue town:
Where Hercules their Porter was, and rudely knockes them down,
Thus won he Troy, and sacked Troy, and Channels flowed blood,
Nor did he breath whilst any part of all the City stood,
Save stately Ileon. In the same a many Ladies wear,
Whose piteous tears wrought Hercules that only place to spare,
As for the false Laomedon he secretly was fled
And valiant Pryamus his son to Greece was captive led.
CHAP. V.
AT home return, Queen Juno craves his company at Creat,
Whom, there arriud, with hartlesse joy his stepdame did entreat.
What? Hear thou not my son (quoth she) how Argiue folk complain
Of Lions three, that in their fields both men and heardes have slain?
All this she said, as knowing him to seek such hard affairs:
To win him to which desperate fight no Course nor cost she spares.
When this was said, enough was said, and half was yet behind
When Hercules did vow redress, and Juno had her mind.
He joys to hear of that exploit, such was his ventrous heart,
And thanking Juno for her news, did so from thence depart.
Philoctes now and Hercules in Nemea Forest be,
Long seeking what they could not find, till, crying from a tree,
An Heards-man said, friends shift away, or else come up to me:
Least that those cruel Lions three now ranging in this wood,
Which have deuourd those Herds I had, and with my Manies blood
Imbrud their fierce devouring chappes, and forced me to clime
This Tree, where I (unhappy man) on leaves have fed long time,
May, all too soon, with tearing teeth destroy you in like case.
The quaking Heards-man scarce had said thus much, when as a pace
From out a Thick the Lions three on Hercules did run.
Philoctes trustlesse of his Prowse, by climing did them shun,
And now the Rampant Lions great, whose only view would quail
An hundred Knights, though armed well, did Hercules assail,
And sometimes with their churlish teeth and pinching paws again
So grievously endanger him, that near he faints with pain.
How beit (glory checking grief) he twain had now dispatched:
The third, and dreadfulst of the three, though many a blow he caught,
Yet neither Club nor Sword had force to harm his hardened Hide,
Until that (weapons laid apart) by strangling hands he did.
Not Hercules himself conceaud more joy of this success
Then did Philoctes, who ere while did hope of nothing less.
The Herds-man, poor Melorcus, like as Hercules him wild,
Vncaest the Lions, fearing long to touch them being killed:
And in his Cottage to the Knights a Country feast he hild.
The Argiues, hearing of this deed, with Triumphs him entreat,
And offer all: but leaving all he does return to Create:
Whom glozing Juno, against her mind, with cost did intertaine,
And with a tongue repugnant quite to her malicious vain
Commends his deeds, when rather she did wish he had been slain.
And therefore with an harder task his labor did renew:
But what was it that manhood might, and he would not pursue?
IN Egypt was a grievous drought, the cause thereof unknown:
Which to redress, their Devilish Gods and Oracle had showen.
Do offer up strange blood, they bid, and so auert our ire:
Busiris, prone before to blood, had now his hearts desire.
No sooner Stranger touched the shore, but them the barbarous King
To fry in flames before his Gods for Sactifice does bring.
Yea custom added worse to ill, his Subject and his friend
(When Strangers miss) supply the flames, his murders had no end.
Howbeit, with these Butcheries the drought did still remain:
For in Busiris was the blood that should redeem the rain.
The Gods did mean (which they not mind) that lewd Busiris he
An Alien borne, that Stranger was, who dead, no drought should be.
A Noble man of Iunos kin Busiris late had slain,
For loss of whom the crafty Queen did often sorrows feign.
Cease (Madame) says Hercules, not long the time shall be,
But I his tyranny shall end, else it give end to me.
Her sorrows did not tith her joy, when he had given consent
To undertake that deathfull task: for death was it she meant.
Now Hercules in Egypt meets Busiris and his Crew,
When suddenly with maine assault on him the Giant flew:
Supposing to have dealt with him, as he had done before
With other Strangers. Hercules alonely, and no more
To take his part, with skathfull strokes bestird his Club so well,
In battering of the Tyrants bones, that strengthlesse down he fell.
Then did he kill and chase away his lewd and cruel train,
Till hearing of no further foe, he comes back again,
And takes up the wretched King, that cries out for aid:
And on the Altar, where himself had Strangers often laid,
Himself was made a Sacrifice: and as his blood did stain
The Altar, even at that same time there fell a joyful rain.
With ended drought, and Tyrants death, a common joy befell,
And all in Memphis entertain the unknown Champion well:
From thence returning back to Thaebes he there a while did dwell,
KIng Creons Daughter Megara, at Thaebes he did espouse:
To cou^tena^ce their wedding feast did want nor knights, nor prowse.
Which triumphs ended, when the knights should thence depart away,
Pirithous to his wedding bids them all, and names the day
Wherein to meet at Thessalie: to which did all consent,
And at the time concluded of at Thessalie convent.
Amidst their cheer, the solemn feast the Centaures did disqueat:
Whom by no means the Nobles there to patience might entreat.
For they an hundred Giants strong, with drinking whitled well,
Amongst their cups, from words to blows, and worser dealings fell:
And (too outrageous at the last, (fierce Eurytis their Guide)
Irreverently they ravish thence Hippodame the Bride.
But Hercules not brooking it, to arm himself begun,
And all alone in rescue of the rapted Bride did run.
By this time did Ixeons Seed stand still in battle ray,
When he, but one against them all, began a bloody fray.
Each arrow that with aiming hand from sturdy Bow he sent,
Did answer by the death of one the Sender his intent.
Whilst Hercules with deadly bow had store of Centaures slain,
And, wanting arrows, with their blood his valiant Club did stain,
The Bridegroom and the other knights came to the ceasing fight,
When all were soyld, excepting twelve that saved their lives by flight.
Alonely Lycus yielded him a prisoner, and lives,
And living unto Hercules much after-sorrow gives:
But Nessus, that escaped then, in time him worser grieves.
CHAP. VI.
THe glory of this high attempt and saving of the Bride
They all ascribe to Hercules: and whilst they here abide
To exercise his Piracies, as Pluto King of Hell,
(Such was the lewdnes of his life, and place where he did dwell,
That he and it were titled so) lay houering near the shore,
And saw the folk of Cicilie their Gods with rights adore,
This rouing King, with armed Guardes of his disordered Crew
Did come a land to make their Pray: but for, to outward view,
They feign devotion, none suspect the ill that did ensue,
Anon, a wreathing Garlands sweet hard at her mothers side,
King Pluto saw Proserpine, and liking whom he spide,
Concluding with his company how to convey her thence,
Betwixt his boistrous arms he took the fair and fearful wench,
And do what the Cicilians might, he sets her aboard:
And to his guilty Sails the Air did gentle Gales afoord.
A number eyes in Cicilie for her did weep, in vain:
For her her Mother Ceres and her Loves mate did complain,
Her self (sweet Lady) of her moan did find no mean, God wot,
Though Dis to please did say and give what might be said or got.
Embarked then, with him his Harp did woeful Orpheus take,
And to Molessa Plutos Realm with speedy Sails did make:
Where he, unknown, at gate of Hell did harp such Music sweet,
As lumpish Cerberus could not but shake his monstrous feet.
His foul and warpt ill-fauoured face, ore-hung with cole-black hairs,
His horslike teeth, his lolling lips, his Doglike hanging ears,
His hooked nose, his skowling eyes, his filthy knotted Beard,
And what not in his ugly shape? but presently appeard
More milder than his common mood, and lesser to be feared.
This hellish Porter, deeming that such music would delight
His weeping Mistress, did convey the Harper to her sight:
Where Pluto swore by dreadful Stix, if Orpheus did by play
But make her laugh, what so he asked he should receive for pay.
Anon such Heavenly Harmony on skillful Harp he played,
That she her husbands music knew, and joyful was she made.
Now Orpheus did a watchword give, and she to laugh began:
And for reward to have from thence his wife he asked than.
Although it gawled Plutoes soul his sweetheart to forgo,
Yeat for to quit him of his oath, he yields it shall be so,
With this condition, that before they fully passed Hell,
He should not backwards look on her, what chance so ere befell.
Now as they pass through blind by-waies, he fearing least perchance
She err or lag, returns a look: and who should mark that glance
But Cerberus, that purposely for such advantage waits:
Who still detaining her, did shut her Husband out the gates.
When Ceres heard of this mischance, she Cicill leaves anon,
And knowing all the Knights of Greece to Thessalie were gone,
She thither goes in hope of help: where presently she meets
With Thaeseus and Pirithous, whose salutings she regrectes.
They wondering what the noble Queen of Cicill there should make:
Become inquisitiue thereof: to whom sad Ceres spoke
First of Proserpine her grief, and then of Plutoes guile:
For her she weeps, on him she railes, and moves them mean while.
The mother of false Dis his rape had more behind unsaid,
When Aegeus and Ixions Sons did jointly offer aid.
About the desert parts of Greece there is a valley low,
To which the roaring waters fall that from the Mountains flow:
So Rocks do ouershadow it that scarce a man may vewe
The open air: no Sun shines there: Amidst this darksome Mewe
Does stand a City, to the same belongs one only Gate,
But one at once may come thereto the entrance is so strait,
Cut out the rough maine stony Rock: This City did belong
To Pluto, and because that he was ever doing wrong,
And kept a theeuish Rabble that in mischiefs did excel,
His Citizens were Devils said, and City named Hell.
When to this Cities ruthlesse gate were come the friendly Knights,
Fierce Cerberus did rouse himself, and scarcely barking bites.
He thought the world had lackt the man that thither durst repair:
And troth to say, not one till then to do the like did dare.
Now fiery sparks from thundering strokes in dark did give the^ light,
And Ceres Champions valiantly maintain their ventrous fight,
When stout Pirithous, too too bold, a deadly wound he caught,
And Thaeseus, though Combattan-like he long the Helhound matched,
Yeat with his fellow had he fallen, and flying fears to cope,
Expecting nothing less then life, but hap exceeded hope:
For Hercules at Thessalic did fear so hard event:
Whence lanching out, he made in show as ifto Thaebes he went,
But with Philoctes all his train and Lycus home he sent:
And he himself to aid his friends did to Molossa go,
Wheare, like as did his mind presage, he found it very so.
For even as currish Cerberus with gorie bloes did chase
The wounded and the weary Knight, came Hercules in place.
An unexpected happy sight to Theseus at that tide:
Whom Cerberus forsaking then at Hercules he flide,
Vpbraiding him with threatening words, and like himself did rave,
And reached him many a crabbed rap with his presumptious Glaue.
The Danter then of Trespassers perceauing Theseus dry
His grievous wounds, and at his feet Pirithous dead to lie,
Desirous to revenge them both, lays lusty lode about,
And with his still victorious Club did Cerberus so cloute,
That, quite dismayed at such a match, he reeling to the ground,
Did send from out his Doggish throat a loud and devilish sound.
But when the victor sure enough the vanquished had bound,
He leaving Theseus weak without into the City went:
Whereas he found the wicked King and Citizens, that spent
Their frutelesse time in vices foul, and dealings most unjust,
As those that in their Porters strength reposed all their trust.
With these did Hercules play Rex, and leaving Dis for dead,
Not one escapes his deadly hand that dares to show his head.
Whole thousands the^ did breath their last, and who had seen the sight,
Might well have said it Hell indeed: for every thing outright,
Besides that sullen Mew it self, did give a figure plain
Of self same Hell where damned Souls abide in endless pain.
Save howlings out and shuddering fear came naught to ear or sight,
With grievous groans of dying Ghosts: and so much more their spite,
By how much more he found them then in pleasures and delight.
This horror hanging, Hercules in buskling up and down
In Plutoes Palace, to her joy, Proserpine he found,
And told her of enlargement thence: And then in harrowed Hell
(Pyrithous buried) he, nor she, nor Theseus longer dwell:
But, waying Anchor with the Queen of Cicils Daughter went
To Thessalie: where present greefes pretended joys prevent,
For, hearing of Pyrithous death, not one but did lament.
Hippodame (a Widow now) especially bewailes
Her ouer-hardie Husbands death: But weeping less preuailes
Then did Revenge: for Hercules unto her doom commits
Her greefes-Contriuer, Cerberus, almost besides his wits
For fear of death his due desert: whom causing to be bound
Both hands and feet, and to be dragd along the ragged ground,
A knauish Skull of Boys and Girls did pelt at him with stones,
And laying on with staves and whippes did break both flesh and bones
WHen Hercules should pass to Hell, as has before been said,
And that Philoctes of his men he had Lieutenant made,
And as Philoctes with his charge on Seas to Thaebes did pass,
He met Androdamus, the King of Calcedon he was.
Androdamus, not knowing yet his Cosen there inthralde,
(For Lycus was his Cosen) to the Thaebane Pilots calde
To Ken of whence and where they would. But ere the Thaebans might
Give answer, Lycus clogd with chains on hatches stood upright
And cride, Androdamus behold and succor me thy friend,
That shamefully, unless thou help, am like my life to end.
I Captive am to Hercules, and thus to Thaebes must go:
Give aid therefore. Androdamus deferres not doing so,
But sets on Philoctes, that himself and Ship defends,
And part of Calcedons he slew, and part to Sea he sends:
But where the number tripled there for them the Battle ends.
When Lycus was discharged of bands, and stout Philoctes bound,
He told what skath the Centaures late in Thessalie had sound.
Amongst the slain he named some allied to the King:
For which the savage Tyrant swore revenge on Thaebes to bring.
And sailing thence prevailed theare by coming unawares:
And puts all to sack and sword, nor old nor young he spares.
He slaieth Creon, and in hold fair Megara was cast:
And leaving Lycus King in Thaebes, from Thaebes the Tyrant past.
Whilst Lycus thus did Lord-it theare, the error of his eye
Did vex his heart: but Megara his lust did chastely fly.
And Hercules by now had news how things at Thaebes fell out,
And how that Lycus theare was Lord, and none for him durst route.
Disguised then he thither comes and to the Palace went:
Whom, when the Porters would have staide, his rags he of did re^t,
And shows himself like to himself, no bloe in vain he spent
That se^s not breath or blood abroch. This uproar Lycus heard,
And thinking that some private Fray had fallen amongst his Guard,
Presuming that his presence would appease the growing heat,
Did cast his haughty arms abroad, as who would say, be queat,
Or here am I that can as well command it as entreat,
Which Hercules so suddenly chopped off, that (yet vnmist)
He thinking to have used Arms, was armeles ere he wist.
Then Hercules, our Hercules is come, all Thaebes it cride,
Now shake we off our servile Yoke and follow him our guide:
And so they did, till none were left to hold on Lycus side.
The medly ended, Hercules did bring the Centaure bound
To Prison: whereas Megara in misery he found:
(For Lycus, speedeles in his lust, against her so had frownde)
Yea (more reuengefull) seeing her embraced by his Foe,
And hoping nothing less then life, to vex them ere he go
He said: thou doatest overmuch to entertain that Whore,
The falsest Lady under Heaven, for let me live no more,
If Megara (I speak by proof) embraced so of thee,
Has not offended diverse ways, and common been to me.
Then Hercules supposing that his speeches had been true,
Sweept off the lying Centaures head, and in that choler slew
(Too credulent) his guiltless wife: but dead her death did rue.
FOr loss of her, and slaughtered friends, he vexed at the heart,
Did then from Thaebes (an hea^ie man) to Foreign lands depart.
Distressed in the Troyan Rhode he succor sought for pay:
To which (his peoples triple plague) Laomedon said nay:
And to provide their second scourge saild Hercules away:
For, coming back with Iasons Prize from Colchos, he complains
Of churlish King Laomedon, and so an army gains.
At Troy the Greek^sh Peers and he did land their armed men:
Whom to resist Laomedon did range his Battles then.
The Troyans they bestird them well, the Grecians stood not still,
Laomedon fights valiantly, and many a Greek did kill:
Till Hercules (disgesting ill to see his Foe pursue
Such good success) encounters him, whom easily he slew.
And having slain the traitorous King he cease not to die
His Thaebian Club in phrigian blood, till all began to fly.
But with the Troyans, Telamon, and Hercules both twain,
And by their valor all the Greeks the gates and City gain,
And kill who so of Troy they caught, and rased to the ground
The City, whilst that house by house, or stone on stone they found
When ventrous Telamon, for that he entered first the gate,
For Prize had fair Hesione, of Troy the latest fate:
For priamus to quit her Rape, long after sent his Son
To ravish Hellen from the Greeks: So thirdly war begone:
Hesione the cause to Troy, and Hellen to the Greeks,
And all did work that Troyan Brute the Albian Climate seeks.
THE SECOND BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. VII.
THe twise-sackt Town the Grecians then did merrily forsake,
And Hercules for new affairs, did land in Egypt take.
There in a Port he did epsy a Fleet of Ships from far,
Well fraught with Men, Munition, and what else pertaines to war.
When Affer (he chief Captain was of that same Fleet) did spy
The Ensign^s of the famous Greek, he knew them by and by:
And entertaining on his knees the Owner of the same,
Rejoiced to behold the man so honored by fame.
With Affer sailed Hercules to Lybia, to put down
The Giant King Aniaeus, that had aided to the Crown
Of Ae^ypt, against the Egyptians wills, Busiris lately slain
By Hercules, in whose conduct the doubt not to obtain.
The taking land in Lybia now, and having in their sight
The threatened City of the Foe, his Tents did Affer p^ght,
And gi^ts it with a sudden Siege. The Giant then did shake
His hideous head, and vowed revenge, yea sharp revenge to take.
But is^ning out his City gates he ^ound the ^oe so hot,
That, notwithstanding such his bragges, the worst Antaeus got:
For Hercules did canuase so his carkes, that at length
He did retire himself and men, as trustlesse of his strength.
His Libians slain, and he not sound, Antaeus Truce did crave:
For grant whereof unto his Foes mean time he victuals gave:
And whilst the Month of Truce did last, the Giant bruised sore,
Did heal his wounds, and to his part sollicits Aiders more,
Mean while the Greek to Mauritain did pass unknown of all,
And theare in King Antaeus aid he found supplies not small:
And for he looked souldier-like, they brought him to the King,
Who offered pay: not so (quoth he) I mean an other thing,
Discharge these Bands, or else will I discharge thee of thy breath,
That all alone to thee and thine oppose me to the death.
When Atlas knew him Hercules, that conquered of late
The Island which his daughters held, and brought to latest fate
His Giant that defended them, and capt^uated than
His friend Philoctes: he twixt fear and fierceness waxed won.
And look how fast the rattling hail upon an house does fall,
So fast they lay on Hercules, that holds wage against all.
For as the Smith with Hammour beats his forged Metal, so
He dubs his Club about their pates and sleas them on a row.
And whilst (not daring to look down) by heaps on him they fly,
Some stumbling on the bodies dead are smoldred so and die:
Some sliding in their slippery blood, where with the place did swim,
Were strangled so: some others whilst disorderedly at him
They freat and foyne, are crowded on by those that hindmost be,
And with their weapons spoil themselves and fellows two or three:
Some others with the wounding points of broken weapons die:
And others daring with their Foe their bootles force to try,
Were in a moment slain by him: and thus in little space,
Without resistance Hercules had Lordship of the place:
And, maugre swords or studied Stars, brought Atlas to the Seas,
Whereas Philoctes did in time his pensiuenes appease,
And to his friend commends the Foe for bounty (which at last
Himself did find) and when as time his grief had ouerpast,
The same that for Astrology the Skies support was said,
In such his Science Hercules a perfect Artist made.
The Month of Truce by this had end, and Hercules returns
To Affer, that encamped at the Lybian walls soiournes.
A second battle then begone: Antaeus like a Baer
Bestires himself amongst his Foes, whilst Hercules did faer
As roughly with contrary bloes, till none to fight did daer:
But humbly all submitting them subdued by his might,
He gave them grace, and stayed theare to do them law and right.
Mean time Antaeus, lately fled, returns from Mauritain,
And with a mighty Troop of Moors renewed fight again:
And all the Fields with Carcases of mangled men were filde,
And numbers failed to the Moors that Hercules had killed.
But when Antaeus saw his men to lessen more and more,
Resolving or to win the Spurs or lose himself therefore,
He makes a bloody glade until the Thaebane he espide,
And finding him: bestow on me thy bloes, the Giant cride,
That am both able to endure and to repay the same,
A Fly is not an Eagles pray, nor Mouse a Lions game:
My death might countenance thy deeds (if that it so would be)
But make account that I anon will triumph over thee.
In saying which he smites his Foe, perfourming wondrous might:
And body unto body they with equal damage fight.
But Hercules disdaining that so long Antaeus stands
With him in combat, griping him betwixt his angry hands,
Did crush his Carcass in the air that life did leave him so:
And thus did reap a Monarchy, and rid a mighty Foe.
Then Hercules (Antaeus dead) with ease he overcame
All Lybia with Provinces and Kingdoms of the same,
And makes ^ffer King of all that bears the Donees name.
IN expedition of which war when Hercules would dwell
No longer time, but purposed to bid his friends farewell,
A warlike wench, an Amazon, salutes him by his name,
And said: know Hercules (if it thou know not by same)
How that the Scythian Ladies, late expeld their native Land
By King of Egypt, have contrived amongst themselves a band,
And with the same have conquered all Asia, Egypt, and
All Cappadocia: Now for that we, Victors, understand
The Africanes are our Allies, we minding to proceed
In further Conquests, tendering them, have therefore thus decreed:
That you two Champions shall elect, and we will also send
Two Ladies, that for victory shall with your Knights contend:
And if your Champions vanquish ours, then we will tribute pay,
But if that ours do vanquish yours, then you shall us obey.
But hope not so, more profit gives our bounty then our bloes,
And vninforced tribute may procure your friendly Foes.
Then Hercules, admiring much the Chalengers, did yield
Two adverse Knights the morrow next should meet them in the field
And mounted well on Corsers twain next light by dawne of day
Into the Listes came Hercules and Theseus: Mid the way
Upon a brace of milk white Steedes the two Viragoes meet
The Knights, and each the other did with civil Congies greet.
Then either part retiring back began to make their race,
And couching well their valiant Spears did run a wondrous pace.
With Menalippe Hercules the fight did undertake,
And Theseus with Hippolite did his Encounter make.
They meeting, either part both Horse and load to ground were cast,
Whereat the Africanes did muse, and Scythians were aghast.
Unhorsed thus, disdainefully each Knight defendant took it:
And either Lady so disgraced as scornefully did brook it.
Then settle they to handy Arms, the which was long and fierce,
And with their cutting weapons did both Helms and Harness pierce.
But Hercules, though never matched so hardy in his life,
Disarmes at length his Scythian Task, and ended was their strife.
But Theseus with his Combattesse in doubtful battle fights,
Till, blushing at the Maidens blows, he checks his mending sprights:
And laid so hardly to her charge, not able to sustain
His fresh-got force, that he also the second Prize did gain.
Antiope, a third unto those warlike Sisters twain,
Beholding how sinisterly the double fight had past,
Makes sorrow, whilst the Africanes rejoice for it as fast.
The Scythians to the Africanes did homage then, and pray
Their Ladies might be raunsomed. That suit did Theseus stay,
For he through lance, his Foe through love went victoresse away.
And therefore when the Athenian Knight and Amazon were matched
In marriage, Menalippe then from durance was dispatched.
And Hercules (then which to him no greater prize could be)
Had Queen Antiope her Bealt and armor for his fee,
And sets the dames of Thermodon from other ransom free.
And Theseus with Hippolite at Athens landing takes,
And Hercules to Calidon a Dismal viage makes.
THeare did King Oeneus bounteously receive so great a Guest:
Where scarcely had he any time from passed toiles to rest,
But that proud Achelous sent Ambassadors to know
If that King Oeneus on him his daughter would bestow,
If not, to threaten wreakfull wars: which much abasht the King,
Till Hercules, who then was come about the self same thing,
(For love to Deianira both competitors did bring)
Expelled fear by offering aid to back him from the Foe,
By means whereof vnsatisfide away the Legates go.
The Tyrant Achelous then, with all Epirus force
Inuades the bounds of Calidon, and spoils without remorse.
But Hercules he leading forth his Army got the day,
And well was he amongst his foes that fastest ran away.
They and their King, with hard escape, inmure themselves at length
Within a Castle near the Sea, an Hold of wondrous strength.
The Thaebane then, as resolute to spoil both Foe and Fort,
Did burn his foes forsaken ships, left riding in the Port,
And with a few besets the hold. When Achelous he
So slender watch about the walls of Enemies did see,
He scorned that so weak a siege should pen him up so straight,
Who having ten for one of them, did issue out the Gate
Against the Greekas, that willingly his coming did awaite.
Espying Hercules, he cride, lo yond same devil is he
That drove us out of Calidon, who so of mine he be
That ^^aieth him, shall be inricht with great rewards by me.
But he that made such offers large, did offer them in vain:
For when his men saw Hercules approaching them amain
With fiery eyes, and angry looks, and dreadful Club in fist,
They thought it needles to assail, and booteles to resist,
And every man retired back into the hold again,
Wheare many days, attempting flight, they cowardly remain.
From war at length they fell to wieles. There lay upon the shore
A broken Hoy, that bad not brookt the Seas of long before,
The Mast they boring full of holes, in every hole did stick
A burning Torch, and lancht it out in night when clouds were thick.
No sooner was the fiery keele a floate upon the waves,
And that the Greeks espied it, but each man rashly craves
The viewing of so strange a sight. But Hercules did smell
The presupposed Stratagem, and raung'd his army well,
And marching near the guilefull light, did find ambushment theare
That playing on advantage thus (prevented though) appear.
Occasion happening, Hercules would not omit the same,
But took them as he found them now, and fights it out by aim.
When Achelous he beheld his guile by guile to fail,
Well might he chafe, but harder chance his courage might not quail:
For look how fierce and boisterouslie a chafed Bull does fight,
So Achelous lustilie on either side did smite:
And by his only prowess then a many Knights were slain,
Whilst Hercules with like success his Opposits did pain.
And now, by chance, amidst the brunt the valiant Woers twain
Do single, and togethers tug, and as two Lions strong
Each one desiring others blood did hold a Combat long.
King Achelous minding her for whom began that broyle,
To Conquer where he did contend, annexed hope to toil:
Al^menas Son remembering too whose cause he did defend,
Even hers on whom his being and his very soul depend,
So chargd his Contrary with knocks, and vsd his Club so well,
That vanquished (though valerous) King Achelous fell.
The Epirotes when they saw their King a Captive led away,
Their hearts were done: and Hercules subdued them ere day:
And Achelous in exile did end his latter days:
And all Aetolia was filled with Hercules his praise,
To whom the King did give to Wife fair Deianira, she
The pleasing prise of that his prowse, and dearly earned Fee,
Who after, of her own decay, and his, the mean should be.
The Centaure Nessus was the man that made her err so much:
Of which her error, but his sin, the circumstance is such.
CHAP. VIII.
WHen over deep Euenus Foord the passage did not fit,
This Giant, of a Stature tall, did offer help to it:
And Hercules, forgetting him (for at the Centaures Fray
The same unslain, but not vnskard, escaped then away)
(...) pray him to the farther shore with Deianire to waide,
And so he did, whilst Hercules this side the River staid.
When Iunos Breed on farther banks his Passenger had set,
The lust and long conceived grudge to foul revenge did whet:
Not Deianira could avoid a Rape, or little less:
Or Hercules, disioynd by Foord, give aid to her distress.
One while, contrary to himself, full humbly he intreates,
Anon, like Hercules indeed, he did command with threats.
But first nor latter might prevail, for Nessus halde her thence.
I may not follow, nor in flight is (Centaure) thy defense
Said Hercules. His deeds approve his latter saying true,
For letting fly a fatal Shaft the Rauisher he slew.
And though the arrow galled him even at the very heart,
Yeat for a while he did endure the not enduring smart.
And having brought his trembling Rape into a vallie, said:
See Deianira how thy Love an end of me has made:
Yeat is my death less grief to me, then that thou should bestow
Thy self on such a changing Churl as Hercules: I know
(Sweet Wench I know) he does prefer contrary Loves to thee,
Wherefore my grave (the less my grief) in this thy good shall be.
Take this (he gave a folded cloth, and to the baene therein
He mixed somewhat of his blood) this same (quoth he) shall win
To thee again thy Husbands love, when he shall it estrange:
For out of doubt, I know it I, he takes delight in change.
When thou suspectest such a wrong, do boil a shirt with this:
No sooner shall he wear the same (herein such virtue is)
But that his novel Love will change and fall whence it did fly:
Mean while do not the unction touch, least so the virtue die.
In all this time betwixt his arms he did the Lady claspe,
And hild her so, as Hawke a Pray, until his latest gasp.
Then leaving him a liuelesse Coarse, mistrusting naught his drift,
She meaning simply, took with her the traitors poysned gift.
And Hercules by this had past the River deep and wide:
Who (Deianira first imbrast) drew from the Centaures side
The fatal Shaft that should the death of brave Achilles prove,
In Phoebus Church, by Paris hand, for Polixenas love.
THe Centaure left vntoombed there, He, She, and all their train
are come to Lerna, whom the King did nobly entertain.
Theare had he from their common tears the cruel hauock made
By Lernan Hydra, whom in Fenne not armies durst invade.
His upper parts had humane form, his nether Serpentine,
The whole was monstrous, yeat his wit more monstrous, but most fine
(For wit is moustrous when the same from virtue does decline.)
Such were his subtle arguments, and still supplies therein,
That he by often loss of heads was fained heads to win:
And witty thus to others wrong confounded all he found,
Propounding questions, and a word unanswered was a wound.
The Scourge of Tyrants hearing this, did promise death or aid,
Whilst fearful Deianira did the contrary persuade.
But woman's speech from weapons use might not withdraw him then,
Til entering Palus, he had rousd the Monster from his Den.
Disdainfully did Hydra take the presence of his Foe,
And after subtle arguments to sturdie fight they go.
Two blows at once with Glaue and Tail made Hercules to reele:
Who since he first had used arms the like did never feel.
Not long he borrowed had the Loan, but Hydra had the like:
So either twain repaye their debt, and neither faintly strike.
But who might stand with Hercules? By him the monster fell:
Who, burning up his ugly shape did pass his soul to hell:
Which happy fate of Hydras fall left Lerna glad and well.
From whence to Athens, and from thence to Lycia did he sail,
Then to Hesperia Gerions Realm his outrages to quail.
HE by his triple tyranny (for Gerion he was said
three headed, in respect that him three other Giants aid)
So spoild and plag'd ye neighbor Realms with daily wrongs and war,
That all the force of Africa his fury could not bar.
In Gadira when Hercules his Pillars reared had,
The which (our western world not known) men farther land forbad,
Then with victorious ships he sets on Gerions chased Fleet:
And secondly at Megida did either army meet.
Theare Gerion with his brothers twain the City did beset,
And scornefullie advance themselves as men not to be met.
Providing therefore murall works, they threaten hot assault:
Whilst Hercules contrary wars unto his soldiers taught.
The Gates wide opned, out he comes unto the Giants three,
Your men, he said, are well at work, well met are also we.
This less then monster more than man, a Fiende in humane shape
The Spanyard said, is he from whom I made so hard escape.
Yet hardlier shall thou now escape, said Hercules, and than
Between them four, three to one, A cruel fight began.
And every of the Giants thought himself an ouer-match
To Hercules, who almost gave to one a quick dispatch,
The second he dispatched in deed, who fell his latest fall.
Then thousands came to rescue them yeat, one, he fights against all:
Till Theseus with the other knights did march their Army out,
And join to him, their Foes with them, and all make battle stout.
Then Gerions brother fights again, and both did bathe in blood,
It was no fighting where they fought, or standing where they stood.
King Meleus, Theseus, Hispan, and Philoctes did no less:
But soueraignlie the son of Jove bestird him in the press.
The Giant, Gerions brother, then by him did breath his last,
And Gerion did retire his men into their Galleys fast,
But where they land, theare Hercules won landing, though he past
The Pikes withstanding thousand Swords, and warding thousand slings
Himself alone, ere that his men to fight on Shore he brings.
Then Gerion, cursing heaven and earth, bestirre ye friends he cride,
Now is the time to live or die, let good or bad betide,
Do live as men, or die as men, see ten we are for one,
What lets us then from victory, that victors have been known?
Revenge your selves, revenge your friends, revenge our common moan.
Nor did he shrink from what he said, or said not as he wrought:
His only deeds were manies death: Till Hercules he sought,
Whom singling, after combat long, of him his end he cought:
So to subjection Hespera by Hercules was brought.
NO better Spanish Cacus sped, for all his wondrous strength,
Whom Hercules from out his Realm debelled at the length.
A richer King or Tyrant worse lived not in any Land,
Nor any one against Hercules in hardier fight did stand.
Yeat chased by his Conqueror he was enforced to fly
Vpto a Mountain in those parts: where as, at point to die
Through famine, by his Magic Art he made the Mountain flame,
And by that shift escapt his Foe, long wondering at the same.
Then fled the Giant night and day (for fear did lend him wings)
And as about from place to place the wandering Tyrant flings,
He on a Mount in Italy called Auentine did light,
Where labored Cacus did repose his wearied limbs all night.
In this same Hill he found a Cave, which fitting place espide,
He did resolve in secrecy thenceforth himself to hide
In that same Mount from sight of men: and being theare alone,
That words at least might vent his woes he makes thus his moan.
Ah wretch (quoth he) no longer King, that title now must change,
Thou late were fearful unto all, now fearing all must range.
This ragged Cave must now suffice in stead of Royal seat,
And though (alas) the place should please, yet want I what to eat.
Where be my solemn banquets now? where is my stately train?
My Tributes? nay my proper Goods? or do my friends remain?
Not one I fear: proud wealth was such, that now in time of need
I know not where to seek a friend in any hope to speed.
And yeat despair not, Picus lives, indebted much to me
For great good turns: to him I will ere here I settled be.
Thus drove he forth the dismal night, and up by peep of day
He sped him unto Calabrie, for there King Picus lay.
His daughters three of long before, and still did love him well:
And, whether with the kings consent, or not, it so befell
He took them all to Auentin, and there with him they dwell.
About his boisterous neck full often their dainty arms they cast,
Still plying him with kisses sweet, no sport was ouer-past
That Cacus would, and they might work: and more, their custom was
By pleasant tales in order told the weary times to pass.
And once especially it was concluded on a row
That each of them should tell her tale, the first beginning so.
CHAP. IX.
KIng Aganippus ere his death had with his Lords decreed
His only daughter Daphles should in Empire him succeed.
A fairer Lady lived not then, and now her like does lack,
And nature, think I, never will a second She compact.
The King intombed, Daphles of his Scepter was possessed:
And one there was, a Noble man, that could it not digest.
Who (for he was of fame and force) did bid her battle, and
In doubtful end of victory their civil quarrels stand.
At length the Argiue Maiden Queen she Doracles subdued:
But (Cacus) of this Stratagem a Tragedy ensued.
Now Loves, not Lances came in ure, the man that lost the day,
And lies in Chains, left her in cares: her Conquest was his pray.
Full often did she blame her self for loving him her Foe,
But oftener thought she it more blame not to have erred so.
Thus whom in Camp she loathed late, in chains she loved now,
And thought him sure, because so sure. To Princes prisoners bow
Thinks she: and watching fitting time, unto the Prison went,
Where at the door of such his Lodge a many tears she spent.
But entering, when her eyes beheld the Image of her heart,
To her still peerless, though his bands had altered him in part,
She casting down her bashful eyes stood senceles then a space,
Yeat what her tonguelesse love adiornd was extant in her face:
And now the Jailer left to her the Prisoner and the place.
Then, cheering careful Doracles, let it suffice (quoth she)
That I repent me of thy bands, and frankly set thee free.
And let that Grace grace-out the rest, for more remains behind
Then, being said, may decent seem to such as faults will find.
My self, my Land, my Love, my life, and all what so is mine
Possess: yet love, and save my life, that now have saved thine.
Then sownes She at his sullen feet, that yet abode in thrall:
Which to avoid, he faintly rubs his Liver on his gall:
And with his hand, not with his heart, did rear her sinking down,
And faining to approve her Choice, had promise of the Crown.
But neither Crown, nor Countries care, nor She (worth all the rest)
Nor grace, nor duty, reconcile whom envy had possessed.
No sooner was he got at large, and wealth supplied his lack,
But he to seek her overthrow to foreign aids did pack.
Demand not how the wronged Queen disgested such her wrong,
But ask if she, the tidings told, to hear them lived so long.
She lived in deed, yet sowned often, and sowning ouerpast,
From her mistempered head she tears her lovely Tresses fast.
And beats on her Iuorie breasts, and casts her on the ground,
And wrings her hands, and scricheth out, and flingeth up and down.
Her Ladies pitying her distress had got their Queen to rest:
From whenceforth outward signs and sighs her inward grief expressed,
Her sparing Diet, seldom sleep, her silence, and what not?
Had framd her now right Louer-like, when thus to him she wrote.
WHat fault of mine has causd thy flight does rest in clouds to me,
But faultles have I heard of none, and faulty may I be.
Yet not my Scepter, but my self, have kingly Suitors sought:
Did all amiss, save thou alone, that set both at naught?
At naught, said I? Yea well I said, because so easly cought.
One crime but cite, and I for it will shead a million tears:
And to be penitent of faults with it a pardon bears.
Ah, Doracles, if our extremes, thy malice and my love,
The formers ever ill shall not the latters good remove.
I hear thou do frequent the wars, and war thou will with me,
Forgetful that my Argiue men impatient Warriors be:
Sweet, hassard not the same to sword that Love does warrant thee.
Each Spear that shall but cross thy Helm has force to craese my heart:
But if thou bleed, of that thy blood my fainting soul has part.
With thee I live, with thee I dye, with thee I loose or gain,
Live safe therefore, for in thy life consists the lives of twain.
Most wisely valiant are those men that back their armed Steeds
In beaten Paths, ore boorded Tylthes to break their staffe-like Reeds:
Wheare not the dint of wounding Lance, but some devise of love,
Sans danger, has sufficient wait their manhoods to approve.
Wheare brave Aspects of lovely Dames Tantara to the fight,
Whose forms perhaps are weg'd in hearts, when Favors wag in sight,
Whearas the Victors Prize is praise, and Trumpets sound each blow,
Wheare all is well, that seems but well, in courage or in show.
Wheare Ladies doffe their Champions Helmes, and kiss wheare Beauers hid,
And parlie under Canapies how well or ill they did.
Retire therefore, sweet heart retire: or, if thou will be armed,
Then fight as these where all things make that all escape vnharm'd.
Such manhood is a merriment: things present are regarded:
Not thousand drammes of blood in war, one drop is here rewarded.
In few, the wars are full of woes, but here even words of war
Have brauer grace the^ works themselves, for Courts from Camps be far.
Than are the valiant, who more vain? Than Cowards who more wise?
Not men that travel Pegasus, but Fortunes fools do rise.
Me thinks I see how churlish looks estrange thy cheerful face,
Me thinks thy gestures, talk, and gate, have changd their wonted grace:
Me thinks thy sometimes nimble Limbs with armor now are lame:
Me thinks I see how scars deforme where Swords before did maime:
I see thee faint with Summers heat, and droup with winters cold:
I see thee not the same thou art, for young thou seem old:
I see not, but my soul does fear, in fight thou art too bold:
I sorrow, lastly, to have seen whom now I wish to see,
Because I seeloues Oratresse pleads tediously to thee.
If words, nor weepings, love, nor lines, if ease, nor toil in fight,
May waine thee from a pleasing ill, yet come thou to my sight:
Perchance my presence may dissuade, or partnership delight.
But woe am I, dead paper pleads, a senceles thing of woe:
It cannot weep, nor wring the hands, but say that she did so:
And says so vncredited, or if, then thought of corse:
Thus thus, because not passionate, to paper fails remorse.
O that my griefs, my sighs, and tears, might muster to thy view,
The^ woes, not words. the^ pain, not pe^, should vouch my writing true.
Yeat fare thou well, whose farewell brings such fare-ill unto me:
Thy farewell lacks a welcome home, and welcome shall thou be.
These lines, subscribed with her name, when Doracles did view,
He was so far from liking them, that loathing did ensue.
And, least that hope should ease her heart, or he not seem unkind,
In written Tables he to her returned thus his mind.
The Bees of Hybla bear, besides sweet honey smarting stings,
And beauty does not want a bait that to repentance brings.
Content thee, Daphles, Mooles take mads, but me^ know Mooles to catch,
And ever wakes the Dawlian bird to ward the sloe-wormes watch.
I have perused, I wot not what, a scrole, forsooth, of love,
As if to Dirus in his Tent should Cupid cast his glove.
A challenge proper to such Sottes as you would make of me,
But I disdain to talk of Love, much more in Love to be.
Nor think a Queen, in case of Love, shall tie me to consent,
But hold the contrary more true, and it no consequent.
For persons must in passions iumpe, else Love it proves lame:
Nor think I of a Woman's grant, but as a Woers game.
Your Sex withstands not place and speech: for be she baese or hie,
A Woman's eye does guide her wit, and not her wit her eye.
Then senceles is he, having speech, that bids not for the best:
Even Carters Malkings will disdain when Gentry will digest.
The better match the brauer Mart, and willinger is sought:
And willing suit has best event: so Vulcan Venus cought.
I argue not of her estate, but set my Rest on this.
That opportunity can win the coyest She that is.
Then he that rubs her gamesome vain, and tempers toys with Art,
Brings love that swimmeth at her eyes, to diue into her heart.
But since the best, at best, is bad, a Shrow or else a Sheep,
Just none at all are best of all, and I from all will keep.
Admit I come, and come I then because I come to thee?
No, when I come, my coming is contrary sights to see.
My leisure serves me not to love till fish as haggards fly,
Till Sea shall flame, till Sun shall freese, till mortal men not die,
And Rriuers, climing up their banks, shall leave their channels dry.
When these shall be, and I not be, then may I chance to Love,
And then the strangest change will be that I a Lover prove.
Let Beuers hide, not busses hurt, my lips, for lips unfit:
Let skarred limbs, not careful Loves, to honor, honor get.
I skorne a face effeminate, but hate his bastard mind
That, borne a man, prepostrously by Art does alter kind:
With fingers, Ladie-like, with locks, with looks, and gauds in print,
With fashions barbing formeles beards, and robes that brook no lint,
With Spear in wrest, like painted Mars, from thought of battle free,
With gate, and grace, and every gaude, so womanly to see,
As not in nature, but in name, their manhood seems to be.
Yea sooner then that maiden hears bud on his Boyish chinne
The fury of the fiery God does in the fool begin.
And yeat to win, who^ would be won, these woo with lesser speed,
Then might be wun a town of war, the croppe not worth the seed.
But let them travail till they tire, and then be rid for Iaides,
If Gamesters fair, if Soldiers mild, or Lovers true of Maids:
Who love in sport, or leave in spite, or if they stoop to luer,
Their kindness must have kindly use: faults only make them suer.
Did fancy? no, did fury? yea, hang up the Thracian Maid.
The wonders seven should then be eight, could love thee so persuade.
But love or hate, fare ill or well: I force not of thy fare:
My welcome, which thou do pretend, shall prove a thankelesse care.
When Daphles heard him so unkind, she held her self accursed:
And little lacked of so well but that her heart did burst.
And wheare she read the churlish scrole, she fell into a sown,
But, brought again, upon a bed her self she casts down,
Not rising more: and so her love and life together end:
Or (if I so may guess) in death her soul did live his friend.
The Queen enterr'd, and Obbit kept (as she in charge did give)
A Knight was shipped to Calidon, wheare Doracles did live,
To offer him, as her bequest, the Argiue Throne and Crown.
Not that we force, or fear (quoth he) thy favor or thy frown
We move this peace, or make thee Prince, but Daphles swore us so,
Who loving more then thou could hate, nor lived nor died thy Foe.
And is she dead (quoth Doracles) that lived to my wrong?
I gladly do accept these news, expected-for of long.
The Lord and Legate were imbarkt, and Ship ran under sail,
Until into the Argiue Strond the Mariners did hail.
To Daphles, by adoption, theare inthronized a King,
He diverse years good fortune had successiue in each thing,
All friends, no Foes, all wealth no want, still peace, and never strife,
And what might seem an earthly Heaven to Doracles was rife.
A Subject, but a Noble man, did ritchly feast the King:
And after meat presented him with many a sight and thing.
Theare was a chamber in the which, portraied to the quick,
The Picture of Queen Daphles was: and deeply did it prick
The King his conscience, and he thought her like did not remain:
So, whom her person could not pearce, her Picture now did pain.
A Kissing Cupid, breathing love into her breast, did hide
Her wandering eyes, whilst to her heart his hand a Death did guide:
Non moerens morior, for the Mott, inchased was beside.
Her courtesy and his contempt he calls then to mind,
And of her beauty in himself he did a Chaos find.
Recalling eke his late degree, and reckning his desert,
He could not think (or faintly thought) his love to stern her heart:
And to the Maker of the feast did such his thoughts impart.
And doubts your Grace the Feaster said, if Daphles loved or no?
I wish (I hope I wish no harm) she had not loved so,
Or you not loathed as you did: then she had lived yet:
To what her latest speech did tend I never shall forget.
My self, with diverse noble men whose tears bewraid our care
Was present, when her dying tongue of you did thus declare.
My hap (quoth she) is simpley bad that cannot have, nor hope:
Was ever wretch (I wretch except) held to so skant a scope.
I see him roue at other marks, and I vnmarkt to be:
I find my fault, but follow it, whilst death does follow me.
Ah death (my Lords) despair is death, and death must ransom bliss,
Such Ransom pleases Doracles and Daphles Pliant is.
Not bootlesse then (since breathles strait) sweet Love does flames contriue,
The which shall burn me up at once that now do burn alive.
Alas (then did she pause in tears) that Doracles were by,
To take it from his eyes, not ears, that I for him do die:
At least, perhaps, he would confess my love to be no lie.
But (Want wit I) offensive sights to Doracles I crave:
Long live, dear Heart, not minding me, when I am laid in grave.
And you (my Lords) by those same Gods whose sight I hope anon,
I conjure, that ye him inuest your King when I am gone.
Alonely say I lived and died to him a Lover true,
And that my parting Ghost did sound, sweet Doracles adue.
A sigh concluding such her words, she closed up her eye:
Not one of us, beholding it, that seemed not to die.
Thus to your Grace I leave to guess how tragic Daphles died:
In Love, my Lord, yea loving you, that her of Love denied.
The Picture, and this same discourse afford sufficient woe
To him, that maimed in his mind did to his Palace go.
Theare Doracles did set abroach a world of things forgot:
What meanest thou man? ah frantic man, how art thou ouershot
(He said) to hate the substance then, and love the shadow now,
Her painted board, whose amorous heart did break whilst I not bow?
And could thou, churlish wretch, contemn the love of such a Queen?
O Gods, I grant for such contempt I justly bide your teene.
Her only beauty (worthy Jove, that now on me has power)
Was worthy of far worthier Love, without a further dower.
But gaze thou on her senceles Sign, whose self thou made thy pray,
And gazing perish: for thy life is debt to her decay.
Time going on, grief it grew on, of dolor sprung despair,
When Doracles to Daphles Tomb did secretly repair:
Theare (tears a preface to the rest) these only words he spoke:
Thy Love was loss, for loss my life in recompense do take,
Dear Daphles. So a daggers stab a Tragedy did make.
Well did this Tragic matter sort to Cacus Tragic vain:
But merrier matter did behoue such humor to restrain.
That knew the second Sister well, who, smiling ere she spoke,
Began her turn, and of her Tale the next report I make.
CHAP. X.
A Proper Lad made Love (quoth she) unto a pretty Less:
In self-same house, for-worne with age, this Maidens Grandame was.
Her eyes were sunck into her head, her cheeks were lean and lank,
Out stood her chin, into her mouth her bloodlesse lips they sanke,
Her toothlesse chappes disgracst her tongue in telling of a Tale,
And suck she might a Teat for teeth, and spoonage too did fail,
Her hair since sixty years not black, was now or white or none,
The substance of her wrinkled face was only skin and bone,
Dim were her eyes, deaf were her ears, tanke smelt it she could sent,
A Palsy made her feeling cease, down tastlesse food it went.
Sight, hearing, sent, touch, taste, and all, thus failing with her strength,
She to her chamber, bed, and chair, betook her at the length.
But gold is loved till grave has lodged, her bags and she were one:
And she must give the Maidens Dowre, or else her Dowre is none.
The young man, though he loved the Maid, on whom no love was lost,
Yeat did he love to live, and knew that marriage asks cost.
The old wives bags did let the Banes: with whom he smoothed so,
That flattered, she fantised, her moldie brains did cro.
What Devil I wot not made her dote, she doted on the man:
Her rotten trunk and rustie face she finified than:
And sees what she could not see, her senseless Senses work,
And underneath a wrinckled hide a wanton heart did lurk.
Unkindly too she kisses gave, which he did kindly take,
Supposing that her kindness was but for the Maidens sake.
Her crooked joints, which long ere then supported, scarcely stood,
She brought unto a wallowing pace, disiellowing so her blood:
And all for love (surreuerence Love) did make her chew the cudde.
Young Battus from his Omphida (for they were named so)
Dislodged by the Grandame long, to work did roundly go:
Desiring both the Maiden, and to marry her a Dower.
The old-wife, netled at his words, for all her love did lower,
And drying up what drained out in belching, thus did say:
The thing (friend Battus) you demand I gladly not denay,
But well you wot that I am old, and yeat not all so old,
But that the remnant of my life may spend the wealth I hold.
As all are nearest to themselves, so to my self am I:
And all shall lack ere I will lack: store is no sore we try.
If you do like of Omphida, I also like the match:
Love has no lack, ye both are young, wealth comes to such as watch.
You loving her, she to her self a dowry is, if not,
My money shall not sell the Maid, a sinful sale God wot:
For money shall not sell my self. And yeat I cannot see,
But that a comfort to mine age an honest match would be.
My Goods besides do want a Guide, and often did I know
Your youngers upon elder wives then I themselves bestow,
And lived well, and loved well. But as I do not care
For marriage, so an honest match I never will forswear.
Well, Battus, take you Omphida: but if you money crave,
My bags must only vent to him whom I my self shall have.
Yeat think not I mislike of you in that you have not sped,
But think I wish no better match, if I my self should wed.
Thus cunningly she closde with him, and he conceaues her thought:
Unequal was the Combat then that Love and Lucar wrought.
The one was in her flowring age, the other to too old:
The first with beauty did allure, the latter with her Gold.
But storms (thought Battus) have their stops, not long the Croen can live,
Or if my kindenes length her life, my kindenes God forgive.
Reso luing therefore on such hope, with easy suit he got
Assurance to be wedded to the old deformed Trot.
Medea charmed Aeson young, Battus Medea-like,
Did work no less a ever upon this vain unwieldy Tyke.
Now on the bridle played she: yeat as she laughes she looks
With ielious eyes, if Omphida be blotted out his books.
Yea she that could not move before, now crauleth every wheare,
To prye if Battus play not false, and cause there was to fear.
But all this while no marriage was, nor witness of their match:
And well he knew that widows shrink, if men forslowe dispatch.
So hasting what she hindered not, come was the wedding day:
The Morning thawde the eauening frost, and slipprie was the way:
Yeat hobling on her rustie joints, to Churchward goes the Bride:
Whose feet (her hearts unequal gides) could nothing else but slide.
Then Battus kindly leads her, and ever as she trips,
God bless thee Mouse the Bridegroom said, and smakt her on the lips.
The oftener stumbled then his Beast, the oftener to be kissed:
And thinks in her gentle Choice her self not meanly blist.
But when the Priest had done his part, and that they homeward come,
The Bride, for Battus, might salute the Pauement with her bomme.
She reeled often, and looked back: he saw, but would not see:
At length she stumbled headlong down, hoyst up again, quoth he:
The second time she did the like, hoyst Brock, her good man said:
And thirdly falling, kindly bad her break her neck, old Jade.
The old-wife took it to the heart, and home she went and did:
But Battus, ere his first was sick, had owed his second Bryde.
THis Jest from Cacus straynde a smyle, but quickly was it done:
When, turning to her Sisters twain, the youngest thus begone*
Ye, Sisters, severally have told how soes in love did fall,
And age with youth: but I do say that Love can a ll with all.
Examples we, whom Love has brought from Court to live in Cave,
And were there need of further proof, a thousand proofs I have.
Could Latmus speak, it might accuse even Phoebe of a kis:
And of a Votarie of hers to speak my purpose is.
But first she cheared thus her friend (for Cacus sadly sits)
Be merry man, thy pensiveness out pastimes badly fits:
Be as thou art, not as thou would, it will be as it is:
Learn then to lack, and learn to live, for crosses never mis.
Think Fortune newly hatch is flidge, and waggeth wing to fly:
All suffers change: our selves, newborn, even then begin to dye.
Be resolute, not desperate: the Gods that made thee poor,
Can, if they will (do wait their will) thy former state restoore.
At least let patience profit thee, for patience is a thing
Whereby a beggar gayneth of a discontented King.
Know Destiny is Destiny. This Epitaph I reed,
Though common-booked Poetry, yeat not unworthy heed:
Unborn to know what I should be to Gods my mother prayde:
A Male quoth Phoebus, Female Mars, and Juno neither said:
An Hermaphrodite was I borne. My death then asked she after:
By sword quoth Juno, Tree quoth Mars, and Phoebus said by water.
A Riuer-shadowing tree I climbd: out slipped my sword: I slidd:
By feet I hung, stabd with my sword, my head in water hidd.
Male, Female, neither, hanging, Sword, and drowning I abidd
Thus, Cacus, howsoever things from likelihoods descent,
In birth, life, death, the Gods are first, the middell, and Event.
And not what they can do they will, but what they will they can:
And that they do, or do it not, behooues not us to skan,
And saying so, and kissing too, her tale she thus began.
CHAP. XI.
I Speak not of the Argiue Nymph that had the ielious Syer,
To whom, shut up in brazen Tower, Jove passage had for hyer.
Not of Europa, Semele or Maia, will I dwell:
Not of your Foe his bastardie, or Laedas rape I tell:
Not of King Ceus Daughters fault, or other freak of Jove
Speak I: save of The Arcadian Nun, with whom he thus did roue.
Calisto was as fair a Maid, as fair as one might be,
Her father King Lycaon fled, Jove chanced her to see:
And seeing liked, liking loved, and loving made it known
To her (sweet Less) for fathers loss that makes then her moan.
Take patience, wench, said Jupiter, with thee shall al be well,
Thy fathers deeds have their deserts, but thou in peace shall dwell.
I am his Victor, but thy self art Victoresse of me:
Do grant me love, my zeal is more than fatherly to thee.
The restless clouds that mantling ride upon the racking Sky,
The scouring winds that sightlesse in the sounding air do fly,
The thriftie Earth that brings out and broodeth up her breed,
The shifting Seas whose swelling waves on shrinking shores do feed,
Shall fall, and fail, ere I be false (Lycaons Impe) to thee:
Of hearty Love this kiss (he kissed) an happy hansell be.
But hapless terms are these, quoth she, unfitting to a thrall:
Yeat, in respect of that I feel, I hear them not at all.
A friend (ah friendlesse name I Friend?) it being as it is,
A friend I say, much more a foe, and more, and worse then this,
The son of Saturn should, and shall, that speed and hearing miss.
Do rid, ah rid mine eyes of tears, and set my heart at rest,
By taking life, not making Love: the former likes me best.
Or, if that poor Calistos life shall lengthen to her woe,
Grant that among Dianas Nuns a Votarie I go:
For neither fi^s it now to love, or ever shall it so.
What viewed Jupiter this while, not pleasing to his sight?
Or what vnuiewed did he guess, not adding to delight?
Not excellent, but exquisite, was all to mind and eye:
Save she, the hansel of this love, did him of Love deny.
It greeues that Natures Paragon in Cloister, not in Court,
Should loose the beauty of her youth, and he thereby his sport.
But constant in her chaste pretense, he grants that would gainsay,
And seated in religion now, with Phoebe did she stay.
Blame Jupiter of other Loves, of this do set him clear:
It was his first, and first is firm, and touches very near.
He might forgo, but not forget Calisto in her Cell,
When setting higher thoughts apart, the Frithes did please him well:
He takes his Quiver and his Bow, and wheare she hunts, hunts he:
And sacrificed to his eyes that day he did her see.
About the Chase, Toils, Dogs and Bows, the Stand, Quarrie and all
He uses double diligence: so often did befall,
Not only sight of her his Saint he got, but also talk,
Whilst thus for his Calistos love, he haunted Phoebes walk.
But sight and talk accrue to love, the substance must be had:
And for to bring his drift about, he virgin-like is clad.
His nonage kept his beard from bloome, no wench morefaire then he
Whom at her Nunnerie a Nun Diana takes to be,
And with his Sisters brotherly do guess him to agree.
Thus faines Lycaons Conquerera Maid, to win a Maid:
His hands to woll, and Arras work, and woman's Chares he laid,
That not so much as by the tongue the Boy wench was bewraid.
Yeat thought is free, he sees, and smiles, and longs perhaps for more:
No marvel, for that Sister-hood had goodly Ladies store.
Scarce one for birth and beauty too was theare unworthy him,
Yet chiefly to Calistos vain he formed life and limme:
And Sister-like they single often, and chat of many things,
But that Calisto minds love no likelihood he wrings.
So Jove not once durst mention Jove, and force was sin and shame;
But love is hardy. Thus it hap: by long pursuit of game,
She weary rests in the Thicks, wheare sitting all alone,
He seeing her, is resolute or now to end his moene,
Or for so sweet a bodies use to leave his soul in loene.
He Nymph-like sits him by the Nymph, that took him for no man:
And after smiles, with nearer signs of Loves assault began.
He feels often her Iuorie breasts, nor makes coy to kiss:
Yeat all was well, a Maiden to a Maiden might do this.
Than ticks he up her tucked Frocke, nor did Calisto blush,
Or think abuse: he tickles too, no blab she thinks the Bush.
Thus whilst she thinks her Sister Nun to be a merry Less,
The Wanton did disclose himself, and told her who he was.
Away the Virgin would have fled, whom he withhild by force:
Thy love (sweet Nymph) has urged this shift, well worthy thy remorse,
He said: nor scorn with me a King to join thy self a Queen:
Or do but love and I will live in Phoebes Celles unseen:
And theare in beds, in bushes here (My fainings fit so well)
We may enjoy what love enioynes, and none our scapes shall tell.
She would not love, he could not leave: she wrangleth, and he wooeth:
She did resist, he did persist, and sport denied does.
That done, which could not be undone, what booteth discontent?
As good be pleased as not be eased: away Calisto went
To Cloister, Jupiter to Court: nor much she did repent,
Until her growing womb disclosed an ante-cedent fault,
Then in the Chapter house she told of Jupiters assault.
Diana, and her virgins all, admyring that escape,
Did gird at her, maligning Jove for such his subtle Rape.
And who more ready to control, then Athalanta was?
Whom shortly Meleager brought unto the self same pas.
The Lady Abbess did discharge Calisto from her Cell:
And silly Nymph, she great with child some other wheare must dwell.
Pelasgis it was Jupiters, and he her cause of blame,
The King her father in exile, her self in this defame,
What then remained? even secrecy, to hyde her self from shame.
Keep close (quoth she) from world ye woods mine error, Jove his crime:
And settling theare in simple Cave, did wait her childing time.
At length was hairy Arcas borne: no sooner could he go,
But that his wildnes eiked to his wretched Mothers woe.
No beast so strong that he would shun, and man he never saw,
Nor yeat his vexed mother could from fearcenes him withdraw.
Long time (the daughter of a King) she lived thus in Cave,
Not wanting grief, but wanting all that poorest wretches have.
And (worst of all) her savage son (whose manners did agree
Unto his birthplace) howerly threats his mothers death to be:
And angry once, pursued her so long from place to place,
That even into the City gates he followed her in chase.
The people when they did behold so fair a nymph in flight,
A Beare-like Arcas in pursuit, (for being naked quite,
His skin was swart and hairie) they did wonder at the sight.
And some that would his passage, stop, he rudely casts down,
And spares no spoil until the sight was noysed through the town.
Then out came Jupiter in arms, whom when Calisto knew,
Help Jove (she cryde) for lo thy son his mother does pursue.
He knew his Leiman at the first, and ioyed of her sight:
Then kiss they, when the Savage boy by force did leave to fight.
Calisto lived Lady like, yea Iunos Rival now:
And Arcas, nobly managed, such virtues him indow,
That (Jove consenting) him for King Pelasgis did allow.
A Son well worthy such a Syer: and for his prowes and fame,
Pelasgis then, of Arcas, took Arcadia to name.
But neither might these Ladies fair by any pleasant tale,
Or dazeling toye of masking love, (sweet Consorts to prevail)
Dissuade outrageous Cacus from vnpatientnes of mind:
Who in his greatest tyrannies did chiefest pleasures find.
He sleas the harmles Passengers, from eldest soul to child,
He burns and spoils the neighbor parts, and women he defild.
And to his Cave (Troponius Cave) did bring the spoils he gains,
In which (except to do more harm) he secretly remaynes.
Whilst none did pass, that did repasse unspoiled or vnkild
(None knowing how) all Italy with fear thereof was filled.
But, lo an help: when Hercules had slaughtered outright
Ten Giants, of Cremona Kings, and put the leauenth' to flight,
From thence the worthy did ariue with his victorious band
At King Euanders City, that by Auentin did stand.
Amongst a many richer Spoils, though none to him so rare,
He brought a sort of Spanish kine. Euander taking care,
(Because the like misfortunes often had happened theare before,)
Least Hercules should loose his kyne, of which he made such store,
Gave counsel that within the walls they might be kept all night.
And, better to approve his words, with tears he did recite
The murders, thefts, and cruelties, without compassion made
Upon his subjects, and their goods, by whom could not be said,
But that the Gods (for so they guess) for sin them so invade.
I am resolved quoth Hercules, wheare Gods do vengeance crave,
It is not strong or fensiue walls that any thing can save:
My Kyne shall therefore grase abroad: if mortal man it be,
Then know a tyrant is my task, his blood the Taskers fee.
The Cattle grasing then abroad (as was his use always)
The Giant left his cruel Den, to seek his cursed prays.
The Moon not wanting of her light, the Kine he did espy:
And knowing them, he also knew his feared Foe was nigh.
And far much better fear had bin then malice at that tide:
But hardly shunneth policy, what destinies provide.
He might have lurkte a while in Den, but of a peevish spite,
Eight of the Kine with fastened cords, by policy and might,
He dragged backward by their tails into his devilish nest:
Then stopping up the subtle hole, did lay him down to rest.
Now Hercules (the rather pricked by King Euanders talk)
Into the fields to see his Kine by prime of day did walk.
Where missing eight, he could not guess which way they should be go^:
A many therefore had in charge, to search them out anon.
The Searchers, following every sign, great store of footings found
Descending from Mount Auentine into the lower ground:
But for the footings did descend, and not ascend, they thought
Of no such cunning as in deed in Auentine was wrought.
Alcaeus Grand-sonne searching long the Thefts he could not find,
Was much disquieted in himself, and angry in his mind:
And chafing, when he should depart, he twice or thrice did shake
A Tree that grew on Auentine: which rooted up did make
So large a vent that one might view they hollow cave below,
And Cacus with his Leash of wives they were disclosed so.
Whom, when the Greek espied theare, O graceless King, he said,
Whose Tyrannies have made the Realms of Hespera afraid,
Whose cruelties have been the cause of all the loss thou have,
What moves thee in Italy to prosecute such waste?
Thinkste thou, whom neither mighty Realms, nor royal Gards of me^
Could late defend, now to escape, enclosed thus in den,
The just reuengment of the Godds? no, no, the Heavens we see,
Have brought to light a wretch so lewd, even by a senceles Tree:
And since that neither wealth nor want to goodness may thee win,
A grievous death, condignly, shall cut off thy grounded sin.
To it did Cacus answer thus: do thou pursue me still?
Who only art the chiefest cause of these my doings ill:
Not suffering me to live the rest of mine unhappy days
Among the fruitless Rocks, a wretch in misery always.
Cease further prate; said Hercules, in troth it greeueth much,
To see a King in this Distress, but since thy life is such
As neither in adversity, nor prosperous estate
Thou can afford one jot of good, I purpose to rebate
Thy wicked days by worthy death, prepare therefore to dye.
When Cacus saw he must perforce so hard a combat try,
He by enchanted flames again endeavored to fly.
But Hercules deluded once by that devise before,
Had learned now for being so deceived any more:
And, casting fear aside, did leap into the flaming Cave,
And theare by Art did conquer Art. The Giant then to save
Himself did take his Axe in hand, wheare Hercules and he
Courageously bestirre themselves, until they did agree,
To try it out in open air. So doubtful was their fight,
That Lookers on could not discern to whether best should light.
The frighted Ladies did their best to help their fighting friend:
But Hercules had victory, and Cacus had his end.
CHAP. XII.
FOr Giants of Cremona slain, and Cacus ridded so,
The Latin Princes praise on him and presents did bestoe.
Wheare Rome is now, Pallantia then, Euander he did frame
A temple, and to Hercules did dedicate the same:
And he (entreated thereunto) in Italy did stay:
To honor whom did Princes come from far and every way.
King Faunus had affairs abroad, when from Laurentum came
His wife Marica, Facua some this lovely Queen do name.
From liking did she fall in love with Hercules, and he
More ready to have made demand, then like to disagree,
Conceauing her by circumstance, so coupled by contract,
That, had King Faunus never lived, Latinus had not lackt:
Yeat home came Faunus, fathering his late Corriuals act.
But whether gotten lawfully, or thus in love forbod,
Latinus, Brute his Gran-dames Syer, was son unto a God.
WHilst that in love of this same Queen, and land of all besides,
The vanquisher of Vulcans son in Italy abides,
Of Calabries a mighty host King Picus he prouides.
And, in reueng of Cacus, swore his Slayer should be slain:
But he, ere long, that so did swear, vnsweared it again:
When, chased home into his holds, theare sparred up in gates,
The valiant Thebane, all in vain, a following fight awaites.
Who, for dispatch, did feign himself a Legate to the King,
And him the Porters, as the same, before their Tyrant bring.
Then shaking off his civil robes, his shining Arms appear:
And renting down (...) ^ro^ sparre, both Prince and people fear.
Some ran to Armor, other some did fight with him their last:
Both court and City in the end did lay upon him fast.
Theare Picus, worthily, did win of valiantness a name:
Yeat Hercules more valiantly by death did Picus tame.
And to attend their King his ghost he sends flock by flock:
His fury was as fire to Fern, his foes as waves to Rock:
Nor did his Lions Spoil give place to darting or to knock.
Mean time his men assault without, whilst he assayles within,
Wheare fighting to beat down the Gates he so the Goal did win.
Within the King his ransackt Court he Iole espyes,
Whose tears, then mounting from her heart, dismount the^ from her eyes,
King Picus (now a lifeles corse) was Father of this Maid:
In vain therefore did Hercules her pensiveness disswayde:
Nor could he but lament her fate, and love so sweet a face,
Whose person also did contain the type of female grace.
At first she was so far from love she rather seemed to hate,
Yeat could she not so give the Check, but that she took the Mate.
Then eithers love, was eithers life: poor Deianira she
Was out of commons, yea of thought, an other had her fee.
WIth this, so fair and portly wench, he sailed into Thrace:
And hears how Diomedes did tyrannize in that place.
No Stranger scapes vnraunsomed: but Ransom wanting, then
He casts them, as prouender, to Horses eating men.
A Guard of Tyrants, like himself, attending on him still,
Who richly did maintain themselves, by such their doings ill.
The Scourge of such was moved, not to be removed now
By Iole, whose loving tears such labors disalow.
With Diomedes and his Guard in Forest did he meet,
Who with their common Stratagem the Stranger think to greet.
Hands of, commanded Hercules, for Horse I am no hay,
All Strangers Raunsom, once for all, my coming is to pay:
Which said, himself against them all began a noble fray.
The sturdie Thracians, mighty men, did hardly loose their ground
But, than the King, a mightier man not any wheare was found.
These all at once assail, and strike, and thunder on his Sheeld:
But number fitted to his force, unwonted so to yield.
For with his club he skuffles then amongst their Curets so,
That speedy death was sweeter dole then to survive his blo.
Well mounted comes the King himself, whom he dismounts anon,
But, reseued to his Horse again, away he would be gone.
Less has^e, he said, I Hearts out-runne, no^ shall thou me out-ride:
Out stripping so the man-feade horse, he topled ore his side
The Monstrous King, that resculesse to flying people cride.
Who, lying all to frus^hed thus, the son of Jove did bring
His cruel Iades, that soon devour their more than cruel King.
The Thracians all submit themselves, and joy their Tyrants death,
And think some God had left the Heavens to succor men on earth,
From such as what they would they will, and what they will they can,
And what they can they dare and do, and doing none withstan.
Nor thought they better of the man then did his deeds approve,
That never was a Conqueror unto his own behoue,
But to establish virtuous men, and Tyrants to remove.
This common Soldiour of the world with Iole did land
In Lycia: and, the earth in peace, discharged theare his band.
Sweet busses, not sharp battles, then did alter man and mind:
Till he, as others, sorrow in security did find.
From Assure went the Empire then when Tonos he had time
To court his Trulles, Arbaces so espying place to clyme.
Secure in Tomyris her flight, was valiant Cyrus slain.
From Capua, not from Cannas, grew brave Hanibal his baine,
The same to whose victorious Sword a second world was sought,
That Macedon in court, not Camp, to traytrous end was brought.
A lover, not a Soldiour, went Achilles to his grave.
And Caesar not in steel, but silk, to Rome his farewell gave.
Even so, this second unto none, superior unto all,
To whom did sooner Causes cease then Conquests not befall,
This monster-Master Hercules, this Tyrant-Tamer, he
Whose high Exploytes did leave the earth from spoil and spoylers free,
In pleasures did he perish now, that did in perils thrive:
A grievous Task I undertake his dying to revive.
CHAP. XIII.
WHen Deianira understood her busbands back return,
She thought it strange, that he from her so strangely did soiorne.
Explorers sent to search the cause, return was made that he
Did loyter in a Strangers Love: and Iole was she
That ever hanged at his lips, and hugged was of him,
And that, his armor laid apart, in silk he courts it trim.
The daughter of th'Aetolian King did little less then rave:
And can the churl (quoth she) prefer in love a captive Slave
Before his wife, whom late he faynd inferior unto none?
Ah Hercules thou art a man, thy manhood thus is known.
Fie, may a foreign Strumpets arms so fasten on his neck,
As he (the Rector of the Earth) must bow if she does beck?
Oh how unlike to Hercules, is Hercules in this?
But, leaving men to natures fault, in her the lewdnes is,
No man so chaste, but such as she may work to do amiss.
Thus whilst her overplus of love to Jealousy did grow,
She simply minds the spightfull gift that Nessus did bestow.
And, for he dying spoke the words, she held it as her Creed
That it could win him to her self: of which (now having need)
She uses part, and sent a Shirt so boiled as she bad
To Hercules: and Hercules was of the Present glad:
Confessing her his only Wife: And whilst he did repent
His breach of Love, on Oeta Mount to sacrifice he went.
Philoctes, Paeans valiant Son, and Lychas, he that brought
The poysned Shirt, were present theare, but of no treason thought:
Not Deianiras self (good Soul) till trial made it plain,
When as his body and the fire gave moisture to the bayne.
His stoutnes hid such torments long, as else could none abide,
Yea till the baine his Bowels and his very Marrow fryde.
But when his torments had no mean, the Altar down he throes,
And from his martred body rents the gory smoking clothes:
And striving to strip off the Shirt he teareth flesh from bone,
And left his breaking Synoees bare, his Intrailes every one
Did boil, and burst, and show themselves wheare lumps of flesh did lack,
And still the murdrous Shirt did cleue unto his mangled back.
Espying Deianiras Squire, that quaking stood, he said,
And art thou wretch the Instrument of my destruction maid?
Whom swinging then about his head, he slinged down the hill:
And so did silly Lychas dye, that purposed no il.
Then running down from hill to Plain, from Plain to hill again,
He rents up Rocks and mighty Hills in error of his pain:
Till, sadly leaning on his Club, he sighing, vows that none
Should be the death of Hercules but Hercules alone.
And to his friend Philoctes took his Arrows and his Bow,
And gladly to the hallowed fire, as to his bed did go.
Wheare lying down, and taking leave with reared hands to sky,
The Earths Protector so, in peace, amidst the flames did dye.
Philoctes, near o'rgone with grief, his Ashes did conuaye
To Italy, inshrined in his Temple there to stay:
And woeful Deianira hears of Hercules decay.
His Ghost she voucheth and the Gods to witness, that her mind
Was giltles of a traitrous thought: nor think me so unkind
(Sweet Husband) as to have the will to ouerliue thee here,
But that my Ghost before thy Ghost it self of guile shall clear:
And now I come, ah now I come, forgive ye gods the deed
She said e^and pearsing so her breast, a breathles Corse did bleed.
AS Greeks lament their Champions loss, so did the Phrygians joy:
And Priamus did fortify his stately City Troy.
Twice Hercules had rased it, and thirdly was it reard
By Pryam, strong in wealth and walls, through Asia loved and feared.
He called to mind Laomedon whom Hercules had slain,
His Sister too Hesione, that Captive did remain
In Salamis with Telamon: and well he was apayde,
In that the Doer of the same lived not the Greeks to aid.
His Sister therefore not restorde, his Legates asking it,
By stealing of the Spartane Queen did Paris cry them quit.
Twelve hundred fifty five war-Shippes, with me^ and Armor frought,
By seauentie Kings and kingly Peers, from Greece to Troy were brought,
To win her thence. King Priamus (besides his Empire great)
Had ayders Princes thirty three: less Lords I not repeat,
Not Sagitar, that in this War did many a valiant feate.
Ten years, ten months, and twice six days, the siege they did abide:
Eight hundred sixty thousand Greeks, by Trojan weapons did:
Six hundred fifty six thousands of Trojans fighting men,
Besides the slaughtred at the sack, by Grecians perished then:
And (if that Hector, Troilus, and Paris, so we name)
Fell forty Kings: omitting more, of little lesser fame.
Mislike, and civil quarrels, when the Grecians homewards drew,
Did well near waste the remnant Kings that Phrigia did subdewe,
Thus secure Troy was ouer-set, when Troy was over stout,
And over rich, was overrun, and tardie looked about.
The Greekish Ships, with Phrigian Spoils, through Xant and Simoes roe,
For now Antenor had betrayde Palladium to the foe,
And with Palladium Priamus, Aeneas sought to hide
From Pyrrhus Polyxena (she for whom Achilles did,
Wherefore upon Achilles Tomb her self was after slain,
What time old Hecuba discryde young Polydor his bayne:)
For which, Aeneas banished, did hoyst his sails to wind,
And, after many perils, rule in Italy did find.
AENeas dead, Ascanius reigned: Ascanius dead, his brother
Posthumus Syluius did succeed. Lauinia was his mother,
Her Syer Latinus, Faunus his, and Picus him begot,
And Saturn him. From mother thus Posthumus lacked not
The noblest blood. On Fathers side his petigree was thus:
Jove had Dardanus: and the same begot Erictheus:
He Troys: Troys, Assaracus: he Capys: and the same
Anchises: he Aeneas had: of him Posthumus came:
And he was Father unto Brute: and thus the Brutons bring
Their petigree from Jupiter, of Pagane Gods the King:
And add they may, that Brute his Syer of Venus son did spring.
Thrice five degrees from Noe was Brute, and four times six was he
From Adam: and from Iaphets house does fetch his petigree.
Posthumus Syluius perishing in Chase amongst the brakes,
Mistook for Game by Brute his Son, Brute Italy forsakes:
And to associate his Exile, a many Troyans mo
At all adventures put to Seas, uncertain where to go:
To whom did Fortune, Fortune-like, become a friend and foe:
Till Brute, with no less pain and praise then had his Grandsier late
Achiued Latium, land^ng here, suppressed so the state
Of all the Fiend-breed Albinests, huge Giants fearce and strong,
Or race of Albion Neptuns Son (else some derive them wrong)
That of this Isle (vn-Scotted yet) he Empire had ere long.
THE THIRD BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XIIII.
NOw, of the Conqueror, this Isle had Brutaine unto name,
And with his Trojans Brute began manurage of the same.
For rased Troy to rear a Troy fit place he searched then,
And viewes the mounting Northern parts: These fit (quoth he) for men
That trust as much to flight as fight: our Bulwarks are our breasts,
The next Arriuals here, perchance, will gladlier build their nests:
A Trojans courage is to him a Fortres of defense:
And leaving so wheare Scotts be now he Southward makes thence;
Whereas the earth more plenty gave, and air more temprature,
And nothing wanted that by wealth or pleasure might allure:
And more, the Lady Flood of Floods, the River Thamis, it
Did seem to Brute against the foe, and with himself to fit.
Upon whose fruitful bancks therefore, whose bounds are chiefly said,
The want-les Counties Essex, Kent, Surrie, and wealthy Glayde
Of Hartfordshire, for Cities store participating aid,
Did Brute build up his Troy-nouant, enclosing it with wall:
Which Lud did after beautify, and Luds-towne it did call
That now is London: evermore to rightful Princes true,
Yea Prince and people still to it as to their Storehouse drew,
For plenty and for populous the like we no wheare vewe.
Howbe-it many neighbor towns as much ere now could say,
But place for people, people, place, and all for sin decay.
When Brute should dye thus to his Sons he did the Isle convey:
To Camber Wales, to Albnact he Albanie did leave,
To Locrine Brutaine: whom his Queen of life did thus bereave.
THe furious Hun, that drowning theare to Humber left his name,
The King did vanquish, and for spoil unto his Navy came:
Where Humbars Daughter, Parragon for beauty, such a Dame
As Love himself could not but love, did Locrine so inflame,
That Guendoleyne, the Cornish Duke his daughter, Locrins Queen,
Grew in contempt: and, Coryn dead, his Change of Choice was seen.
To Cornwall goes the wrothfull Queen to seize her Fathers Land,
From whence she brought, to work revenge, of warriors stout a band,
And bids her husband battle, and in battle is he slain:
And for their Son in Nonage was, she to his use did rain.
The Lady Estrild Locrins Love, and Sabrin, wondrous fair,
Her husbands and his Leimans impe, she meaning not to spare,
Did bring unto the water that the wenches name does bear:
There binding both, and bobbing them, then trembling at her ire,
She said: if Scythia could have hild the wandering King thy Sire,
Then British waters had not been to him deserved bayne:
But Estrild, snout-fayre Estrild, she was sparde, forsooth, to train
With whorish tricks a vicious King: But neither of you twain,
Thou stately Drab, nor this thy Brat, a bastard as thy self,
Shall live in triumph of my wrong: first mother and her Elfe
Shall fish in Flood for Humbars soul, and bring him news to hell,
That Locrins wife on Locrins whore revenged her so well.
They lifting up their lilly hands, from out their lovely eyes
Power tears like Pearls, and wash those Cheeks where naught save beauty
lies*
And seeking to excuse themselves, and mercy to obtain,
With speeches good, and prayers fair, they speak and pray in vain.
Queen Guendoleyne so bids, and they into the Flood are cast,
Whereas amongst the drenching waves the Ladies breath their last.
As this his Grandame, such appeared Mempricius, Madans son,
Whose brother Manlius traytrously by him to death was done.
And since of noble Brute his line prodigious things I tell,
I skipping to the Tenth from him will show what then befell.
ABout a thirty years and five did Leir rule this Land,
When, doting on his Daughters three, with them he fell in hand
To tell how much they loved him. The Eldest did esteem
Her life inferior to her love, so did the second deem:
The youngest said her love was such as did a child behoue,
And that how much himself was worth, so much she him did love.
The foremost two did please him well, the youngest did not so:
Upon the Prince of Albanie the First he did bestoe:
The Middle on the Cornish Prince: their Dowry was his Throne,
At his decease: Cordellas part was very small or none.
Yeat, for her form, and virtuous life, a noble Gallian King
Did her vn-dowed, for his Queen into his Country bring.
Her Sisters sick of Fathers health, their husbands by consent
Did join in Arms: from Leir so by force the Scepter went:
Yeat, for they promise pentious large, he rather was content.
In Albanie the quondam King at eldest Daughters Court
Was settled scarce, when she repines, and lessens still his Port.
His second Daughter the^, he thought, would show her self more kind:
To whom, he going, for a while did frank allowance find.
Ere long abridging almost all, she keeps him so lo,
That of two bads, for betters choice he back again did go.
But Gonorill at his return, not only did attempt
Her fathers death, but openly did hold him in contempt.
His aged eyes power out their tears, when holding up his hands,
He said: O God, who so thou art, that my good hap withstands,
Prolong not life, defer not death, my self I ouer-liue,
When those that owe to me their lives, to me my death would give.
Thou Town, whose walls rose of my wealth, stand evermore to tell
Thy Founders fall, and warn that none do fall as Leir fell.
Bid none affie in Friends, for say, his Children wrought his wrack:
Yea those, that were to him most dear, did loathe and let him lack,
Cordella, well Cordella said, she loved as a Child:
But sweeter words we seek than sooth, and so are men beguild.
She only rests untried yet: but what may I expect
From her? to whom I nothing gave, when these do me reject.
Then dye, nay try, the rule may fail, and nature may ascend:
Nor are they ever surest friends, on whom we most do spend.
He ships himself to Gallia then: but makes known before
Unto Cordella his estate, who rueth him so poor,
And kept his theare ariuall close till she provided had
To furnish him in every want. Of him her King was glad,
And nobly entertained him: the Queen with tears among,
(Her duty done) conferreth with her father of his wrong.
Such duty, bounty, kindness, and increasing love, he found
In that his Daughter and her Lord, that sorrows more abound
For his unkindly using her, then for the others crime:
And King-like thus in Agamps Court did Leir dwell, till time
The noble King his Sonne-in-lawe transports an Army great
Of forcie Gawles, possessing him of dispossessed Seat:
To whom Cordella did succeed, not reigning long in queate.
Not how her Nephews war on her, and one of the^ slew the other
Shall follow: but I will disclose a most tyrannous mother.
CHAP. XV.
GOrbodugs double Issue now, when eighteen Kings were past,
Hild jointly Empire in this land: till Porrex at the last,
Not tied so by brotherhood, but that he did disdain
A fellow King, (for never can one Kingdom brook of twain)
Did levy secret bands: for dread whereof did Ferrex fly,
And out of Gallia brings War, in which himself did dye.
Then Porrex only reigned here, and ruled all in peace:
Till Iden, mother Queen to both, her fury did increase
So fearcely, as she seeks revenge even in the highest degree.
Why lives this (quoth she) a King? in grave why lies he?
Dye Iden, dye: nay dye thou wretch, that me a wretch have made:
His ghost, whose life stood in thy light, commands me of aid.
Nor want I (Ferrex) will to aid: for why the Gods I see
Defer revenge, nor with a Devil the Devils disagree.
The heavens, me thinks, with thu^derbolts should press his soul to hell,
Or Earth give passage, that at least with men he might not dwell.
But I my self, even I my self, their slacknesse will supplye,
And Mothers name and Nature both to such a Son deny.
Dead night was come, when Iden found the King her son a sleep,
And all was still: not then as now did Guards their Princes keep.
Admit they had, who would have fearde such mischief in a mother?
She whispring softly, sleep thy last, yea sleep as does thy brother,
Did gash his throat: who starting up, when strength and speech were go^e,
Lifts up his faynting hands, and knew the Tyranness anon:
And makes signs, as who would say, ah mother thou have done
A deed, as never mother erst did practice on her Son.
But name of Son, nor signs did serve, him still with wounds she plyes
Nor (more than Monster) did it please that simply so he dies,
But that his body, peecemeale tore, about the Lodging flies.
And thus from noble Brute his line the Scepter then did pass:
When of his blood for to succeed no heir suruiuing was.
Four Dukes at once, in civil broils, seiunctly after rain.
Near when, the Scotts (who^ some accuse by Ante-dates to gain)
Did settle in the Northern Isles. These people bring their line
From Cecrops, and that Pharo he that ever did decline
From Moses, seeking Hebers house from Egypt to convey.
His daughter Scota Gathelus their Duke brought thence away,
When Pharos sin to Jacobs Seed did near that Land decay.
And Cecrops son brought the^ from thence (as Scotts enforce the same)
The Stone that Jacob slept upon, when Angels went and came.
Of it was made their fatal Chair: of which they bear in hand,
That whearesoere ye same is found, the Scotts shall brook yt land:
At Westminster that Monument does now, decaying, stand.
In Lusitania Gathelus did first his Kingdom found:
And of his race (of Scota, Scotts) when Spanish Scotts abound,
Ariue in Ireland, and in it a second Empire ground.
And thirdly, when their broodie Race that Isle did ouer-store,
Amongst the Islands Hebredes they seek out dwellings more.
These Irish, sometime Spanish Scots, of whence our now- Scots be,
Within the Isles of Albion thus, whilst Brutaines disagree,
Did seat themselves, and nestle too amongst the Mountain grounds:
What time a Scythian people, Pichtes, did seize the middle bounds
Twixt them and us: and these did prove to Brutaine double wounds.
The Penthland people and the Scots, alying, friendly live,
Until the Pichts, by British wyles, contrary cause did give.
Then from their Captains fell the Scots, and chose to them a King:
And Fergus out of Ireland did the Chair of Marble bring:
In which instald the first Scotch King in Albion, so he wrought
That Pichts and Scots, then up in Arms, were to atonement brought.
Three valiant people thus at once in Albion Empire hold,
Brutes, Scots and Pichts: the latter twain less civil, but as bold.
The Pichts were fierce and Scythian like: much like the Irish now
The Scots were then: courageous both: Nor them I disallowe
That write they fed on humane flesh, for so it may be well,
Like of these men their bloody minds their native stories tell:
But to our British business now, to show what theare befell.
Not how the tri-partited Rule unto his quartarne Rain
Dunwallo, after forty years, did Monarchize again:
Not what precedent Kings in France, and Denmark did obtain
Speak I. From Porrex forty Kings in silence shall remain:
Alonelie valiant Brennus, and his brother Beline, they
Vnpraised for their wars and works shall not escape away.
CHAP. XVI.
THese Brothers, thirsting amplier Reigns, did martiallie contend,
Till Brenn his force was not of force his brothers to defend.
To Norway sails he, wheare he got an Army and a prize,
The Prince of Norwaies Daughter, whom he wins in this wise.
The King of Denmark stood with him, until the States decreede
That both should plead before their Prince, and better Pleader speed.
And when the Norgane Prince and Peers were seated for their strife,
The King of Danes beginning first, thus pleaded for a wife.
Not yet a King, King Philips son with none but Kings would cope,
His reason was, inferior strife of glory gives no hope:
I am a King, and grant the Prize in question worthy me,
But grudge that my Competitor a banished man should be.
Do grant him what he has for-gon, and never more shall gi^,
Yeat were he but a Demi-king, to challenge me unfit:
Dunwallos younger Son, that has his brother to his Foe,
And worthelie, his trecheries have well deserved so,
And yet (audacious that he is) he blusheth not to hear
The troth of his untroth, nor yeat an heere-Repulse does fear.
Would she for whom I must contend were not to me the same
She is, or he that stands with me a man of better fame.
But since in this unequal Plea I must my self imbace,
Know, Norwaies, that my pleaded cause co^cernes your public ca^e.
It is the King of Denmark does your Prince his daughter crave,
And note, it is no little thing with us Allie to have.
By league, or Leigure, Danske can fence, or front you, friend, or foe,
Our neighborhood does fit to both, your welfare or your woe.
Combine therefore in needful League our near conjoined States:
I may your good, naught less can he that thus with me debates.
He is a Bruton (if Exile allow we call him so)
And far from aiding you, that knows himself not to bestoe.
Admit he were received home, what Empire does he sway?
A sorry Islands Moyetie, and far from hence away.
Her Dowry is your Diadem: what Ioynter can he make?
Not any: give not then to him from whom you cannot take.
And Lady (She for whom they strove was present) well I wo^,
My love does claim a greater debt than so to be forgot.
I wish (mine Opposite his want) that Arms might give the right,
It is not dread, but doomed (sweet wench) that thus with tongue I fight.
Proud Bruton (frowning so on Brenn) disclaim in her my dew,
Else thou repining shall repent: do make thy choice a new.
At least amend thine Error, and mine envy shall have end:
I need not force so weak a Foe, seek thou so strong a friend.
Norwaies consent, and, Lady, be no Counter-mand to this:
Descent not Brenn: conclude her mine: else my Conclusion is,
If not for worth, by force perforce to win her from you all,
Yea though our banished Copes-mate could his British Succors call.
The King of Danes concluded thus: and after silence short,
The Brutaine Heroes veiled, and did answer in this sort.
Most gracious Norgane Peers, you hear the ouer-tearming taunts
Of this Appelant, that himself and Scepter ouer-vaunts.
It lesser greeueth he should grudge that I with him co-riue,
Than his so peremptory speech in your despite to wiue.
It greeues, in troth: not for my self, but for he beardeth you,
And seems disdaineful of your aid, that does so proudly wowe.
How captiously he derogates from me, and mine estate?
And Arrogates unto himself, to bring me so in hate.
How daintely his eyes endure so bace an Objects view?
How desperately does he conclude, and threatens me and you?
Well, bark he, byte he, bragges nor blows shall dare me to defend
A Challenge, wheare so brave a Prize stands for the Wagers end.
Nor think (vainglorious that thou art) me lesser than a King,
Or greater than by suit, or sword, to prize so rare a thing.
Upbraid me not with banishment, nor Belyns quarrel touch,
Nor yeat my petite Signorie: nor more than troth by much.
These present nobles know the cause for which I hither come:
Not as an exile, but for aid, and they assure me some.
Then know, the cause is honest when their Honors give supplies:
As capable are they of troth, as thou art apt for lies.
My bothers Kingdom seems, forsooth, an Ouer-match to mine,
My Kingdom, Cutlake, therefore is an vnder-match to thine?
Nay, give (and so I hope ye will) the Prize to me, and than
Let Cutlake with his Crown of Danske vn-crowne me if he can.
Then he, disabling me to make a Ioynter happily,
With Denmark such a Ioynters want (if wanting) should supply.
But neither have I such a lack, nor hold I such a love,
As that her Dowry (not in quest) before her self does move.
He harpeth as himself would have, that makes love his Staile:
Else would he sue in milder sort, and suing, fear to fail.
For Lady see your Lovers Plea: your love, says he, is debt:
And if not words, nor worthiness, then Armor shall you get.
Brave words and fit to fear, not feed, a courted Ladies vain.
But say he cannot wowe in print, but Soldior-like and plain:
Nor I, in sooth, more loves my heart than can my tongue explain.
Conclude we therefore Souldior-like, and let a combat yield
Unto the hardier of us twain the honor of the field,
If not: then, if my Lords so please: or she thereto agree,
Although thou should by force of Arms, subdue her hence to thee,
Yeat from thy strongest Hold in Danske I would thy Conquest free.
Lo here my Gage (he terr'd his Glove) thou know ye Victors meed:
(So did he pause, his Pledge untouched, and then did thus proceed)
Then fret thy fill, and work thy worst: deliver, Lords, your wills:
Ye have experience how this same with brags, not battle, killes.
He threatens only, I entreat, he claims her of dew,
I wish, and hope for to deserve. The Counsel then withdrewe
Themselves apart: and soon for Brenn a verdict did ensewe.
The Dane enraged sailed thence, and rigged out a Fleet,
And did with Brenn, resayling home, at great advantage meet.
Their Ships did grapple, and their swords did sunder life from lim:
So fought they, as their ships did seem in Seas of blood to swim.
But multitude oppressed Brenn, he hardlye did escape,
His Lady will he, nill he, left the King of Denmarkes Rape.
Not meanly insolent the Danes hoyst up their home-meant Sayleae
But after many crabbed Flawes, and long contrary Gayles,
The Kings and Norgane Ladies Ship was tossed to the Cost
Of Brutaine: wheare, imprisoned, King Belyn was their Host:
Until, sufficient Pledges had that Denmark it should pay
Continual Tribute to the Brutes, he them dismissed away.
Mean while King Bren (received now amongst the Gawles did threate
For Englands Crowne-halfe him withheld his Brothers self and Seat:
(For Time, alaying Love, did add unto domesticke hate)
And with the Cenouesean Gawles, whose Prince his heir of late
He had espoused, did invade the Empire of his Brother:
And almost did their Battles join, when thus intreates their Mother.
I dare to name ye Sons, because I am your Mother, yet
I doubt to term you Brothers, that do Brotherhood forget.
These Prodigies, their wrothfull Shields, forbodden Foe to Foe,
Do ill beseem allied hands, even yours allied so.
O, how seem Oedipus his Sons in you again to strive?
How seem these words in me (aye me) Iocasta to revive?
I would Dunwallo lived, or ere death had lost again
His Monarchy, sufficing Four, but now too small for Twain.
Then either would you, as did he, employ your wounds elswheare:
Or for the smalnes of your Power agree, at least for fear.
But pride of rich and rome-some Thrones, that wingeth now your darts,
It will (I would not as I fear) work sorrow to your hearts.
My Sons, sweet Sons, attend my words, your Mothers words attend,
And for I am your Mother do conclude I am your friend:
I cannot counsel, but entreat, nor yeat I can entreat
But as a Woman, and the same whose blood was once your meat.
Hence had ye Milk (She baerd her Pappes) these Arms did hug ye ost:
These fyled hands did wipe, did wrap, did rock, and lay ye soft:
These Lips did kiss, or Eyes did weep, if that ye were vnqueat,
The^ply I did, with Song, or Sighs, with Dance, with Tung, or Teate.
For these kind Causes, dear my Sons, disarme your selves: if not,
Then for these bitter tears that now your Mothers Cheeks do spot:
Often urge I Sons and Mothers Names, Names not to be forgot.
Send hence these Soldiers. ye, my Sons, and none but ye would fight:
When none should rather be at one, if Nature had her right.
What comfort, Beline, shall I speed? sweet Brenn, shall I prevail?
Say yea (sweet Youths) ah yea, say yea: or if I needs must fail,
Say noe: and then will I begin your Battle with my bail.
Then then some Stranger, not my Sons, shall close me in the Earth,
When we by Armor ouer-soone shall meet, I fear, in death.
This said, with gushing tears eftsoons she plyes the one and other,
Till both did show themselves at length Sons worthy such a Mother:
And with those hands, those altered hands, that lately threatened bloes,
They did embrace: becoming thus continual friends of foes.
Glad was the Queen: and Beline hild sole Empier: more, he had
From Denmark Tribute: and to this a greater honor add,
His daughter Cimbra, wedded to the Almayne Prince, gave name
Unto the Cimbrians, holding Rome so long and warlike game.
Some (if no Error) give to him for foreign Conquests fame.
His Valor, War, and Peace ore past: now speak we of the Knight,
That this side and beyond the Alps subdewed all by fight.
The stateliest Towns in Italy had Brenn their Builder, and
Even Rome, the terror of the World, did at his mercy stand.
The Senate, giving to the Earth ear-while both war and peace,
Could not themselves, their City, scarce their Cappitoll release.
THeir Gander Feast, what Manlius and Camillus did therein,
How This the Cappitol, and That from Brenn his Spoils did win,
I pretermit. The three-topt Mount Parnassus had beloe
Apollos Temple, whither men for Oracles did go.
This, with the God and Goods the Gawles did put to sack and spoils:
And whilst, encamped here, they kept such sacreligious coil,
The God, or rather Devil, whom The Almighty did permit,
His Deity profaned, to deceive the world in it,
With Tempests, Earthquakes, Steneh, and Sights, so cryde the Spoylers quit
That most did perish, few disperse, and all were out of heart,
Yea Brenn himself, discouraged, did change in every part.
He looking after and upon the scattered and the slain,
Did seem a second Cadmus, save less patient of his pain:
And, shaming to be seen to weep, devoured sightles tears:
And, in these words, his hearty greefes did number to their Ears.
Sweet Soldiers leave me to my self, it likes me that ye leave me,
More takes your tarriance from my health than can these plagues bereave me:
Each of these Mass of Corpses dead has bin a death to me,
Deliver then mine Eyes of you, too many deaths I see.
Survive, and tell the Western World what we exployted have:
How that to Rome, amidst her Roof, the maiden Sack we gave.
Tell of our Battles, Booties, and our Buildings: lastly tell
(An honor to our Overthrow) that we at Delphos fell
By wounds divine, no humane Arms. But God, who so thou be,
Less is thy courage than Command, else would thou cope with me,
As Pluto with Alcides did, and Mars sometimes with men:
Do me like honor, and these Graves shall lightly grieve me then.
But thou full little dare so. Nay, I do dare too much,
That with my so unhallowed tongue thy Deity dare touch.
Ah, see these Slaughters, and reserve alive this small Remain,
Let lastly me, and only me, eike number to the slain.
But bootlesse on a ruthles God I see my prayers spent,
As haughtely do thou revenge as humbly I repent.
Well (God of Delphos) since our tears, this Incense, nor these Graves
Appease thine ire, persist to plague this flesh, that henceforth craves
No pity: to the Hebrewe God, of power exceeding thine,
(Men say) appeal I, and bequeath the Souls of me and mine:
Accept my simple Legacy, O Godhood most deuyne,
Said Brenn. And with a selfe-wrought wound did perish: and his men
Departing, won, and left the name to Gallo-Grecia then.
The righteous Gorboman might add fresh Subject to our Muse,
But skipping to his Fathers Sons, of them it thus ensewes.
Five years had Archigallo reigned, when hated doing wrong,
He was deprived of his Realm, and lived vagrant long,
And fearing all that frended none, kept close the Woods among.
Theare Elidurus hunting found his wretched Brother, and
They gasing each in others face, with sighs and weepings stand.
A King, as Elidurus is, once was I thinks his Brother,
A wretch, as Archigallo is, I may be thinks the other.
The lowly King alights anon, and when they had embraced,
Then Archigallo secretly in Ebranks Town was placed:
In which, the King commanding so, the Nobles did convent,
To whom did Elidurus thus inform of his intent.
If Fortune had bin cross (my Lords) to me, or any fear
Of Armor were approaching us, I should perchance appear
Faint and false-hearted in my charge, but ever lackt the one,
Nor has the other likelihood, for quietler rules none.
Yeat Kings may think their heads too weak their Dyademes to sustain,
For endless cares concur with Crowns, a bitter sweet is Rain:
Howbeit, Subjects falsely judge their Princes blessed are,
When both of peace and perils they contain the common care,
And yeat for this they grudgingly from Pounds a Penny spare.
Not these, my Lords, make me disclaim in it which all pursue,
But Justice bidds my Brothers right I should commend to you.
This one Request includes, I know, exceeding dangers twain,
To me, if for a private life I change a public Rain,
To you, if whom ye have deprived ye shall restore again.
But for I have done right, no wrong, though Justice wants not foes,
And though unto a Magistrate disgrading brings woes,
Yeat against the bad a conscience good may safe it self oppoes.
Nor be ye fearful of revenge, that did no more than right:
Even Archigallo will confess his sin, and clear your spite:
Whose restitution (were he wronged) at least shall you acquit.
You hassard less, re-kinging him, then I vn-king'd to be,
And Danger ouer-dares, if it from Justice disagree.
Then, good my Lords, do right his wrong, at leastwise do him right,
Whose smarte, no doubt, has wrought in him a reconciled spright.
Just Gorboman his brotherhood succeeding in their Line,
Then Archigallo should be King, to him let me resine.
So much the King did urge this Text, that Archigallo rayn'd,
And Elidurus willingly in private life remaynde:
The one restored, for his late depriving nothing moved,
The other (wonders tell I now) dis-crowned yeat beloved.
Ten years did Archigallo reign, beloved well, and dyed:
And Elidurus once again the Kingly Throne supplied,
Until his Brothers secondly depose him of his rain,
But they deceasing, thirdly he was crowned King again,
And so, until his Dying day, with honor did remain.
A many Kings whose good or bad no Wrighter has displaide
Did follow. Lud, and Hely, for their stately buildings made
Rest chiefly famous. Nor forget King Bledgrabed I shall,
Whom Brutons did their Glee-god for his skill in Music call.
The next whose days gave famous deeds, Cassiuelan is said,
Whom Caius Julius Caesar did with Armor thus invade.
CHAP. XVII.
THis Conqueror of Gallia found his Victory prolonged
By British Succors, and for it, pretending to be wronged,
Did send for Tribute: threatening else to bring the Brutons War.
The latter going forward first, the Albinests to bar
A common foe, concur as friends: and now was come the Spring,
When Caesar out of War-wonne France victorious Trowpes did bring.
But easlier won the Grecians land at Pargama by much,
Than got the Latins footing here, their Contraries were such.
Ye might have seen of Hectors race, then thousand Hectors here,
With policy on either part, the Romans buying dear
The bloody Shore: the water yeat less deerer than the land
To them, whom valiantly to proof the Ilanders withstand.
Often battle they, the Brutons still victorious, and in vain
Their foes were valiant: only here was Caesar's force in waine.
And as our men unto his men were as tempesteous Thunder,
So did his ankred Ships on Seas by Tempest dash in sunder.
But twice (quoth Caesar) Fortune, thou were opposite to mine,
But thirdly here to Caesar's self thou (wontles) do decline.
Conuaying then his weary men into his wasted Ships,
To Gallia, there to Winter them, he miscontented slippes.
Of this same Victory did spring security and strife,
The Scotts and Pichtes did sunder hence, the Brutons, ouer-rise
In Largess, making frollike Cheer, a quarrel then aroes
Betwixt the King and Luds false Son, and they dis-ioyne as foes:
That Caesar slippes Advantage such were error to suppoes.
Even of the Brutons some there were recalling back the Foe,
And Winter past, with doubled power he back again did roe.
The Romans more, the Brutons they far fewer than before,
Offend, defend, fight for, fence from, to win, and ward the Shore.
But Caesar landed, and ensew'd continual cruel fight:
Thrice put the fierce Cassiuelanes the Caesarines to flight,
And still the King encouraging in every wing appears,
So giving needless spurs to fight, his Soldiers brook not fears,
Nor little did the Cornish Belles offend the Roman ears.
When Caesar's often succesles fight had tired him and his,
Inringed with his mayhmed Camp, the Roman speaks this.
Are these same Bands, those selfsame Bands that never fought in vain?
And ye the men that following still my Standard still did gain?
Even these, and ye, are very those: nor can I discommend
Your manhoodes, that with lesser work brought greater Wars to end.
But not, as was my wont to wright, the Senate now shall reed,
I came: I saw: I ouer-came: such Foes forbid such speed.
Nor let the Senate muse, for Troy with Troy does here contend:
This warlike people (fame is so) from whence sprung we descend.
Yea, if Aeneas had not left the Phrygian Gods to us,
And Greeks Palladium Shipped to Greece, this Fortune foyling thus,
I would have thought those very Gods had followed our anoy:
But them have we, these only have undaunted hearts from Troy.
But what? shall Caesar doubt to fight against so brauea Foe?
No, Caesar's Tryumphes with their Spoils shall give the brauer shoe.
Ye Gods that guide our Capitol, Mount Palatin thou Throne
Of stately Rome, ye Followers too of her affairs each one,
Delay not, but deprive me quite my Triumphs now in hand,
Nor let me live, if so I leave unconquered this Land:
This Land, the last of Western Isles, an Isle unknown ere this,
Which famous now through Caesar's fight and our misfortune is.
Enough, my fellow friends in Arms, enough we Romans have
To seek revenge: your Conquest lo a Country rich and brave:
And (which persuades victory) in Troynouant there be,
That hold that City to our use: the Brutons disagree,
No Scot or Pichte assisting them in these our Wars I see*
Their civil strife will prove their scourge, how stout soere they seem,
And perpetuity does fail in every thing extreme.
Not Fortune still is good or bad, and now let be our day:
Too long we live, if that so long we shall on trifles stay,
Said Caesar. And with such his words did so inflame his men,
That with less patience did they live, than linger battle then.
The Romans bid the Bace, and then did cruel War begin:
And little wanted that the Brutes the better did not win.
But Caesar so foresawe Supplies, and Succors here and theare,
Persuading this, dissuading that, controuling flight and fear,
That, after many Romans slain, the Brutons took their flight,
To Southern Shores: whereas to proof Cassiuelan did fight
With often Eruptions out of Woods, until the traitorous Knight,
The Earl of London yields his Charge and City to the Foe,
Through which disloyal president did other Cities so:
And then with hard-won Tribute hence the Conqueror did go.
But he, that won in every War, at Rome in civil Robe
Was stabbed to death: no certainty is underneath the Globe.
The good are envied of the bad, and glory finds disdain,
And people are in constancy as April is in rain:
Whereof, amidst our serious pen, this Fable intertaine.
An Ass, an Old Man, and a Boy, did through a City pass,
And whilst the wanton Boy did ride the Old Man led the Ass:
See yonder doting fool, said Folk, that crauleth scarce for age,
Does set the Boy upon his Ass and makes himself his Page.
Anon the blamed Boy alightes, and lets the Old Man ride,
And, as the Old Man did before, the Boy the Ass did gide:
But, passing so, the people the^ did much the Old Man blame,
And told him, Churl, thy limbs be tough, the Boy should ride for shame.
The fault thus found, both Man and Boy did back the Ass and ride,
Then that the Ass was ouer-charg'd each man that met them cride.
Now both a-light, and go on foot, and lead the empty Beast,
But then the people laugh, and say, that one might ride at least.
With it they both did vndershore the Ass on either side,
But then the wondering people did that witles pranke deride.
The Old Man seeing by no ways he could the people please,
Not blameles then, did drive the Ass and drown him in the Seas.
Thus whilst we be, it will not be, that any pleases all:
Else had bin wanting, worthily, the noble Caesar's fall.
CHAP. XVIII.
AVgustus quayling Anthony was Emperor alo^e:
In whose vn-focd Monarchy our common health was known.
The Brooser of the Serpents head, the Woman's promisd Seed,
The Second in the Trinity, the Food our souls to feed,
The Vine, the Light, the Door, the Way, the Shepherd of us al:
Whose Manhood joined to Deity did Ransom us from thrall,
That was, and is, and evermore will be the same to his,
That sleeps to none that wake to him, that turns our Curse to bliss,
Whom, yet unseen, the Patriarchs saw, the Prophets have foretold,
Th'apossles preached, the Saints adore, and Martyrs do behold,
The same (Augustus Emperor) in Palestine was borne,
Amongst his own, and yeat his own did cross their Bliss in skorne:
Bi-formed Ianus then in Mewe: so would this Prince of Peace,
That Caesar's Edict every wheare should Mars his envy ceace.
THen reigned here King Cymbelyn, King Theomantius son:
Next him Guiderius, that withheld the Tribute Caesar won.
The Romans that, in our respect, neglected Misia, Spain,
Armenia, France, and Siria, then Recusants of their Rain,
Not by their Captains, but himself the Emperor of Rome,
Into relapsed Brutaine with imperial Ensigns come.
Then hotter than the Punike Wars to Romans did begin:
And Claudius loses valiantly all that the Brutons win,
But Romish Hamo, from whose death Southhampton had that name,
In British Arms salutes the King, and slew by guile the same.
Duke Aruiragus using then the Armor of the King,
Maintained fight, and won the field ere Brutons knew the thing.
This hardy Knight, his Brother slain, was Crowned in his place:
And with his winnings, also won the Emperor to grace:
Who sending for his daughter, fair Genissa, so did end
The Wars in Wedding: and away did Claudius Caesar wend.
But Aruiragus after this revolted, and to stay
The havoc made of Romans here came succors every day.
His Queen Genissa childing died, when his Revolt she knew:
And Voada, deuorsed late, became his Queen of new.
Then he that at Jerusalem the fatal siege begone,
Was sent from Rome, and warring here, the wonted Tribute won:
And through his gentle Victory, bound Aruiragus still
A friend to Caesar, whom the King adopted heir by will.
I here omit the dismal War in Isle of Mona made
Against the Romans, whom the Priests the Druides invade
With banning words, and women, with their hair untrussed, stand
With brands of fire in furious wise about their desperate Band.
The King deceased, Voada and her two daughters, they
Abused by the Roman Lords, do hotter wars assay.
THe noble Scot King Corbred he confedrates with the King
of Pichts: and they and British Peers to field their Armies bring
To aid the Queen of Brutes, that like the Amazonian Dame
That beating down the bloody Greeks in Priams succor came,
Had pight her Iauelin at her feet, when entered in among
The fearce confedrates, thus she spoke amidst the silent throng:
My state and sex, not hand or heart, most valiant friends, with-hild
Me, wretched Cause of your repair by wicked Romans ild,
From that revenge which I do wish, and ye have cause to work:
In which suppose not Vo^da in female fears to lurk.
For Lo my self, unlike my self, and these same Ladies fair
In Armor, not to shrink an ynch wheare hottest doings are.
Even we do dare to bid the Base, and you your selves shall see
Your selves to come behind in Arms: the Romans too that be
Such Conquerors, and valiantly can womankind oppress,
Shall know that British women can the Romish wrongs redress.
Then Arm ye with like courages as Ladies shall present,
Whom ye, nor wounds, nor death, the praise of Onset shall prevent.
Nor envy that our Martial rage exceeds your manly ire,
For by how much more we endure, so much more we desire
Revenge on those in whose default we are unhallowed thus,
Whilst they forget themselves for men, or to be borne of us.
Ye yield them Tribute, and from us their Legions have their pay:
Thus were too much, but more then thus the haughty Tirants sway.
That I am Queen from being wronged does nothing me protect:
Their Rapes against my daughters both I also might object:
They maids deflower, they wives enforce, and use their wills in all,
And yeat we live deferring fight, inferring so our fall.
But valiant Brutons, ventrous Scots, and warlike Pichts I err,
Exhorting, whom I should dehort your fiearcenes to defer.
Less courage more considerate would make your foes to quake:
My heart has joyed to see your hands the Roman Standards take,
But when as force and Fortune faild, that you with teeth should fight,
And in the faces of their Foes your women in despite
Should fling their sucking Babes, I hild such valiantnes but vain:
Enforced flight is no disgrace, such Flyers fight again.
Here are ye, Scots, that with the King my valiant brother dead
The Latins, wondering at your prowes, through Rome in triumph lead.
Ye Mars-stard Pichtes of Scythian breed are here Colleagues: and more,
Ye Dardane Brutes, last named, but in valor meant before:
I^ your conduct, most knightly friends, I superseade the rest:
Ye come to fight, and we in fight to hope and help our best.
Scarce did this brave Bellona end, when as the Battles join,
And life and death was bought and sold with courage, not with coin.
Above the rest the Queen of Brutes through blood did cut her way,
Six thousand Ladies Lyons-like exployting like Afray:
Till Cattus with his Roman Arms, subdewed, fled away.
Of Romans seventy thousand died, of Brutons then were slain
Twice fifteen thousand, and the rest their ceased freedom gain.
When valiant Plancius, President in Gallia, heard such news,
He waffes an Army out of France, and Voada pursues.
The Albines^s to aid the Queen assemble at her call,
And then began a second War, nor was the slaughter small.
The Brutons, barring flight, had closed themselves with waines about,
In which the awles women stood suruaying who was stout,
Controuling Cowards, and among did fill the air with dinne:
But, valiant though the Brutones were, the day the Romans win.
In vain the furious women then on Sons and Husbands call,
Themselves with Sons and Husbands did by adverse weapons fall.
Queen Voada past help, and hope, betook her self to flight:
Till looking back, vnfollowed then, and having in her fight
The senseles Tronkes of slaughtred friends, she leaning on her Lance
Did power forth tears, and grew at length impacient of the chance,
And said: my self, my trusty friends, will with my dearest blood
Keep Obite to your happy Ghostes, that for your Countries good
Be as you be, and I will be: no Roman sword shall boast
Of my dispatch. So on her Lance she yielded up the Ghost.
Her Daughter then, for to revenge her friends upon her foes,
Assisted by the vanquished against the Victors roes,
And slaughtring through the Roman Tents the brave Virago goes,
Till Plancius, ever provident of perils, brought supplies,
What time Vodicia, urging wounds, with constant courage dies.
SVch business hanging, Lucius, here the first baptized King,
Died issulesse: and for the Crown did long contention spring.
At length Constantius Caesar (for the Brutons yielded so)
Did Helin, Colis daughter wed. Of her do praises go
For finding of the holy Cross: and for devotion rare.
From these proceeded Constantine, the most undoubted heir
Both to the Roman Monarchy and this his Parents Reame.
He turned the Empires ebbing pomp into her flowing stream,
And was a Prince Religious: yeat (with reverence be it said)
If less religious, then not he the Empire had decaide,
By largess to a pompeous Priest, Apostolic ere then,
But now intruding even on God, insulting over men.
Nor sparest thou his native Realm that seized thee of Rome.
Admit his franknesse were a fault (as is their common doom,
That say he made a Paul a Saul that made a Priest a Prince,
And in that grace the Empires grace disgraced ever since)
Find thou no fault with such a fault whereby he fitted thee:
But, if thou will ungrateful prove, ungracious cease to be,
A Traitors Tutor is a. K. nor force we such a. T.
Let such a Prelate bless or banne, with Candle, Book and Bell,
He cannot raise himself to heaven, nor rid a knave from hell.
Vain are his Bulls engendring Calves, sent hither from his Stals,
To feed (mad Sots) the Foul that by his name the Sendor calls.
Nor think he dreamed this in vain that dreamed thus of late:
One seemed to have passed Stix, and entering Plutos gate,
Saw Hecat new canonized the Sourantisse of hell,
And Pluto bad it holliday for all which theare did dwell.
Stern Minos and grimme Radimant descend their duskie rooms:
The Docke was also clear of Ghosts, adiorn'd to after-doomes:
The Furies and the deadly Sins, with their inuectiue Scroles
Depart the Bar: the Feends rake up their euer-burning Coals:
The Elues, and Fairies, taking fists, did hop a merry Round:
And Cerberus had lap enough: and Charon leisure found:
The airy Sprights the walking Flames, and Goblins great and small,
Had theare good cheer, and company, and sport the devil and all:
To Tantalus the shrinking flood, nor starting fruit were such:
Nor Titius his bowels did the hungry Vultur touch:
Upon his Stone sat Cisaphus: Ixeon on his Wheel:
The Belides upon their Tubs: no wonted toil they feel.
Till, in this anticke Festival, these last recited five
Of dignities for duties theare they earnestly did strive:
And then the quarrel grew so hot that hell was hell again,
And flocking Ghosts did severally their Fauctors part maintain.
With Cisaphus took part the Ghosts of minds that did aspire,
And by ambitious climing fell, deserts unlike desire.
With Tantalus hild starued Ghosts, whose pleasure was their pain,
Whose ever Hords had never use, and gettings had no gain.
To Besides assisted Souls of Unthrifts, whose supplies
Did pass from them as Sea through Cieues, whose wastes no wealths suffice.
Unto Ixeon stood their Sprights that had their lusts for law,
Rebellants to a common good, and sinning without awe.
To Titius lastly joined Ghosts, whose hearts did empty hate
As Todes their poison, growing when it seems to abate.
About fly Apples, Stones, and Tubs, the wheel was tumbled down,
The Vultur girds, no Ghost but had at least a broken crown.
This skufling and confedracie in hell made such a rear,
That (wontles of such braules and blows) Proserpine did fear.
But Pluto, laughing, told his Bride to Ela it was Fa,
To morrowes dinne should prove that same to be a civil day:
In peace these were their practices on earth, and here in hell
(Save that their Souls have never peace) we find them as they fell.
They work to me, each of these five, though daily count I ask,
Do newly number Million Souls, whose torments is their task.
The Queen of such, not free of fear, replied thus again,
And yeat, me thinks, that Pluto should have pity on their pain.
He lowers, and Feast with Fray had end, and drink did every soul
Of Lethe: who, their joys forgot, even yet in torments houle:
Nay Pluto must be Pluto still, and so I will (quoth he,)
For this same only day the Ghosts indebted are to thee:
For as the like shall never come, so never like befell,
But henceforth all, yea Prince, and Pope, shall ever find it hell.
So dreamed one: but ouer-long on fantazies I dwell.
CHAP. XIX.
THe Cosen of great Constantine, in Rome and here succeeds:
Betwixt the Brutes, the Scots, and Pichtes continual trouble breeds:
And long the reg'ment of this Land the Romans did enjoy,
Transmitting Captains evermore as Foes did here anoy.
But Rome it self declined now, and Brutaine was oppressed,
No longer were the Scottish Spoils by Roman Swords redrest.
Then ends the Tribute, then began new troubles, worser far
Then Tribute: for the Scots and Pichtes infer consuming war.
The Brutons, under Rome secure, as men that did rely
On others, were disabled now by Martial means to try
The fame of fight: but Captainelesse, confusedly they deal,
And give a wretched instant of an headles Commonweal.
And whom so many Roman Peers, grand-Captaines of such might,
Of whom nine Emperors themselves in persons here did fight,
Could hardly foil, were fronted now even of a barbarous Foe:
And at the point (a wondrous change) their Country to forgo.
Such fruit has ease such policy did serve the Romans turn,
Who, waining Martial minds, themselves the quietlier here soiorn.
The Brutons thus dispoy'ld of Arms, and courage in effect,
Of Prince, of Captains, and advise, their business to direct:
Dispatch their Legate to the Land Diminutiue in name
To Brutaine: where the Legate thus his Ambassie did frame:
The back-slide of our helpless friends, the downfall of our flate,
Our lack of Prince, of people, and our wealth, not now as late,
The savage dealing of our Foes, consuming outs and us,
Is cause (right mighty King) that we approach thy presence thus.
Not for we are in blood allied, or that whilst Fortune smiled,
Your Ancestors had rule from us, not for the Dames defiled
At Cullin, who withstanding lust for it did loose their lives,
That else to Conon and his Knights had lived noble wives,
We are emboldned in our suit: though all of these might move:
But for our former wants, O King, and for thine own behooue,
Great Brutaine does submit it self thy Subject (if thou please.)
Or else dispose it at thy will. Provided we have ease
Against such Foes, as would not save our lives to have our Land:
Whom to conclude (except thou help) we never may withstand.
The King Aldroen pitying much the cause of his Allies,
Armed thence his brother Constantine, a Captain stout and wise.
He chasing hence the Scotts and Pichtes, with glory wore the Crown,
And through his virtue stayed up a Kingdom sinking down.
WIthin a while did Vortiger the Duke of Cornewalle reign,
When Constans Son of Constantine he traitrously had slain.
The Scotts did ruffle then anew, nor did the King affye
In Brutones, for they hated him, and reason had they why:
And Saxon Fleetes from Germany in Armor here arrive,
Through whose support the King in wars against the Scots did thrive.
The Foe by Hengest foiled thus, he and his brother git
The chiefest credit with the King, but few gaine-saying it,
Necessity of Soldiers here so well for them did fit.
And Hengests Daughter intertain'd King Vortiger so well,
That to misliking of his wife and liking her he fell:
And sotted thus in foreign Love, did wed the Saxon Wench:
Which wrought unto the Saxons weal, but to the Brutes offense*
For whatsoere the Queen did ask, the King would not deny,
Until his Subjects ran to Arms, and made the Saxons fly.
They putting down the Father, then did set up Vortimer,
He poisoned by his Stepdame, they restored Vortiger,
With this condition, that he should no Saxons intertaine.
But Hengest (hearing from the Queen that Vortimer was slain,
And Vortiger his Sonne-in-lawe re-kinged) did resaile
With Saxon forces: though with fraud, not force he did prevail,
For thus by policy he did the Brutons circumuent:
He craved Parlie, as a man that were to quietness bent,
The place appointed, Parlantes him in simple meaning meet
Far from their Army all unarmed, whom Saxon Traitors greet
With deadly wounds by hidden knives, and held the King with them,
Confounding so the British Oste. Nor cease they to contemn
Both Christian rights, and civil Rule, subuerting either twain:
And what they would of Vortiger through feare^ull threats they gain:
And plant themselves in Southfolke, Kent, and elsewhere at their will:
And ruffling run throughout the Land oppressing Brutons still.
The King and Brutons fled to Wales: and Feend-got Marlin theare
Bewraied more then I believe, or credit seems to bear:
As showing how the Castle work, reared daily, fell by night
By shaking of two Dragons great that underneath it fight,
With other wonders, tedious if not trothlesse to resight.
Aurelius Ambrose, brother to King Constans murdered late,
From either Bruton having aid, won so the kingly state:
And, ere that Hengest or his Son stout Octa he subdew'd,
First to revenge his Brothers death he Vortiger pursew'd,
In vain the Welsh wild Mountains fence the Flier from his Foe,
Or Gerneth Castle, when as flames throughout the buildings go:
In midst whereof the wretched King did end his days in woe.
THe Brutons thus had peace a while, till Vortigerus Son,
And Gutllamour the Irish King, in new Conflicts begone:
Whom, whilst that Vter valiantly in Wales to wrack did bring,
His Brother Ambrose did decease, and Vter then was King.
What Vter did by Marlins Art, in compassing his will
Upon the Wife of Garolus, transfigured by skill
Into the likeness of her Lord, on whom he got a Son,
Renowned Arthur: or to name the Acts by Vter done,
Were much and needless: only note he was a valiant Prince,
But such as was his noble Son, was not before or since.
Yeat blazing Arthur, as have some, I might be ouer-seene:
He was victorious, making one amongst the Worthies neene:
But (with his pardon) if I vouch his world of Kingdoms won,
I am no Poet, and for lack of pardon were undone.
His Scottish, Irish, Almaine, French, and Saxone Battelles got,
Yield fame sufficient: these seem true, the rest I credit not.
But Bruton is my task, and to my task I will retire:
Twelve times the Saxon Princes here against him did conspire,
And Arthur in twelve Battles great went vanquishor away:
Howbeit Saxon forces still amongst the Brutons stay.
This King to entertain discourse, and so to understand
What Accidents in aftertimes should happen in this Land,
He with the Brutish Prophet then of Sequelles fell in hand.
Of six long after-Kings the man, not borne of humane seed,
Did Prophecy, and many things that came to pass in deed.
Now Arthur, chief of Chivalry, had set his Crown at stay,
And to his Nephew Mordred did commit thereof the sway,
When with his Knights, the wonders of the world for Martial deeds,
Beyond the Scas in foreign fights he luckely proceeds:
Till faithless Mordred called him back that forward went with fame,
For at his Uncles Diadem he traitorously did aim.
Twice Arthur won of him the field, and thirdly slew his Foe,
When, deadly wounded, he himself, victorious, died so.
INterred then with public plaints, and issules, ensewes
A drouping of the British state: the Saxon still subdewes,
Howbeit worthy Kings succeed: but destiny withstood
The ancient Scepter to iniure in Brutes succeeding blood.
Vnlou'd Careticus was he that lost the Goal at length:
Whenceforth, in vain, to win their loss the Brutons use their strength,
Yea God, that as it pleases him, does place or dispossess,
When foes, nor foiles, nor any force, their courage might suppress,
Seemed partial in the Saxon Cause, and with a Plague did cross
The Brutons, that had else at least rebated from their loss:
For Cadwane, and Cadwallyn, and Cadwallader, the last,
But not the least for valorous of British Princes past,
Brought out of Wales such knightly wars as made their foes aghast.
The Plague (worse spoyler then the Wars) left Cambre almost waste,
Which to avoid, the remnant Brutes into their Ships did haste.
Cadwallader, in leaving thus his native Shore, he fixed
His eyes from whence his body should, and with his sighs he mixed
His royal tears, which giving place, he speaks thus betwixt.
Sweet Brutaine (for I yet must use that sweet, and ceasing name)
Adieu, thy King bids thee adieu, whose flight no weapons frame:
But God co^maunds, his wrath commandes, al counter-maund is vain,
Else, for thy love, to die in thee were life to thy Remain.
Thus times have turns, thus Fortune still is flying to and fro:
What was not, is: what is, shall cease: some come, and others go:
So, Brutaine thou of Nation and of name endurest change,
Now balking us whom thou have bread, and brooking people strange.
Yeat (if I shoot not past mine aim) a world of time from me,
Part of our blood, in highest pomp, shall Englands glory be:
And chiefly, when unto a first succeeds a second She.
But, leaving speeches ominous, Cadwallader is woe,
That seeing death determines grief, he dies not on his foe.
Ah, Fortune fails mighty ones, and meaner does advance:
The mightiest Empier Rome has change, then Brutaine brook thy chance:
Let it suffice thou were before and after Rome in fame:
And to endure what God intends were sin to count a shame.
Nor vaunt, ye Saxons, of our flight: but if ye needs will vaunt,
Then vaunt of this, that God displaced whom you could never daunt.
This said, the tears co^trould his tongue, and sails wrought land from sight
When (save a Remnant small) the Isle was rid of Brutons quight.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XX.
THe Brutons thus departed hence, Seven Kingdoms here begone:
Where diversely in diverse broils the Saxons lost and won.
King Edel and King Adelbright in Diria jointly reign:
In loyal concord during life these Kingly friends remain.
When A delbright should leave his life, to Edel thus he says:
By those same bonds of happy love, that held us friends always,
By our by-parted Crown, of which the Moyetie is mine,
By God, to whom my soul must pass, and so in time may thine,
I pray thee, nay I conjure thee, to nourish as thine own
Thy Niece my Daughter Argentile, till she to age be grown,
And then, as thou receiuest it, resign to her my Throne.
A promise had for this Bequest, the Testator he dies:
But all that Edel undertook, he afterward denies.
Yeat well he fosters for a time the Damsiell, that was grown
The fairest Lady under Heaven: whose beauty being known,
A many Princes seek her love, but none might her obtain:
For grippell ^del to himself her Kingdom sought to gain,
And for that cause from sight of such he did his Ward restrain.
By chance one Curan, Son unto a Prince in Danske did see
The Maid, with whom he fell in love as much as one might be.
Unhappy Youth, what should he do? his Saint was kept in Mewe:
Nor he, nor any Nobleman admitted to her vewe.
One while in Melancholy fits he pines himself away,
Anon he thought by force of Arms to win her, if he may,
And still against the Kings restraint did secretly inuay.
At length the high Controller Love, whom none may disobay,
Imbased him from Lordlines, unto a Kitchen Drudge:
That so at least of life or death she might become his Judge.
Access so had to see, and speak, he did his love bewray,
And tells his bearth: her answer was she husbandles would stay.
Mean while the King did beat his brains his booty to atchieue,
Nor caring what became of her, so he by her might thrive:
At last his resolution was some Pessant should her wiue.
And (which was working to his wish) he did observe with joy
How Curan, whom he thought a drudge, escaped many an amorous toy.
The King, perceiving such his vain, promotes his Vassal still,
Least that the baseuesse of the man should let, perhaps, his will:
Assured therefore of his love, but not suspecting who
The Lover was, the King himself in his behalf did wowe.
The Lady, resolute from Love, unkindly takes that he
Should bar the Noble, and unto so base a Match agree:
And therefore shifting out of doors, departed thence by stealth,
Preferring poverty before a dangerous life in wealth.
When Curan heard of her escape, the anguish in his heart
Was more then much, and after her from Court he did depart:
Forgetful of himself, his bearth, his Country, friends, and all,
And only minding (whom he mist) the Foundresse of his thrall.
Nor means he after to frequent or Court or stately Towns,
But solitarily to live amongst the Country grownes.
A brace of years he lived thus, well pleased so to live,
And Shepherd-like to feed a flock himself did wholly give.
So wasting love, by work, and want, grew almost to the Waene:
But then began a second Love, the worser of the twaene.
A Country wench, a Neatheards maid, where Curan kept his Sheep,
Did feed her Drove: and now on her was all the Shepherds keep,
He borrowed on the working days his holy russets often:
And of the Bacons fat, to make his Startops black and soft:
And least his Tarbox should offend he left it at the Fold:
Sweet Growte, or Whig, his Bottle had as much as it might hold:
A Sheeue of bread as brown as Nut, and Cheese as white as snow,
And Wildings, or the Seasons fruit, he did in Scrip bestow:
And whilst his py-bald Curre did sleep, and Sheep-hooke lay him by,
On hollow Quilles of Oten straw he piped melody:
But when he spied her his Saint, he wipte his greasy shoes,
And cleared the driuell from his beard and thus the Shepherd wooes.
I have sweet Wench a piece of Cheese, as good as tooth may chaw,
And bread, and Wildings souling-well (and therewithal did draw
His Lardrie) and, in eating, see you Crumpled Ewe (quoth he)
Did twinne this fall, and twin should thou if I might ^up with thee.
Thou art too eluish, faith thou art too eluish, and too coy:
Am I (I pray thee) beggarly, that such a Flock enjoy?
I wis I am not: yeat that thou do hold me in disdain
Is brimme abroad, and made a gybe to all that keep this Plain.
There be as quaint (at least that think themselves as quaint) that crave
The Match, that thou (I wot not why) may, but mislik'st to have.
How would thou match? (for well I wot, thou art a Female) I,
I know not her that willingly with Maidenhead would die.
The Plowmans labor has no end, and he a Churl will prove:
The Craftsman has more work in hand then fitteth unto love:
The Merchant traffiquing abroad, suspects his Wife at home:
A Youth will play the Wanton, and an olde-man prove a Mome.
Then Choose a Shepherd. With the Sun he does his Flock unfold,
And all the day on Hill or Plain he merry chat can hold:
And with the Sun does fold again: then iogging home betime,
He turns a Crab, or tunes a round, or sings some merry ryme:
Nor lackes he gleefull tales to tell, whilst round the Bole does trot:
And sits singing care-away, till he to bed has got.
Theare sleeps he soundly all the night, forgetting Morrow cares,
Nor fears he blasting of his Corn nor uttering of his wares,
Or storms by Seas, or stirs on Land, or crack of credit lost,
Not spending franklier then his Flock shall still defray the cost.
Well wot I, sooth they say that say: more quiet nights and days
The Shepherd sleeps and wakes than he whose Cattle he does graize.
Believe me Less, a King is but a man, and so am I:
Content is worth a Monarchy, and mischiefs hit the hie:
As late it did a King and his, not dwelling far from hence,
Who left a Daughter, (save thy self) for fair a matchless wench:
(Here did he pause, as if his tongue had done his heart offense.)
The Nea^resse, longing for the rest, did egg him on to tell
How fair she was, and who she was. She bore (quoth he) the bell
For Beauty: though I clownish am, I know what Beauty is,
Or did I not, yeat seeing thee, I senceles were to mis.
Suppose her Beauty Hellens-like, or Hellens somewhat less,
And every Star consorting to a puer Complexion guess.
Her Stature comely tall, her gate well graced, and her wit
To marvel at, not meddle with, as matchles I omit.
A Globe-like head, a Gold-like hair, a Forhead smooth and hie,
An even Nose, on either side did shine a graish Eye:
Two rosy Checkes, round ruddy Lips, white iust-set Teeth within:
A mouth in mean, and underneath a round and dimpled Chin:
Her Snowish neck with bluish Veins stood bolt upright upon
Her portly shoulders: beating Balls, her vained Breasts, anon
Add more to Beauty: wand-like was her middle, falling still,
And rising whereas women rise: but ouer-skippe I will,
What Males in Females ouer-skippe: imagine nothing ill.
And more, her long and limber Arms had white and azure Wrists:
And slender Fingers answer to her smooth and lilly Fists:
A Leg in print, a pretty Foot: conjecture of the rest,
For amorous Eyes, observing form, think parts obscured best.
With these (O thing divine) with these, her tongue of speech was spae^;
But speaking, Venus seemed to speak the Balle from I Would to baer.
With Phoebe, Juno, and with both her self contends in face:
Wheare equal mixture did not want of mild and stately grace.
Her smiles were sober, and her looks were cheerful unto all:
And such as neither wanton seem, nor waiward, mell, nor gall.
A quiet mind, a patient mood, and not disdaining any:
Not gybing, gadding, gawdie, and her faculties were many.
A Nymph, no tongue, no heart, no Eye, might praise, might wish, might see
For life, for love, for form, more good, more worth, more f^ire, the^ she:
Yea such an one, as such was none, save only she was such:
Of Argentile to say the most, were to be silent much.
I knew the Lady very well, but worthles of such prays,
The Neatresse said: and muse I do, a Shepherd thus should blaze
The Coote of beauty. Credit me, thy latter speech bewraies
Thy clownish shape a coined show. But wherefore do thou weep?
(The Shepherd wept, and she was woe, and both does silence keep.)
In troth, quoth he, I am not such as seeming I profess:
But then for her, and now for thee, I from my self digress.
Her loved I, (wretch that I am a Recreant to be)
I loved her, that hated love: but now I die for thee.
At Kirkland is my Fathers Court, and Curan is my name,
In Edels Court sometimes in pomp, till Love contrould the same:
But now. What now? dear heart how now? what ailest thou to weep?
(The Damsel wept, and he was woe, and both did silence keep.)
I grant quoth she, it was too much, that you did love so much:
But whom your former could not move, your second love does touch.
Thy twice beloved Argentile submits her to thee:
And for thy double love presents herself a single fee:
In passion, not in person chaung'd, and I my Lord, am she:
They sweetly surfeiting in joy, and silent for a space,
When as the Ecstasy had end did tenderly embrace,
And for their wedding, and their wish got fitting time and place.
Not England (for of Hengest then was named so this Land)
Then Curan had an hardier Knight, his force could none withstand:
Whose Sheep-hooke laid apart, he then had higher things in hand.
First, making known his lawful claim in Argentile her right,
He war'd in Diria, and he won Bre^^tia too in fight:
And so from treacherous Edel took at once his life and Crown,
And of Northumberland was King, long ragning in renown.
CHAP. XXI.
THe Saxons that, in these discents, derive from Gods and men,
^oue, Minos Get a, Flokwald, Flyn, Fredw^lfe, Fraeloffe, VVoden,
Each as here placed others son, not only Conquer here,
But with their wandering Armies spoil the World through-out welnere.
The English Saxon Kings oppress the mightier ones the weak:
Each trifling cause sufficing here their love and leagues to break.
One seazeth of his Neighbors Realm, and is disseaz'd ere-long:
For Empire some, for Envy some, and some to right their wrong
Contend unto their common loss, and some like Monsters rain:
As Sig^ert, who for tyranny did banishment sustain.
He wandered vnbewailed long, a man whom men exempt
From house and help, pursuing him with capital contempt.
Forlorn therefore, with drouping lims, and dropping eyes, in vain,
He frendles walks the fruitles Woods, and foodles did complain.
A Swineheard meeting him by chance, and pitying his estate,
Employed the Western King, unknown, on his affairs to wait.
Nor did the needy King disdain such room, for such relief:
An vnder-Swineheardship did serve, he sought not to be chief.
But when by speech and circumstance, his Master understood,
His servant was the sometimes King: blood cries (quoth he) for blood:
My giltles Master in thy pomp, thou Tyrant, did slay,
Nor unrevenged of his death thou shall escape away.
With that he took a Libbat up, and beats out his brains:
And dead (so odious Tyrants be) not one for him complains.
NOt all so ill, yeat cause of worse unto the English state
Was Osbert of Northumberland: his love did win him hate.
Enamored on Lord Buerns wife, as tired in the Chase,
He left the Hounds, and with a few dismounts at Buerns Place.
Her husband absent, heartely his Lady entertaines
The King, and feasts him Royally, not sparing cost or pains.
But he that fed on Fancies food, and hungered whilst he eats,
Thought Venus sparer in her loves then Ceres in her meats.
The Train and table voyded, then he taking her apart,
Directs her by his tongue and tears unto his loving heart.
Delay he says, breeds doubts, but sharp denial death,
Or do not long surcharge my bliss, or soon discharge my breath:
For if my prayers add no edge unto thy begged doom,
The vintage of my thriftlesse love is blasted in the bloome.
Be favorable to my fire: for thy sweet sake, be bold,
I durst attempt even Hell (if hell so sweet a thing might hold.)
Do think her coie, or think her chaste, my Censure I suspend*
Some Women yield not at the first, yeat yield they in the end.
She gave repulses to his lust, and he replies of Love:
Not all the Writs Diana had might Cupids Plaint remove.
She countermaunding his demand, he ceased Courting now,
And did with her by violence what virtues disalow:
And then departed, leaving her in self-conceit disgraste:
More trespassed then some would think, and yeat perhaps as chaste.
Home came her Lord, whose brows had buds, and found his wife in tears,
And (foolish thing) she told a troth, for which revenge he swears.
But so the man did prove a beast: he better might have hid it,
Some such are mistically domme, yeat domly do forbid it.
His Wives escapes done secretly, if by the man detected,
Shows hilled bu^ps (supposed bu^ps) meerehornes, not horns suspected.
At Denmark in his Cosins Court, he tells of his wrong:
And gains against his sovereign Lord of Danes an Army strong:
Hungar and Hubba, and himself, Conductors of this Host,
Did with their foreign forces land, and spoil the Northern Coaste.
The vicious valiant Osbret, that had vanquished ere then
The King and Kingdom of the Scots, though wanting arms and men,
Thought skorne his foes should beard him so and bar him up in walls,
And therefore, issuing out of York, upon the Danes he falls.
A Bloody Bargain then begone, no fight might fearcer be,
And of the Danish part were slain for every English three.
But manhood lost, and number won, the Danes they got the field:
And Osbret dyed valiantly, that not to live would yield.
Mean while the Danes with fresh supplies ariue at every Shore,
And war almost in every shire infesting England sore:
With whom courageous Etheldred contended long in vain,
By them was he, King Ella, and the holy Edmund slain.
Nothing was done, but all undone, till King Alured he
In danger of his Royal self did set his subjects free:
For every day, in every place, the Danes did so increase,
That he nor any English King enjoy one day of peace.
Nor mightier men at Arms than they, might any wheare be found,
Who in their diverse Wars els-where did diverse Realms confound:
For as the Goths, the Vandales, Hunnes, and Saxons erst did range,
So now the Danes did plague the world, as sent by interchange.
This Western and victorious king, and greatest Monarke here,
Perceiving of this spoiled Isle a toward Ruin near,
Disguised like a Minstrill poor, did haunt the Danish Tents,
And with his feats and melody the Enemy presents:
And of their sloth, their gluttony, and Counsels privy so,
He took advantage, giving them a sudden overthrow.
And s^ayeth Hubba, Hungar, and the Cause of their repayr,
And puts all to sword and Seas that unbaptized wair.
Yeat to Northumberland returned fearce Gurmond with the Danes,
Mean time did king Alured die, the Hatchet of their Tranes.
But Adelstane (one king betwixt) not only cleared the Land
Of Danes, but of all England had sole Empire in his hand.
Thus of this long dismembered Realm was he the only King:
In which, till Egelred, his reign did prosper every thing.
He reigning, much of England then the Lordly Danes did hold,
Exacting Tributes every year, and selling Peace for Gold.
And (which no doubt did hatch those Plagues) the King a wicked one,
Did enter by his Brothers blood, extorting thus his Throne:
King Edgar that subdued the Scots, and slaughtered the Danes,
And of the Welsh had tribute Wolffs, of whom it more remains
That, as it were in Triumph-wise, Eight Under kings did roe
Him, Sterns-man, on the River Dee, with diverse honors more,
This Edgar by a former wife had Edward, by an other
This Egelred, a Son unto a kind and cruel Mother:
For as she labors to prefer her own by well and ill,
So to destroy her Son-in-law she wanted means, not will.
And means did hit. King Edward hunts, and hunting lost his Train,
Whom, man-les, at her Castle Corfe the Queen did entertain.
He having seen to whom he came in courtesy to see,
Made haste away, in Quest of them that still a hunting be:
And when he, mounted, should depart, to him his Stepdame drinks.
Whom, pledging, him an Hierling stabbed, and life-les down he sinkes.
Thus Egelred obtained the Crown, but for his cr^wing so
His Subjects grudge, and he became a Preface to their woe.
For when this proud and vicious king, was neither loved of his,
Nor lived safely for the Danes, his secret Edict is,
That suddenly in one self hour, throughout the Land should pass charge
A common Massaker of Danes, which so performed was:
Hartfordia VVelwyn (VVealth-wyn then, for promptness in that
Beginning, other Towns as it themselves from Danes enlarge.
CHAP. XXI.
THis common mu^ her of the Danes was common mirth to all
The English, whom they did oppress with slaueries not small,
Compelling me^ by grievous Draught as Beasts to plough their Land,
Of whom the English as of Gods, or Feends, in terror stand.
The Husband durst not use his Wife if liked of a Dane,
Nor House nor Goods, nor ought he had, for who resists was slain:
That frankes and feeds daintily, This pines and fares ill,
And of his sweat that has the sweet, and is imperious still.
Each house maintained such a Dane, that so they might prevent
Conspiracies, if any were, and grope how minds were bent:
Lord Dane the same was called then, to them a pleasing name,
Now odiously Lur-dane say we, when idle Mates we blame.
When Swain the Dacia^ King did hear his Danes were murder dso.
With bitter vows he shipped his men for Englands ouerthroe:
And landing, spared no shrine, nor Saint, nor Sex, nor any State,
Not wanting Aiders Englishmen, that held their King in hate.
Especially false Edricus the Admiral deceiues
His King and Country oftentimes, and Bribes of Swain receives:
And Egelred his cowardisse encouraged the Foe,
Till Swain at length, for Masses great, was bribed hence to go.
But making short return, the Peers of England that disdain
Th'indignities of such a King, that did so feebly reign,
Submit them Subjects unto Swain: and Egelred did fly
Unto the Father of his Queen, the Duke of Normandy:
And Swain, possessed of the land, did shortly after die.
His son Canutus, present here, had Seazon of the Crown,
Till Egelred, returning back by Armor puts him down:
Who scarcely gives breathing time, but that he back resailes
From Denmark, and by force, by friends, and fortune here preuailes:
For in this War King Egelred did sicken and decease:
And then the broiles (Canutus king) did for a time decrease,
Till Edmund, son of Egelred, did interrupt that peace.
COnferring Arms, to Edmonds age when Egelred did lie
On deathbed, to his son he said: not quite forlorn am I,
Whose life has had so much of grief, thus graciously to dye.
Ad more, thy virtues glad my death, yeat two things grieve among,
To leave my Kingdom so in Wars, and thee for Wars too young,
So may these troubles wear to none as thou do wax I pray,
And so possess thy Fathers Seat that all approve thy sway.
Not to be made a King (my Son) is so to make thee proud,
For Mildenes fitteth majesty, high minds are disaloude.
See me thy Father, now a King, and by and by but earth,
Nor think that every King has hap to die a happy death.
Let nature for perfection molde a Paragon each way,
Yeat death at last on finest lumps of living flesh will pray:
For nature never framed it, that never shall decay.
The brauest are as blossoms, and the longest Liver dies,
And dead, the louelest Creature as the lothsom'st Carrion lies.
Then think not but that kings are men, and as the rest miscarrie,
Save that their fame or infamy continually does tarry.
Deem past Examples Sentences, and (which did fail in me)
Make use of those not now in use, for now will cease to be.
Attempt not things beyond thy reach, join fortune to thy will:
Least Phoebus Chair do else surcharge rash Phaeton his skill.
If Fortune help whom thou would hurt, fret not at it the more:
When Ajax stormed, then from him the Prize Ulysses bore.
Try friends by touch, a feeble friend may prove thy stro^gest Foe:
Great Pompe^s head to Caesar's hand it was betrayed so.
Admit thou had Pactolion waves, to land thee Gold at will,
Know Craesus did to ^yrus kneel, and thou may speed as ill.
Abandon lust, if not for sin, yeat to avoid the shame:
So Hogs of Ithacus his men the Latian Witch did frame.
Be not too moody in thy wrath, but pause though fist be bent:
Often Philips Son did rashly strike, and leisurely repent.
Content thee with vnthreatned Mean, and play not Aesops Dog:
The Gold that gentle Bacchus gave did greedy Mydas clogge.
Be valiant, not too venterous, but fight to sight again:
Even Hercules did hold it ods for one to strive with twain.
Be not ambitiously a King, nor grudgingly decline:
One God did root out Cis his stock, and raise up Iesses line.
Jest nor with edge tools, suffer Saints, let mighty Fools be mad:
Note, Seneca by Neroes doom for Precepts penance had.
Have care to whom, of who^, and what to speak, though speech be true,
That Miss made Poe^^us contrary his Ravens Swan-like hew.
He frames torments to himself that feeds a Tyrants vain:
Perillus was by Phalaris adiudg'd to self-taught pain.
Praise not the beauty of thy Wife, though she of form be sped:
For Gyges, moved so, did graft on Candaules his head.
Shun Jealousy that heart-breake love, if Cat will go to kind,
Be sure that Io has a means that Argus shall be blind.
Commit not Treasure with thy Child to greedy minded men:
Thou leauest Polidor a spoil to Polymnestor then.
Occurrants give occasions still of like, in which be sure
To serve thy God, to save thy self, and well to all procure.
Be virtuous, and assure thy self thou can not then but thrive:
In only virtue it is said, that men themselves survive.
As for the vicious, such they are, as is the heedlesse Fly,
That killes it self, and hurts his sight that has her in his eye.
Farewell my Son, England farewell, thy never happy Prince
Does take his leave, an happy leave, if taken so long since.
And, Edmond (burying not with me thy virtues, nor my speech)
I bless thee in his blessed Name whom I of bless beseech,
Said Egelred: and shortly gave a quiet gasp or twain,
And being dead, his noble Son succeeded him in Reign.
THis like himself, even Knight-like and an Englishman indeed,
Did quicke^ Englands quailing Prowes, and Mars-like did proceed.
A brauer Captain than was he not any band might have:
And yeat a Mars did match this Mars, Canutus was as brave.
These wonders of that age for Arms, and Dirii of those days,
Did often battle, equally to eithers loss and prays,
Now after many bloody Fields, when none might estimate
The better or the worser part, a Knight that saw the state
Then present, and by likelyhoods presaged what might fall,
Said (hearing it the differing Kings and Soldiers almost all:)
We ever war, and never win, Edmund has Fortitude,
Canutus Fortune, neither thus of other is subdude,
Death fears not us, nor for their lives our Contraries do care:
It follows then, that all must die wheare all so despret are.
If all be slain, then who shall serve our Princes that survive?
Or fence out Forrens? better one, then none of both should thrive.
To thrive therefore, were not a-misse, that seeing one of twain
Will Owner all, that only they the quarrel do maintain.
Or if Combattensie not please, the Land is rich and large,
And they Copernicers may live, and us of death discharge.
If Combat nor Partition be, then will his War revive,
Till one, suruiuing all of us, wants one with whom to strive.
This said, the Kings did mark and make a profit of the same,
And did conclude by Combacy to win or loose the Game.
Within a little Island near (round which the Armies stand)
The Kingly Champions try their Force, by fighting hand to hand.
They spur their Horses, break their Spears, and beat at Barriars long
And then, dismounting, did renew a Battle brave and strong.
Whilst either King thus Martially defends, and did offend,
They breathing, King Canutus said: we both I see shall end,
E^e Empire shall begin to one: then be it at thy choice
To fight, or part. With it their Knights cry out with common voice,
Divide, most valiant Kings divide, enough ye have of Fight:
And so the Champions did embrace, forgetting malice quite.
Partition equally was made betwixt these Princes twain,
And Brother-like they live and love: till by a deu'lish train,
Earl Edricus, a Traitor to the Father and the Son,
Did murder Edmund: and his head (supposing to have won
The favor of Canutus so) presenting said (O King)
For love of thee I thus have done. Amazed at the thing,
Canutus said, and for that thou have headed him for me,
Thy head above all English heads exalted it shall be:
The Earl was headed, and his head poold up for all to see.
Of England, Danske, and Norway, then Canut was perfect Lord,
And in this triple Regiment all with virtue did accord.
Harold, and Hardi-knought his sons each the other did succeed:
Of either which small certain Fame of well or ill we reed,
Save by their Raigns to Engl^sh-men did grievous thraldo^ breed.
But after Hardt-knought his death the Danes were chased hence,
Not intermedling with the state of England euersince.
CHAP. XXII.
OF foresaid Egelred his Sons, Alured, and his brother,
Was Edward King: (for Goodwins guile had made away that other.)
Religious, chaste, wise, fortunate, stout, francke, and mild was he:
And from all Taxes, wrongs, and Foes, did set his Kingdom free.
By ouer-ruling of his Lords, entreating long the same,
Least, dying Issuelesse, he leave succession out of frame,
He took to Queen a Damsel fair: howbeit, by consent,
In vows of secret chastity their loving lives they spent.
The Father of this maiden-wife, he sitting by the King,
And seeing one that stumbled, but not falling, up to spring,
Did laughing say, the brother theare the brother well has eased,
(His meaning was the Stumblers feet.) And had thou so pleased,
So had my Brother, quoth the King, bin easing unto me.
The traitrous Earl took bread and said, so this digested be
As I am guiltless of his death: these words he scarcely spoke,
But that in presence of the King the bread did Goodwyn choke.
His son Harold, by Hardi-knoghts late daughter, him suruiues,
He, crossed by contrary winds, in Normandy ariues,
Where Goodwins son did take an oath, Duke William urging so,
To keep unto the Duke his use, when Edward hence should go,
The Crown of England (claimed by Adoption, and by blood.)
But Harold, after Edwards death, not to his promise stood.
And for he was in wealth, in friends, in blood, and Armor strong,
And title had his Mothers right, he forced not the wrong:
But arming him against the Duke, so urged unto wroth,
Did seize the Crown unto himself, contrary to his oath.
Whilst William therefore works for war, King Harold had not rest,
For Harold Hare-foote, King of Danes and Norwaies, much oppressed
The English with his puissant Bands. But Harold him assailes,
And after fearce and doubtful fight most valiantly preuailes:
And with the Norgaine Prince he slew his people almost all:
When, for division of the spoil, did much contention fall
Betwixt the King and Englishmen: and many a noble Knight
Not only murmur and malign, but did forsake him quight.
Such malice growing, William with his Normanes taking land,
Found hot hot* spur Harold pressed in Arms, his puissance to withstand:
And either Battle Marshalled, as either Captain wild,
The King of England eagerly the Normane Oste behild,
And with his cheerful speeches thus his men with courage filled.
See valiant (War-friends) yonder be the first, the last, and all
The Agentes of our Enemies: they henceforth cannot call
Supplies: for weeds at Normandy by this in Porches groe:
Then Conquer these would Conquer you, and dread no further Foe,
They are no stouter than the Brutes, whom we did hence exile:
Nor stronger than the sturdy Danes, or victory er while:
Not Saxo^^e could once contain, or scarce the world beside
Our Fathers, who did sway by sword where listed them to bide.
Then do not ye degenerate, take courage by descent,
And by their burialles, not abode, their force and flight prevent.
Ye have in hand your Countries cause, a Conquest they pretend,
Which (were ye not the same ye be) even Cowards would defend.
I grant that part of us are fled and linked to the Foe,
And glad I am our Army is of Traitors cleared so:
Yea pardon has he to depart that stays Mal-content:
I prize the mind above the man, like zeal has like event.
Yeat troth it is, no well or ill this Island ever had,
But through the well or ill Support of Subjects good or bad.
Not Caesar, Hengest, Swayn, or now (which neretheles shall fail)
The Normane Bastard (Albion true) did, could, or can prevail.
But to be selfe-false in this Isle a selfe-Foe ever is,
Yeat wot I, never Traitor did his Treasons S^ipend mis.
Shrink who will shrink, let Armor's wait press down the burdned earth,
My Foes, with wondering eyes, shall see I over prize my death.
But since ye all (for all, I hope, a like affected be,
Your Wives, your Children, lives, and Land from s^^uitude to free)
Are Armed both in show and zeal, then gloriously contend,
To win and wear the home brought Spoils, of Victory the end.
Let not the Skinners daughters Son possess what he pretends,
He lives to die a noble death that life for freedom spendes.
As Harold hartned thus his men, so did the Normane his:
And looking wishly on the earth, Duke William speaks this.
To live upon, or lie within, this is my Ground or Grave,
(My loving Soldiers) one of twain your Duke resolves to have.
Nor be ye Normanes now to seek in what you should be stout,
Ye come amidst the English Pikes to hew your honors out,
Ye come to win the same by Lance, that is your own by law,
Ye come, I say, in righteous war revenging swords to draw.
Howbeit of more hardy Foes no passed Fight has spead ye,
Since Rollo to your now-Abode with Bands victorious lead ye
Or Turchus, Son of Troylus, in Scythian Fazo bread ye.
Then worthy your Progenitors ye Seed of Pryams son
Exployt this business: Rollons do that which ye wish be done.
Three People have as many times got and forgone this shore,
It rests now ye Conquer it not to be Conqured more:
Fot Normane and the Saxon Blood conioyning, as it may,
From that consorted Seed the Crown shall never pass away.
before us are our armed Foes, behind us are the Seas,
On either side the Foe has Holds of succor, and for ease.
But that Advantage shall return their Disadvantage thus,
If ye observe no shore is left the which may shelter us,
And so hold out amidst the Rough, whilst they hale in for Lee,
Whereas, whilst men securely sail, not seldom shipwracks be.
What should I cite your passed Acts, or tediously incence
To present Arms? your faces show your hearts conceive offense:
Yea even your courages divine a Conquest not to fail*
Hope then your Duke does prophecy, and in that hope prevail.
A People brave, a terren Heaven, both Objects wroth your wars,
Shall be the Prizes of your Prow's, and mount your fame to Stars.
Let not a Traitors perjured Son ex^rude us from our right:
He dies to live a famous life, that does for Conquest fight.
By this the furious Battles join, a bloody day to either,
And long they fight, the victory inclining unto neither:
At length the English had the ods, who keeping close array,
Unto the Duchy Forces gave no entrance any way:
Who fayning fear, and Martially retyring as oppressed,
The English so became secure, and follow on dispersed.
To which advantage, furiously the Normanes did return,
And got a bloody victory. In vain the English spurn
Amidst the Pikes against the prick: King Harold then was slain:
From whom began the Normanes sole, but soon conjoined rain:
For second Henry, Mawd her Son, freed Englands blood again.
Since when (and ever may they so) that Offspring ruled us:
Of whose Conjunction in the Crown, the Genalogue is thus.
King Edmund Irn-side Issue had Edward the Outlaw: he
Had Margaret: Mawd by Malcolme (the^ the King of Scots) had she:
Mawd to the Conqueror his Son first Henry, Mawd did bei^e:
This second Mawd the Angeos wife, had second Henry heir.
EDward, King Harolds Preregnant, of the same Change foretold,
Who present and succeeding times thus, dying, did unfold:
It is a world, to note (quoth he) the ways that men adore,
And how Hypocrisy has bred of Godlike Devils store,
That speak to seem, that seem to shift, that shift to spoil by guile,
That smooth, and sooth, and yeat deceive with Scriptum est mean while.
But let them heave their hands to Heaven, they have their hier in Hell,
That seem devout to cloak deceit, and say, but do not well.
The Rich are retchles in their wills, their liking is for law:
The Poor repine, and Goods, not theirs, by idle shiftings claw.
The Lords and Landed ouer-rent, and cunningly the same
The Parasite does ouer-reach, and bears away the game.
One rises by another fall, and some do clime so fast,
That in the Clouds they do forget what Climates they have past.
But Eagle-winged minds that fly to nestle in the Sun,
Their lofty heads have leaden heels, and end where they begun.
It is a common point on which the aged grossly run,
Once to have dared, said, and seen, more then was ever done.
The Youth are foolish-hardie, or less hardy then they ought,
Effeminate, fantastical, in few, not few are naught.
At Cyprus not the wanton Saint, nor yeat her wily Son,
Did want her Orgies: nor at Rome did Vesta lack her Nonne:
The Lampsacens gave Pryapus his filthy Rites, and Create
To Jove his Bulls: and Si^ilie to Ceres tithed Wheat:
The Thracians with their Bacchanales did Lybers Temple fill:
And Italy did blood of Babes on Saturnes Altars spill:
And fatal wreathes of Myr^ill boughs were sacred unto Dys:
In few, there was no Pagane God his Sacrifice did mis.
But Englishmen, nay Christian men, not only seem profane,
But Man to Man, as Beast to Beast, holds civil duties vain.
Yea Pulpits some, like Pedlers packs, yield forth as men affect,
And what a Synod shall conclude, a Sowter will correct.
The rude thus boasting Litrature, one Schism begets another,
And grossly though a Sehis^^e, yeat has cach Schismatike his Soother.
Mean while the learned want their Meed, and none with profit hears
The tedious Doult, whose artles tongue does preach to weary ears.
Here could I enter in a Field of matter more than much:
But guess that all is out of frame, and long time has bin such:
And what shall be let time disclose. This only will I touch:
A Green Tree cut from withered Stock, divided Furlongs three
From proper Root, it shall reioyne, and after fruitful be:
Thus said the King. And thus do some expound that Prophesee:
The Tree this Land, the Stock and Root the thralled English line:
King Har^ld, and the Williams twain, the Furlongs some define:
Henry the Normane that begot on Mawde his English Queen
Mawde, second Henry's Mother, was the Trees Return to green.
King Stephen first, though not so firm, did in this Turn proceed:
But second Henry perfectly restalled VVodens Seed.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XXIII.
ASsisted by the former Bowne persist, my Muse, and tell
How by the Normane Conquest here an other world befell.
New laws (not Labyrinths as now through wrested Quirkes) came in:
New Lords also, at whom, for most, our ancient Crests begin.
The English sink, the Normanes swim, all topsie turute was,
Until the Conqueror had brought his whole command to pas.
Then was one Edgar, son unto the outlaw Edward, he
To holy Edward had been heir, had not King Harold be:
And William pleading too by sword admits no milder law:
So Edgar in his soonest flight his safest issue saw:
Who with his mother (daughter to the King of Hungary)
And Sisters, did attempt into his Grandsiers Realm to fly.
Thus Englands hope with Englands heir in one same Bark did sail:
When desprate from their villanage was English blood of bail.
(...) God, that to the hopeles is not helples, if he please,
Did drive the storm-beate English ship into the Scottish seas:
Wheare, cast a shore, King Malcolme soon had notice of the wrack,
And did become a gracious Lord unto their present lack.
And (Agatha a Votarisse) took Margaret to Queen:
Protects her brother even by Arms, against King Williams teene:
Until by war and wise convey he so to pass did bring
That Edgar reconciled was unto the English King:
In credit, though withheld his Crown, and thus at least did good:
His flight Scotch-queen'd his Sister, she regraded Englands blood.
For let we Edgar against the haer preserved, as expressed,
And either William, luckie Knight at arms, interred rest,
And set first Williams youngest son, first Henry, on the Throne,
Through him the royal English and the Normane bloods grew one.
On Mawd, Scotch Malcomes daughter by the foresaid Margaret he
Had Mawd, that solie did survive her drowned brothers three,
Her, Empress to the Emperor then newly being ded,
Did Geffrey Plantaganet the Earl of Anioy wed,
And she unto Plantaganet did second Henry beire,
Of England, Angeo, Gascoyne, and of Normandy the heir.
Yeat Stephen, first Williams daughters son who^ The Earl of Bloys did marry,
Did with the Empress and her son now King now Captive varrie:
But lastly, tired, and interred, all England by his death
Was quietly second Henry's, who was lawfulst heir by birth.
With Hengests blood our droupen Muse it also now reuiues:
For harshly sounds our Poeame, save in matter where it thriues.
Let be your bitten Vine, we here a blisfull vintage gain,
That did, and does, and evermore vnblasted may remain:
For this coriuall seed begot England English again.
From whence we note what Scepters, what discents, and turns befell:
Less pleasing unto some, perhaps, than toys which many tell
That but of phansies, women, loves, and wantonness can sing:
From which their tunes but pip their toungs and the^ they hang the wing
THis second Henry, mighty both in Empire and in Arms,
Was only by his Clergy crossed with unbeseeming harms.
Perplexed therefore at th'apeales that waiward Becket made,
To some, demanding his disease at Normandy he said:
Our Popes that seem (they do but seem) S. Peter to succeed
Who did deny, although deserve, high Styles to him decreed,
Are quite unlike to Peter and Popes thirty three fore-past
Who lived in misery and died by Martyrdom at last.
Now need not Tyrants: Popes to Popes be Tyrants: and they all
Do wrest even Principalities submissiue to their Pall.
Peter did sin, and sinning to repentant tears did fly:
Popes sin not, but to others sins give pardon (else they lie.)
Christ washed feet, Kings kiss their feet, Christ gave to Caesar his,
They take, and say that either Sword in their subjection is.
The Pope did so our mothers Pheare the Emperor entreat,
As that his proud attempts I shame and sorrow to repeat.
What cite I foreign matters, when our native Stories yield
Of Myters meddling with our Sword an ouerplenteous feeld?
We offer Tapers, pay our Tithes and Vows, we Pilgrims go
To every Saint at every shrine we Offerings do bestoe,
We kiss the Pix, we creep the Cross, our Beads we overrun,
The Covent has a Legacy, who so is left undone:
We fast the Eaue, we feast the day of every Saint they make,
Their houslings, Shrifts, and Sacraments most reverently we take,
By-tale we say Orysons, and to words unknown Amen:
The Quier does chaunt, we knock our breasts, we bow and cross us the^:
Their skaer-spright water, boxed Boans, their hoasts, and what not brings
The Priest, the Friar, or Pardoner we count not holy things?
We seat them in our fattest Soyles for Pasture, wood, and spring,
We lodge them safe in stately walls, we sorrowing when they sing.
Their Belles call them from easy beds to sing in gowns as warm,
But Larums us from restles Camps, by wounds to heal their harm.
And meet is so: but meet also that they protected thus,
Be ^ot unquiet, but for their quiet pray for and further us.
When our great Gra^dsier thought this Isle by Conquest clearly wo^ne,
And entered Kent, what erst he did did seem in Kent undone.
A moving wood stole marching on, and hemmed his Army round,
When al at once, their boughs cast down, was heard a warlike sound,
That to the Normanes did disclose an Army ordered well,
Resolved to die, rather then leave the laws where they did dwell:
(For so, in way of Parlie, did their mytred Stygand tell.)
Their Bishop, their Contriuer, and their chief conduct was he,
By whose devise the conqueror, intrapped, did agree
To ratify the laws of Kent such as they were, and be.
But bearing in a common good with Crosiers crossing Crowns,
Proud Anselme in our Uncles reign did far exceed the bownes
Of Prelacie or piety (for Churchmen should be meek:
Yeat some in practice leave what they of us in preaching seek:
For they that bid me do, and do themselves the good they bid,
Do lead me to the substantive, and leave me not in quid)
Yea, either of our Uncles thriu'd in Foreign Conquests more,
Than against their Churchmen, setting al their Kingdom in uproar.
One Prelate wrought the pope to curse and cross his Prince withfoes:
Twixt others long ambitions Pleas for Primacie aroes:
And now, through Becket, to our self no lesser damage groes.
I have had hardy Knights for wars, and helpful friends in peace,
Yeat helples friends, and hartles Knights this Cleargie-pride to ceace.
These words heard diverse present Knights, who vexed at the wrong,
Did, clean unwitting to the King, ariue in Kent ere long,
And at S. Bennits Altar, in the Minster of his Sea,
At sacring for a sacrifice the saucy Clerk did slay.
Which heard, the Pope canonized the slir-strif Priest a Saint,
Insencing Kings against our King, till wars made Henry faint.
Then humbled unto haughty Priest as Legates sent from Rome
He basely bows: and they to him for begged Penance dome
Purs-payne and heathen battles, and (which worser was decreed)
Barefoote he went, whom Monks did whip till feet and body bleed.
Barefoote to Jury fare the Knights, fo dying for their deed:
Nor might they mend it, for as bad even Emperors did speed.
CHAP. XXIIII.
THe Kings fair Leiman Rosamund, and how his Sons rebel
Iouer-passe. To Richard next the Dyadem befell.
He did in Cypris, Sycil, and in Syria war and win:
Whose glory his confederate Peers to envy did bginne:
And, warring with the Souldan, left the English King behind:
Who left not fighting till he forced Conditions to his mind,
And of Jerusalem was King. But as he did return,
The Austrich Duke, (whose reared flagge our wro^ged king did spurn
From Acon walls, his victory,) did Richard intercept,
And him in easelesse prison for revenge and ransom kept.
The Duke his daughter, as the King did theare a captive lie,
Did labor strongly in the love she would but could not fly:
And sighing wept, and weeping spoke, and speaking thus she said:
Richard through hate, through love am I in diffring bands betrayed.
My harvest hangs in the grass, and ere the proof may blast:
Or clew-led Theseus, from the den of Minotaurus past,
To far more harder stars than was poor Ariadne lest
Leave me he may, of all, yea, more than all, of him bereft.
Sweet Love, Saint Love, or rather I thy Saint and thou my God,
In such deserts let such deceit be, as should be, forbod.
The Gailor, bribed, with his keys to stay or free him sent her.
Love (lovely Richard) makes, quoth she, that I this hell-house enter,
Hence make escape, remembering me that thus for thee do venture.
Attentive to her sprech, but more retentiue of her shape,
The King, awaking to her form, did sleep his own escape:
And giving her a meeting kiss, quoth he, so God me keep
As true desire to quite this good in me shall never sleep.
Yeat ransomelesse I will not hence: but fetching back the lone,
When as thy Father shall repay to England ten for one,
I vow thy love a recompense, till when I live to thee.
Thus sever they: and ransom him ere many weeks did free.
Soon after on the Belgicke towers he English-flags did rear:
Austrich and all the Empire of his prowess stood in fear:
Until a desperate Stragler with an arrow pierst his head,
And sent the woeful English home, their worthy Leader dead:
Thus Lyons-hart (his courage got that surname) lastly sped.
To whom King John, in courage not inferior to the other,
Succeeded, but in life and death moretragicke than his brother.
IN Scotland, France, Ireland, and Wales he warred, wearied less,
Than by the Pope and English Priests wronged without redress,
Nor was, save from their Sovereigns death, their malice out of date:
Yeat John, feign they, hut they felt John, did trouble Church and state.
When (for as Gaylers with Conuicts, so Popes deal with a faulter:
Their sin-salue like the setting loose from Shackles to the haulter)
When Mass and all the Sacraments were Strangers many a day,
And that, so farreforth as it in the triple Myter lay,
Even God himself was barred hence, and that, prostrate before
His Vassal Bishop Langtons feet, the King did grace implore,
When Peter pence were granted, and the English Crown to hold
By rent and Homage of the Pope, and that for sums of gold
The French Kings son was cursed hence, who else had wore ye Crown
And that the reconciled King did seem on surest ground,
Then he, whilst he in progress did at Swinshed Abbey lie,
Was poysned by a Monk, that baend himself that John might dye.
The Monk, more solemnly interred and song for than the King,
Was cause that diverse diversely did consture of the thing.
Some charged the Popes of Avarice, for that when Rings offend
They sell them peace: of pride, for that to them even Monarks bend:
Of mere incharitie, for that to wreake their private spite
Against Kingdoms Kingdoms they incense, and, worser, do acquit
Even subjects to allegiance sworn against their Lords to fight:
Of Treason, for that to entrap such as from them descent
With oaths and al things they dispense: Some bid us thus prevent
Their sins and sleights, do not as they, not deal with them, for why?
Who does must live their Vassal or their Victory must die.
A merry mate amongst the rest, of cloysterers thus told.
THis cloystring and fat feeding of Religious is not old
(Quoth he.) Not long since was a man that did his deuoire give
To kill the passions of his flesh, and did in penance live:
And, though beloved of the King, he lived by his sweat:
Affirming men that would not work unworthy for to eat.
He told the erring their amiss, and taught them to amend.
He counseled the comfortless and all his days did spend
In prayer and in poverty. Amongst his doings well
Highways he mended: doing which this Accident befell.
A dosen Thieves to have been hanged were lead this Hermit by,
To whom he went, exhotting them as Christian-men to dye.
So penitent they were, and he so pitiful (good man)
As to the King for pardon of the Prisoners he ran:
Which got, he gave it them. But this Prouiso did he add
That they should ever work as he. They grant, poor souls, and glad.
He got them gowns of country gray, and hoods for rain and cold,
And hempen girdles, (which besides themselves) might burdens hold,
Pick axe and Spade: and hard to work the Covent sell together,
With Roabes, and Ropes, and every tool for every work and wheather.
So did they toil as thereabout no Causie was unwrought:
Wherefore new labors for his men the holy Hermit sought:
But at departure prayed them to fast, to watch, and pray,
And live remote from worldly men, and goes so his way.
The holy Thieves (for now in them had custom wrought content)
Could much of Scripture and, indeed, did heartily repent.
But when the country folk did hear of these same men devout
Religiously they haunt their Celles, and lastly brought about
That from the woods to Buildings brave they wound the Hermits crew,
Who was from found-out work returnde, and their Aposta knew.
He going to their stately place, did find in every dish
Fat beef and brewis, and great store of dainty foul and fish.
Who seeing their saturitie, and practicing to win
His Puples thence, Excess, he said, does work access to sin.
Who fares finest does but feeed, and ouer-feedeth often:
Who sleeps softest does but sleep, and sometimes over soft:
Who clads him trimmest is but clad: the fairest is but fair:
And all but live: yea, if so long, yeat not with lesser care
Than forms, backs, boanes and bellies that more ho^ely cherisht are.
Learn freedom and felicity, Hawks flying where they list
Be kindlier and more sound than Hawks best tended on the fist.
Thus preached he promised abstinence, and bids them come away.
No have but good: well wear they, and so well, as they would stay.
The godly Hermit, when all means in vain he did perceive,
Departing said: I found you knaves, and knaves I do you leave.
Hence said this merry fellow (if the merriment be true)
That Cloystring, Friars clothing, and a Couents number grew.
This heard a simple Northerne-man, no friend to Monk, or Friar,
Or preaching Lymmer: for his speech disclosed thus his ire.
AFowle ill on their weazens, for the Carles garre syke a dinne,
That more we member of their iapes than mend us of our sin.
At Ewle we wonten gambole, dance, to carrole, and to sing,
To have good spiced Sewe, and Roste, and plum-pies for a King:
At Fasts-eue pan puffes: Gang tide gaites did alie Masses bring:
At Paske begun our Morrise: and ere Penticost our May:
Tho Roben hood, liell John, Friar Tucke, and Marian deftly play,
And Lard and Lady gang till Kirk with Lads and Lasses gay:
Fra Mass and Eensong sa good cheer and glee on ery Green,
As, save our wakes twixt Eames and Sibbes, like gam was never seen:
At Baptis-day with Ale and cakes bout bon-fires neighbors stood:
At Martelmasse wa turned a crabbe, thilke told of Roben hood,
Till after long time myrke, when blessed were windows, dares and lights,
And pails were filled, and hathes were swept, against Fairie-elues and sprits:
Rock, and plow Mo^daies gams sal ga^g, with saint-feasts and kirk-sights.
Iis tell ye, Clearkes erst racked not of purpoe ne of pall:
Ylke yeoman fed more poor tume wambes than Gentiles now in Hall,
Yea, ledge they nere sa hally Writ, thilke tide was greater wrang
Than heretoforne: tho words had sooth, na writing now so stra^g:
Iis na Wizard, yet I drad it will be warse ere lang.
Belyue done lyther Kirk-men reaue the crop, and we the tithe,
And mykell bukish ben they gif they tache our lakines blithe.
Some egg us sla the Prince and show a Bullock fra the Pape,
Whilke, gif it guds the sawle, Iis sure the cragge gangs till the rape:
Syke votion gyles the people, sa but sylde good Princes escape:
Sa teend our King his life, and song is Requiem for the Monk:
Good King God rest thy sawle, but Fee^ds reaue him bath sawle and tro^ke.
Such talk was long on foot, and still was quittance tale for tale.
Dunstone, quod one, made Edgar, erst an English Monarke, quale
For matter of less moment, even for wedding of a Nun,
Whom in her Cell the King espi'de, lou'de, wooed, and thus won.
THe same (quod he) that rules this Land the same entreats thee:
Thou may, sweet Wench, unto thy self derive a Queen from me.
What lets, since none may love thee more, unless perhaps this Cell,
Too strict a place wherein thy self, eue^ Beauties self, should dwell.
Let nature hide her barren forms and imperfections thus,
And in such Puritanes as thou commend her skill to us.
Thou wrongest Nature, molding thee to molde by thee as faer:
Thou wro^gest me^, that would beget the fruit which thou sholdst baer:
Thou wrong'st thy Country of increase: thou wro^g'st me in like sort:
Thou wrong'st thy Kin of kindred: and thou wrong'st thy self of sport.
Should thou but dream what marriage were, thou would not live a maid:
One heart of two, two Souls to one by wedlock is co^uaid.
An husbands open kissings, and his secret coyings, nay,
The very Soul of Love, more sweet then thou or I can say,
The joy of babes which thou should bear, the Service at thy beck,
The sweet consorted common weal of household at thy check,
Would make thee seem a Goddess: who, because thou art not such,
Offendest God in hiding of thy Tallent. Too too much
Thou dotest on Virginity, permitted, not imposed
On any, save on such as for no such thy self thou knoest.
Else what should mean this penning up, such vowing, and these Vailes,
Since Vessels only are of worth that bear in storms their sails.
The Scedsters of thine Essence had they been as thou would be
Thou had not been: Then gratify the same, thy self, and me,
And leave these superstitious walls: Thou profitst not hereby,
Nor are we male and female borne that fruitless we should dye:
Then love me, for, believe me, so will prove a Jubilee.
Her red dispersed in shadowed white, did add to either more,
To her of beauty, and to him Love greater than before.
She claims the places privilege, and faintly cites a Tex:
She pleades her birth too bace, and plays the No-I of her Sex,
And fights as she would be foyld. But, prized, Durstone makes
It Sacrilege: and for to wife the Recluse Edgar takes,
In twelve years would be not annoint or crown him King and more,
Enioynes him seven years penance, and to edify and store
Great Monasteries forty ere Indulgence could be got:
Thus Edgar for his Cloister cheer did pay this costly shot.
CHAP. XXV.
John's murder bred such murmr. But third Henry, John his son,
Assisted chiefly by the Pope, his fathers Scepter won:
Who interdited Lewis, till he cursed him into France,
And left to Henry prosperous reign, till happened this mischance.
A Parliament at Oxenford did derogate so much
From his prerogative, as that the Quarrel grew to such,
That civil wars betwixt the King and Barronage began:
Not ending, but with tragic ends of many a worthy man,
Brother to brother, sire to son, and friend to friend was foe:
Al laboring (which they should uphold) their Countries overthrow.
Now was the King a Captive, and the Barrons by and by
His Conquest, and the civil strife too fast begot supply.
My heart vnapts mine hand to write the troth of it too true:
Even wars Idea: more then tongue or eye can say or view.
But to conclude (which still concludes) the King he did subdue:
And shows himself a gentle foe thus having won his peace:
And after lived in honor, and did happily decease.
Whose death (then warring with renown in Syria) being known
To Edward, he resailed and possessed his fathers Throne.
THe hansell of his Scepter was, the Welchmen did rebel:
Of whom to Edward, though with loss, the Victory befell.
Then on the French he warred, and a Winner did resayle:
And for that Baltoll, whom he made the King of Scots, did fail
His Homage, thence from Albanacke to England due and done,
Against the Scots he grievous, but a glorious war begun.
Not Barwicke, though for number bold until it flowed blood,
Nor any Scottish arms or hold, though infinite and good,
Might stay his awing prowess, till he had their King his thrall,
And in that Land, by Conquest, made himself the Lord of all.
Then taking Scottish oaths, which they did break, and he revenge,
With those Exploits he French attempts as gloriously did menge.
Yea Paganes, French, Cambries, and Scots, remembering but his name,
Cannot forget their skarres he made, though envious of his Fame,
Matchles for Chivalry: and yeat his Justice matched the same,
Not partial for the Prince his Son, a rash unbridled youth,
Whom he imprisoned, hearing of his outrages the truth,
And unto whom he dying spoke words worth report and ruth.
My life (quoth he) a warfare right in body and in soul,
Resignes my robed carcass to be rotted in the moule.
If well I did, well shall I do, if ill, as ill and worse:
And therefore (Ned) work as I will upon my bless or curse.
When thou becom'st an earthly God men's lives to ouersee,
Forget not that Eternal God that ouerlooketh thee.
The least part of a King is his, all owing him, and none
Less private than a Prince, the weal or woe of every one.
He and his People make but one, a body weak or strong,
As does the head the lims, or lims the head assist or wrong.
Derive thy laws from wisest heads, to be vpholden still,
Not adding or abstracting as conceited Tier-braines will.
Be cheerful, and in work nor word be neither proud nor hot,
No sincere love, but servile fear, or neither, so is got.
Encourage good Men by thy love: reform the bad by law:
Reserve an care for either Plea: and borrow least of awe.
Oppress not rich men, seeking so to please the poor: for neither
Is to be doomed, but as right or wrong is found in either.
To loyter well deserved gifts is not to give but sell,
When to requite ingratitude were to do evil well.
And (which save for the ill-mist ill might else have been forgot)
Be choice, but choose: for wiuelesse have each stranger, place, and shot.
Their heir, their home, and cost: which, save the last, indeed are not.
Reform thee even to day: unapt to day, less apt to morrow:
Youth aptly offers virtues such as years unaptly borrowe.
For he that plies the lappes and lips of Ladies all his prime,
And falls to Arms when age fails Arms, then also loses time,
As if a Bear in Moone-shine should attempt the Moon to clime.
Well have I driven out my date, and well thy days shall run,
If thou prove not my Glories grave, nor I plange in my Son.
The ouer-weening of thy wits does make thy Foes to smile,
Thy Friends to weep, and Clawbacks thee with soothings to beguile.
Yea, those thy Purses Parasites, unworthy thine Estate,
Do love thee for themselves, nor will they leave thee but too late.
I bless thee; if thou banish them, and curse thee, if they bide:
My bliss and curse be at thy choice. And so he shortly did.
FOrth with a second Edward, son to Edward, wore the Crown,
He to promote his Flatterers did put his Nobles down.
So Robert Bruze, then King of Scots, found ingresse for his Arms;
Recovering Scottish forces, and did spoil our men by swarms.
Barwicke in fine, and all erst won, and more then all was lost:
Yeat of more multeous Armies we than Scotland were at cost.
No Land divided in it self can stand, was found too true:
To worser then the wars abroad the homebred Quarrels grew.
Grange gotten Pierce of Gauelstone, and Spensers two like sort,
Mean Gentlemen, created Earls, of chief accoumpt and port,
Envying all equality, contrine of many a Peer.
The wrested death: those few that live lived mal-contented here.
Good Thomas Earl of Lancaster, on whom the rest rely,
The chief and grauest of the Peers, did, ouer-warred, fly
Into the woods: whereas himself and state he did bewray
Unto an Hermit: unto whom he, sighing, thus did say.
Happy are you sequestered thus from (so I may divine)
Our common wrack of common weal: for how it does decline
Through wild and wanton Guydes in part I feel, in part I aim,
By Presidents too like and fire too likely here to flame:
Hear (if you have not heard) what fire, our leisure fits the same.
CHAP. XXV.
THe Spartanes was for rapted Queen, to Ilions overthrow,
The Monarke of Assyria changed, and Latin Kings also
For Tarquins lust, yea how with us a double change did groe,
When British Vortiger did dote upon the Saxons daughter,
And Buerne for his forced wife from Denmark brought us slaughter,
I ouerpasse. Who knows not Ireland, our neighbor I Will?
Where Noe his Niece, ere Noe his flood, inhabited a while:
The first manured Western I Will, by Cham and Iaphets race:
Who, jointly entering, sundry times each other did displace:
Till Greece-bred Gathelus his brood from Biscay did ariue,
Attempting Irelands Conquest, and a Conquest did archiue.
Five kings at once did rule that I Will, in civil strife that droopes,
When fierce Turgesius landed with his misbeleeuing Troops.
This proud Norwegan Rouer so by aides and arms did thrive,
As he became sole Monarke of the Irish Kingdoms five:
Erecting Paganism, and did eiect the Christian law:
And thirty years, tyrannizing, did keep that I Will in awe:
Nor any hope of after help the hartlesse Irish saw.
Alone the wily King of Meth, a Prothew plying favor,
Stood in the Tyrants grace that much affected his behauor.
For what he said that other soothde, so ecco'ing his vain,
As not an Irish else but he a petty King did reign.
Turgesius friends that Viceroy for his daughters love the rather,
And therefore for his Leiman asked the Damsel of her Father.
Ill wot I what they know that love, well wot I that I know
That that brown Girl of mine lackes worth to be beloved so:
I have a many Neeces far more fairer then is she,
Yeat think I fairest of those faires unworthy you, quoth he,
But she and they are yours, my Lord, such Beauties as they be.
This Preface lik^e the Tyrant well, that longed for the play:
Not well contented that so long the Actors were away:
Often iterating his demand, impatient of delay.
Now have I, quoth the King of Meth, conuented to your bed
My Neeces, and my daughter, loath to loose her Maidenhead.
But doubt not Sir: coy Wenches close their longings in their palms,
And all their painted Storms at length convert to perfect Calmes.
Alonely if their beauties like (as likelier have we none)
You may conclude them women, and the Goal therefore your own.
To morrow, severed from your Train, unless some special few,
Expect them in your chamber where I leave the game to you:
Yeat when your eye has serude your heart of her that likes you best,
Remember they are mine Alies, untouched dismiss the rest.
Sweet also was this Scene: and now unto an Act we groe.
The Irish Princess, and with her a fifteen others more,
With ha^ging Glybbes that hid their necks as tynsel shadowing snoe,
Whose faces very Stoickes would, Narcissus-like, admire
Such Semeles as might consume I oues self with glorious fire,
And from the Smith of heavens wife allure the amorous haunt,
And reintise the Club-God Dys and all his diuelles to daunt,
And make the Sunne-God swifter than himself, such Daphnes chaced,
And Love to fall in love with them, his Psichis quite disgraced,
These rarer then the only Foul of Spice-burnt Ashes bread,
And sweeter than the Flower that with Phoebus turns head,
Resembling her from gaze of whom transformde Acteon fled,
From Meth came to Tergesius Court, as Presents for his bed.
In secret was their coming, and their chambering the same:
And now the lustful Chuffe was come to single out his game:
His Pages only, and a youth or twain attending him,
Wheare Banquet, Bed, Perfumes, and all were delicately trim.
He gives them courteous welcome, and did find them merry talk:
Mean while (the Harbengers of lust) his amorous eyes did walk
More clogd with change of Beauties than King Midas once with gold:
Now This, now That, and one by one he did them all behold.
This seemed fair, and That as fair: and, letting either pass,
A Third he thought a proper Girl, a Fourth a pleasant Less,
Lovely the Fifth, lively the Sixth, the Seventh a goodly Wench,
The Eight of sweet Complexion, to the Ninth he altreth thence,
That mildly seemed maiesticall, Tenth modest look and tongue,
Th'Eleuenth could sweetly intertain, the Twelfe was fresh and young,
The Next a gay Brownetta, Next and Next admirde among:
And ^ury feature so intycte his intricate affection,
As liking all alike he loved confounded in election.
Sweet hearts quoth he, or Jupiter fetched hence full many a Theft,
Or hither brought he Thefts that here their Leiman Children left.
Here wandering Cadmus should have sought his missed Sister, wheare
Fair Leda hatched her Cignets, whilst nor Cock nor Hen did fear.
How many view I fairer than Europa or the rest,
And Girle-boyes, favoring Ganim^de here with his Lord a Guest.
And Ganim^des we are, quoth one, and thou a Prophet true:
And hidden Skeines from underneath their forged garments drew,
Where with the Tyrant and his Bawds, with safe escape, they slew:
Of which young Irish Gentlemen and Methean Ladies act
The Isle was filled in a trise, nor any Irish slackt
To prosecute their freedom and th^amased Norgaines fall,
Which was performed, and the King of Meth extold of all.
Those Rouers (whose Originals, and others not a few,
As Switzers, Normaines, Lumbardes, Danes, from Scandinauia grew,
A mighty Isle, an other world, in Scythian Pontus Clyme)
Thus wrackt, left Ireland free unto our second Henry's time:
When, far unlike the Methes that erst their Country did re(...)ore,
An Amorous Queen thereof did cause new Conquests and uproar:
Dermot the King of Leynister, whom all besides did spite,
Did love, beloved, the Queen of Meth to whom he thus did wright.
THy King, sweet Queen, the hindrance of our harts-ease is away,
And I, in heart at home with thee, at hand in person stay.
Now is the time (Time is a God) to work our love good luck,
Long since I cheapned it, nor is my coming now to hucke:
But, since our fire is equal, let us equally assist
To finish what we fancy, say Maligners what they list.
No like immortal she-Egge Chucke of Tyndarus his wife,
(The wrack of Dardane walls) shall move to us like costly strife.
Thy husband no Atrides is: or were it he were such,
The Idane ball Judge did not more, but I would do as much.
For why? thy self, a richer cause of war, art worthy so:
Whom to continue ever friend, I careless am of foe.
My Kingdom shall contain thee that containest me and it:
Yea, though we be condemned, Love or armor shall us quit.
Loves law at least adiudgeth bars, clear books, to plead in brief
Prescription to objections how his passions be our chief:
For none does live not passionate of love, ire, mirth, or greese.
I wait thee in the nearest woods, and thither, watching watch,
Do wait escape: of all things else my self do care dispatch:
Let only Love (sweet Love) persuade, if more remain to wowe,
I hope I wish not more be done than what you mean to do.
This read, and red her cheeks, and to his reed already bent,
Not casting further doubts unto her Paramour she went,
Conveyed into Leynister. Not many weeks ensewe,
When Morice King of Meth returns, and what had happened knew.
A whitle-winde in a w^irle poole roost that pair of doves (quoth he)
The single state is double sweet, at price too decre I see.
How wowe we woe? and won, how loath we foul and doubt we fair?
And only then lack women faults when men their faults forbear.
The devil go with her, so that I with credit might forgo her,
But such does sin with savor, he is flouted that does owe her.
I may not put it up. unless I put up many a mock:
Foul fall that H^rrolde causing that my G^itrone is the smock,
He worth, and wronged, and his wrong a common quarrel made,
Assisted by the Irish Kings, did Leynister invade.
King ^^rm^te, whom his subjects then and long ere then did hate,
Was left defencelesse, desprate of his life, deprived his State,
And fled to England: wheare the Pope imbulled had of late
England for Irelands Conquest: So the Exile welcome was,
As aptest Instrument to bring that Stratageme to pass.
For but to be reseated was the Fugitives request,
And then to tribute part and leave to English men the rest.
King Henry, yeat in war elsewhere, did freely license any
To make adventure for themselves: so Dermot sped of many.
Earl Strang^ome, and the Geraldines, Fitz Stephans, Reymonde, and
More worth* Knights, of Wales for most, did take the task in hand,
And to the Crown of Englands use made Conquest of that Land.
But should you ask how Dermot sped (Father) he sped too well:
And nothing else the Irish books do of his Leiman tell.
Alone observe what changes here through only lust befell:
And note our England surfetteth in greater sins than it
The only cause that I am Earl an Exile here do sit.
The County thus concluded, and the Hermit answered this.]
CHAP. XXVII.
TO lose an Earldome, and to live an exile what it is
I cannot tell, but not to have what may be lost were blis.
I will not speak of Coiture, nor of Conception, naither
It fits I should, for never made I Grandsier of my Father:
But mine experience at our birth begins it birth, I speak
How than do we no creature worlds less helpefull or more weak.
From birth our Infancy throughout we live as not alive:
To others diversely a care, we senseless how we thrive.
No sooner we vncradell, be we females be we boys,
But we affect so many, and (God wot) such foolish toys,
And are so apt for dangers, and unapt to shift the same,
As aptly vanities by term of childishnes we blame.
Thence grow we to more strength and sense, still senceles howbeit
Of vice or virtue bettring by correction, not by wit:
Gamesome, not caring who takes care, nor can we save or git.
Next but demies, nor boys, nor men, our dangerous times succeed:
For vanities erst aimed at we shortly act in deed:
Wild roysting, wanton love, or else unthrifty shots and game
Do cuppell, ere we find our fault, distress unto defame.
Perhaps experience beating us does bid us lay to thrive:
The first degree to which (say some) is warely to wiue.
But, wiued, if our Saint become (as not unlike) a Shroe,
Then is that first degree to thrift the third degree in woe.
Or be it she be constant, wie, well intertayning, fair,
Do grant her silence, patience, and what virtues else be rare,
Yeat by how much more she deserves so much more we desire
To please and profit such an one, for whom on hers we tire
Our selves and senses, yea perchance, labor the most we may,
Much labor is too little that should household charge defray.
We aged carke to live and leave an overplus in store:
Perhaps for Spendals: so amidst abundance live we poor:
Our heirs wax sickishe of our health, too long our here abod,
Mean while the nearer to our graves the further we from God:
Grippell in works, testy in words, loathsome for most at length,
And such at fourscore as at four for manners, wit, and strength.
Thus Infancy is feeble: and our lusty youth vnstayde:
Our manhood carking: and our age more lothed than obayde.
And thus from first to last our lives be fruiteles and vnqueate.
But you, perhaps, expect I should of novelties entreat.
I have no tales of Robin Hood, though mal-content was he
In better days, first Richards days, and lived in woods as we
A Tymon of the world: but not devoutly was he so,
And therefore praise I not the man. But for from him did groe
Words worth the note, a word or twain of him ere hence we go.
Those days begot some mal-contents, the Principal of whom
A County was, that with a troop of Yomandry did rome,
Brave Archers and deliver men, since nor before so good,
Those took from rich to give the poor, and manned Robin Hood.
He fed them well, and lodged them safe in pleasant Caves and bowers,
Often saying to his merry men, what iuster life than ours?
Here use we Tallents that abroad the Churles abuse or hide,
Their Coffers excrements, and yeat for common wants divide.
We might have sterued for their store, and they have dyest our bones,
Whose tongues, driftes, hearts, entice, mean, melt, as Sirens, Foxes, stones,
Yea eue^ the best that betterd the^ heard but aloof our mones.
And redily the Churles could pry and prate of our amiss,
Forgetful of their own, when their reproves had proof as this:
* It was at midnight when a Nonne, in travel of a child,
Was checked of her fellow Nonnes for being so defilde:
The Lady Prioresse heard a stir, and starting out of bed,
Did taunt the Nouasse bitterly, Who, lifting up her head,
Said, Madame, mend your hood (for why so hastily she rose,
That on her head, mistook for hood, she donde a Channons hose.)
* I did amiss, not missing friends that wished me to amend:
I did amend, but missed friends when mine amiss had end:
My friends therefore shall find me true, but I will trust no friend.
Not one I knew that wished me ill, nor any workt me well,
To lose, lack, live, time, friends, in yncke, an hell, an hell, an hell:
Then happy we (quoth Robin Hood) in merry Sherwood that dwell.
Thus said the Out law: But no more of him I list to tell.
Grammarian-like, in order words significant to speak,
Logitian-like, to reason pro and contra am I weak:
Rhetorical I am not with a fluant tongue to ster:
Arithmatieke in numbering has subtracted me from her:
Geometry her Plattes, Bownes, and Proportions pass my strain:
Not Music with her Concords or her Discords breaks my brain:
Nor yeat Astronomy, whose Globes does Heaven and earth contain:
Let fair Mnemosine her brood their thrice three selves explain.
Expect not here Anatomies of Lands, Seas, Hell, and Skies,
Such length, breadth, depth, and height I balke: nor would I be so wise,
Least, knowing all thing else, I should not know my self precise.
The Skies contain the fiery Lights: Clouds moisture: and the air
Winds, Birds and Vapors: men and Beasts the upper Earth does bear:
Her Bowels Worms and Metals: Seas to Fishes properare.
Whom this Astrology, and this Cosmographie mislike,
Beneath the Earth, beyond the Moon, further then far must seek.
Signs workings, Planets Iunctures, and the elevated Ponle,
With thousand toys and terms wherein our curious Artists roll,
Be strangers to my Cell: yeat lo as sound a mind and heart
As theirs that calculate their times, eat, sleep, and wake by art.
What was the world before the world, or God ere he was God,
Why this he did, or does not that, his bidden, or forbod,
I dare not think, or arrogate such Mysteries divine,
Faith with her Fruits significant suffice these wits of mine,
To love God, and our neighouer as our self is all in fine.
One Law and Gospel was and is, and eithers drist is thus,
To show us how the law does kill, and Gospel quicken us:
Which Corasiue ahd Lenatiue of Simples made compound
Do rather cure, he kindly heales that alsh feels his wonnd.
This is my rest: if more I knew I should but know too much,
Or build in my eonceited brain too high above my touch,
Or else against the hare in all prove toyous: even such
As be too many blockish Clerks and bookish Clownes, extaceme
In all things, save in honesty, that have no zeal but seem.
As for the Court it is, you know, become a skittish Coult,
Of wise men hardlier managed than of the glorious doult,
Vice rides on horse back, virtue does from out the saddell boult.
Theare all deformities in form in some one man we see:
More guarded than regarded, frank not to continue free,
When as the Merchants book the Map of al his wealth shall be.
The Muses bacely beg, or, bibbe, or both, and must, for why?
They find as bad Bestoe as is their Portage beggarly.
Yea now by melancholy walks and thread bare coats we guess
At Clyents and at Poets: none work more and profit less:
None make too more, unmade of more, the good of other men,
For those enrich our Gownests, these eternize with their pen.
Yeat, soothly, nodds to Poets now wear largisse, and but lost,
Since for the nodant they observe no pen-note worth the cost:
For palace. Hermites live secure obscure in roufes imbost.
Some few there be much honored (well worthy of so much,)
Once wanting, wealthy, then and now in either fortune such:
But many a bace stout blood theare is more lordly than be Lords,
Who wheare himself once coucht and bowde nor cap or beck affords:
But should we sin (God shield we should in smallest sins offend)
What smaller sin then skoffe such fools so skornefull to no end?
The Soldiers qaue nor pay nor pray, but (if I may be bold)
Themselves be prayed upon by some that do it vncontroulde:
And whilst the same on shore or s^as be over set or pine,
Or Cups on Cushions full secure we victory define:
We cast what may be done, but keep the helps mean time away,
And diet thriftly our friends to give our foes a pray.
The Citizens, like ponned Pikes, the lessers feed the great:
The rich for meat seek stomachs, and the poor for stomachs meat:
And every wheare no Gospel is more gospelled than this,
To him that has is given, from him that has not taken is.
Court, City, Country, Camp, and I, at ods thus even be,
I intermeddle not with them, they intercept not me,
For still I tether thence mine eyes, so here my heart is free.
Believe me, Sir, such is this world, this crosse-blisse world of ours
That Virtue hardly hides her self in poor and desert Bowres:
And such be best that seem not best: Content exceeds a Crown:
They may be richer, but more sweet my penny than their powne.
For wrest they, cark they, build they, sport they, get they worlds together,
At first or last they die from al, and pass they wot not whether:
Then comes their pelf in plea, themselves not praised at a feather.
And then (for so the Princes of great Alexander did)
Greedy of his, they strive and let the dead-man stink vnhid.
Or he that had a Country has, perhaps a Coffen now:
Perhaps less Cost, a Sheet and corse: perhaps, his heirs allow
The toombe himself alive had build, else toombles might he lie,
As, save for fashion, tearelesse. And it matters not: for why?
Testators and Executors so give and so receive,
As doubtful whethers joy or grief is more to take or leave:
For, as do hogs their troughes to hounds, so these give and get place:
Death, not the Dier gives bequests, and therefore but Graue-grace.
Nor all die testate: if they do, yet wieles may wills prevent:
Or what by rigor was misgot, in ryote is misspent.
Then Churles, why are they Churles unto themselves and others too:
The good that comes of their goods is good themselves shall do.
But men do walk in shadoes, and disquiet themselves in vain
To gather Riches, ignorant to whom they shall remain.
The world thus brooding Vanities, and I observing it,
Here in the world, not of the world, such as you see me sit.
The Earl did well allow his words, and would have lived his life,
Durst he have stayed, for whom pursuit in every place was rife.
He reconuenting arms therefore, and taken Prisner so,
Died to his Countries friends a friend, and to her foes a foe.
NOr might ye Queen and Kings own Son escape the Spe^cers pride,
But, fearing, fled to France, and there as banished abide:
Til thence supplanted, safety at Henaude they provide.
John, brother to the Earl, a Knight of Chivalry the chief,
With little, but a luckie band, was shipte for their relief.
No sooner had the Zealand ships conuaide their men ashoare,
But English Succors daily did increase their Standerds more.
Yeat first the Queen, Prince Edward, and the Nobles humbly crauc
Theirs and their Countries enemies, but no redress might have:
And then Sir John of Henaude shewde himself a warrior brave.
The King, his wicked Counselors, his big Vpstarts, and all
Were overcome: So Spencers both from heaven to hell did fall,
Put to a foul and shameful death: with others that misled
The King in Outrages more great than erst in England bred.
Prolers, Blood-thirstie, Parasites, Make-shifts, and Bawdes did thrive,
Nor was an ancient English Peer vnbanisht or alive:
For foreign and domesticke Swords, Plague, Famine, and Exile,
Did more than tithe, yea tithe the Tithe of men within this I Will.
Of Baldricks, Hoodes, Tabrides, and Furs, from Knights disgraded tore,
Attaintures of Nobility, and Arms reuersed store,
So many Spurs hewn off the heels, and Swords broke over head,
Were through a King so light and lewd a Council never read.
The King in prison and deposed, tyrannised, he did
By Trecheries of Mortimer that ruld the Roste that tide,
Whilst Edward, in Minority, his Fathers throne supplide.
CHAP. XXVIII.
THIS third of that same Name, as yet in Nonage for a time,
Although a King was vnder-kept by some that ouer-clime:
Queen mother and proud Mortimer, familiar more than should,
Did and undid more than they might, not less than as they would:
Till Edward, better counseled, hong Mortimer, the death
Of many a Peer, who Earl of March, and haughty for his birth,
Was Lord of nine skore dubbed Knights, his other traynes except,
For greater pomp than did his Prince this Lord of VVigmore kept.
But more he had been happy though less hautie in his Halls,
More honor in humility than safety in walls:
Proud Climers prove not monuments, save only in their falls.
The senseless pride of Fools therefore, whom reverently we ride,
Should lessen, at the least because that earth their earth shall hide.
The Country purged of Fleecers, and of Flatterers the Court,
The King became a Mars for Arms, a Jupiter for Port:
Th- Olymp^ds, the Pythea, and the prowess of the Earth,
Did seem even now, and not but now, to have in him their birth:
East, South, and North, gave aim farrc off, admiring so the West,
As if that Mars discarding them had set our Realm his Rest.
Philip Valois, and David Bruz, of power and courage more
Than any French or Scottish Kings since or of long before,
Confedrate with three other Kings and Princes far and near,
War all at once on Edward, but did buy their warring dear.
David debelled, left his land, but lastly did return,
And, whilst our King did war in France, much did he spoil and burn,
And proud of mighty Troops of men, of unresisted prays,
And Edwards absence, prosperously he on advantage plays,
Until, not sending hence for help, the Queen did muster Knights,
And with the Foe, though tripled-wise, victoriously she fights:
The Scots for most did perish, and their King was Prisner taine,
And Scotland wholly for a pray to England did remain
Mean while was Paris scarcely left, to rescue Philips Goal,
Whom Edward ferrits so from hold to hold as Fox from hoale,
That Melancholy he deceast, and valiant John his son
Was crowned King of France: and then the wars afresh begone.
But after many fields, unto the Foes continual wrack,
The French King captiuated to the English Monarke, back
His Victor sails, the Prince of Wales, Edward surnamed black:
The flower of Chivalry, the fear of France, and scourge of Spain,
Wheare Peter, dispossessed of Crown, was crownde by him again.
Four years the French, eleven years was the Scotch K. prisners here.
Whose, and the Dolphines ransomes were as great as good their cheer.
PRince Edw. John of Gaunt, and all their Fathers sons might boaste
Of famous Sier, and he of sons matchless in any Coaste:
Howbeit, King and Prince at last, misled by counsel ill,
Through Taxes lost a many hearts that bore them erst good will:
Thence finding Fortune contrary to that she was before,
Yeat either dying seaz'd of French and Scottish Conquests store:
Yea Callice late, and Barwick yet of their Exployts is lest,
Though Son before the Sier and both of lives long since bereft.
When Barwick was besieged, and stood bravely at defense,
Sir Alexander Seiton, theare chief Captain, had pretense
To linger forth the Siege till Scots should draw the English thence
In rescue of Northumberland, and therefore sent his son
A Pledge of treated Truce: and when the guile-got Truce was done,
And Barwick not relieved nor resigned, as it ought,
Two sons of Seiton were before the walls besieged brought,
They ready for the Iybbet and their Father for his Grave,
For either he must yield the Town or them he might not save.
In grief he then his Countries cause and Childrens case reuolues:
But, partial unto either, he on neither Choice resolves,
To be a loyal Subject and a loving Father too
Behooued him: but both to be was not in him to do.
Nature and honor wrought at once, but Nature ouer-wrought,
And, but his Lady it preuents, to yield the Town he thought.
O what pretend you Sir, quoth she, is Barwick worth no more
Than error of such love? I joy that I such Children bore
Whom cruel Edward honors with such a cause of death,
For that especial cause for which we all receive our breath,
Even for their Countries cause they dye, whose lives for it be dew,
Why see their faces, (constantly she did their faces view)
The same, my Seiton, seem so far from dreading any woe,
As if they skornde that Barwicke should redeem them from the Foe.
Full dear they were to me unborn, at birth, and borne, and now,
And Mother like I moan their death and yet their death allow.
More Sons and such you may beget, your honor if you stain,
Defected honor never more is to be got again.
Prevent not then your self, your Sons, and me so great a blis:
Adieu, and dye (sweet Sons) your souls in heaven shall live for this
With such persuasions did she win her husband from the walls:
And Edward executes their Sons, and to assault he falls
So long that Barwicke yields at length, and still us master calls.
THese were the days when English arms had every where request,
And Edw. knights throughout the world had prick and praise for best.
Not Knights alone, but Prelates too, and Queens: whereof were twain,
The quondam and in esse Queens, by Armor honor gain:
By War the Queen that was did cease her husbands tragic Rayn,
And by the Queen then being was the Scotch King Prisnet tayne.
It follows then, that as the Pawnce does circkle with the Son,
So to the vice or virtue of the Prince are people won.
O that our Muse might evermore on such a Subject run:
But Vulcan forgeth other Tools, and sharpneth deadlier swords,
For little else then civil wars our following Pen affords.
French Expeditions badly thrive, whereof we cease to speak:
Not foreign, but Domestic wars, grew strong to make us weak.
Melpomen here might rack her wits, Sylla and Marius hate,
Pharsalian Fields were gentle Frayes, regarding this debate.
The second Richard, son unto the black Prince (Edward dead)
Was crownde an Infant, and from him the Stratagem was bread.
The bace attempts of Ball, of Straw, of Lyster, tag, and rag,
Of Villains, Of-skoms, Clownes, and knaves that checkmate durst to brag
With Richards self, and to their deaths his chiefest Princes drag.
Till Wal(...)ths girdle-Armor made the Arms of London more,
Because his courage chiefly gave an end to that uproar,
And what-so-els Occurrants much may interrupt our Vain,
Digesting York and Lancaster, acquiring eithers Rain,
Our Pen shall not endenizen: Now drops it sacred blood
Of Men-Gods, English Potentates that in this Faction stood.
Richard begun that civil war, that till the Seventh from him
Did last: though often fields with blood of Citizens did swim.
Against the Nobles the vphild innoble, and his Peers
And Commons went alike to wrack, nor God nor man he fears.
In few, Ambition, Avarice, and Counsel lewd had wrought
In him a nature worser than into the world he brought:
Whereby, and thus, himself and house at length a down-fal cought,
Twixt Mowbray D. of Norffolke, and the D. of Hertford, son
To John of Gaunt, close Conference of better days begun.
The King (said Henry Hertford) more remiss than does beseem,
Leaves France to French, Scotland to Scots, and us to woes extreme:
His Flatterers do fleece the Crown and Commons, not a State
Does or dares counsel, ancient Coats that on the Crown should wate
Give aim to bastard Armorie: what rests then but this?
Pluck down those grating Harpies that seduce our King amiss,
If worthles still, set up a King worthier than he that is.
The other, saying little then, immediately reueales
The secret, and before the King his Foe-made friend appeals:
Whose Gauntlet raised by the Duke defendant, at the last
It grew to single Combat, when the King his Warder cast,
And to the Duke of Norffolke judged for evermore exile,
And self same law Duke Henry had, save for a lesser while.
Thus That did This, but This and That their Judge did thus begile:
And to his Coffers did escheate a world of wealth, a Pray
Unto his Parasites, which thriu'd by other men's decay.
Mean while (whose actious life had lawd) did John of Gaunt decease:
So to the banished Duke his Son five Cronets did increase.
But with his kindly air the King withheld him all the same:
Till entering, aided by his friends, he won beyond his clame:
For Richard was imprisoned, and by Parliament put down,
And Henry Duke of Lancaster elected to the Crown,
The Line Lancastrian frollicke, but the house of York did frown.
For to those Hydra-kinded wars that after did ensue
Those Families gave name: though first the Diadem was due
Unto the house of Clarence, till to York that interest gre we
By marriage, here omitted: for we only give a view
How York mis-raigning Lancaster did enter, then how This
Was dispossessed, That repossest, and how their Union is.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XXIX.
HEnry (the fourth so named) hild the King deposed strate
In Pomfret Castle, howebeit in honorable State:
And got an Act, that who so wrought the Prisner to restore,
That Richards self, to void their hope, should dye the first therefore:
Whose birth brought Nature, gentle Lord, returning whence it straid,
Now altered him, erst altring it: and Richard mildly said.
I must not say I am, and would I might not say I was,
Of great the greatest: less they grieve from whom does little pass:
Nor more it grieves to contrary the same I have been, then
To have deserved not to be vnmaliced of men.
Thus humbled and full penitent lives he, less mal-content
Than was the Duke of Exeter his brother, whose intent
Was as at a lusts to have destroyed King Henry, but descryed;
Himself, four such, and many Knights the death of Traitors dyed:
And by these primer Yorkests thus King Richards date grew out:
But whether brayned, famisht, or exiled rests a doubt:
For often Vprores did ensue for him, as vndeceast,
How beit solemnly interred, himself, or Sign at least.
Twice by confedrate Chivalry the P^ercies and their friends
Did fight and fall, for either war to Henry's honor ends.
He never had but war, and was victorious evermore,
As Well at home, as also of his Foes on foreign Shore:
Till lastly Armor overcame all Envy, and he lives
Of all beloved, and his death a common sorrow gives.
HOt spur his Son, Henry the fifth, hung at his Fathers eyes,
To watch his Ghost, and catch his Crown, and that or ere he dies.
And where the Father doubted if he got it well or not,
The Son did swear, how so it came, he would it not forgo.
His bad did bliss the Bad, the Good despair all good: But neither
Did aim aright, for suddenly his change deceived either:
Of good becoming best, that was of ill the baddest, and
The true perfection of a King was not but in this Land.
He lead good fortune in a line, and did but war and win:
France was his Conquest: Scots but brag and he did beat them in:
A friend unto weldoings, and an Enemy to sin.
Yeat of the Yorkests never lackt he Princes that rebel:
Nor other than confusion to their still coniuring fell.
In few, if any Homer should of this Achilles sing,
As of that Greek and My^midon the Macedonian King
Once noted would I note both Prince and Poet happiest men,
That for deserving praise, and This for well employed pen:
For well this Subject might increase the Worthies unto ten.
He, aged thirty six, deceast and left his infant Son,
His Kingdom, Conquests, and his Queen, whose Fathers Realm he won,
To grave protection, Regents, and so royal for the port,
As that his Orphants Cradle seemed an Alexanders Court.
Queen Katherin, Daughter of the French, King Henryes wife of late,
The fairest Lady in the West, hild with her son Estate.
She often behild, and hild her peace, a brave Esquier of VVailes,
That tide her fancy to his form, till fancied form preuailes.
All liking was reuersed Love, save Owen Tuder, all
Save him (that durst not dream such good) to her was less than small.
She formally, by quaint degrees, attracting him to favor,
Did nourish burnings in her self, by noting his behauor.
She pitched Tewe, he masshed: She vncompaned, To fly
He bids her solitary moodes: She asks the remedy:
Disclosed pangues sometimes, quoth he, in Physic Physic is:
Which sometimes to observe, quoth she, does Patients patience mis:
Cureles to Aesculapius and Apellos self am I:
The latter felt my languor, and, immortal, wished to die:
And yeat, save one, no one disease lay hidden to his Art:
For you were bootlesse then to guess how to vngreeue my smart.
Had Daphne to Apollo been Apollo, Tuder said,
His might have been, and so may be your Graces humor staid.
He, other Gods and Goddesses, found more contented Love
Beloe, in diffring bosoms, than in equal beds above.
I aim at Love (for thereto your Aenigma does incline)
And aim to him a Deity for whom I so divine.
But gladly doubt I of the Man, for if I doubted not,
I should but massacer my lack in envy of his lot:
Yeat are unworthy of the Moon Endymions lips, I wot.
But (for I will disperse the mistes of further Mysteries,
And toogh the Pinuesse of my thoughts to kenning of your Eyes)
If Ge^try, Madame, might convey so great a good to me,
From ancient King Cadwallader I have my pettigree.
If wealth be said my want, I say your Grace does want no wealth,
And my suppliment shall be love, employed to your health.
It has been when as hearty Love did treat and tie the knot,
Though now, if gold but lack in grains, the wedding fadgeth not.
The goodly Queen in bashful signs blushed out a dumb Reply:
Which he did constur as she meant, and kissed her reverently.
Tuder, quoth she, I greater am than would I were for thee,
But can as little master Love as Lessers in degree.
My Father was a King, a King my Husband was, my Brother
He is a King, a King my Son, and I thy Sovereigns mother:
Yeat Fathers, Husbands, Brothers, Sons, and all their Styles together,
Are lesser valewed than to live beloved of my Tuder:
Should England, France, and thou thy self gainesay thy self for mine,
Thy self, France, England, nor what els' should bar me to be thine.
Yea, let them take me wilful, or mistake me wanton, so
My self in love do please my self let all the world say no:
Let Pesants matte their marriages, and thrive at peradventure:
I love for love: no gentle heart should fancy by Indenture.
But tell me, Owen, am I not more forward then behooues?
I am, Sweetheart, but blame me not, the same that speaks loves.
And long may live, quoth he, to love, nor longer live may I,
Than while I love your Grace, and when I leave disgraced die.
But Lady, if I do deserve, I then desire dispatch:
For many are the jealous Eyes that on your beauty watch.
Good hap is like to hit me well, to hit so well is rare,
And rareness does commence my suit, let suit conclude my care.
Should Caesar kiss (he kissed her) it were but such a kiss:
And he, and I, here, or elsewhere, in other sport or this,
Do act alike: no bettring but as your belouing is.
You may experience, when you please, what difference in the men:
And if King Henry pleased more, blame Owen Tuder then.
But am I not (yes, Sweet, I am) more sawsie than behooues?
Yeat for my heart forgive my tongue, This speaks, and That loves.
How he imprisoned did escape, and else what else-wheare reed:
The Queen and this brave Gentleman did marry, and their Seed
Began that royal Race that did, does, and may still succeed
In happy Empire of our Throne, a famous line in deed.
Once, when this Match was at a point, they merrily disposed,
Did descant what from vulgar tongues thereof would be supposed.
They will believe me amorous, or thee so wiued as
Vulcan the Smith of Lemnos that to Venus married was,
The Queen did say. And Tuder said: I hope of hansell better,
In Venus and in Vulcans names more lies than the letter:
For he was as I would not be, She as you should be never,
Either so apt to give and take as pity them to sever.
I pray thee, Owen, quoth the queen, how met they, can thou tell?
I can he said, and more then so, then mark the process well.
When Vulcan was a Batcheler, and Venus was vnwed,
Thus wowde he her, thus won he her, thus wowde and won he sped.
CHAP. XXX.
VEnus the fairest Goddess, and as amorous as fair,
Beloved of Mars, and loving Mars, made oftentimes repair
To Vulcans forge, as to see wrought for Jupiter his Fire
And thunders, Mars his Armors, and the Sunwaines curious tire,
When they, indeed, of merriments in Love did theare conspire:
And lastly did conlude the Smith a Stale unto their sport,
Wherein did Venus play her part, preuayling in this sort.
Vulcan (quoth she) no God there is, I think, but needs thee:
For Thunders Jove, Ceres for Sieths, for Armors Mars I see,
Bacchus for prewning Knives, and Pan for Sheep-hookes, Phoebus he
For Cart-tiers, Dis for shakling chains, Neptune for Ankers, and
No God but lackes thee, saving I that ask not at thy hand.
My Swans do draw in silken Geeres, my wheels be shod with down,
No hardines is in beauties Coach: But thou, by birth no Clown,
But Jove his Son, a God as we, art made a drudge too much,
When, if that Venus might be heard, thou should not be such.
How apt are all in those same toils that tend to their behoof
To let thee bear till back does break? but common is the proof,
That cunning is not cunning if it stands not aloof
By this had Vulcan hammered his heat, and bad to stay
The Bellows, and he lymping from the Anfeeld thus did say.
My business, Venus, is ydoe, now may I tend to play:
What woudst thou? for I member scarce thy arging by my fay.
Wodst that I leave the forge, and thrt I god it with the Gods?
If so thou meanst, thy meaning and my meaning be at ods.
Sweeter my Bellows blowing and my hammers beating is
To me, then trimmest fidling on the trickest kit ywis:
Ask whatso-else I have to give, thous maunde it for a kis.
As if, quoth she, my kisses were so current unto all?
No, not at all to Vulcan, if his kindness be so small.
I ask thy proper ease, then earne thy proper ease, and ask
More than a kiss: at least wise do thy self from Mars vntaske.
He is my Foe, friend thou not him, nor forge him Arms, but let
Him luske at home vnhonored, no good by him we get.
What lets but that we may become superlatiues? Of us
All stand in need, we need not them. Then gave she him a ^us.
And say me so, quoth Vulcan, and unto the trough he hies,
And skowres his coly fists and face, and with his apron dries
Them, badly mended, and unto the Queen of Dalliance says
That Mars should lusk at home for him. Then guilefull Venus plays
Her part so well, that on her lap his head the Dotardlayes.
And whilst upon her pressed Thies (no Haven for such Hulke)
He ^olls, and loades her with the weight of his vnwealdy bulk,
And whilst she coyes his sooty Cheeks, or curles his sweaty top,
The Groshead now and then, as hapt, a threadbare term lets drop.
Then laughes he like a horse, as who would say, trow said I well?
But soon his wits were Non plus, for his wooing could but spell.
This fitted her: for so before twixt Mars and her was meant,
Though not that she so cunningly should Mars of Arms prevent.
But him to stawle in store, not else employde, was her intent.
Her Lubber now was snorting ripe, and she mean while was glad,
That for to serve her turn else-wheare so good a Staile she had.
What pass I, thinks Venus, on his form or fashions rude?
For, letting form and fashion pass, one fashion is pursude
In getting Children: at the least, who so the Child shall git,
It shall suffice that Vulcan is the same shall father it.
Now Mars in heaven, Anchises and Adonis on the earth
May earne for Babes, for Vulcan shall be parent at their birth.
Nay, be it that he should espy false carding, what of it?
It shall be thought but jealousy in him, or want of wit.
Him frowns shall threat, or smiles entreat, and few will judge, I win,
If it shall come in question, that to Cockhole him were sin.
Whilst thus she thinks in her self the Cyclops did awake:
And, to be short, more doings pass and they a marriage make.
But wonder did the Deities, when bruted was the match,
That he so foul a thick-skinne should so fair a Lady catch,
They flout him to his face, and held it alms to arm his head.
Well, Venus shortly bagged, and ere long was Cupid bread:
And Vulcan (in like heresy of fathering as more)
Did rack his Art to arm ye Lad with wings, with shafts, with bow,
Most forceable to love or hate, as lists him shootes bestow.
When Vulcans Venus had obtaind her Cupide armed thus,
Then (for we wish that all besides be suitable to us)
She, of the Gods and Goddesses before the wanton noted,
Was of the Gods and Goddesses for wantonness out-coted,
Not one but wexed amorous, yea even Diana Doted.
Loves Mother had direction of his arrows, and she wild
Him hit the Son-God: for because he, blabbing had behild
Her daliance with Adonis: so that vexed Phoebus loves
Fair Daphne, whom nor wooes, nor vows, nor gifts, nor greatness moves.
Succes^es therefore, and enraged, he bastards Cupid and
(For stoutly on their honesties do wily Harlots stand)
Venus did chaife, and of the Gods their strife came to be skand.
Dispersing then her goodly hairs, she barred so sweet a face,
As from the sternest Godhood might extort suborned grace.
Fast at her side clung naked Love, a lovely boy in deed,
And Vulcan, benched with the Gods, his wife did thus proceed:
(When Phoebus had already told his tale with sense and heed.)
He says, quoth she, for chastity my hauiour was amiss:
Which proved or disproued, then in you to sentence is.
Ah, listen whence it is, ye Gods, that Venus is abused,
Because that Phoebus making love to Daphne was refused.
If that were wrong, the wrong must then by Phoebe be excused:
Who, rescuing her Votarisse, did so prevent her brother.
But be it that this Boy of mine, not seeing one from other,
Did hit him, for the Sons offense should he malign the mother?
And shall I tell the Childs offense? Why thus forsooth it was:
He fitted him to such a Love as did for Beauty pas.
But if he say it needeles was, because it booted not,
I say, that Beauty beggeth if by posting it be got.
He wooing like himself in post did kiss the post, and she,
Too good to be his forced Trull, is now become his Tree,
His speeches too, though spoke by one, concerns in credit three.
Mine Husband, and my self, and Son, Gods, and as good as he.
Now woe am I, we severally are, as it were, arayned
Of Cuckolrie, of Spous-breach, and of Bastardy, though feigned,
Yeat too too forcible I fear to be forgot of some,
For slander set on foot, though false, is talkatiuely dome.
Malicious (for thy malice is thy matter all in all)
Is it to harlotize, think thou, a Goddess wrong too small,
But thou must forge it from the Earth, even from the Sheep-cote? Nay,
That color lacks color thou thy self I troe wilt say.
Ambitious, fair, and amorous thou termest me: if so,
Unlikely to disparge my self or bacely stoop so lo,
But being such, and knowing thee in very deed the same,
Might, leaving petite loves, have found thy self my readiest game:
For Phoebus is a Leacher, else are many tongues to blame.
Better no bad of mine (nor need I fear that fault in thee)
Thy bad does pass by probate, but a Quere is for me.
Perhaps (such as it is) my form may forge to his pretense:
Since Beauty is a common mark, apt therefore to offense.
Well, be it Beauty does atract, atracting is beloved,
Beloved courted, courted won, and won to action moved,
Yeat from such causes such effects what Consequence has proved?
For Daphne was, I wot, full fair, and well can Phoebus court,
Yeat Daphne chastely did withstand, and Phoebus mist his sport.
My husband though by trade a Smith, for birth out-brau'd of none,
And lovely unto Venus, (though mislik^ of many a one)
May for his plainnes also fit my foes inuectiue drifts:
As who would say, I wedded him to salve up other shifts.
By Styx I vow, although I should exceed my self for fare,
Yet Venus would be Vulcans, and he knows I truly swear.
He is indeed no Gallant, yeat a God, and merely free
From imperfections, such at least as pay not marriage fee.
And for his plainnes, to be plain, the rather choose I him:
For such as he live best, love best, and keep their wives most trim.
When Roysters either roue at change, be peevish or precise:
Fair women therefore matching thus be not, say I, unwise:
Judge not by such presumptions then, they add but to his lies.
Thus have you now a Medley of his malice and my moan,
His vice, my vow: and lastly rests your sentence to be known.
If Mercury should plead my cause, he could but set me clear:
Good causes need not curious terms, and equal Judges hear
The Equity, not Eloquence, and so I hope will ye:
And so shall grateful Venus sail under your gracious Lee.
So, putting finger in the Eye, the Deities descent:
Some hild with Phoebus, some with her: Which strife did Vulcan stent.
My wife, quoth he, more honest than her Cuser is, I troe,
Shall not ywis be bused by the squand^ing Pollo so:
She loves me, I durst swear, and save my self she loves no more:
And why should you or I believe his yea before her noe?
Troth, said the Gods, since Vulcan is contented we are pleased:
And so the variance was by him thus wi^tely appeased.
Phoebus his Plainte did quash: but so he aftertimes did watch,
As that Sir Hornsbie had by proof he was a loving Patch,
When Mars and Venus playing false his wier Net did catch.
Now riddle, Madame, if those tongues that make Sunonamies
Of them and us prove Oracles, what should thereof arise?
That more, quoth she, which you have said than in the letter lies.
But names infect not, nor receive your Riddle Prophecy:
If ought fore-sayd be ominous should any fear it is I.
When so the Queen had said, then to this more proceeded he:
Vulcan, Venus, Cupid, Sol, and Daphne turned to Tree
Were tennis balls to every tongue of every Dei^ee.
Tush Tush, quoth Pan, gay Venus and the gentle youth her son
Are blameles blamed: What think you, would Phoebus the^ have don
Had he in love bin crossed as I? And then he thus begun.
CHAP. XXXI.
THe Goteheards of Hyrcania hild their Orgies unto me,
And theare was I, unseen of them, the Festifall to see.
Now had they censed, and with glee eat were the hollowed Kids,
When as they fell to Rowndelaies, and I the Rownd amids.
Not Satires, or the Naiades, were half so nimble as
This country Consort (for each Lad was sorted with a Less.)
There was a tricksie Girl, I wot, albeit clad in gray,
As peatt as bird, as strait as boult, as fresh as flower in May,
As fair as Cupids Mother, or through him it is I err,
Ifso I err (for why his shaft had fixed me to her)
She daunsing dyed her lilly Cheeks, whilst I for love did di^:
And as unvisible I stood (what boots it me to lie)
And drew with breath her sweet-stole breath, so acting spiritually,
The feast was done and all undone that I did wish to do:
My Deity adiornde therefore, in human form I wowe.
And first (because that first they should approach us Gods) I feign
My self a Priest (for well I wot they sildome woo in vain.)
I made me smug, and with a Tex did intermix a toye,
And told how fine and fair a life our Clergie-Femes enjoy,
And how our leisure fitted Love. And let it fit (quoth she)
To such as lust for love: Sir Clarke, you clergefie not me.
Then came I curious in my silks (But who would think that Pan
Could play the Courtier?) and did feign my self a jolly man.
I talked of Castles, Manors, Parkes, and all things more than mine.
Too course (quoth she) am I for you, and you for me too fine.
Then Souldier-like I sued, and did boast of Battles many,
And standing on my Manhood would not be coriu'd of any:
And sometimes proffered kindness, such as came not to the push,
But checked for my boystrousnes was balked with a blush.
Then play I master Merchant, and did plye her by the book:
I spoke of great Accounts, Receites, nor little care I took
For rigging and return of Ships, (her lips mean while my Pex.)
Ply Sir (quoth she) your busy trade, you are besides the Tex.
I seem a country Yeoman: Then a Craftsman: both in vain:
The former was too lumpish, and the latter worse of twain:
Do what I could, I could not do whereby her love to gain.
Then thought I, out of doubt as I a God feign Manhood, so
This is transformed Diana for some practice meant beloe.
A year was past, and I past hope through coyish chaste denial,
And yeat I could not but persist in quest of further trial.
I met God Pryapus (for he, not Venus son it is
Abuses us, This darteth Love, That drives to lust amiss)
See yonder Clown? quoth Priapus (not far-off was a Loute
With near a handsome rag, himself less handsome soole to snout,
Less wel-form'd, or more il-fac'st, and like Clenchpoope look and lim,
Less mannerd, and worse gated than this Saturns-Eeue-made Slim,
God never made since God made Man, if ever God made him.)
That Lob, quoth he, and yonder Less that this way drives her Gotes
Do mark them Pan, you may observe from them vnthought-of notes,
I knew her for my Minion wench of whom I erst did tell.
First blend they herds, and forthwith lips, and after billing fell
To other sport, such sport ywis as would have likt me well.
Must I, thought I, give aim to such a skrub and such a Saint,
That Skowndrell, and this Counterfeit: confounded so I faint.
How cheer you Pan, quoth Priapus, the shameless God of lust,
Thus can I fit such friends as you with such a Trull of trust:
(We were indeed ere then at odds.) So Priapus he left me,
When he had brought me to this sight that near of sense bereft me.
But thus I loathed where I loved, and learned not too late
That coyest are not chastest, that the gayest Females mate
With Loutes as soon as Lords, that Love is luck not shiftles fate,
That cowled, celled, he, or she, whosoever, or wheresoever,
Or Votarie, or Secular, scarce one pryaped never.
To Pans report did Mercury reply and thus recite,
Of Cupide and of Priapus does Pan distinguish right:
But let be Lust, a word or two of Love and of his might.
I Entering Guest-wise on a time the frolic Thabane Court,
Mine eye presented to mine heart a Nymph of lovely Port:
Her knew I not, nor knew she me, unknown therefore vnkist
I loyter on the Earth, mean while in Heaven not vnmist.
My Senses held a Synod, and vnacted Acts dispute,
And nothing else I did affect but to effect my suit.
For whencesoeuer Love proceeds, or whatsoere it be,
Or whosoever loves, Love tormenteth in degree.
Mine Eye conuaid it to mine Heart, mine Heart controwld mine Eye:
Yeat Love retriu'd it self, I loved not knowing whom or why.
Then did I seek, and find (who am no Milksop as ye wot)
Acquaintance in the Court, the which the nicest balked not.
Nor smally did my shape, my tongue, and tunes (no common geere)
Prefer their Master to a place about their Mistress near.
When she did sigh then I did sob, I laughed if she did smile,
And by officious Forgeries pretended to begile.
But her, not coy, I found so chaste, as save a kiss or twain,
I nothing got, although in all I vained to her vain.
From ill therefore I grew to worse, from worse to worse, for why?
Through ouer-louing at the length I loved ielously.
My Stomach lest me, every sense had imperfection then,
My color ceast and, sick, I forge contrary cause to men.
So many Quames came ore my heart as news to ear or eye
Of others commoning in sport, or courting seriously.
No Corsiue to Coriuals, and no death unto despair:
I did not hope, yeat held I on with cost to nourish care.
Sometime, attyred by the book, I faind a merry cheer:
Sometime I drouped, and did wear disorderly my geere.
But how-soere I came to her, I found her still the same,
Gamesome enough to intertaine, and yet for me no game.
And though enuiously I aimed at others better speed,
Yeat, too precisely, did I sift such doubts were more than need.
Then rowsing up my self, I with my self did reason thus:
No folly were in Love, if so no folly were in us:
Wheare Mercury is laid asleep may others lay a straw:
The Lover and Beloved are not tied to one Law:
Because I am the same I am should she not therefore be
The same she is: mine is too love, but hers to disagree.
Then Mercury be to thy self thy self, these thoughts begile
With meeter thoughts, thou lingerest in loss too long a while.
Think not thy greatness, or thy gifts, or gracious eyes may get her:
A Fool more foul may seem more fair, Love may think bad the better.
If she determine Chastititie, then falls thy suit to ground:
Or if some other be preferred, then better lost than found:
Likte, or misliked to thy Love should reason be the bound.
Or Women love to be beloved of change of Clyents, or
Uncertain wheare to find them, with the Eagle or the Dorr.
Albeit Beauty mooues to love, and Love does make thee sue,
Better at first be Non-sute, than at length not to subdue.
Such Reasons seeming plausible, I fleeting whence I loved,
By absence and new Exercise old Passions were removed.
So did I love, and so I left, so many a skorne, and skoffe,
Care, cost, disgrace, and loss of time were and may be cut off:
And women so less stand aloof, when men can so be wise:
So lesser suit has lucklier speed, than to be too precise.
Not women, but our wilfulness, does work our own unrest:
Though Beauty, Love, and they lack fault, we may abuse the best.
SO help me Jupiter, (quoth Mars) in Love so may Ispeede,
As Mercury and Pan do err in points of Love indeed:
Precisians and plain Plodders (such is This, and so is That)
In Love do swallow Cammels, whilst they nicely strain a Gnat.
Why what be Women? Women, geld the latter sillabell,
Then are they nothing more then Woe, their names remain does tell.
Their yea, or no, even when they swear they love or love us not,
Believe who list: soon be they gone, as suddenly are got.
What need we creep the Cross to give unto a begging Saint?
Tush tush, a Fly for booke-Loue, none be fortunate that faint.
Not paper, pursse, or kerchiefe Plea lets Fancy sooner loase
Then at the Shrine to watch the Saint, She is not coy, but cloase:
Pollitians know to cheapen, what to offer, when to skoase.
The Clown, no doubt, that potted Pan lackt Art to gloss and flatter,
And yeat nor Pan nor Mercury went roundlier to the Matter:
He found right Method (for there is a Method, time, and place,
Which Fools observing do co^mence ere Wiseme^ have their grace.)
Though dastard Hawks do sore aloft and dare not seize upon,
Or Bussards-like do sit aloof until the game be gone,
Kind killing Hawks but wag the wing, and work tolsowse anon.
Once Love, surreuerence, made my self vale Bonnet, So submis
My ceremonial wooing was, as common wooing is:
With rufull looks, sighs, sweet Pigs-nye, and Fooleries more than few
I courted her, so much more stout by how much more I sew:
Till aptly singled, as it hapt, I say not what did hap,
But Love that late did load my Head, did load her willing Lap.
Nor this Lad Love of that same Love is guilty any whit,
For why? nine Moons did wexe and waine between his birth and it.
Alas poor Boy, before he was, Love was a common game,
The first-made Man, the Rib-reft Man in Eden showed the same:
For when his sudden eyes admired the boan-flesht fair Conuart
Derived from his Side, his tongue, directed by his heart,
Forthwith pronounced Woman, but a moment erst vnknoen,
So dear as flesh of his own flesh, and bone of his own boen:
Quit then, ye Gods, this Lad and let your search of Love alone:
Who will in power be felt of all, in person found of none.
Or rather is not real, but some Fancy: if not, then
Fantastical in Women, but essentially in Men.
If Love be such in Women (But mistake me not, for why?
I note them but fantastical in fault of Destiny)
Defer were then to err: When all is done that do we may,
Labor we sorrowing all the night, and sewing all the day,
The female faulty Custom yields less merit greatest pay,
And ventrous more then virtuous means does bear the bell away.
Now touching Venus (worthy such a Pheere, not such a Foe)
Vulcan, me thinks, observes well slight proof in yea and noe,
The Court therefore is well advised to Sentence not to groe.
The Gods, that did ere while but aim at Vulcans wives sons Father,
Saw Venus blush, and held that aim autentical the rather.
End Gods and Goddesses, quoth Jove, to argue to and fro:
Like good and bad is either Sex. Nay more, behold, than so,
I viewd erewhile the Destenies, and thence I thus did know.
Zimois, when Troy must perish, shall send down her Floods a Fleet,
And world it were our Father ruld when Create thought him unmeet:
But long time hence, and far Stars thence, that World shall world an I Will
Enuyrond with the Ocean waves, then famous in short while
Through often Triumphs over Foes and Traffike every wheare,
Howbeit thrice orerunne, and once a Conquest shall be theare.
*Those Changes notwithstanding they a People shall remain
Vnchased thence, and of that Streene shall Five at length re-raigne.
Dread, terrene Gods, the Fifth of those, a terrene God desse, She
Even at the fiery Trigon shall your chief Ascendant be:
Right Phoebe-like (Phoebe may like a Compeere like to her)
Retriue her named Name, to time the trial we refer.
This said, he bids adiorne the Court, and willed Mercury
Thencefoorth not to convent the Gods for such a Foolerie,
As Love, the idle Bodies work, and Surfeit of the Eye.
And thus the Queen and Tuder chat. But thought of nothing less
Then that from them Jove's noted five fated to such success
Should spring, as sprung, and part springs yet. But cease we to digress
And show we how her Son did long and lucklesse Reign possess.
CHAP. XXXII.
IT rests, fifth Henry's Son, that made the Henry's more by one,
Did in his Infancy possess his Conquering Fathers Throne,
And happily was ruled a Child, and ruled an happy man,
Till with his Parrasites his Peers and he with them began
A bloody quarrel: offering so unto the Yorkests spright
For to reclaim, in bold attempts, their discontinued right.
Richard Plantagenet the Duke of York, by VVarwicks aid,
Did get the Jail, not long enjoyed, for he in Arms decade,
Subdued by King Henry's Queen, when as by friends and force
He had in Parliament obtaynde in every clause his corse:
For, mounted thear the Kingly Throne, that Yorkish Heroes said,
Here should I speak, and shall I hope: and so his Claim conuayd
From Clarence his Progenitor, with reasons such among,
As, he Protector of the Realm, King Henry's heirs were wrung
From all Reuersion: hearts and ears did so applaud his tung.
Edward his Son then Earl of March (the Duke his Father slain)
Won, by the Earl of VVarwicks aid, in double battle Reign.
King Henry fled to Scotland, and the Queen and Prince their Son,
From France sollicet Succors, which unto their loss they won.
Henry was taken, they and their Confedrates were subdued:
Yeat still the Queen escaped, and she armor still pursued.
But, Warwick pleased, all attempts did fail to Edwards Foes:
Displeased, Edward failed, and declined Henry rose:
He crowned Either, and the same discrowned them again,
Admyrd of all, beloved of all: howbeit lastly slain
By Edward, whilst he did uphold vnchancie Henry's Reign.
So Warwick perished, Henry so refalne from Kings estate
Was reimprison'd, and his Queen did land her aids too late:
But landing, when of Barnet field she heard the luckles fate,
(Albeit Knights Lancastrians store did flock in her defense)
She stood a second Niobe, bereft of speech and sense:
And whilst the Duke of Somerset an ouer-hardie Knight,
Did bravely marshall out her force to ouer-matched fight,
Hers and King Henry's Son, the Prince of Wales a proper Lad,
In comforting his mother did continue her more sad.
Ah Son, quoth she, through often mishaps mishaps I can digest:
I fear for thee, for thee the hope that to our House does rest.
Now all are tried we can trust, if now we fail we fall:
Thy death is in the same request as is thy Fathers thrall:
And (which I would it were the worst) the Foe does thirst my life,
To end his Triumph in the deaths of Husband, Son, and Wife.
Though thy great-Grandsier, Grandsier, and thy Father won and wore
The King-ring, which thy Father hild years thirty eight and more,
Though by the cappitall Remote of Lancaster withstood,
Yeat fail prescription and discents, now lack they but our blood:
Then learn against thou prove a man (ah hardly hope I so)
The Line Lancastrian naturally does labor of that Foe.
The Queen, concluding thus in tears, did then to Armor go.
Fierce was the Field, and either part did valiantly offend:
But, Edward ouercomming, when the Battle was at end,
The Queen was carried Captive thence, And Edwards men did bring
Her Son the Prince (sole son and heir unto the captive King)
Before the Victor, whose demands receiving answers stout,
He thrusts the manly Boy from him, whom Gloucester about
The King (Churl that he was) did stab. (So tragic was the spite
Betwixt those Linages that often each others so requite.)
His death was more than death unto his Parents: but not long
His Father moned vndispatcht alike for death and wrong
By foresaid Duke of Gloucester, of whom succeedes our song.
THus won the Yorkestes ancient Reign: six bloody Fields did seat
Edward the Fourth in Englands Throne, possessed a while in queate.
He won his Subjects love, and love was debt to his deserts,
But, as must ours, so lastly his vn-bodied Soul departs.
He left his Kingdom to his Son, his Son to be protected
By Richard Duke of Gloucester, Who, piety rejected,
Grew treble-wise tyrannical, malicious to the blood
Of his deceased brothers Queen, And what so Yorkest stood
Betwixt the Scepter and himself, alive, he pricked dead,
A Foe to all Lancastrians, as the same by nature bread,
This common Deaths-man of those Kinnes, and every Nobles fall,
Whom he but gest Coriuall or might cross him near so small,
This stoope-Frog Aesops Storke, alike tyrannous unto all,
To guilty, giltlesse, friend, or foe was not secure one day,
But Either dies as eithers death might fit him any way.
Yea, even whilst his Brother ruled, when all Lancastrians, and
His Brothers twain, his Nephews twain, and Neeces three did stand
Betwixt himself and home, even then by blood he hunted Rain:
For when his own and ruthles hands King Henry's heir had ^^ayue,
Then Henry's self, Henry the sixth a giltles King in bands,
He stabd: his brother Clarence did through him, by other hands
But, now Protector, as do Wolves the Lambs protected he,
And fared as if fearing that one wickedder might be.
Queen mother and her kindred hild the Orphant King a while,
Her Kin he murdered, and from her he got the King by gile,
Whom (though uncrowned tituled fist Edward) rest his mother,
He made be murdered, with the Duke of York the younger brother
When neither Yorkest his Allies, and of Lancastrians none
Were left to let it, who should let but he might leap the Throne?
He wore indeed the wrested Palm: But yeat, to better bad,
By murder of his wife he sought new marriage to be had
With that Elizabeth that was the Eldest daughter to
Edward the fourth: But all in vain the King his Niece did wowe,
For Henry Earl of Richmonds friends such doings did undo.
Which Henry and Elizabeth by secret Agents were
Contracted, he of Lancaster, and she of York the heir:
Of which letigious Famelies here mapped be the Lines,
Even till the Heir of these two Heirs both Stocks in one combines.
CHAP. XXXIII.
Henry (as if by miracle preserved by Forraines long
From hence-ment Treasons) did arrive to right his Natives wrong:
And chiefly to Lord Stanlie, and some other Succors as
Did wish and work for better days, the Rival welcome was.
Now Richard heard that Richmond was assisted and a shore,
And like vnkenneld Cerberus the crooked Tyrant swore,
And all complexions act at once confusedly in him:
He studieth, strikes, threats, intreates, and looks mildly grim,
Mistrustfully he trusts, and he dreadingly did dare,
And forty passions in a trice in him consort and square.
But when, by his conuented force, his foes increased more,
He hastened Battle, finding his Coriuall apt therefore.
When Richmond orderly in all had battelled his aid,
Inringed by his Accomplices, their cheerful Leader said.
Now is the time and place (sweet Friends) and we the Persons be
That must give England breath, or else vnbreath for her must we.
No Tyranny is fabled, and no Tyrant was in deed
Worse tha^ our Foe, whose works will act my words if well he speed:
For ill to ills Superlatiue are easily intist,
But intertaine amendment as the Gergesites did Christ.
Be valiant then, he bids so that would not be out-bid
For courage, yeat shall honor him, though bace, that better did.
I am right heir Lancastrian, he in Yorkes destroyed right
Usurps: But, through Either ours, for neither Claim I fight,
But for our Countries long-lackt weal, for Englands peace I war:
Wherein he speed us unto whom I all Events refarre.
Mean while had furious Richard set his Armies in array,
And then, with looks even like himself, this or the like did say.
Why, Lads, shall yonder Welshman with his Straglers ouer-match?
Disdain ye not such Riualles, and defer ye their dispatch?
Shall Tuder from Plantagenet the Crown by craking snatch?
Know Richards very thoughts (he touched the Diadem he wore)
Be metal of this metal: Then believe I love it more
Than that for other law than Life to super sead my Clame,
And lesser must not be his Plea that counter-pleads the same.
The weapons ouer-tooke his words, and blows they bravely change,
When, like a Lion thirsting blood, did moody Richard range,
And made large slaughters where he went, till Richmond he espied,
Whom singling, after doubtful Swords, the valerous Tyrant died.
THus ended Englands war and woe, usurping Richard dead,
When Henry and Elizabeth uniting titles wed:
Of which two Heirs th'vndoubted Heir of either Line did cum,
The Epilogue unto these wounds, digested in this sum.
Fourth Henry first Lancastrian King put second Richard down:
Fourth Edward of the House of York re-seazd sixth Henry's Crown:
Lad-Princes twain were stabd in Field, of either Lineage one:
Four Kings did perish: Sundry times now-Kings anon were none:
Six, three of either faction, held successively the Throne:
But from the second Richard to seventh Henry we pretend
Eight Kings this Faction to begin, continue, and to end.
The Princes, Earls, Barons, and Knights this quarrel did devour
Exceed the tale of Gentry best and bacest at this hour:
So plagueth civil War, and so from Robe to Ragge does scour.
Then luckiest of the Planets wear Predominants, say we,
When by this Bedmatch either Heir that Bloud-mart did agree:
When Seventh begot the Eight, and Eight the First and Last for like
Our now Pandora: nor till her our humbled sails we strike.
For should we at her Grandsier rear our Colome, yet too poor,
We could not write (as Hercules on his) Beyond no more:
For he lackt search, our Muse has Kend an Ocean is in store,
Even matter that imports worth coparing all before.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XXXIV.
NOw let us poste-alone to Mars and Mercury repa^r,
At least so farforth as we may without controwlment daer.
Richard the third, Henry the Seventh (last subjects of our pen)
Was slain, was crownde, with hate, with love, as worste, as best of men:
So not with York and Lancaster does wonted envy reign,
Nor can Aeneas Offsprings now of Orphansie complain.
But that Cadwalladers Fore-doomes in Tuders should effect
Was unexpected, save that God does destinies direct.
Else Owen Tuder had not wiu'd Fifth Henry's noble Queen:
Nor had they of their bodies Earls Penbrooke and Richmon seen:
Nor Margret, Somersets sole heir, to Richmon had been weade:
Nor they the heir of Lancaster, Henry the Seventh, had bread:
Nor he of Yorks Inheritrix, Elizabeth, had sped:
Nor they united either house all other titles dead.
Yeat, ear this union, Either so arrived to their right,
As Psiches on an errant sent to Hell by Venus spite.
Worse Ferrymen than Charon, Hoods contagious more than Styx,
Worse Porters than foul Cerberus were pleased, past, stood betwix.
How therefore Either dangerously their Labyrinth did pass
Shall not be ouerpassed: Thus their several fortune was.
Henry's the fourth, the fifte, and sixth successively did reign,
Until fourth Edwards sword to him did lawful Empier gain:
Lancastrians droupe, the Yorkests had their long expected day:
Sixth Henry and the Prince his son, by stabbes were made away:
The foresaid Margaret, sole heir of Somerset, erst wife
Of Tuder, Earl of Richmond, had by him a Son in life,
To whom, from her, the Crowne-right of Lancastria^s did accrewe:
He from his English foes himself by secret stealth withdrewe
To little Brutaine, wheare he found the Duke a frendfull true.
This Henry Earl of Richmond, now poor Lancasters Remain,
Was by fourth Edward practiced home by many a subtell train:
Whom once the gentle Duke (beguilde with promises vnment)
Delivered to the Englishmen, with whom he homewards went.
Forsaken Ladd for yet he was a Ladd) what did remain
But certain death, so to assure his foes uncertain rain:
Which to establish many a Prince of his Allies wear slain.
But him ear broughta-boorde, the Duke (advised better, stayed,
And him (as if by c^^^nce escapte) to Sanctuary conuaid.
The Lamb so rescued from the Wolf, that privileged place
Assured him till Edwards death, and then he hoped grace.
But he that was Protector of his murdered Nephews than
Usurped England, and became a Monsture not a man:
Richard the third omitting all his tyrannies beside)
To be possessed of the Earl by many a message tried.
Great wealth was sent, greater assum'de, but nothing might preuail:
The gracious Duke abhord to set his guiltles friend to sail:
But furnished with money, men, and armor shipped him thence
To win his right: yeat churlish Seas did let such kind pretense*
Full hardly Richmonds threatened Ship escapt our armed Shoore,
For Richard of the Rival got intelligence before.
Return'de, the Duke did sicken and Landoise did bear the sway:
And he for Masses great was brib'de Earl Henry to betray,
Yeat through wise Bishop Murtons means by stealth he scap'te away.
In travel then from Brutaine to his Grome himself was Grome,
By interchaunged raiment, till to Angers they wear come.
The French King, pitying his distress, pretended asked aid:
And secret platformes for his weal his English friends had laid.
Henry in France, at home his Friends bester them, and the Foe
Mean time with hope, with fraud, with fear imployde his wits also.
Now of the Earls conspiracy the total drift was this:
Elizabeth the daughter of fourth Edward vowed he his,
And she was vowed to him, if God with victory him bliss:
Our wounded Englands healing balm, for thus thereof ensew'de:
The factious Families unite, the Tyrant was subdew'de,
And thence the surname Tuder does Plantagenet include.
AS hardly as her husband did Elizabeth escape:
For why? like Stratageme for both did bloody Richard shape.
Whilste that her Father lived, now a King, and now exilde,
Her Crosses then did happen from such victors as wear mild.
But now the same that murdered her Brothers to be King,
That did withfraud begin and then with blood conclude each thing,
That flattred friends to serve his turn, and then destroyde the same,
That was her Uncle, yeat did hate her Mothers very name,
That thought he lived not because his Neeces wear vndead,
These now (and blame her not) in her a world of terror bread.
But of vnpriuiledged blood yet had he store to spill,
Yet sanctuaries wear not forc'te, yet but expecting ill.
Theareofte the Queen her Mother, She, and Sisters would report
Their happy and unhappy da^es, the fewer of first sort.
Happy was I (the old Queen said) when as a Maid vnweade,
Nor Husbands weal nor Childrens woe mistempered my head.
Yeat I, beloved, loved and so left that free estate,
And thought me happyer than before, for lovely was my Mate,
John Gray (a sweet Esquier for his prowysse dubbed Knight)
Was, as behooved, all my joy: who, slain in factious fight,
Your Father, Daughters, late my Lord and Husband now in earth,
From me had many a secret curse, as motyue of his death:
Lancastrian was my husband, and that faction had the wourste,
So, to relieve my Widdowhood, I kneeled to whom I curste.
Edward (for Henry was depoes'de, and Edward seaz'd the Crown)
(I wot not for what form of mine) did raise me kneeled down,
And gave me cheerful words, and took me courteously aside,
And played the ciuell Wanton, and me amorouf^y he eide:
His plea was love, my suit was Land: I plie him, he plies me:
Too baece to be his Queen, too good his Concubine to be
I did conclude: and on that point a while we disagree.
But when I was his Queen (sweet King) not for I was his Queen,
But for himself, and for the love that passed us between,
I held me happiest vnderheauen: yea, when his adverse Line
Discrowned him, I had enough that I was his, he mine.
Then, after fortunes often change, he died, and I survive
A life exceeding death for grief and greefes Superlatiue.
My heart, ah Sons, my heart (dear Hearts) was dead ear ye did die:
Too young wear ye to censure of your uncles tyranny.
Then wept she, and her daughters wept: their only talk always
Was passed joys, or present woes: nor hope they better days,
But in Earl Richmonds good success, that now a power did raise.
Too soon had Richard notice that Earl Henry would ariue,
By precontract his eldest Niece Elizabeth to wiue:
And well he knew in Yorks descent she was immediate heir,
And Henry like in Lancaster: a Match for him to fear.
Which to prevent he flattered his Neeces from their mother:
Who, fearful Ladies, did expect like deaths as had their brother.
And as they fear did he affect, which for the troubles then
Was vneffected: now behou'd to win him love of men.
Yeat casts he how he might convey to him his Neeces right,
Soon compassing his Wifes dispatch, whose life stood in his light.
Then plyes he his amazed Niece to his in^^^tious bead
Of her abhorred, She in conceit by faith fore-plighted spead.
This marrage motion gawles her more than any former grief:
Her self, Friends, Realm, Conspiracy, and all it touched in brief,
And therefore death, late feared, now she fantaseth in chief.
Mean while did Henry land, incampe, fight, and subdewe his Foe,
And, marrying her, long civil wars in England ended so.
CHAP. XXXV.
Seventh Henry's foreign busenes had succesfull honor: here
Three schol'd D^dalien Icarists (whose mounting cost them dear)
Did interrupt the peace. The first a Priests bace Puple: he
By his Complottors was pretenst'e Duke Clarence son to be.
A many of our native Peers, some foreign Princes too,
Submissiuly behight him aid in all that they might do.
The Lad was lofty, for himself he harrollized well,
At full he could his lessons, and a formale lie would tell.
For him was fought a bloody field, the Victory the Kings.
Lambert the forged Yorkest, and the Priest (that framed his wings)
Wear taken: For minority the Icarus was quit:
The Dedal^s for clergy tites was but intowr'd for it.
Thus scapte the Priest. The mother Queen to her that now was Queen
Found harder sentence for a crime more venale, as I ween,
She that did forward Henry with her friends, her purse, her wit,
That had conspired, conceil'd, concurred, for him the Crown to git,
And had him now her son in law, vnchauncy Queen, fore-went
Her whole revenues, and her age as if in durance spent:
Because against her heart, good Soul (for bootles to withstand)
See yielded all her daughters to the late Usurpers hand,
Whereby the Union might have quaild, and for it might she must
Endure such law, strict law to her of malice not unjust.
THan good old Queen Elizabeth our next young Phaeton
Had gentlier Judgment: He till then from Realm to Realm had gone,
And now in Ireland (hoping no such honor) was at Cork
Saluted by some Rebels theare for Richard Duke of York,
Fourth Edwards second son. Those Styles to him were strange, but they
Did feofe them on the bace-borne Muffe, and him as King obey.
The Yorkesh Faction (though they knew the error) let not slip
Occasion, that they now might have Lancastrians on the hip:
Margret fourth Edwards sisters heart for joy hereof did skip.
She had him soon to Burgone, and informs him cuery thing
That might concern Yorks pettegree, or apted for a King:
Maliciously repining still at Lancasters success,
And often would thus or thus-like her heart with tongue express.
God has forgot our house of York: nay York it self forgot:
To my late Brother Richards soul cleave evermore this blot:
He made away our friends to make a way unto our Foe,
To Lancaster, proud Lancaster: I, thence these tears doc floe.
Had he stock't up that hated stock, had he ra^'st out that Race,
Python had ceast, and he had been Apollo in that case.
That Henry was Lancastrian, and that Henry was alive,
And where he lived, and that he should not live if we would thr^^
He knew ywis: yeat knew he not his death how to contriue.
The Duke of Brutaine is no God, then how the devil y'ste
That both my brothers, laboring him, for whom they (...)
Their Sinons wear too simple, and their bribes but petite geere:
When had they bought him with their souls they had not bought him dear.
The heir of Lancaster (fie how it loathes to sound that name)
Enioyes the Crown: nay worse, enioyes to wife a Yorkesh Dame:
Worser, the name Plant^genet is buried in the same:
And, worst of all, their Title such as law bids us disclame.
Who would have looked such change to chance? oh how I feed like will
As Ae^as daughter Aesons house with tragedies to fill?
Who can endure to see their friends decline, their Foes ascend?
I see it, and for seeing so do wish my life had end.
When that her darling had his looer she left him to his wings:
Who flead not to worse company or at less game than Kings.
He lights in the French Kings Court, wheare (honored as the same
From whom he falsely would contriue a Crown by forged name)
He had Supplies, and English ayds, and Irish troops also,
With which he lands in England: where King Henry met the Foe.
On either part the Battle was right bloody, but at length
The King subdues, and Perke^ flead the land, dispoyld of strength.
Then, as the French, the Scotch King did repute of him: whereby
He wyu'd a Lady passing fair and of the Kings Allie,
The Earl of Huntlies daughter of the scotch-blood-royall bread:
She both before and after that her low-pris'd Mate was dead,
When well she knew his parentage, and felt his ebbed state,
In only sorrow did abound, in love no whit abate:
Howbeit in the English Court preferred to high estate.
Theare (for she was of comely parts and vncompeered face)
She, often bravely courted, yields no Courtier labored grace.
To one among'st the rest that most admierd her aunswers chaste
She said: besides the sin and that I so might live disgrac'ste,
A Presedent of wrong and woe did make me long since vow
Chastely to live the Love of him whom Fates should me allow.
I knew (quoth she) a Knight (a Knight he was in each respect)
I knew a Lady (fair she was but foully to be chect)
They loved long (if that to love and leave may love be said)
Till lastly she conceived love wheare love should be denayd.
Then he, whose Sowles Soul goddiz'd her, perceiving her untruth,
Became unlike himself, and moved, save her, each one to ruth.
At last he runs'distraught about, and what his moods conceited
He did: confusedly he wept, asked, answered, and entreated:
Ah many a time (for though his words lackt method, yeat they moved)
He had these speeches, arguments how earnestly he loved.
CHAP. XXXVI.
MY Mistress is a Paragon, the fairest fair alive:
Atrides and Aeacides for fair less fair did strive.
Her color fresh as Damask Rose, her breath as Violet,
Her body white as Iuorie, as smooth as polisht Iet,
As soft as Down, and were she down Jove might come down and kiss
A Love, so fresh, so sweet, so white, so smooth, so soft as this.
The Cleon^an Lions spoils for her I would redress.
I would the Lernan Hydras heads with sword and fire suppress.
My force the Erymantheon Bore should bravely ouermatch.
The swift-foote golden horned Stag I, running, would or^catch.
My bow the Birds of Stymphalus from wastfull prays should chase.
Of her proud Baldricke would I spoil the Amazon at Thrace.
Augeas washed Stables should my seventh Labor end.
I with the Bull of Calidon, victorious, would contend.
On horse-deuoured Diomede like honor should be won.
(...) Spanish Robber Geron should by me to death be done.
(...) ^p^ght of Spite in Hespera I golden fruit would pull.
Three-headed Cerberus in chains should make the Jury full,
B^ast, Snake, Bore, Stag, Birds, Bealt, Planks, Bull, Thief, Fruit, Dog,
Diome^d,
^hokt, feared, p^uncht, cought, pearst, prized, washed, thrown, slain, pulled,
chaned, horse* fead.
Were labors less than I would act, might I of her be spead.
D^ll mal-contented Saturn ruled the hour when I was borne:
Had Jupiter then starr'd I had not lived now forlorn:
Or Mars had steeled my milkie heart with manlier moods than thees:
Or Mercury had apted me to plead for Lovers fees:
Or Sol infused sense to search what better me behou'd:
Or Venus made me lovely, so for love to be beloved:
Or Luna (Contrary to Love) had bettered the best:
Ah, could seven Planets and twelve Signs constell one such unrest?
Then loved that Sier of Gods when he had vowed his childrens death:
That Son of his made wanton scapes with Lasses on the earth.
D^rus, ask Vulcan and his Art if thou did love or noc.
And Hermes that he Hearse loved will not disclaim I troe.
Nor w^art thou Phoebus chaste although thou wor'st a willow with.
Thou Citherea had a leash of Loves besides the Smith.
End^^ion gaynst Diana could vouch farther than the eye.
Thus loved ye all, ye churlish Stars, yeat let ye Lovers dye.
This said he, and for this he said, I for the ruth of this
Did vow, that whosoever once were mine I would be only his.
Why? these his words did savor wit, not one distraught (quoth he.)
Nay hear the rest of his unrest, it follows thus (quoth she).
Often would he kiss a senceles Tree and say, sweet Mistress mine,
I was, I am, and will be still the same and ever thine.
B^leeue me, or if so you doubt, Anatomize my brain,
And ^re my Senses see your self the Sourentesse to reign.
Believe me, or if so you doubt, rip out my heart, and see
Your self in it, in it you are and evermore will be.
Believe me, or if so you doubt, command I forthwith dye,
And see your self the only heaven whereto my soul does fly.
If such I seem and be not such, let naught betide me well.
If such I seem and be not such, I wish no heaven but hell.
If such I seem and be not such, your Favors let me mis.
With that he blessed himself and said, ah, what a wish was this?
Then steps he to some other Tree, and, as unto a friend,
Bewayles himself, with long discourse of love to little end.
And (as it were a mystery) thus many a time would tell
Of one Erickmon, as might seem, with him acquainted well.
Who would (quoth he) have thought that he had doted on a Lasses
Who rather would have thought the Girl so gilefull as she was?
Once brau'd he it and often found with silken Wenches grace:
Yeat (and I wonder) faults he not, though having time and place.
He never hild but gracious thoughts of women, yeat I win
The fairest She he ever saw might quit his thoughts of sin.
When of the Court and City both he could sufficient say,
From eithers busy Vanities he gets him away:
Amongst the woods his happiest days by-come or to be past
He found, had not Gynettas face intrapped him at last.
Nor Court nor City had she seen, yeat eithers praise she had:
So much more worth by how much less she was vnnicely clad.
At sixteen years such was she as at Twenty, and at boeth
Well worth the loving, for her loore, her face, and comely groeth.
Thence, waxing amorous, he checked his eyes that checked him so,
Which checks as often were countercheckt by Love his mightier For.
He loathed to live, that lived to love, and loved to loss, for why?
He scorned that wontlesse passion, or an amorous Fool to dye.
Full often therefore would he balke her sight that pleased him most,
And, if perceau'd to be in love, false freedom would he boast.
But all for naught, not absence or sweet exercise of wit,
Or ought besides might put aside Loves ouer-mastring fit.
Thus pyned ere he pleads love, yeat pleasing her so well
As none had fitter time and place his hearts unrest to tell,
At length he flatly says he loves, when (words too sweet for true)
Her answer was she liked him, and so atonement grew.
Then vncontroulled kisses and imbracings (often mixed
With less than love too gross, though more than should be such betwixt)
Were current: And if ever man did fish before the net,
If ever man might credit her did by her credit set,
If ever man for hearty love deserved honest meede,
Erickmon might believe himself to be beloved indeed:
More arguments of earnest love gave never Maid than she,
Less cause to falsify that love gave never Man than he.
How beit, on advantage played Gynetta all this while,
And by external smoothnes did obscure internal guile.
There was a Swayne, a wily wagge, that with his apish toys,
His Pedlarie, and pype-notes, such as pleases girls and boys,
So changed (I would have said bewitched, but that she often changed)
Gynetta, that her former love was suddenly estranged.
Erickmon hardly brok't such bace coryuing of the Swayne,
And of her love and wits did wish reducement all in vain.
Was never Girl so ouergon that had so good a wit,
So well reported of ere then, and well deserving it,
Than was Gynetta: guilty then both of her own reproof
And of her Lovers grief, that sat and sight thereat aloof.
And, were it not that she was young, and that Erickmon knew
She rather seemed than sinned in deed, he might have erred in view.
With weeping heart he her remaunds to be with him at-one:
And many restless days and nights consumes he in moan,
To think upon her madness, which her self believed none.
Her too much wronged Relict might (as well he might) be grieved,
Perhaps offended, but God knows no whit the more ^eleeu'd.
So wilful she, so wily and officious was her Squier,
That, craft intrapping craft, they both did enter bootles fire:
She bore a mind more haughty than to humble her so much,
And he a bacer mind than that he hoped his fortune such:
Yeat either liked at randon, not resolving any end,
Unless, perhaps, she dallied him as erst her former srend.
Mean while (for Apes be ever Apes) somewhat did he not well
That moved a discord, and through it their loves deuorse befell.
Er^^kmon languisht all this while not re-beloued long,
For she that ^ayl'd to do him right did feofe on him the wrong,
Who, giltles, pleads guilty (for what was it he would not
To reconcile her favor, lost might seem ere it was got?)
So love, again a foot, gave both re-intertainement hot.
Not any, loved they nere so much, seemed more to love than they,
Nor any, loved she any whit, in love made shorter stay
Than she: for he do what he could, did often times offend:
For why? even impudently she grew toyous in the end,
That was so modest comely erst as none might lier amend,
A Supersedeas for her love was every new-come friend:
And being now in much request, and waxing proud of favor,
By artificial pride she changed her natural behauour:
Her face was Maskt, her locks were ^url'd, her body pent with buske,
And (which was needles, she more sweet) her raiment sented Musk:
By all she did might seem to be unlike her self she me(...):
Yeat (worst of all) to sanctum-Sinne too aptly is she bent:
Erickmon when that followed her unpitied, not v^pearst,
Reformed his wits, his suit and hope of her, not now as erst,
And scornd her mind that scornd his love to her so firmly geason,
For why^shee offered double wrong to wrong and scorn a reason.
Thus whilst he hopt he hild her least: so alters the ca^e
With such as she: Ah such it is to build on such a face.
This said he, and for this he said, I for the ruth of this
Did vow that who so once were mine I would be only his.
Why? this concerned not him, nor showed a man distraught, (quoth he)
Nay hear the rest of his unrest, it follows thus (quoth she.)
Then (sheading tears) he to the Tree so spoken to would say,
Was not Gynetta false that did Erickmon so betray?
But has my Mistress cause to change? what cause, think you, should moue^
I framed me hers, she fayn'd her mine, my love is ever love.
May ye fair face prove one foul botch, those shining eyes prove bleard
That sweet breath stench, like proof to all that fair or sweet appeard
In her that wrongs her true-loue: let her loathed ever lust,
Beg may she, and vnpittied pine, rot, perish on the dust,
And, dead, be damned, that unto her true-loue is unjust.
Ye men say all Amen, or if amend your selves ye must,
Curse not (this Madman said) but swear that women be untrue,
Their love is but a Mummerie, or as an Aprils dew,
Got with a toy, gone with a toy: gifts, flattrie, gawdes, or wine
Will make her check and fly to game less fair, perhaps, than thine,
More amorous than men, and men convey their love less fine.
If such they are (as such they are) and will be whilst they be,
Why am I then so true of love? because not borne a she.
Witlackst thou then (fond Fool). I sigh to say true aim you give.
Wheare grew that lack (fond Fool?) I sigh to say wheare now I live.
Whence grew that lack (fond Fool?) I sigh to say from joys removed.
When grew that lack (fond Fool?) I sigh to say when first I loved.
And do thou love? ah, too too well I wot I love indeed.
Why do thou love? with luck too ill I love for lovers meede.
Whom dosst thou love? ah, too too well I wot a lovely She.
What time in love? with luck too ill in love too long for me.
Wit lackst thou then that wilfully do err and nourish it.
Wit do I lack, not wilfully, then blame not will but wit.
How shall I do? my Heart is lost, and I am left in woe:
Met any man a poor tame Heart? the Heart, good Folk, I owe:
Stricken, maimed, all of gore, and drouping does it go.
A Less once favored, or at least did seem to favor it,
And fosterd up my frollicke Heart with many a pleasing bit:
She lodged him near her Bower, whence he loved not to gad,
But waxed cranke, for why? no Heart a sweeter Layer had.
But whether that some other Dear estranged her or not,
Or that of course her game is Change, my Heart lackt brouse I wot:
Despysd, displeasde, and quite disgrac'st, my Heart even to this day
Dislodged, wandering, woe begone, I wot not wheare does stray.
But see, ah see, I see how Love casts off Desire his Hound,
A fell fleet Dog that hunts my Heart by parsee each-wheare found.
Sweet Cynthea rate the eger Curte, and so thy foe prevent:
For lo a far my chased Heart imboste and almost spent.
Thanks, gentle Goddess: now the Lad pursues a bootles chase:
My Heart recouers Covert wheare the Hound cannot hold pace.
Now tappas closely, silly Heart, vnrowse not and so live:
The Huntsmans-self is blind, the Hound at Loss does ouer-giue.
But list, alas, Loves Beagles be vncoupeld, Beauty praites
And drives my Heart from out the thicks, and at Recei^ awaites
Vaine-hope, and either now falls in, and now my Heart must dye,
Now have they him at Bay, and now in vay^e he fights to fly.
Auaunt Desire, ha Curre, auaunt: the Bore so raze thy hyde.
Unto the fall of my poor Heart see see how Love does ride.
Hark how he blows his death: ah see, he now the Say does take
Of my poor Heart, that never more for Love shall pastime make.
Thus lived he till he left his life, and for the ruth of this
I vowed, that who so once were mine I would be only his.
Yeat (said her Suitor) he, not she, was punished, as may seem.
Yes yes, quoth she, a Conscience pricked is deeply plagued I deem.
Then Scotland warred on England, and in that same wa^re did end
The Knight that had coryued: so the Lady lost each friend.
Often saw I her in tears, and often I heard her to complain
For faith erst lost, for loss now sound, dividing ^^ghs in twain.
There be that say (if truly said) unbodied Souls have walked,
And of the Ghosts of these two Knights the like abroad was talked:
Her ears had this and she the heart that dared not her eyes,
For thither whence the brute did grow she (feareles faulty) hies:
Her Followers stood aloof when she, alone approaching, said,
Beloved both, what means this fight? (they seemed as if they srayd)
Ah, pardon me, sweet First-belou'd, my guile I grant was great,
So is my grief: My latter Love refrain, let me entreat.
But whilst she spoke of deadly wounds they both did seem to fall,
And after vanished, leaving her perplexed in fear not small:
Who thenceforth fared as the Knight that did for her distraught,
Still haunted of the Ghosts, and haunts ye place where they had faught,
Until of her despayring life her self the Period wraught.
Thus lived she till she left her life, and for the ruth of this
I vowed, that who so once were mine I would be only his.
Tush, this was but a Fantasy, quoth he, of subtle Feends,
Deluding her simplicity in figure of her friends:
I hear not that they said or did aught taching her untruth,
But foolish was her fear, the like I censure of your ruth.
And shall I tell what they did tell, and say what they did do?
I will, for so, perhaps, you will surcease (quoth she) to wowe.
The Ghost resembling him to whom she had disloyal bin
Said: I, and This, and thou be thus and shall be doomed for sin:
For dotage in my love, for his deceitful lust, wetwaine
Of freesh-sore wounds do hourly faint, hurt, heal, heal, hurt again:
Nor can I utter half we see, and fear, and suffer still
Of endless Torments: only thou art Auctresse of such ill.
Who love beloved believe no life but wheare their love does live,
To fault is then their murdrous fact that first defect does give.
He had not faulted or I fallen had thou hild faith to me:
Ah little feel we in regard of Plagues prepared for thee.
Thus said he, and for thus he said I for the ruth of this
Did vow, that who so once were mine I would be only his.
Well, Madame, quoth the Gentleman, be this so, or a shift,
I see to frustrate my demand is honestly your drift:
Then so, or not so, or what so you shall infer of this
It matters not, Perkin is yours and be you only his.
For, sooth to say, wear all said false, it were indeed a hell
To have a Loues-Coryuall, and as none could brook it well,
So none should ask, and none should yield to alter love begun,
Therefore, sweet Lady, I conclude such il is well vndun:
Mine amorous suit has here an end: and would you might prevail
With Perken too, that proudly strives to bear too high a sail:
So may you, if perhaps you have for him so apta tail
As this you told to me for me, although more hardly true
As this which I shall tell, that does include a moral view
Of matter worth the note for him, the rather told by you:
Then hear it: for our leisure and the order of my Q*
CHAP. XXXVII.
SVppose (for so must be supposed) that Birds and Beasts did speak:
The Cuckooe sometimes loved the Owl and so with her did break.
Then flew the Owl by day, so did the Cuckooe all the year,
So did the Swallow and the Batte: but how it happened hear.
The Cu^kooe by the Swallow (then the Swallow was his Page)
Did send the Owl a sucking Mouse, a tydie for the age:
The Bat (the Bat then served the Owl) preferred the Bringer and
The Present to her Mistres sight; that in her Tod did stand.
My master to your Owleship, quoth the Swallow, sends by me
This Modicum, desiring you to take the same in gree.
The Owl, that never till that day had tasted flesh of Mouse,
Had quickly lopte a Limb or two, and feasteth in her house
The Swallow with a cut see of her then disgorged wheat:
When, talking of the dainty flesh and elswhat, as they eat,
The Bat (then waiting at the boorde) fetched sighs a two or three:
The Owl did ask the cause. And do you ask the cause, quoth she,
Why thus I sigh when thus in sight my kindred murthred be?
My self was sometimes such, and such am still, save now I fly:
With that she freshly wept: and thus proceeded by and by.
A fresh, quoth she, now comes to mind mine Ancestors ill hap,
Who^ pride made prays to Kestrels, Kites, Cats, Weasels, Bae^, and trap:
My Grandsier (for wheare Nature fails in strength she adds in wit)
Was full of Science: But, insooth, he misapplied it.
The Weasell, Prince of Vermen (though besides a virtuous Beast)
By shrewdnes of my Grandsiers wit his Holes with hoords increaste,
And seemed to conn him thanks, who^ none besides had cause to thank:
For Princes Favors often make the favored too cranke.
Not only Mice, but Lobsters, Cats, and noble Vermen paid
In coming Coram Nobis for some crime against them laid.
But, God, it is a world to see, when purposes be sped,
How Princes, having fatted Such, are with their fatnes fed:
The Weasel served my Grandsier so and every Vermen laughed
To see himself in Snare that had in Snares so many caught.
Now also live some wily Beasts, and fatly do they feed
Among Beasts of chase and birds of game, with less then needful heed.
My Graundsier dead, my Father was in favor nerthelesse:
Nor did his Father more than he for high Promotion press.
And (though I say it) long time he deserved favors well,
For quayling Foe men, and at home such Vermen as rebel:
And for the same the Weasell did him mightily prefer:
But Honors made him haughty, and his haughtines to err.
I will be plain, he waxt too proud, and plotted higher drifts
Than fitted him or fadged well, for who have thriu'd by shifts?
Nor will I say (because his son) he wronged the Weasell, but
The Weasell died, and that that did succeed to shifts he put:
For which his Fathers Fortune did oretake him at the last:
Such fickelnesse in earthly pomp, which, flowing ebs as fast.
This double warning might have i^kt unto my wit, but I
Did follow Kind: Nay, more, I did importune Dis to fly,
And he did give me these black wings, resembling him that gave the
A proper Gift, and hardly got, to shame me now I have them.
But know ye Dis? some Pluto him or Limbos God do call:
Or, aptlier said, in Hell of devils the Chief and Principal:
And somewhat now of him and how I changed say I shall.
I happened on a Cranny, whilst my Mouse-daies lasted, which
I entering, wandered crooked Nookes and paths as dark as pitch:
Theare, having lost my self, I sought the open air in vain,
Both wanting food, and light, and life well near through travels pain
The Moole by chance did cross my way, and (as ye know) her smell
Supplies her want of sight and serves her purpose full as well:
I heard a tracting sownd and, skar'd, my hair did stand upright,
Nor could I see, or fly, but fear and bless me from a Spright:
She had me, hild me, questions of my being theare the cause,
And in mean while peruseth me with favorable claws.
I was about to plead for life, when she preuents me thus:
Ha, Cosen Mouse, what Fortune gives this meeting here to us.
Fear not my Son (I call thee Son because I love thee much)
Do hold thy self as merry here as in a Pantlers hutch:
What know not me? or see thou not? with that she leads me
Into an higher room, wheare her to be mine Eame I see.
I did my duty, and my heart was lightened when mine eye
Encountered a friend whereas I made account to die.
Before me sets She Viands, and my stomach served me well:
And, having fed, my Grandsiers and my Fathers ends I tell,
(For She enquires for them, ere I acquaint her what befell.)
The reverent Moole, then sighing, said: ah, let no Vermin think
That Fortune ever favors, or that friends will never shrink:
I did fore-smell their lostie flight would cost them once a fall,
And therefore, Cosen, see thou be forewarned therewithal.
Here see thou me (I tell thee, though I prise not Gentry now,
Thine Eame and of the elder house) that long ago did vow
My self a Recluse from the world, and, celled under ground,
Least that the gould, the precious stones and pleasures here be found
Might happen to corrupt my mind, for blindness did I pray,
And so contemplatiuely here I with contentment stay.
Admit the Weasell graceth thee, the more he does the more
The other Vermen will malign and envy thee therefore:
Himself, perhaps, will listen to thy ruin for thy store:
Or thou thy self, to mount thy self, may run thy self a shore.
That Vermen that has reason, and his own Defects espies,
Does seem to have a soul, at least does thrive by such surmies,
For what is it but reason that human from brutish tries?
But man, or beast, neither has troth that this for true denies,
He has enough that has wherewith pure Nature to suffies:
In overplus an ouercharge for soul and body lies,
For Soldiers, Lawyers, Carrions, Thieves, or Casualties a Prize,
His comber-minde that lives with it and leaves it when he dies,
From whom to catch it scarce his heir stays closing of his eyes:
O wretched wealth, which whosoever wants no Fortune him enuies.
Here may thou feast thee with a Mad: and here no Pickethanke pries
Into thy life, nor words well spoke to ill vnmeant applies:
No Flatterer to vndermind: no tongue no ear for lies:
No gleaning from the Orphant: no oppressed widows cries:
No bribes to give, no hands to take: no quarrelling for flies:
No wrongs to right: no laws to break, because no law that ties,
But what we lust we do, nor do nor lust badd enterprise:
And find less want in Nature, than wits-want in Arts disguize.
Nor any here in force, in friends, fraud, wealth, or wit affies:
O do thou not so rich, so safe, and just life despies:
Theare lacks not of noble Births to star the courtly skies.
Theare be enowe Politians, thou may for thy Soul be wise:
Then leave thou matters of estate to States, I thee advise:
And rather sit thou safely still, than for a fall to rise.
Not for she was my Elder or mine Eame, but for the place
I hild my peace, that would have said her Moolships mind was bace.
But she perceiues me to dissent, and says, Cosen Mouse,
Do as you like, you shall not find a prison of my house:
Stay while you will, go when you will, come and return at pleasure,
And ever welcome: Virtue is an uncompelled Treasure.
This past, and thence pass we through deep dark ways, save here and theare
The veins of gould and precious stones made light in dark appear:
Vaste Vaults as large as Isles we pass, great Rivers theare did flow,
Huge worms and Mo^sters there I saw, which none on earth do know.
On go we, till I saw a glimps and she heard noise of flame,
Then said she prayers, bidding me to bless me from the same.
I, musing, frain'd her meaning: She her meaning thus did tell.
That flaming Region, ever such (quoth she) is Plutos Hell:
All gould, all metals, wealth, and pomp that nourish Mortals pride
Are hence and his, and hither they do theare Mis-guiders gide:
He them inchaunteth, and the same inchaunt the folk on Earth,
Until their dying dotage theare finds here a living death.
Still nertheles I wished to see the hellish Monarch Dis,
When he (more ready to be found then for our profit is)
Ore-heard us, and vnhid himself, and shinde in rich array,
And seemed a glorious Angel, and full gently thus did say.
That slandrous blind bace-minded Moole, friend Mouse, deceiues thee much,
And prates of me, of Hell, and Earth more than is so or such:
Believe him not, but rather do believe thine eyes, and see
If any earthly pleasure is vntripl'd here with me.
Then shewde he sights (which since I found illusions to betray)
Of greater worth than Earth affords, or I have Art to say:
Nay, more, he bids me ask what so I would, and I should have it:
Then did I pause, bethinking what was rarest I might crave it.
My Holes were stored with corn and croomes, on Earth I walked at will,
And in her Bowels now had seen indifferently my fill,
Upon it, nor within it, not sufficing to my pride,
I asked wings, scarce asked when they grew on either side.
Short leave I took, and mounting left the Hell God and the Moole,
And soared to the open Air through many a sorry hoole.
It was at Twilight, and the Birds were gone to roust, but I
(Inchaunted with the novelty of flight) vnweared fly,
And had the Sun been up, I ween (such pride bewitched my wit
To Egel-fie my self) I had assayd to soar to it:
Not seeing that my limber wings were Leather-like vnplum'de,
But at the Dawning also I of wing-worke still presum'de.
The Swallow (and I ween it was this Sallowes father) he
Was earliest up, with him I met, and he admired me.
I hild him wing, and wistly he suruaies me round about,
And lastly, knowing who I was, did give me many a flout,
And fled to tell the other birds, what uncouth Foul was bred,
Who flockt to see me, till with gibes and girds I wished me ded.
Then, shifting out of sight, I hung till Twilight in a hoole,
Transformde, derided, hunger-spent, and (minding still the Moole)
In vain I wished reducement of my shape, and (which was worste)
My hap was harder than to own in that distress a Cruft.
Then fled I to my wonted Holes of hoorded food to get,
Too narrow by mine added wings that did mine entry let.
Now Mise fled me, not to the Moole I would return for shame,
To Dis I durst not, mong'st the Birds I was a laughing game.
Then cursed I mine aspiring mind, then knew I Dis a Devil,
The Devil the Prince of Pride, and Pride the root of every evil.
Hell, Earth, Air, Heaven, and what not? then conspiring mine unrest,
What might remain but death for me that lived so unblessed?
But as I, fainting, flew that night your Ladyship, Dame Owl,
Did call me to your Todd, and glad to see a new night-fowle,
Did take me to your service, thence your Chamberlain to be:
Ha Jupiter reward it you that so relieved me.
It is a sweet continual feast to live content I see:
No danger but in high estate, none envy mean degree.
Then all this process (quoth the Owl) does tend, belike, to this,
That I should eat no Mouse-flesh: Nay, Sir Bat, so sweet it is
That thou, so near of Kin to them, shall also serve my lust:
And there withal in ruthles claws the hapless Bat she trust.
Here meant the Courtior to have left, whom Perkens Lady prays
To tell what end such wowing had: And thus hereof he says.
The Swallow saw that cruel pranke and flies aloof and said,
Ungrateful Glutton, what offense has that thy Servant made?
Choke may thou with the murder So he left her, and unto
The Cuckooe tells what the Owl unto the Bat'did do.
Varlet (he waxed choleric) and what of that, quoth he?
Was not the Bat her bond-Slaue, such as thou art now to me?
What tel'st me then of other news then what her answer is
Unto mine amorous Message, says my Lady nay or yis?
The Swallow told him that through such occurrant of the Bas.
He, interrupted, came away vnaunswered in that.
A mischief, quoth he, both on that and thee ill sauoured Elfe:
And in a stammering chafe he fled to wowe the Owl himself.
The Swallow Man's him thither, whom the deu'lish Owl did hate,
And all because he had reprou'd her tyranny of late.
The Cuckooe, offering to have bilde, she coyely turnde her face,
It Is more, quoth she, than needs that we kiss, as stands the case:
Rid hence yonn same your knauish Page, you sent him with a Mouse
To spy my secrets, or belike to brave me in my house.
Gods precious, would you knew I bear a mind less bace then that
I can digest your Drudge with me so saucely should chat:
Jack Napes, forsooth, did chase because I eat my Slave the Bat.
O what a world is this that we can nothing private have
Vncensur'd of our Servants, though the simplest Gill or Knave?
Well, rid him of your service: Nay, it skils not if of life,
At least if so you mean that we shall love as man and wife,
For such Colecarriers in an house are ever hatching strife.
The Cuckooe, hearing this complaint, flew on his trusty Page,
And vndiscreatly gave him strokes that killed him in that rage.
Yeat, ear he left his life, he thus unto his Master said:
Thus many honest Servants in their Masters hasty brayd
Are Dog-like handled, either yeat like dear in Jove's just eyes:
Of Harlots and of hastines beware, said he, and dies.
When now her gluttony and spite had thus dispatched twain,
The Cuckooe, plying amorously her favor to obtain,
Even then, and looking very big, in came the Buszard, who
Did swear that he would kill and slay, I mary would he do,
If any Swad besides himself fair Madam Owl did wowe.
The Cuckooe, seeing him so bog, waxt also wondrous wroth:
But thus the Owl did stint the strife. She calls them husbands both:
Now fie (quoth she) if so you could betwixt your selves agree,
Ye both should have your bellies full, and it no hurt to me.
The Buszard faintly did consent, the Cuckooe said Amen:
And so was Hen enough for Cock, not Cock enough for Hen,
For she deceyues them both, and had besides them other game:
The Gende Buszard dying soon for sorrow of the same.
The Cuckooe wisely saw it and did say but little to it,
As nooting she was set on it and knowing she would do it.
But what the Swallow warned him of Harlots proved true,
For, as was gessed, also him by treachery she slew.
The Goddess Pallas, to give end unto these tragic deeds,
Descended, and (the dead revived) to Sentence thus proceeds.
The Bat, because begild of Dis, See pittieth partly and
Permits him Twy-light flight: to give thereby to understand
That to aspire is lawful, if betwixt a Mean it stand.
The Swallow, for that he was true and slain for saying well,
She doomb'd a joyful Summers Bird, in Winter time to dwell
Even with Mineruas secret store, as learned Clerks do tell.
The Buszard, for he doted more and dared less than reason,
Through blind bace Love enduring wrong reuengeable in season,
She eie-blur'd, and adjudged Prays the dastard'st and least geason.
Unto the Cuckooe, ouerkinde to brook Coriuals, she
Adiudg'd a Spring-times changeles note, and whilst his young ones be
By others hatched, to name and shame himself in every Tree.
But live, quoth she, unto the Owl ashamed of the light,
Be wondered at of Birds by day, fly, filch, and howl all night,
Have lazy wings, be ever lean, in fullen corners rucke,
When thou art seen be thought a sign to folk of evil luck:
Nor shall thine odious form, vile Witch, be longer on my Shield:
Whence racing forth her Figure, so the Goddess left the field.
Just Guerdons for Ambition, for poor Souls oppressed for well,
For dastard Dotards, Wittolrie, and Harlots nice you tell,
Said Perkens Wife. But thus now of her husbands pride befell.
At last when sundry Arms had end, Henry victorious still,
And Perkens passage was fore-stald, he yields of his own will
Himself from Churches Privilege to Henry's Mercy, who
Did only limitte his abode, and less he could not do.
But when he sought escapes he then had petite punishment,
And after, for some new attempts, to Tower was he sent:
Whence practicing escape, it was said, he won to his intent
Young Edward Earl of Warwick, that indeed was Clarenes son,
And ever had been Prisner theare ear Henry's reign begone,
And now by law, too strickt me seems, for this to death was don.
Perken was hanged, and hang may such: but that the Earl should die
Some thought hard law, save that it stood with present policy.
Sir William Stanley did for this (often King-law is do thus)
Deserving better of the King: but what is that to us?
The last of our three Phaetons was tuter'd of a Friar:
Who, being fitted now by Art and nature to aspier,
(The foresaid name of Warwick feigned) seduced folk thereby:
As I my self in Essex heard and saw a Traitor dye
That feigned himself sixth Edward, and to grace-out such his lie,
Looks, body, words, and gesture seemed heroycall, to view
He had like age, like marks, and all that might enforce it true:
Whereby to him assisting minds of simple Folk he drew.
Our Cowle-mans foresaid Actor so prevailed that the Friar
In Pulpets durst affirm him King, and Aids for him requier:
But lastly both were taken: both did fault in one same ill,
Yeat rope-law had the Youth, the Friar lived Clergie-knaued still.
When Armor ended Avarice began (for then begins
The slye Mercuriles^, and more by wyles then valor wins.)
Beneuolences, Taxes and sore Fines for penal laws,
To Henry hoords from Henry hearts of many a Subject draws.
Empson and Dudly (fur'd Esquiers more harmefull, being gown'd,
To Englands friends than Englands foes, through Avarice profound)
In such exacting chiefly Act, applaused of the King,
To whom their civil Thefts, not Thrifts, exceeding wealth did bring.
Yeat when the gracious King found out their tacking Rich and Poor,
He then did pardon much, and much did purpose to restore:
But, dying, those two Harpies lost their hated heads therefore.
So hardly favored of Kings themselves in bownes contain,
That they, securely stout, at length do perish through disdain.
So hardly too some Princes are from private Lucar won,
As, though their bags ore-flow, they think no harm abroad undone.
Henry (acquit his latter days of Avarice fore named)
Deceast for Prowess, Policy, and Justice highly famed.
THE EIGHT BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XXXIV.
EIGHT Henry (heir indubitate of York and Lancaster)
Succeeded, and with Kingly rites his Father did interr.
His mind, his words, his looks, his gaet, his lynaments, and Stature,
Wear such for Majesty's as showed a King composed by Nature.
All Subjects now of civil strife, all counter-minds for Reign,
All envious of his Empier now wear rid, wear pleased, or slain.
Rich wear his sundry Tryumphs: but his cost had foyzen than
When Terwin and strong Turnay in resisting France he wan:
When Maximilian Emperor did under Henry fight:
When English Ships did often put the French Sea-powre to flight:
And that the French King was inforc'st to crave and buy his peace,
Who, wiuing lovely Mary, so the wars for then did cease.
This sister to our King, and then the French Kings goodly Queen,
Was welcomed with Tryumphs such as erst in France unseen.
Iustes, Barriers, Tylts, and Turneyes were proclaimed each wheare for All:
Whereforeto Paris at the time flockt Caueliers full tall,
With Princes brave, and Ladies fair of every Realm about,
And hence, with more, Charles Brandon, in fine Chivalry most stout,
Whose body fitted to his mind, whose mind was puesant, and
Whose puesance yielded not to Mars, this Mars in France did la^d:
With who^ incou^tred valiant knights, but none might him withstand.
The English-French Queen standing theare, admired for beauty rare,
Behild the Tryumphs, in the which high Feats performed ware.
But Brandon (yet no Duke) he was the Knight above the rest
That in her eye (nor did she err) acquitted him the best.
For whether that he trots, or turns, or bounds, his barded Steed,
Did run at Tylt, at Randon, or did cast a Spear with heed,
Or fight at Barriers, he in all did most her fancy feed.
Weak on a Couch her King lay theare, who^ though she loved well,
Yeat likte she Brandon, and the same loved her ere this befell:
For chastely had they fancied long before she came to France,
Or that from mean estate to Duke Henry did him advance.
The days of Triumph wear expired, and English Peers with praise
Come home, and Jews King of France decea'st within few days.
Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk then, with honor furnished hence,
Was sent to France for to return the widow Queen from thence,
Who had been wed scarce th^ice three weeks unto a sickly King,
To her, a fair young Queen, therefore small time might solace bring.
Yet less did timetha^ brave Duke Charles assuage fair Mary's grief:
He chats, she cheers, he courts, she coyes, he wowes, she yields in brief.
No winds (thought she) assist those Sails that seek no certain Shore,
Nor find they constant lives that but they live respect no more.
Let each ones life aim some one end: as, if it be to marry,
Then see, hear, love, and soon conclude, it betters not to tarry.
To cast too many doubts (thought she) wear often to err no less
Than to be rash: And thus, no doubt, the gentle Queen did guess,
That seeing This or That at first or last had likelihood,
A man so much a manly Man wear dastardly withstood:
Then Kisses reuel'd on their Lips to eithers equal good,
And, least King Henry should dissent, they secretly did wead,
And then sollicet his good will, and of their wishes spead.
The periut'd valiant Scotch-King James, slain at brave Flodons Slaughter,
Had also left in widowhood Englands fair elder Daughter.
She also weds a Scottish Earl, vnlicenc'st of her Brother:
And was to her Sons Daughters Son, now sixth James, great-Grandmother.
A Scruple, after twenty years, did enter Henry's mind,
For wedding of Queen Katherin, a Lady fair and kind,
Spaynes Daughter, then the Emperors Aunt, and for her virtuous life
Well worthy Henry: But for she had been his Brothers wife,
And also of their coiture surmise directed Laws,
He seemed in conscience touched, and sought to rid him of the Cause.
Then was the matter of Deuorse through Christendom disputed,
The Match of all adjudged void, and so the Queen non-suted.
She, after tears to him from whom she was to be deuorste,
Did humbly say: and am I not, my Lord, to be remorste?
That twenty years have been your Wife, and borne your Children, and
Have loved and lived obediently, and unsuspected stand.
I am (ah too too sweetly erred) I was, poor Soul, the same
Whom once you did prefer, nor now of me you need to shame.
The blossoms of my beauty was your Booty, nor my favor
Now alters so to alter so from me your late behauour.
But Conscience is the color of this quarrel: well I wot
I also have a conscience that in this accuses not:
But as the same, perhaps, might say that me succeedes say I,
That for the pleasure of a Prince go many things awry.
Which her Fore-doomes seemed to effect in her that her succeeded,
In Queen Anne Bullyn: who, for she in Luther^sme proceeded,
Was hated of the Papists, and enui'd because preferred,
And through the Kings too light belief (for Kings have sometimes erred)
She lost her head, and might have said (some thought) ere she did dye,
That for the pleasure of the Prince go many things awry.
So did the gracious Mother of our now most glorious Queen,
Whose zeal in reverent Fox his works autenticall is seen.
The Kings four other Queens (for why? he did a Sexamus)
Shall pass, though Jane did bear a Son to him, a King to us,
Edward the Sixth: and of the same we shall deliver thus.
CHAP. XXXV.
SVCH as was Love in Figure of Ascanius, when the same
In kisses sly did sheade himself into the Tyrian Dame,
Or such as was sweet Hyacint, Apollos lovely Boy,
Or Jupiters Ganymaedes, rapt up to heaven from Troy,
Or rather like young Solomon, in sentencing betwixt
Two mothers claiming one same Child, was young Edward the Sixth.
Now Rome fell sick in England, but how long she lay in trance
We list not write, alonly death to her did never chance:
For old Rome never lackt that durst their lives for her bestoe,
Not new Rome that to Hell for her dare souls and bodies go.
Then true Religion might be said with us in Primative,
The Preachers and the people both then practiuely did thrive:
Our decent Church-Rites, still in print, not practice (worthy those
Whose reverent heads collected them from whence true wisedo^ groes.
Not mangled then of Nouesses and curious Doults, which now
Would have they know not what, and would reform they know not how,
Omitting or admitting as their own Conceits allow)
Did then put forth her Branches, and wear fruitful in the bood:
And, wear our Church-Lords now for zeal as Church-lawes now for good,
Soon might like union be, now by indifferency withstood:
For give to vulgar Heads the head and look for all confused,
At once they publish and repeal, al else, save Order, used:
And as Kytts Camp ill-form'd good form at their reforming Tree,
Sons ost by aim consorting voice their Fathers hanged should be,
So wheare the Multitude prevail they censure ere they see.
But (might I be so bold to speak to them should speak to me)
A good example would do good in Churchmen, seeing they
In saying ^^oth are less believed, not doing as the say.
I know our Churchmen know that Faith is dead where lack good works.
Yeat know I not what policy in Alms vnpreached lurks.
Some teach (and well) that these concur, but few do urge the Theme
Of charity: affeard, perhaps, our More should urge their Beam.
But fear not, Fathers, preach at full Love, good works, and Remorse,
More will your bad Examples let than shall your words enforce,
To preach by halfes is to be worse than those tongue-holly Iauells,
That cite good words, but shift off works and Discipline by Cauells.
Often have ye handled pithily (not preached without need)
What good to give, what hurt to take, from those that Souls do feed:
But so obscurely has been blancht of good works elsewheare done,
As many, boasting only Faith, Faiths fruits selfe-aptly shonne:
When such a faith is but the faith of that faith-fruitles Devil
That cited Scripture unto Christ, applying good to evil.
Tell whether that the Leuite or Samaritane did better:
Tell wherein Dives lived and did to Lazarus a Debtor.
Vnknot sententious Solomon his Parable which is,
Full Clouds will rain upon the Earth: How thus is meant by this,
Rich me^ by Clouds, poor men by Earth (else Clerks expound amiss)
Tell, how some Clouds but misell Rain: that is, if so they give
A penny Alms or twain a year they think they much relieve.
Some Clouds flash down their Shewres: that is, some set up two or three,
And beggar so themselves and theirs: say such are foolish free.
Some Clouds hayle down their Rain, beat flat, hurt, and help not ye ground:
That is, vpbraid who^ they relieve, and hold the^ servile bound.
Some Clouds give Snow, that lights and lies a moisture moystles: so
Do those that say, alas, God help, and nothing else bestoe.
Some Clouds do shewre into the Seas: say such do give to such
Whom Alms make idle, or belike to recompense as much.
Some Clouds with lightning, thunder, and loud winds drip down their rain:
That is, give sildom alms, and those proclaimed and seen, ere ^ayne.
Some Clouds retain but form of clouds, with figure black as Coal:
That is, look big, Examine long, but Scriptum est their doale.
Some gracious Clouds shed temprate Shewres on thirsty earth indeed.
That is, the Orphant, Widow, Thrall, succor, protect and feed.
Say also whatsoere we give, to whosoere it be,
Though given in sight of men, if not because that men should see,
But with Devotion, as a work from Faith that cannot sever,
God for such cheerful Alms will be our bounteous Almner ever.
Say, make not as it wear a Quest of quere ere Ye give,
But give ye Alms as men be poor, not as poor men to live.
Provided common Beggars nor disordered Lossels, who
Men know provided for, or can but labor none will do,
Than whom do say (for so is sooth) no Creatures worse desatue,
Take you no Orators for them, but that they hang or statue.
And thus for this. Our Ouerture to it reduces me.
The Uncles ofthis Orphant King, so long as they agree,
Vphild Religion, King, themselves, and Realm in happy state:
Which then began to ruinate when they begun debate.
CHAP. XL.
SOme say their falling out was through two haughty women's strife,
The Admiralls Queen Bigama and Lord Protectors wife:
These (for what glory enuies not one woman in an other?)
Began a brawle that ended in the blood of either Brother.
It Is thought the Earl of Warwick threw close fuel to this fire,
And nourisht it to cut off them, that so he might aspire:
For when the one had lost his head, he forthwith took in hand
To forge the Lord Protector false unto the King and Land:
Who, though he tried by his Peers of treason was acquitted,
Yeat also of a Statute new he being then indighted,
Was hardly found a Felon, and too stricktly sentenc'st so:
For meanest fault is high offense urged of a mighty Foe:
The King thus lost his Uncles both, to his no little woe.
Now Warwick was become a Duke, feared of high and low,
Full little thinking that himself the next to Block should go:
The two Prince-loyall Semers erst made let unto his lust,
But now remained none whose faith or force he did mistrust.
The Orphant King fell sick (but here suspend what some suspect)
The new Duke of Northumberland mean while did all direct.
It was contrived King Edward from his Sisters gave the Crown,
Their Fathers Former Act and Will by wrested law put down:
The Sisters Daughters Daughter of Eight Henry, Lady Jane,
Was published heir apparent, and that right from Mary taken,
And from Elizabeth, though both collatrally preceed her:
And when by full Confedracie the Crowne-right was decreed her,
And Gylford Dudly fourth-borne Son unto Northumberland
Had married her, and nothing seemed the Plot-forme to withstand,
King Edward (entered seauenteene years of age, and seven of Reign)
Departed to that endless rest his virtuous life did gain.
The Council then convent. But who will think, perhaps, that one
Should alter All, to alter true Discents unto a Throne?
^ane, Suffolks Daughter, Gylfords wife (One worthy such estate
For righteous and religious life, who nerethelesse should wate
Her Intrest after others Two, The younger of which twain
Did match, yea Mate her virtues) was proclaimed Queen to reign,
And in the tower of London hild Estate and princely Train.
Mean while fled Mary, doubting less her Scepters loss than life:
But sildome fayles a rightful cause that comes to open strife:
The Commons knew our either Law preferred a Sisters Right
Before a Cosens, and fot it did many fadge to fight.
Northumberland with Arms pursued the Lady Mary, and
Observed directions from the Peers: who when they understand
Of Mary's strength of flocking Friends, on sudden came to pas
That they proclaimed Mary Queen, and Jane her Prisner was:
And well was he, that late did seem a Foe, might first salute
The Queen, and all unto the Duke did their Amiss impute.
For, soothly, more the Peers did fear than favor always,
Who, though he seemed as forward now in Mary's cause as they,
Yeat was he taken and in-towr'd, and lost his head for this:
A Warrior brave. But than his Sier, himself, one Son of his,
Like rare Politians seldom liu'de: who in three several Reigns
Successively did show them such, though loss did prove their gains.
THe Duke thus dead, Suffolk, Lord Gray, Lord Gylford, Lady Jane,
Wear executed: But we blanch the rest excepting twain,
That is, Lord Gylford and his wife, young and less worthy blame,
Because the Dukes their Fathers, all the Council, all of name,
Yea and King Edwards Pattents sealed for them, not they, did frame
What so was done in this, yeat they must perish for the same.
Who higher then this Couple late? and who more wretched now?
Of more then much remained naught, nor law did life allow.
Unhappy Youths, not for they die, but for the mutual grief
Of him for her, of her for him, which tortured them in chief.
Come was the day, the tragic day, wherein they both should die,
When Either, passing to their end, each other did epsy,
She in her lodging, waiting death prepared her that day,
And he in being lead thereto he Lodging in his way.
Assending and dissending Signs then fly and fall apace,
And each bemones the other more than minds their private case.
Their E^es, that looked Love ere while, now look their last adieu,
And stain their faces, faultles ere this dismal enter-vew:
Their Ears, erst listening ioies, are deaf, unless to sighs profound:
Their tongs, erst talking ioies, those looks and sighs did now confound:
What parts soere of them had felt or tasted joys ere this,
Wheare senceles now of any joy, save hope of heavenly blis.
Whilst Either thus for Earthly Pomp no longer time did look,
He passes to the fatal Block, she praying on her book:
Wence (having made a godly end) he was returned, whilst She
Prepared for like, and of her Lord the senceles Tronke did see:
A sight more deathful than her death that should consort him strait,
And for the which her feareles eyes did every moment wait.
She vnabashed, mounting now the Skaffold, theare attends
The fatal Stroke-and unto God her better part commends:
And as she lived a virtuous life so virtuously she ends.
CHAP. XLI.
OMitting Knights, three Dukes, three Lords, also a Queen elect
Then perished thus, and somewhat some of Edwards death suspect.
All which fell out a Stratagem, in God his secre Dome,
That should induce a Tragedy to England meant by Rome:
For when these mighty Protestants, through Ones Ambition, fell,
Queen Mary seemed to shut up Heaven, and set wide open Hell.
Whence swarmed papish Tyrants, that false doctrine did erect,
Whilst that seduced Mary did Gods threatened cause neglect.
Blameless she was not, for a Crown that could her Foes ore-goe:
Nor all too blame, for mighty States do and have erred so,
To Whom the Scriptures wear obscured by Christ's Italian Foe.
Her courage was not common, yeat abused over much
By Papists chiefly, She her self too naturally such.
Here hence she is reproved of a most tyrannous Reign,
And of a thriftles Marriage with the trustles King of Spain.
But when rich Brabants supreme Fair, the Bakers daughter, staide
The King in dalliance, and the Queen had news that false he plaide.
It Is thought his tarriance grieved, and told that one should counsel this
Have patience, Madam, so it was and will be as it is:
Fourth Edward did the like, yeat loved his Queen no whit the less:
Nor did the like impatient her, that knew him to transgress
As guilty of a Leash of Loves, Shores wife and other twain:
She knew as Streams, if stopped, surrownd so Kings will show they reign:
As did our second Henry, whom his Queen often crossed in vain^.
Which, and one other Story, if it please you that I tell,
I shall. Yea doc (quoth she:) Then thus (quoth he) it once befell.
NOt known of Rosamund, his eye had stoed her in his heart:
Fair Maid, quoth he, believe me fair and all so fair thou art
That, wear I Henry Engla^ds King, thou should be Engla^ds Queen:
But so must fail, for Elenour already is between.
He bod me buy thy love, if so it might be bought with Gold,
If not, he bod me swear he loves: in faith he loves, be bold:
He bod me ask, if so he came, what should his welcome be,
And if, perhaps, he lated wear if he should lodge with thee:
Protesting secreasie thereof to all, unless to me,
With promise to perform at full each promise as I make it:
I promise Love, Wealth, Secrecy, then promise thou to take it.
Content you Sir (quoth To (amund) you aim your marks amiss:
I am not for his Highness, nor for me his Highness is.
And should he know (I shame he should) of this your Brokage bace,
He would acquaint you what it wear your Sovereign to disgrace.
Whosoever you be, be still the same, or better if you may,
Think not Lord Cliffords daughter will vn-maiden her for pay,
But know, if Henryes self were here, himself should have a nay.
Then know (quoth he) which being known, well may thou know I love thee,
I am the King, and for I am the rather let it move thee.
In sooth, sweet Wench, thou say nay thou know not whereto:
For, wear my wish at work, less good wy wish than work would do.
What, fearst thou shame? no shame to be beloved of a King:
Or dread'st thou sin? The Pope for pay absolueth every thing?
Or doubt'st thou jealous Elenour? I will remove that doubt:
At Woodstock shall she find thy bower, but never find thee out:
Theare shall thou pass a pleasant life, commanding me and mine:
Then love, beloved Rosamund, a King subjects him thine.
He kissed, She blushed, and long it was ere love from her he wroung,
For, whilst up played in her heart, it paused on her tongue.
Not Sibils Cave at Cuma, nor the Labyrinth in Creat
Was like the Bower of Rosamund, for intricate and great.
The Pellicane theare neasts his Bird and sporteth often with her,
Conducted by a Clew of thread, else could he not but err.
Besides her Maids, a Knight of trust attended on her theare,
Who suffered for her Beauty, long concealing it for fear:
At length at full and formally he courted her for grace,
But all in vain, naught booted him to have both time and place:
Henry, quoth she, begone and he shall end my thoughts unchaste:
Nor peach't she him, nor he, dismissed, did hold himself disgrac'st.
The Kings three Sons had notice of their Fathers Leiman now,
So had the Queen, and the yof such coriuing disallowe.
Came I from France Queen Dowager, quoth she, to pay so dear
For bringing him so great a wealth as to be Cuckquean'd here?
Am I so old a woman, he so young a wanton grown,
As that I may not please, that pleased, and still might with his owen?
What is the Drab, or tempting Devil? or wherefore doteth he?
The French King once, himself even now, for fair preferred me.
And has he toyled up his Game? and settels he to love her?
Nor Heaven nor hell shall cross my course but that I will remove her.
Like Phrogne, seeking Philomel, she seeks for and found
The Bower that lodged her Husbands Love, built partly under ground:
She entered, but so intricate wear Turnings to and fro,
That welneere she had lost her self, but could not find her Foe:
Yeat out she got, and back she goes with her Attendants, who
Admire their furious Mistress, and mislike what she would do.
With her Confedrates often she went, prevented of her will,
Howbeit lastly did prevail: For hap did hit so ill,
That whilst the Knight did issue out, suspecting no assaut,
He was assailed, and from his giding Clewe they caught.
So won they unto Rosamund: Whom when the Queen did view,
Most bravely clad in rich Attire (her self more rich of hew)
The beauty and the brauenes of the Person and the place
Amazed her and hers, who stood at gaze a certain space.
No marvel, quoth the Queen, that often the Court did mis the King,
Soon such an Hebe hither such a Jupiter might bring:
Now, trust me, wear she not a Whore, or anies Whore but his,
She should be pardoned: But in faith I must not pardon this.
A Queen coriuall with a Queen? Nay kept at Rack and Manger?
A Husband to his honest bed through her become a Stranger?
Abide who list, abye she shall, how so I buy the danger.
Fair Rosamund surprised thus, ear thus she did suspect,
Fell on her humble Knees, and did her fearful hands erect:
She blush't out beauty, whilst the tears did wash her pleasing face,
And begged Pardon, meriting no less of common grace.
So farforth as it lay in me I did, quoth she, withstand,
But what may not so great a King by means or force command?
And daerst thou Minion, quoth the Queen, thus article to me?
That then were Nonplus when the King commenced Lust to thee:
Nay, best he take thee to the Court, Be thou his Queen, do call
Me to attendance, if his Lust may stand for law in all:
I know it, Strumpet, so harps he, and thou do hope the same:
But lo I live, and live I will, at least to mar that game.
With that she dashed her on the Lips, so dyed double red:
Hard was the heart that gave the blow, soft were those lips that bled.
Then forc'st she her to swallow down (prepared for that intent)
A poisned Potion: which dispatched, from whence they came they went.
The wronged Wench, the Quintessence of Beauty, and the same
(Save that intised of a King) stood free from all defame,
Did forthwith sicken, so that help for her might none be found,
When to the Knight that guarded her, then grieved of a wound,
She said: Wear it that Henry knew his Rosamund wear thus,
No weighty busnes might withhold but he would visit us:
Full well I loved and love him still, that should not love him so,
And for I should not worthily I labor of this woe.
Ah Beauty, that betraies thy self to every amorous Eye,
To trap thy proud Possessors what is it but Wantons try?
Wheare-through it seldom haps the Fair from meant deceits to fly:
At least the nicest Fair alive shall vanish once as I.
Vain Beauty stoop to Virtue, for this latter is for ever,
Wheareas that former altreth with every Air and Fever.
I pray the Queen of Pardon, whom I pardon from my heart:
Farewell my present Friends: But thou, sweet King, wheare so thou art,
Ten thousand times farewell to thee: My God, whom I offended,
Vouch safe me Mercy: Saying which, her life she sweetly ended.
Thus did fair Rose (no longer Rose, nor fair, in sent, or sight)
Whom pensive Henry did inter, and soon her wrong did right,
The Queen imprisoned and his Sons, rebelling, put to flight:
Thus wrought they sorrows to themselves in wreaking of their spite,
Nor loved the King thenceforth the Queen, or left to err anew.
Now rests our other promised Tale, a common Tale (if true)
Like less had harmed Elenour, and more may profit you:
Be bitter and it betters not, be patient and subdue:
King Phillip is not gone but to return, which when he shall,
Your Majesty must not exclaim if so you would recall:
Impatience changes smoke to flame, but Jealousy is Hell:
Some wives, by Patience, have reduc'st ill husbands to live well,
As did this Lady of an Earl, of whom I now shall tell.
CHAP. XLII.
AN Earl (quoth he) had wedded, loved, was loved, and lived long
Full true to his fair Countess, yeat at last he did her wrong:
Once hunted he, until the Chase, long fasting, and the heat
Did house him in a peakish Graunge within a Forest great:
Wheare, Known, and welcomed (as the place and persons might afforde)
Brown bread, whig, bacon, curds, and milk were set him on the Board:
A Cushion made of Lists, a Stool half backed with a houpe
Wear brought him, and he sits down besides a sorry Coupe.
The poor old Couple wished their bread were wheat, their whig were Perry,
Their baco^ beef, their milk and curds wear cream to make him merry.
Mean while (in Russet neatly clad, with linen white as Swanne,
Her self more white, save rosy wheare the ruddy color ran,
Whom naked Nature, not the Ayders of Art, made to excel)
The Good man's Daughter sterres to see that all were feat and well:
The Earl did mark her, and admire such Beauty theare to dwell.
Yeat falls he to their homely Fare, and hild him at a feast:
But as his hunger slaked so an amorous heat increast.
When this Repast was past, and thanks, and welcome too, he said
Unto his Oste and Ostesse, in the hearing of the Maid:
Ye know (quoth he) that I am Lord of this and many Towns,
I also know that you be poor, and I can spare you pownes,
So will I, so ye will consent that yonder Less and I
May bargain for her love, at least do give me leave to try:
Who needs to know it? Nay who dares into my doings pry?
First they mislike, yeat at the length for lucar were mislead,
And then the gamesome Earl did wowe the Damsel for his bead.
He took her in his arms, as yet so coyish to be kissed
As Mayds that know themselves beloved and yeeldingly resist:
In few, his offers wear so large she lastly did consent,
With whom he lodged all that night, and early home he went.
He took occasion often times in such a sort to hunt,
Whom when his Lady often mist, contrary to his wont,
And lastly was informed of his amorous haunt elsewheare,
It grieved her not a little, though she seemed it well to bear.
And thus she reasons with her self: Some fault perhaps in me,
Some what is done that so he does: Alas, what may it be?
How may I win him to my self? He is a Man, and men
Have imperfections: It behooues we pardon Nature then.
To check him wear to make him check, although he now were cha'ste:
A man controuled of his Wife to her makes lesser haste.
If duty then or daliance may prevail to alter him,
I will be duetifull, and make my self for daliance trim.
So was she, and so lovingly did entertain her Lord,
As fayrer or more faultles none could be for Bed or Board.
Yeat still he loves his Leiman, and did still pursue that Game,
Suspecting nothing less then that his Lady knew the same:
Wherefore, to make him know she knew, she this devise did frame.
When long she had been wronged, and sought the foresaid means in vain,
She rides to the simple Graunge but with a slender Train:
She lights, enters, greets them well, and then did look about her:
The guilty household, knowing her, did wish themselves without her,
Yeat, for she looked merrily, the less they did misdoubther.
When she had seen the beauteous Wench (the^ blushing fairnes fairer)
Such Beauty made the Countess hold them both excused the rather.
Who would not bite at such a Bait? (thought she) and who (though loath)
So poor a Wench, but gold might tempt? sweet errors lead the^ both:
Scarce one of twenty that has bragged of proffered Gold denied
Or of such yielding Beauty baulkt but (ten to one) has lied.
Thus thought she: And she thus declares her cause of coming thither:
My Lord, often hunting in these Parts, through travel, night, or wether,
Has often lodged in your House, I thank you for the same,
For why? it does him jolly ease to lie so near his Game:
But for you have not Furniture, beseeming such a Guest,
I bring his own, and come my self to see his lodging dressed.
With that two Sumpters were discharged, in which were Hangings brave,
Silk Couerings, Curtens, Carpets, Plate, and all such turn should have:
When all was hansomly disposed, She prays them to have caer
That nothing hap in their default that might his health impaer.
And, Damsel, quoth she, (for it seems this household is but three,
And for thy Parents Age that this shall chiefly rest on thee)
Do me that good, else would to God he hither come no more.
So took she horse, and ere she went bestowed gould good store.
Full little thought the County that his Countess had done so,
Who, now returned from far affairs, did to his Sweetheart go.
No sooner set he foot within the late deformed Cote,
But that the formal change of things his woondring Eyes did Note*
But when he knew those goods to be his proper goods (though late,
Scarce taking leave) he home returns the Matter to debate.
The Countess was a bed, and he with her his lodging took:
Sir, welcome home (quoth she) this Night for you I did not look.
Then did he question her of such his Stuff bestowed so.
Forsooth (quoth she) because I did your Love and Lodging knoe,
Your Love to be a proper Wench, your Lodging nothing less,
I hild it for your health the house more decently to dress.
Well wot I, notwithstanding her, your Lordship loves me,
And greater hope to hold you such by queat then brawles I see:
Then for my duty, your delight, and to retain your favor,
All done I did, and patiently expect your better Hauour.
Her Patience, Wit, and Answer wrought his gentle tears to fall,
When (kissing her a score of times) Amend, sweet wise, I shall
He said, and did it: And your Grace may Phillip so recall.
But he (whosoever he was) that thus had dubled Tales to cease
Queen Mary's grief, for Phillips guile, as well had hild his peace:
Her no persuading might dissuade from pe^siuenes of heart,
Until that his Unkindness in her Deaths-Scene acts it part.
But howsoere or whatsoere her cause of death might seem,
Her death did many a good man's life from Tyranny redeem:
For, as in Passion, so was she in Papistrie extreme.
And were not the abodement bad at her to end our Theme,
Our Cattle unto stronger draughts we should and would vnteame,
But to the Head* land shall our Plough, unless we break our Beam.
Yeat ere we ear to it (for it shall be our Holly-day)
Of somewhat said and somewhat escaped rests thus much by the way.
CHAP. XLIIII.
BEFORE we touched (and little else) what Courses hapt at home,
But now, in few, at foreign Acts of Native Kings we rome:
Of Bri^tish and of English Kings, more famous than the rest,
This sparing Catalogue ensewes: whose deeds we thus digest.
* Ae^eas Offspring famous Brute did set from Greekish thrall
Six thousand Phryg^an Knights; by him did Guyan* Guffer fall:
He conquering this I Will, his Name unto his Conquest gave:
And of his Cornish Cambries men courageous yet we have.
* Torkes Builder Ebranke that subdu'de the ^imbrians and the Gawles,
And built the best of Scottish Towns, next in our Number falls.
*When Brennus and Belynus had Eight spacious Kingdoms won,
Had slain two Consulls, sacked Rome, and matchles Arms had done,
And built ten Cities, best that be in Italy this day,
Those Kingly Brothers, as must all, their debt to Nature pay.
* G^rg^^nus slew the Dactan King: won Tribute: and the same
Gave Spanish Exiles Ireland, whence our Scottish Nation came.
* C^ssi^^lane did twice beat back from British Seas and Shore
The worthy Coesar, that but then was victor evermore:
And thirdly had prevailed but for Luds revolted Son,
When as brave Nennius hand to hand of Caesar honor won.
* Guydar and Aruiragus won of Claudius Caesar spoil:
The former in a second Field did s^out Vaspasian foil.
*When as the wandering Scots and Pichts King Mar^us had subdude,
He gave the Livers dwellings, less than where they since intru'de.
* Constanti^s, wedding Coyls heir, was Monarke of the West,
Who, with this Islands Scepter, of Romes Empire was possessed.
*Great Constantine, that worthily a Worthy might be said,
The British Roman Emperor, throughout the world obayd,
He made his Siege Bizantium, that retains his name ere since,
And made (but so unwitting marde) the Priest of Rome a Prince.
* Maximian as Imperial and as valerous as any,
With British armor did subdue both Kings and Kingdoms many.
*What speak we of great Arthur, of his Chivalry or Court?
Precelling all, sole President of virtue prow's and port,
A King of many Kings, his Knights in all Exploits were seen,
He was in deed a Worthy, and the Worthiest of the Neene.
*Five Crowns King Malgo prized. *And in Battles fifty five
Against the Mis^reants valiantly did King Alured thrive:
^ollo (whose Seed should conquer us) he hence did bravely beat:
That, ma^ger France, in Normandy his Scythian Troops did seat*
*He that re-monarchiz'd our I Will King Athelstone did slay
Six Kings, twelve Dukes, and countlesse tale of Heathen in one day:
The one of Nine, his Knight Sir Guy, we touch but by the way:
Omitting other Kings and Knights, too long in few to say,
Of British race a many, and of Saxon Princes some,
Whose blood by Normaine Mixture now is tripartite become:
O^ (For, perhaps, from such Consort the Brutes casseerd will be)
Three blended bloods of Nations three has given us Natures three,
The Saxon prowess, Dan^sh pompes, and Normaine Pollicee:
And of the Romans and the Pic^ts we are no portion small:
Four of which Nations Scythia bred, we thriuing in them all.
*KIng William, Englands Conqueror, from Rollo sixth, with pray
Of twice five hundred Towns in France vn-^o-met sayld away.
* Henry the second, upon whom the Scotch-King tendant was,
(Which Scots their often overthrows we henceforth ouerpasse,
Who to our Kings, Lords Parramounts, not wars but vprores bring)
Spoylde France, won Ireland, and deceast of Judah chosen King.
*Next Lyon-harted Richard he won Cypris, Siria, and
Jerusalem, debelling quite the Sowldan from his Land:
He skalde the strong Egyptian Oste, and king'd his Sisters son,
And plagued France and Austrich for the wrongs they had him don.
*First Edward made the Turks, Sauoies, the French, and Flemings tremble.
*The third so named to them and more did Mars himself resemble:
Whose Knights, in 2. Richards days, so tickeld France, and Spain,
And parts Lugdinian, that no King but Richard seemed to rain:
Ten thousand were his household: Scotch digests we here disdain.
*The fourth and *fifth of Henry's were as actious as the rest:
Especially the latter was the foremost with the best.
*Not yeat Fourth Edwards honor from his Ancestors digrest.
On these do vulgar Ears and Eyes so brimlie wait and gaze,
As they distaske our private Pen notorious Lauds to blaze.
Our Catalogue omitteth some for Arts and Justice good,
Some natur'de well, advised ill, some worthy Laethe flood:
Not one forecited but deserves at least an Homers Muse,
Although with Agamemnons Veil Apelles shift I use:
But colors to that Painter, Art unto that Poet none
So good, to paint and praise at full our following Crowns, save one,
Since Tuders Seed, Henry the Seventh, arrived Englands Throne.
NOr superstitiously I speak, but H. the letter still
Might be observed ominous to Englands good or ill.
First, Hercules, Hesione, and Hellen were the cause
Of war to Troy, Aeneas Seed becoming so Out laws.
Humbar the Hu^n with foreign Arms did first the Brutes inuaide.
Hellen to Romes Imperial Throne the British Crown conuaide.
Hengest and Horsus first did plant the Saxons in this I Will.
Hungar and Hubba first brought Danes that swayed here long while
At Harold had the Saxon end: at Hardiknought, the Dane.
Henry's the first and second did restore the English Rain.
Fourth Henry first to Lancaster did Englands Crown obtain.
Henry litigious Lancaster and York unites in peace.
Henry the Eight did happily Romes Irreligion cease:
The Father of our Mother Nurse, our common Joys increase.
Which double H. and H. H. here our homely Poemes Lee,
He save that salueth all our sins: And, God, voutsafe thou me
A prosperous Course in sailing through the Ocean deep and large
Of her now-Highnes Scepter, for I here assume that Charge.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, SIR GEORGE CAREY Knight, Baron of Hunsdon, etc.
THough late I wright, too soon I wot, I here Occasion take,
(May this to none, wish I, but me Retreat to Sorrow make)
Both to remember Hi^ We meant our Penn-Lee tore-use,
As to trans-patronize from him to you mine orphant Muse.
Not one alive that shall not die, thrice happy then the same
That, as your Noble Father, shael survive them selves in Fame.
Both Epitaphes and Elegies his Ghost has many an one:
Alas, what can I say not said, or more than moend him moan?
Not matter more than much, nor more for truth than matter skante,
Or less of Glory than of both, would to his Poet want:
But, were a Nonplus of his Praise, all were but this in gross,
His Good to his own Soul is Good, his Death to us is Loss.
What should I add his ancient Creasts, and noble Petegrae?
Such as that Henry (Primer of you Hunsdon Barons) be
Your Lordshippe, to your Country, Prince, and such in high Degree*
And such as you, when you are not, succeed the Careys blood
In stiil-Descents: and than this wish how may I wish more good*
My Syrinx sounded first to you, and may ear long anewe:
B^ you Mecaenas also to this Poesy does ensewe.
His had it been, had he yet been, that had the rest, which now
Yields humbly yours, if it for yours your Lordshippe shall allow.
Most humbly your Honors, William Warner.

THE NINTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XLIIII.
AVert your eyes and ears, all ye, that envy her the fame
Of more renowned Regment than our fluent Thoughts can name.
Ye that conceit such Poemes as more learned not conceive,
Read not the rest, but silently even at this line do leave.
Ridled Poesies, and those significantly flow,
Differ in ears as do in mouths the Apricock and Slow.
Physicians bylles not Patients but Apothecaries know:
Some modern Poets with themselves be hardly inward so:
Not intellectiuely to write is learnedly they troe:
Whereby they hit Capacities, as blind-man hits the Croe.
Nor Those, not These, fear thou, my Muse, but mildly sing the prays
Of these our present times, less gross than those of elder days.
Our world has made it course that as the Moon does wax and waine
From gold to silver, then to iron, and now to gold again.
Of whose faire-cured Leaprosie from former twain to gold,
(For in a Quintessence was all ear Gods worlds-curse of old)
The vndeluding Alcumist is that Elizabeth
Whom English, yea and Alients, hold a Goddess on the Earth.
Elizabeth by Peace, by war, for Majesty for Mild,
Enriched, feared, honored, Loved, at well meant Toys has smilde,
Let then Mnemosines control, as well they may our Muse,
We shall such grace wheare we transgress for Supersedias use.
Phoebus, thine humbled Phaeton this second boon does ask,
'That thou would give, and jointly guide, to, and with me, thy Task:
Infuse Apollo too into thy self, thy self in me:
Yeat then our mighty Subject threats will much omission be.
But what implore I Fictions? that I well imploye my pen,
Eternal God, say thou (which thou all-only canste) Amen.
When Jupiter and Arcas young (the Sier, and Son) had clos'de
Saturnus in Italian Hell, not to be baylde suppos'de,
Then Proserpin, black Dis his wife, inlargd the Wrangler thence,
To vex her Sister, cross her Siers and Brothers sownd pretense.
Then she, even she whom Cynthia some, and some do Pallas call,
(Yt skils not whether, Eithers lawdes do aptly her befall)
By Saturn, Dis, and Proserpin, giltles molested long,
Unto the God y'clip't, I-Am, thus motioneth her wrong.
O mightiest Mighty, that of naught createdst all that is,
And gauste to Man (thy noblest Work) him self, and all for his,
And, save Obedience, did impose on him no other Fine,
And, disobaying, did redeem his Loss with decrest Thine,
Which self same Thine, and still same-Oures, I also intercesse,
For thee professing being wronged, to have at length redress.
Scarce this was said when thus ensewd, the Three wear rapted hence.
Saturn and Dis confinde their Hells: Proserpin her offense,
Grown through Mis-Guides, Venial perhaps, we censure in suspense,
And fair, loved, feared, Elizabeth here Goddiz'd ever sense.
For me to wreste from Hercules his Club as easy wear,
As in the Ocean of her fame, with choysest sails, to bear
That freight, yt with the India^ wealth may more then much compare.
Yeat how The Italian Feends did freat and hitherto inuaye
Against thy glory, gracious Saint, wear ouerlong to say.
But he that of a Prisnor thee so great a Prince did frame,
Thy loving, and beloved God, to thee is still the same.
King Phillips-selfe (so doting on his Pope-created Crewe,
That, he it suffering, his own Son and heir those Locusts slew,
Because they feared he would prove unto the Gospel true,)
Even Phillip, now that raketh hell for rascal brybed Skomes
To rid thee hence (indignities that badly him becomes)
Once had thee, then not having power to do thee any harm.
It is the work of God (let Rome vncursse, let Spain vn-arme)
That thou art Queen, to plant his word, when we could hope it least,
When Ours, and all the Kings had cast their Crowns before the beast,
When greedely the Priests of Baal did for thy ruin gape,
Thou did, vnharmde, the Lions den and fiery Oven escape.
Even the^ when Tryumphs were in hand, bells ronge, and bonfires made,
Because Queen Mary of a son delivered was said,
Even then, I say, God mortifide that womb, to bring to pass,
That unto thee, his Queene-elect, no Issue letting was:
That soon Religion and our Realm might welcome wished peace:
May thou, the Cause thereof, survive long after my decease.
But if it be his will, to whom are all Events fore-knowne,
That Papistrie shall in our Land again erect her Throne,
Let Spaniards, or what Tyrants else, be Masters here, so they
Take also with our Land our Lives, and rid us out the way.
For not they only die, but die in lingering Torments, who
Fault to their Inquisition, o^ their Damned Rytes must do:
Then better Bodies perish than should souls miscarrie too:
Of neither which has Rome or Spain remorse, but thristing Sway,
Regard not whom, by whom, or how, they treacherously berray:
How often have they, the rest ore past, subborn'd our Queens decay?
By wars, wiles, witchcrafts, daggers, dags, Pope, poison, and what not?
To her have they attempted death, for liewe the Traitors lot:
Vouchsafe, O God, those loves of thine be neuermore forgot.
Was never any thryued yet that threatened her amiss:
For of anointed Princes God sole Judge and Rector is.
And if Examples might prevail, then Traitors might perceive,
They perish in their purpose, or but Spyders webbes do weaue.
And here occasion apteth that we catalogue awhile,
And unto English Dukes, from first to last, address our Style:
Though numbers greater, and as great of power, did pride begyle,
Yeat in this one degree observe what headding and exile:
If then such Mighties felt Gods frown, shall Meaners hope his smile?
CHAP. XLV.
EDward, surnamed the black Prince, and third Edwards eldest son,
Third Thomas Duke of Norffolke, This did end, and That begone,
From Normaine Williams Conqueste here of Dukes the Title hie:
Of forty seven, but twenty two a natural death did die.
Edward ye Duke of York, that lead fifth Henry's Vaward Knightly,
Then slain at Agencourt with fame, we ouerpasse him lightly:
Nor Humfrey Duke of Gloucester here catalogue we rightly:
Nor William Duke of Suffolk, who, exilde, on seas was met,
And, hated, headded: howbeit sixth Henry's Fauoret:
Nor Edmund Duke of Somerset, that Henry's loved Peer:
Nor Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, to that same King as dear:
Nor sweet young Richard, Duke of York, of Glosters kyn too near:
We also two Plantagenets, both Dukes of Clarence clear,
Of which was Thomas slain in France, George drowned in Malmsie here:
For though these Eight remembered Dukes deceast not in their beads,
Yeat none of these had traytrous hearts that forfetted their heads:
Howbeit, otherwise, of these wear some that erred so,
That, stomack't for such Errors, did their ends untimely groe.
Nor was the Duke of Ireland, Vere, in second Richards time,
A Traitor, but a Parasite, which proud no less a crime:
He as ambitious, as he was envious, and envied,
Was banished by the Nobles, and in banishment he died.
Mowbreie of Norffolke (right or wrong) by foresaid Richard was
Exiled, and in Italy did hence to nature pas.
When second Richard was deposde, and Henry wore the Crown,
Two Hollands, to restore the one and put the other down,
Conspiring, wear detected, and at Cercester they both,
Of Excester, and Surrey Dukes, found death in Vulgar wroth.
Richard Plantagenet, the Duke of York, fourth Edwards father,
Sought to depose fixed Henry, and was heard therein the rather,
For that to him by law-Descents the Scepter did acrew:
But they compound, howbeit wars were reard, and him they slew.
John Holland, Duke of Excester, fourth Edwards sentence fleade,
And was long after in the sea suspuicusly found dead.
Then Henry, Duke of Somerset, rebelling lost his head.
Of Edmund, Duke of Somerset, the like is also read.
So Henry, Duke of Buckingham, third Richards friend-foe speade.
And that tyrannous Richard, Duke of Gloucester, his Reign
Usurped was suppressed, he for blood paid blood again.
John, Duke of Norffolk, fought, and fell at Bosworth field. His son
Duke Thomas, in Eight Henry's days, did heading hardly shonne,
Adiudg'd perpetual Durance, in Queen Mary's reign vn-donne.
Wolsey, that slye, officious, and too Lordly Cardnall, wrought
(Who could and would effect his will) that to the block was brought,
Eight Henry reigning, Edward Duke of Buckingham, whose end
That Prelate ioyde, the people moend, because his foe, their friend.
Seimer, the Duke of Somerset, envied more than reason,
By one that came the next to Block, though mighty at that season,
Sixth Edward in Minority, did, quit although of treason.
No sooner Marie got the crown, more liklie to be gone,
But John, Duke of Northumberland, beheaded was anon,
Who wrought to set the Diedeme Jane Dudlies head upon.
Her Father Henry Gray, the Duke of Suffolk, was also
A friend unto that Faction, and the Spanish Wowers foe:
But by that act he lost his head, as did too many more.
In blessed Queen Elizabeth her happy Reign of peace,
The Tragedies, and Tytles too, of English Dukes did cease,
Which Thomas, Duke of Norffolke, last Tragedian, did increase.
All these wear mighty in their times: yeat being Malcontents,
Both they, and hundreds powerful Peers, for like found like Events:
Howbeit of the common wealth none worser did desarue,
Than such as flattred Princes faults, who faulting, all did swerve.
Which, in their Policy, the States of Hell did then foresee,
When as they joined others, Aids, unto the Furies three,
Narcissus Shadow, and the Voice of Echo: than which twain,
How fabulous so-ere it seem, naught has or more does baine:
Wherefore to such as know them not we either thus explain.
CHAP. XLVI.
WHeare Cadmus, old Agenors son, did rest and plant his Reign,
Narcissus (of his Of spring) theare for beauty fame did gain.
His Mother was Lyriope, fair Thetis fairer Daughter,
Whom cheifest as the choicest wowde, and brave Cephisus caught her.
Boeotia was the fertile Realm, Parnassus Plain the place
Whear this admired Youth was borne, this Lass-Lad form and face,
No Nymph so fair but wished him hers, howbeit all in vain:
His self-love wrought his selfe-losse, and his beauty proved his baine,
Who, proud of Natures plenty, hild all others in disdain:
Till God, who had created Man the fairest Creature,
(Howbeit but a shadow of his proper Feature,
More differing far than Sunshine from the Suns selfe-substance pure)
Narcissus ouer-scornfull pride not longer would endure,
But from his form, that pleased him most, his plague did thus procure.
As this same fond selfe-pleasing Youth stood at a Fountaynes brym,
And proudly sees his shadow theare, admiring every lym,
Echo, an amiable Nymph, long amorous of him,
But loving, vnbeloued, now, at least to please her Eye,
Conuaies her self, unseen, into a Thicket joining by,
And thear, as much ore-gone with love, as he ore-gone with pride,
She hears, and sees, and would have pleased three Senses more beside
And nothing more than every part, thus stealth-seene, liked her,
And nothing less, than hidden with vnhidden to confer,
For well it had contented then in more then sight to err,
Although not meanly did his scorn against it her stomach sterre,
Mean while the Lad (such power has pride men's Senses to subdue)
Doats on his Shadow, now supposed to be a Substance true:
And lastly wowes so formally in words and gestures sweet,
That Echo found his error: and, he saying, Let us meet,
Let Us meet, quoth Echo, mockingly: which, hearing, he with speed,
(Believing that his shadow was a Nymph, and spoke in deed,)
Did leap into the Fountain, whear that Gallant, drowning thus,
Has left example how like pride may cause like plague to us.
How smooth-tongu'd Echo, that for him in all, save voice, did pine,
To quit his scorn, baind other Fools, alike vainglorious fine,
By soothing them, is Nas^es tale, no purpose here of mine:
But how Narcissus shadow and this Ecchos voice, though they
Have long been dead, haunt now the World, is it we mean to say.
PLuto, Minos, Radamant, and all the infernal States,
Did pytch a Session, to correct Remisnes in debates:
Devising Orders that on Earth might more Disorders be.
Tisiphone, Alecto, and Megaera, these same three
Wear shrewdly checked, because it was objected, though untruly,
That they wear idle, Hell lack't Guests, and men on Earth waxt ruly.
The hellish Potentates therefore a new Commission framed,
Narcissus ghost, and Ecchos voice, therein of Quorum named.
These twain, and those three Furies thus, Copattentees, leave Hell,
And diversely throughout the Earth to Soule-infecting fell.
Leave we those others, laboring their Mischiefs far and near,
Whilst Echo and Narcissus are more badly busy here.
Crab'd Saturn, and too-boystrous Mars, direct those Formers matter,
Soft Venus, and smooth Mercury, give Method to these latter:
Those Furies roughly do effect their tragic Taskes, these Twoe
So slyely work, that sweetly men their proper sorrows wowe.
Heer-hence our gold-imbased World in view and value fayld,
For Echo and Narcissus much in many things preuayld.
Hence is it some of high estate themselves do ouer-like,
Whilst deadlier wound them Ecchoing tongues than should a foe them strike.
Hence, whence dishonorde, some of them believe of men belyed
Their glozing Grooms, as Tyrants so by them they wrong envied.
Hence oftentimes Authority looks biglier than a Bull,
With Suitors poor too sternely quick, in helping them too dull.
Hence both in preaching, harboring, and humility, it is
Some Prelates sooth, be soothed, lead, and they be lead amiss.
Hence Law, sometimes, as formde of wax, through new refined wit
Of Judge or Pleador, alters sans certainty in it.
Hence Martialists in Discipline and ordering their war,
Less happily, the ancient use, conceitedly, do bar.
Hence is it that the Lawyers more affect their fluent Tail,
Than what is right, or whom they wrong, or how they speed, or fail.
That Lawyer though who more by Art than right does ouerthroe,
Consents to sin, deceiues the Judge, wrongs Right, is Justice foe.
Hence flattred Gentry proudly does degenerat at last:
And some would be believed such, that of no Gentry taste.
Hence Citizens with Courtiours so do vayne-it for the time,
That with their paper Ladders they even stately Castles clyme:
Then proudly prick the mounted Sers, the Harrolds, all to blame,
Will they, nyll they, urging fees to gentellize their name.
Hence country Loutes land-lurch their Lords, and Courtiers prize the same.
Hence worldlings so much study wealth that they forget the use,
And, drudges-like, press out the Grapes, not drinking of the iuse.
Hence arrant Preachers, humming out a commonplace or two,
With bad, ill, naught, Pope, pots, play, mack, keeping a foul ado,
Cogging, and cog'd-with, of a sort of lazy knaves and queanes,
That they be Doltes, and preach to Doltes, will hear it by no means.
With those do these (who could they steal the Goose would stick the Fether)
The Brownist and the Barrowist, go hand in hand together.
Hence is the fashion-Founder of new locks, looks, bas-le-maine,
And John Deuisor in Attire, one Fool in persons twain.
Hence, more than with our selves our selves, do Flatterers prevail:
They make us proud of Virtues, known of us in us to fail:
But less Manslaughter hurts, than when Men-soothers say al-hayle.
Though Echo and Narcissus haunte, and hurt, each Sex and State,
(Our States Superlatiue except, still one for right and rate)
Yeat cheesely they with women-kinde prevailed have of late:
And thus of this two Gossips old, together met, debate.
CHAP. XLVII.
THE Younger of these widows (for they both had thrice been so)
Trots to the Elders Cottage, hers but little distance fro:
Thear, cowring ore two sticks a-crosse, burn at a smoakie Stock,
They chat how Young Men them in youth, and they did young men mock:
And how since threescore years a-goe (they aged foure-score now)
Men, women, and the world, wear chaung'd in all, they know not how.
When we were Maids (quoth. the one of them) was no such newfound pride:
Yeat served I Gentels, seeing store of dainty Girls beside.
Then wore they Shoes of ease, now of an inch-broad, corked hye:
Black karsie stockings, worsted now, yea silk of youthful'st dye:
Garters of Lystes, but now of silk, some edged deep with gold:
With costlier toys, for courser turns, than v^'d, perhaps of old.
Fringed and ymbroidred Petticoats now beg. But heard you named,
Till now of late, Busks, Perrewigs, Maskes, Plumes of Feathers framed,
Supporters, Pooters, Fardingales above the Loins to waire,
That be she near so bombe-thin, yet she crosse-like seems foure-squaire?
Some Wives, grayheaded, shame not locks of youthful borrowed hair:
Some, tyring Art, attyer their heads with only Tresses baire:
Some (grosser pride than which, think I, no passed Age might shame)
By Arce, abusing Nature, heads of antick't hair do frame:
Once starching lack't the Term, because was lacking once the toy:
And lack't we all those Toys and Terms, it were no grief but joy.
But lawful wear it some be such, should all alike be coy'
Now dwells each Drossell in her Glass: when I was young, I wot,
On Holly-dayes (for sildome else such ydell times we got)
A Tubb or Paile of water clear stood us in steed of Glass:
And yeat (which still I bear in mind) for it I schooled was,
Even by an holy Friar, that espyde me tooting so,
Who, softly stealing at my back, cryde suddenly. Ho, Ho.
I, starting, turned and saw the Friar, who, though no dyuell he wear,
Yeat, for he was a Friar, I did for soul or body fear,
That is, least this wear pride (whereof I sharply now should hear,)
Or that the cockish Cowle-man (none but we alonely theare)
His ghostly calling laid apart, might carnally appear:
But, meant he well, or mused he ill, my Mother coming in,
Mends all amys, and soberly the Friar did thus begin.
Young Damsels, and sometimes (quoth he) old Dotards vnawaer,
Do thus offend, whilst thus they seem upon themselves to staer:
But what they see is not themselves: And then a Tale did tell,
How Echo and Narcissus wear aucthorised from Hell,
That egging, and This acting pride, in Worldlings hearts to dwell:
And either often in Mirrors and in Waters beauteous seem,
To curious Gazers inn, who those to be themselves do deem.
Fly glass and water-tooting, Girl, Narcissus fall extreme:
Fear flattrie too: for Men to Maids be Ecchos to subdewe,
The Friar said: and all too soon I found his sayings true.
Yeat then he seemed to have told a Tale but of a Tubbe,
Which three score Wynters-aged Sores eue^ now, do freshly rub.
My Parents they wear wealthy, and my self in wanton youth,
Was fair enough, but proud enough, so Foole-enough in truth.
I might have had good Husbands, which my desteny withstood:
Of three now dead (ah, grief is dry, Gossyp, this Ale is good)
In faith not one of them was so: for by this drink I swear,
(Requarrelling the Cup, whose Lips and it vnparted wear,
When the other Beldamme, great with chat (for talkatiue be Cups)
The formers Prate, not worth the while, thus fondly interrups.
WHen I (quoth she) the Country left to be a London Las,
I was not fayrer than my self believed fair I was.
Good God, how formal, prankt, and peart, became I in a trice,
As if unto the Place it wear a Nature to be Nice.
Scarce entered I the Teenes, but that to Wed my will was hot:
Ye that be married, and intend to marry, well I wot,
The Priest no sooner said, but I upon my typ-toes stand,
As if that Lesson had concerned my self, even out of hand.
The same proportion with my heart my groeth nor age did hold:
Days seeming years, when I, Vn-wead, was sixteen winters old.
And growing was the green Disease, which men in Maids do cure,
When came a Lover, I, (for-sooth) becoming full demure.
For erst I had observed this Art, Delay gives men Desire:
Yeat loathe to hurt my haste, and least the Hansell should retyer,
I was not over coye, nor he to warm him at my Fire.
I Will blab (for why? for it and more that I in youth did do,
Long since I passed ghostly shriftes, penance, and pardons too)
Such match we made, that Maid, nor Wife, nor Widow, left he me,
But with my Maidenhead he crossed the Seas, and farewell he:
For from my fault could not, as chan'st, the Somner prole a fee:
My belly did not blab, so I was still a Maid, and free.
It comfort should in loss to think we had not once to lose,
And what we have as ever to be hild should none suppose:
But not in me this sentence hild: more eagerly than erst
I on the brydell byte, as loath to fast that late did feast.
Swift gallops tier both man and horse, soone-hot, is soone-cold love,
No Man, I mean, Loue-hot as mine, loves as the Turtell Dove,
And, in good soothe, a Sott is she, that cog'd-with cannot cogge:
As readily my Love did gad, as did my Lover iogge.
Tush, in those times wear no such toys as Gagate stones to try,
By toysting them in Potions, if a Maid had trod awrie.
But this was rather current, yea each holy Fathers lore,
That therefore Nature sweetneth Love, that it the world might store.
Which made me think it then a sin (so tender hearted I)
Beloved, not to Love again, indangring men to die:
(For so they swore they would, nor then believed I men would lie:
Whom now I know Camelions, whilst to pray on us they plye.)
Yeat better times were those than these for our avail, for why?
Even for good-fellowship at least then were they roundly to it,
Now ear they love (if ever love) sententiously they doc it.
Who loves not for the Person but the Portion loves no whit,
But he that loves for only Love, does reason quite forgit,
Say men, and article the Match, less by true Love than Wit.
Ungrateful Men, what would ye more than Love for Love? than we
Be close, neat, bountious, bucksome, and our bodies Masters ye?
Too curious, pettish, ielous, too imperious, too unstable,
Are Men, say Women: but to beat such Fools with their own babble,
As when that I was young, our Sex is now, troe I, as able.
Old doting Fool, one foot in grave, what prattell I of youth?
Contrition, not Shrift-pennance cure, if preach our Vicar truth.
Here, after little pause, they prate confusedly, I wot:
Whose talk had often ended, had the Period been the Pot.
They told how forward Maidens wear how proud if in request
How brybed, praised, promisd fair, men baddest out the best.
They talked of a Widows tears, her haste again to weade,
He gone forgot, his Orphant wronged, she spoyld, an Unthrift speade,
They pratteld too of London Youths, how late their headie gaer
Might have invited to a Sack, wheare they prepos'd no shaer.
They talked of times when Beasts could speak, of Foxes, and of Apes:
Much needles prattel, what through Drink, and Dotage, them escapes
Yeat Ecchos and Narcissus Voice and Shadow (now as then,
Working against humility, of wantes the worst in men)
Caused them as thus to use their prate, and me of this my pen,
And to these glorious Follies too those Furies say Amen.
CHAP. XLVIII.
THE Monarch of that Continent that does, in one, contain
Five ancient Scepters (for he would the world wear wholly Spain)
As Castile, Aragon, Nauarr, Granado, Portugaile
Be newly named, yea India wheare Castillian Powers prevail:
These, States in Affricke, Lumbardie, Peru, Assores, and
Both Cicells, Austra, Barbary, Naples, with Netherland,
And many other Provinces, by such ambition got,
As gives his Impressa life to verefie the Mot,
Him not sufficing (for it says, the World suffices not)
Even he, I say, affecting Raygne in England, Almaine, France,
And all Europa, lately did an holy League advance.
The Pope, Himself, Sauoy, and Guise, therein Confedrates chief:
^ome wroght by Bulls, Sauoy by Sword, Spain yielded Guise relief,
Guise did religious Treason act: but all did fail, in brief.
Geneua is vnsacked, France yields Rome small profit, Spain
By cost has lost, England, through God, tryumphant does remain,
Nauar has means to have Nauar: and, when shall God so please,
The rightful heir of Pertagale his Empire shall re-seaze.
Ye Christian Princes, pity him, in punishing his Fo,
That now afflicts him, and would on you tyrannize so.
If one selfsame Religion (if Religion Romistes have)
If Natures Line, or Native Laws, the Pope that so did crave,
If to have had possessed the Crown, with Portagales applause,
Might have prevailed, these and more had helped Antonius cause.
But brybed Traitors, fraud, and force, have made the Spaniard such,
That Castile, from a Cronet leapt, thinksmany Crowns not much.
The great Nauarrois, Sampson, stauld the first Castilian King:
But badly Castile quits his love whence did that honor spring:
And from his Line by treachery the Diadem does wring.
So, by what right or wrong so-eate, Spain cloureth Crowns together
And aims, even from Portugale, as is supposed, hither:
Not wanting English, willing to be hopled in that Teither.
But Traitors, Fools, and Fugitives, Whom prouendor does prick,
Ensew your proper sorrow, lean upon that rotten stick,
Your kindness shall not mis, at least, this kindly Spanish Trick.
WHen Spaniards and their Partizens eare-while should us inuaide,
In plotting of that Stratageme in Council much was said:
Some of our Queen to be destroyde, of murdering us some spoke,
Some this, some that, but all of all an altered World to make:
Least English Papists, then shut up in Elie and els-wheare,
Mean time by us might lose their lives, some One, by chance did fear,
Which scruple was removed soon by one, that well did know,
Not for religion, but a Realm, did Spain that cost bestow.
Our drift (quoth he) a Conquest is, the Profit meant to Spain,
Not that the English Papists should be Sharers of the gain.
So hope they, but (so help me God) our policy wear small
That they should flourish, nay, should live, could we procure their fall.
Theare be they great already, wheare we only great must be,
Whom, should they equal, woe to us when we shall disagree:
Now that therefore which we cannot with honesty contriue,
Our Foes shall finish, if of them they leave not one alive.
Thus said he, not gaine-saide: for hang who shall so they may thrive.
This Maxim has hild, and good, wheare they have ouerthrone
By treacherous Agents, of the same they have not trusted one:
Add, than the Spaniard, prouder and more cruel People none.
Even Cortes, that with cost and pain, rich India did subdew,
And gave to Spain his Conquest, found false Meede for Service true.
So they that won them Portugale, and Naples spead, in few:
And too imperiously do they, oppress their Conquests new:
Yeat boast not perpetuity, but (Spain) this Pattern view.
Caldea prized Assiria, and Assiria prized the same,
The Medes and Persians both, and them the Macedons orecame,
The Romans the^, that Empier next had France, the Germans now,
Which only Title hardly do the Spaniards them allow,
Spain has Navarre, that once had Spain, wheare once crowned we their King,
And once did Spanish-Irish-Scots us to subjection bring,
We Scots, French, Irish: too and fro thus often Scepters fly:
Yea to Posterities old names of Lands and Peoples dye.
Sicambries, Gawles, Picts, Vandels, Goths, and Astrogothes, known late
In Europ by these names, have changed those names, and Europs State,
And with the Spaniards, part of those, may alter in like rate.
Each Bird shall then remaunde her Plumes, and naked leave your Iaye,
At least when Phillip shall decease: and why not ear that day?
For power and prowse lack Turnus Peer, yeat when his Fates withstoode,
Iturna, no not Iunos-selfe, could do him any good.
But Godhoode none in Indian Gold, and pope-buld hopes shall mis,
Nor Macedonian Phillips Son Castilian Phillip is:
But one who, whilst he wars for ours, has lost even part of his.
Not only Spain think destinate in Pomp not to impaier,
Our lived long, that breathes, envied, not else but odious Air:
And (which is monstrously too true) Religion is pretext,
Where through the Spanyard and the Pope all Christendom have vexed.
Witness their Powers, by Land and Seas, that threatened us er'while:
Of it a word: and note how God did patronize our I Will.
CHAP. XLIX.
THe Spaniards long time Care and Cost, invincible surnamed,
Was now a flote, whilst Parma to from Flanders hither aimed,
Like Fleet, of eightscore Ships and od, the Ocean never bore,
So huge, so strong, and so complete, in every Strength and Store.
Carikes, Gallions, Argosies, and Galliasses, such
That seemed so many Castles, and their tops the clouds to tuch.
These on the Lizardes show themselves, and threaten Englands fall:
But theare with Fistie Ships of ours that Fleet was fought withal.
Howbeit of a greater sort our Navy did consist,
But part kept Diet in the Port, that might of health have miste,
Had Spayns Armada of our wants in Plimmouths Haven wiste.
The rest had eye on Parma, that from Flanders armor threats:
Mean while Lord Charles our Admiral, and Drake, did worthy Feats:
Whose feareles fifty Moole-hils bod their trypeld Mountains bace,
And even at first (so pleased it God) pursewde as if in chase:
By this (for ouer-idle seemd to English hearts the Shore)
Our Gallants did imbarke each-wheare, and made our Forces more
But in such warlike Order then their Ships at Anchor lay,
That we, unless we them disperse, on bootles labor stay:
Not lacked Policy that to that purpose made us way.
Ours fyred diverse Ships, that down the Current sent, so skaerd,
That Cables cut, and Ankers lost, the Spaniards badly faerd.
Dispersed thus, we spare not shot, and part of them we sink,
And part we board, the rest did fly, not fast enough they think.
Well guided little Axes so force tallest Oaks to fall,
So numbrous Herds of stately Hearts, fly Beagles few and small.
Nine days together cha'ste we them, not actious, save in flight
About Eight thowsands perished by famine, sea, and fight.
For Treasure, Ships, and Carrages, lost Honor, Prisners tayne,
The Spaniards, hardly scaping hence, escaped not rebukes in Spain.
Well might thus much (as much it did) cheer England, but much more
Concurrancie from one to all to stop that common Sore.
Even Chatholiques (that erred name does please the Papists) waer
As forward in this Quarrel as the foremost Arms to bear:
Recusants and Suspects of noote. Of others was caer.
And had not our God-guided Fight on Seas prevailed, yet
The Spaniards, land whereso they could, had with our Armies met.
Our common Courage wished no less, so lightly feared we Foes,
Such hope in God, such hate of them, such hearts to bar^er bloes.
Here flamed the Cyclops Forges, Mars his Armorie was here,
Himself he sheads in us, and with our Cause our selves we cheer.
But (which had scar^^fide our wounds, if wounded, with the Balm
Of her sweet Presence, so applaus'd as in Sea-stormes a Calm)
Her royall-selfe, Elizabeth our Sovereign lawful Queen,
In magnanimious Majesty amidst her Troops was seen.
Which made us weep for joy: nor was her kindness less to us.
Think nothing letting then that might the common Cause discus,
Wheare Prince and People have in Love a Sympathy as thus.
Howbeit Force, nor Policy, but Gods sole Providence,
Did clear fore-bosted Conquest and behighted Thraldom hence.
He in Saneherib his nose did put his hook, and brought
Him back again the way he came, without performing ought:
He fought for us, Alonely we did shout and Trumpets sound,
When as the Walls of ^^rico fell flat unto the ground.
Y^a least (for erst did never here like strong Supplies befall,
Like loyal hearts in every one, like warlike minds in all,
Less spaer of Purses, more Foresight, and valiant Guides to act,
As shewde our hardy littell Fleet that battle never slackt)
Least these, I say, might have been said the cause that we subdew'de,
Even God, to Glorify himself, our gained Cause pursew'de,
Without our loss of Man, or Mast, or Foe once touching Shore,
Save such as wrackt, wea^e Prisnors, or but landing, lived not more:
And as in public Prayers we did his defense implore,
So being Victors, publicly, we yielded thanks therefore.
Her Highness self (good cause she had) in view of every Eye,
On humbled Knees did give him thanks that gave her Victory.
Remains, what she won, what Spain and Rome did lose in fame:
Remains, Popes use Potentates but to retriue their Game.
CHAP. L.
IF not with minds preiudicate, but holding in suspense
A while the Papacy, that takes and gives so much Offense,
With single hearts, and Eyes, and Ears, al christian Princes would
Peruse the sacred Scriptures (as in very deed they should)
Then might they justly censure, how in ^owlines, or Pride,
In Charity, or Cruelty, how strait to God, or wide,
In Doctrine, and in Discipline, Rome has, and now does guide,
With still Prouisoes from the Lay the Scriptures light to hide,
Least should (as would, and clearly does) their Cosning be espide^
Whereby, even ipso facto, is their Cause against them tried:
The sin of Pride made Lucifer against God him self rebel,
And through that sin he so sedu^'t that Adam also fell.
Then played he Rex ore all the Earth, except a faithful Few:
Till Christ, incarnate, on the Cross Synns Kingdom did subdewe.
Then Christ, was powrefull in the world, for Faith had practice right:
And what could more our Ghostly Foe then Faith and Practice spite?
His ancient Stratageme therefore to plant he casts anew,
And by the pride of only Works from Faith a many drew.
Then were such Honors heapt on Popes, (Worlds-A^iects ere that time)
That Lucifer him self than they presumed not more to clyme.
Their golden Legend, though not it autenticke be in aught,
To us does teach a Story that to them might now be taught.
Theare was a Man of stature big, and big withal in mind,
For serve he would, yet One tha^ who^ he greater none might find.
He, hearing that the Emperor was in the world most great,
Came to his Court, was (...)tertaynd, and, serving him at meat,
It chanced the Devil was named, whereat the Emperor him blessed:
When as, until he knew the cause, the Pagane would not rest.
But when he heard his Lord to fear the Devil his ghostly Foe,
He left his Service, and to seek and serve the Devil did go:
Of heaven, or hell, God, or the Devil, he erst nor heard nor card,
Alone he sought to serve the same that would by none be darde.
He met (Who soon is met) the Devil, was intertayn'd, they walk,
Till, coming to a Cross, the Devil did fearfully it balke.
The Servant, musing, questioned his Master of his fear:
One Christ, quoth he, with dread, I mind when does a cross appear.
Then serve thy self, the Giant said, that Christ to serve I Will seek.
For him he asked an Hermit, who aduisde him to be meek, found,
By which, by Faith, and works of Alms, would sought-for Christ be
And how and where, to practice these he gave Directions sound.
Then he, that sko^nd his Service late to greatest Potentates,
Even at a common Ferry now to carry all awaites.
Thus doing long, as with a Child he over once did waide,
Under his Loode midway he ^aints, from sinking hardly stayde.
Admiring how, and asking who, was answered of the Child,
As on his Shoulders Christ he bore, by being humbly mild,
So through Humility his Soul to Christ was reconcilde,
And, of his Carrage, Christo-fer should thenceforth be his name.
Then let this popish Scripture, Popes, at least you Conuerts frame:
Of which Converting, Christo-fers ye thenceforth shall be said:
If not, apply and perish in your Luciferring Traid.
Ye know, I know, that but in Christ may no Redemption be:
So your great friend, our Gardner, on his deathbed could agree:
But to the Vulgars open not, against Rome, that gap, quoth he.
So miserable is your state who, seeing, will not see,
That Christofer, ear Christo-fer, was Atheist less than ye.
Well answered once a King of ours the Pope, that bod him free
Two P^elates, terming them his Sons: The King seemed to agree,
But sent their complete Armor: look are these thy Sonne^, quoth he.
False Hesket too not falsely spoke, reporting lately this,
That such as Papists would seduce, and of seducing mis,
Are marked dead: For he to whom he so did say, fear I,
Earl Ferdinando Stanley, so dissenting, so did try,
As other Peers, here, and els-where, have found the like no lie.
Nor preached he the Pope amiss, that did to him apply
This Tex, to wit: This is the Heir, come on and let him die,
The Inheritance let us inioye: Naught seek they else, for why?
Those bad be good that give, those good be bad that Gifts deny,
From Annanias literal fault they Consciences would tie:
These death-eide Basilisques therefore in every Sense do fly.
Be of Religion iumpe with them, in all their Toys aff^e,
A Peter-Penny, if withhild, knocks all the rest awrye.
Hell, Heaven, Bulls, Pardons, Pope, and to be Pope, does money buy.
Yea, too blasphemous, they in^roch upon the Deity,
Though of these (...)ifers have been that perish through a Fly.
Each sin against God, how vile so-eare, will Popes with Pardons fit:
Cross but the Pope, pardon thou him, he will not pardon it.
For Faith his common Plea is sword and fire against his foes:
But who, but fools, believe that Faith exacted is by bloes.
Than those three Mighty Emperors, Fifth Charles, with Ferdinand,
And Maximilian, with the Pope did none more partial stand:
Yeat suffered they the Consciences of Protestants in peace,
But Philip, nor the Pope will now their Inquisition cease:
Though Either suffer Jews, and Stews, because of Gains increase.
CHAP. LI.
THis Spanish Inquisition is a Trappe, so slily set,
As into it Wise, Godly, Rich, by Blanchers bace as fett.
Direct or indirectly then to answer all is one:
From those Inquisitors escape but very few or none.
Even so by racking out the joints, or chopping off the head,
Procustes fitted all his Guests unto his iron beade.
Aue Maria, Credo, and the Pater noster say,
In Latin, else they penance thee, and take thy goods away.
Nay, these though said, both say and do as they, yeat all for naught,
They will exact by Torture what thou think, and have thought,
Of Mass, the Pope, and Popish points, til in the Lapse thou fall:
Then, Mercy God, amongst those men no mercy is at all:
A bloodier Law used bloodierly was never heard or shall.
Tormenting men until they guess by whom they are acus'de,
Which gessed, it against themselves for Evidence is vs'de:
As who would say, so be it must, because it so is mus'de.
Phillip, abusiuely seduc't, and World-deceiuing Pope,
Peruse all Laws, even Paganizme, past under heavens coope,
And rightly pondring those with this, the^ speak your thoughts indeed,
Was not your Draco Satan that himself could thus exceed?
Here add for badde we might your League, if That of This had need.
O happy and thrice happy Realm of ours, and other Lands,
Wheare, touching death by Clergie-doomes, the Policy withsta^ds.
THen freated Paul, Pope Paul the Third, when Peter came in Plea*
No Marvel, Luther preached gold, and glory from his Sea.
But, see an help: Ignatius then conceited had his Sect,
And craved Confirmance of the Pope, which Paul did then reject,
But when he heard that Orders vow might chiefly him avail,
Them Iesuists he incorporates: nor they his Pope ship fail:
But for his only Doctrine are Apostles, and as true,
As to the Devil the deadly-Sinnes to Popes this Order new.
Yeat these be those are underhand deceived whilst they deceive:
Witness the Gallows, wheare for most they end those webbes they weaue.
For unadvised are, me thinks, our Iesuistes in this,
In Cell-life since so strict, and here they hanging seldom mis,
That, for Applause at least (although even so wear bacely badde)
They change not Treachers unto them to whom from us they gadde.
But better course than either wear secure at home to stay,
And theare with loyal hearts attend what Subjects should obaye,
Wheare no tyrannizing is ore the Conscience, though it straye.
And Men of civil Carriage, though in bodies not imployde,
Win good Report, they shiftles shame that wish their Home distroyde.
Young English Fools, for cause too true, we pity you in deed:
First for ye are our Countriemen, then for that ye proceed
Against Scripture, Law, and Nature, and Fools palpable, in that
Ye note not how your Follies make our English Foxes fat:
Allen at Rome, Others els-wheare, that live hand-ouer-heade,
By tasking you to broach those Faults for which themselves be feade.
Whilst these lie burrowed, safe from skath, among you adoptiue Cubs,
They do observe the pregnanst wit, whom Coffeehouse rubs,
Of Atheist, factious, desprate, or vainglorious, him they school,
And then transport to England, thear to play the dangerous Fool:
Seduciugly insisting on performance of their vow,
That does Rebellion, Regecide, and breach of Oaths allow.
Though David knew his Sovereign Saul disfauored of God,
And might have killed, and then bin crowned, such sin his soul for-bod.
Which of the Pa^riarks, Prophets, or Gods People, whilst they saru'd
Even Ethnicks, traytrously unto their own Affections carved.
But thus do ye, nay worser, for your Darnell giddeth so,
As Gods Anointed and Beloved ye censure for his Foe:
But woorst of all, by murthring her to merit Heaven ye troe.
Put case the diulish Act were done, to escape yeat lacks your Charter,
And dead with Torments, not the pain, but cause, does make the Marter.
Say that the Pope lacks Malice, Say your selves do love the State,
Too grossly yeat your Doctrine faults in things of greatest wate.
Which your Absurdities do our Divines confute, I wot:
Ye say his Popeship cannot err, We prove ye err in, Not.
Nor in the Sacrament that Christ is really we hold.
Your Transubstantiation we justly have controld.
Yours for the Living and Deceast Propitiatory Masses,
And Purgatory, should we grant, ye might conclude us Asses.
Your Worshipping of Images, and Inuocating Saints,
And Supererogation, us with your Defects acquaints.
Besides the Supper of our Lord, and Baptism, we reject
More Sacraments: Howbeit ye Five other do erect:
As Confirmation, Penance, with Priest-Order, Marrage too,
And extreme Unction. Over more too much applause ye do
Works Meritorious. Of the Cup the Lay ye do bereave:
And of translated Scriptures, so, unspied, to deceive.
D^^ges* Vows, Indulgences, Confession in the ear,
Dissoluing Subjects from the Faith they should their Princes bear,
Dispensing with the Scriptures, for Revenge, to please, or gain,
Your Pardons, Pilgrimages, and your hallowed Paltries vain,
Pope, and what-so is Papistrie, well may we call profaine:
Ambitious Rome, that for thy Pomp not sparest Souls to baine.
Once weart thou truly Catholic, corrupted foully now,
Not outed quite the Church, A Spark in her we thee allow:
And wish thou weart, as then thou weart, when as the Fathers good,
As touching Antichrist, and whence, in both misunderstood.
No Marvel, even to Daniels-selfe in Mystery it was:
And dye did those good Fathers ere that Scripture came to pas.
But now, who-so can Antichrist but etymologize,
And knows the Pope and Rome, the Place and Man of sin descries.
Sheep-clothed Wolves, Christ's Pro-contra, the Popes have bin and be:
No place but Rome for Antichrist, none but the Pope is he.
CHAP. LII.
But human Pureness none is such, but it to err^ is known:
Think not we labor here your Faults, and o^uer-leape our Own.
For in the best of men the Flesh and Spirit combat still:
One thing the Spirit, and the Flesh the contrary does will.
We Virtue praise, but practice Vice: possessed weal we fly,
And tract off woe. At Heaven we aim, but with a worldly Eye.
Our selves we love, yeat than our selves we have no crosser Foe.
For peace we war, a perverse war that does our selves ore-throe.
At once we burn, and are key-cold. We seem to stand that fall:
To heal that hutt. We brag of bad. We dye ere death does call.
We triumph while we are subdude. We bliss our proper baine.
We gladly do subject our selves unto each giddie Vain.
Our gadding Thoughts conceit the Clouds, our selves mean while for got.
Our Nay is Yea, our Yea is Nay: we will, and then will not.
Our Souls like this, our Flesh lusts that As Proteus changes, so
Do our Affections: and our Thoughts be shifting too and fro.
Even Hydra-like we flesh our Faults: our Minds do waver still.
Our selfe-Conceits be winged: and we fly from good to ill.
Our Peace with Discord breeds our woe: the Contrary our Ease.
We never do but plague our selves, whilste that our selves we please.
We would be we, as if not we. Us Plenty makes poor.
We, partial, blame, enable, and disable us eremore.
All these, and wilful Sins besides, to us with you and all
Too common we confess. But of our Doctrine speak we shall.
Propitious be to us, O God, that Faith have practice too:
Which we omit as Publicanes, as Pharisees ye do.
Our Doctrine though is Gospel, yours Traditions but of Men:
Enough of Yours: Examine Ours by Touch of Scripture then,
Upon the only Scriptures does our Church Foundation lay:
Let Patriarchs, Prophets, Gospel, and The Apostles for us say:
For Soul and Body we affirm, are all sufficient they:
Yeat ye add Canons, part corrupt, some Books ye quite denaye.
We by the Hebrew, and the Greek, their primer Pens, expound
Each Scripture, by the eldest Clarks, when doubtful Textes be found:
Not by the Latin only, as ye would that all wear bound.
So farforth yeat the Fathers and the Councels we approve,
As do their Expositions tend to sincere Faith and Love.
Else fully Scriptures, in themselves, explain themselves, say we:
I^ searched with that humble Spirit by which they written be:
Through which is often from literal speech a spiritual sense set free,
Upon which sense the Catholic Church did, does, and must agree.
Nor does our Church admit, at least allow, of those in her,
That teach not Faith sincerely, win to Heaven, from Hell deter,
That with new Glozes tainte the Text, or such as be vnreade
In that sweet Promise of the Seed should broose the Serpents head:
The Alpha, and Omega, of all Scriptures, and whereby
Of grace, through faith in Christ, our Souls revive, and Sin does die:
Our Church affects, how so effects, such pure Theology,
And Guides, and to our Natural Prince, graunts sole Supremacy.
Gods Cou'nant with the Patriarchs, and extending to the Seed,
Us Gentiles to coequall is a Primate in our Creed:
And Christ we know the end of it. In Circumcisions place
Is Baptism. And entirely we the Tables Two embrace
Which God himself in Synai wrote, and gave to Moses then,
To publish to the people, Two Commandments in Ten:
Scriptures Idea, couched in our Love to God and men.
The Apostles, Athanasian, Nice, and Bizain Creeds we hold
Autentick, by the holy Spirit in sacred Writ inrowld.
One Godhead of three Persons, in coequall Majesty,
Do we believe: of whom the Son did for Believers die:
The only Ransom that redeemes from Satan's Tyranny:
Even Christ, the Way, the Truth, the Life, not crooked, glozed, frail,
But right for Rule, in Promise firm, in Guerdon near to fail:
Who to reprove the bad, approve the good, and to assure
The Wau'ring, and against the Devil our safety to procure,
Did, giltles, die, that we, lost Souls, might live: naught else did make
That he, his Deity adiorn'd, did human Nature take:
Nor, glorifide, disclaimes he us, unless we him forsake:
And what is fruitles Faith, but such Apostasy? and what
Ensues Apostasy, but to be doomed Damned for that?
No Doctrine, or Traditions, we hold current, save the same
That Gospel, or The Apostles Acts, or Pens, include or name.
Baptism, incorporating us in Christ, and us in one,
Christ's mystical last Supper, whear in Sign his death is known,
Be Sacraments, except which twain, do we accept of none.
By only Christ our Advocate we to the Father pray:
Nor think we Saints deceased can our Suits to him convey:
Howbeit still most reverently of Saints we think and say.
Unnecessary Burdens, on our Christian Freedom laid,
Contrary these, that but belief, and virtuous life perswaide.
Yea only Faith does justify, say we, of Gods free grace,
By Christ: not Faith is idle, but does Charity embrace.
Who may, but will not help does hurt, we know: and curious they
That, dribling Alms by Art, disband wel-Meant from wel-Dons pay:
And he that questions Ones distress, and does not help endeavor,
Than he that sees, and nothing says, or cares, is less Deceiuour.
Then hope we health when sin is felt repentantly in heart:
Add then new life, and we to God, God does to us conuart:
Thus Peter used his Keys, not thus play Popes S. Peter's part.
For Cleargie-men, and Lay, our Church has godly Discipline:
Laws worthy better than sometimes are those the Laws define.
Our Princes in their Policies and Laws do we obey:
Though God his Cause they seek to cross, yeat we for the^ do pray,
In patience, not perverse Attempts, for better times we stay.
Not as denide, but as devout we do and should abstain
From Meats even meet, the proud Flesh from sins excess to waine,
Which, should we ska^t, and yet be dronk with lust or like were vain:
Save also public Policy does public Sparing crave,
In Fasts or differences of Meats, no other keep we have.
Alms deeds, and works of Charity we practiuely profess,
And follow Saints as they did Christ, and leave whear they tra^sgresse:
Such, and so much, as said, are we: forgive us, God, if less.
For godly though Religion, Prince, and Policy they are,
Yeat things, that of themselves be good, abuse brings out of square,
And sundry Faults in sundry Folks we sometimes must forbear:
Howbeit with best gouernd States our State may now compare.
CHAP. LIII.
A Wise man living like a Drone, an Old Man not devout,
Youth disobedient, Rich-men that are Charity without,
A shameless Woman, vicious Lords, a Poore-man proudly stout,
Contentious Christians, Pastors that their Function do neglect,
A wicked King, no Discipline, no Laws men to direct,
Are Twelve the foulest Faults that do all Commonwealths infect:
In most of all which Twelve erres not, or much in any one,
Our State, respecting this, of some, Laws not abused none.
Our God-blest Queen, Palladium of our happy public Weal,
For worth so far beyond all words, we one only touch in zeal.
No Realm than ours has wiser Laws, for every Right and Wrong:
Nor is through Meed, or Means, the Weak betrayed to the Strong,
Though of vn-Quaifed Judges some is sung another song.
But who the Person, not the Cause, respects, has forgot
The Creator of Persons, who and Justice differ not.
A Council watchful for the State. Our Benches every wheare
Supplide with Judges learned, just, and such as God do fear.
Wink here and there at Auerice, Incharitie, and Pride,
And better Clergy than is ours not Europe has beside.
Say me, who can, whether Extreme has harmed Religion more,
That old of theirs too prodigal, or This of ours too poor?
Then Giving gave too slack a Rain, now-Gleaning curbs too sore.
By Slavery and by Symonie now Church-Preferment comes:
Like Nabal and to Helies Sons get Churchmen up their cro^mes.
Too much, too little, or a mean, sort out alike, we see,
Housekeeping, nor Humility, in any of the Three.
Be hospitalious, Churchmen: Lay, cease sacrilegious sin:
Your Soules-sore, but their Stores-salue, whence, eue^ whiningly, they win,
By pinching from the Pulpet, and their Purses, with this note,
Scarce will their Studies stipend them, their wives, and Children cote.
And verily it is a fault, and maimed Learnings Foe,
That Church-Possessions should amongst the Lay be shared so.
And verily it is a fault, if so the Clergy live,
As theirs to take be thought no Sin, nor Meede to them give.
Almighty everlasting God, which only work'st great wonders,
Amend such Pastors, and unite thy Flock that Satan sunders.
No one thing quails Religion more than foundring Presbytrie:
Each S^ot, impugning Order, says, and does his Fantasy:
Our Book of Common prayer, though most sound Divinity,
They will not read, nor can they preach, yeat up the Pulpet tower,
Thear making tedious Preachments, of no edifying power.
O learned Seers, whose good lives and Doctrine do agree,
(Not barren is our Land of such) heer-hence vn-meant are ye:
To you, in Reverence and Reward, may nothing wanting be:
It Is only wished your work from Dolts, your Hiues from Drones were free:
It Is wished in These, in Fugitives, in Papists, and (more bad,
Whom to persuade to reason, were with reason to be mad)
In Calophantick Puritaines, amiss amendment had.
THese Hypocrites for these three Gifts to their Lauerna pray,
Just to be thought, all to beguile, That none their Guiles bewray:
Their Art is fayning good they want, and hiding bad they have:
Their Practice is selfe-praise, of praise all others to deprave.
On Love, say some, waits Ielosie, but Ielosie wants love,
When curiously it ouer-plus does idle Quarrels move.
Best Puritaines are so ore-zeal'd: But should I term the rest?
Inhospitalious, Mutinous, and Hypocrites the best,
Insociable, Maleparte, foxing their private good,
Exiling hence wel-neere al Troth, meet Sports, and Neighborhood,
Learnings Foes, contemptuously by them be Laws withstood,
Self-pleasers, Skorners, Harlots, Drones, against the Hair in all:
Of their extreme, whence Atheism breeds, be warning Hackets fall.
If ever England will in ought prevent her own Mishap,
Against these Skommes (no term too gross) let England shut the gap
Their giddie heds gave color first that Spain against Flanders armed,
And the^ their Countries Foes they helped, and most their Country harmed.
If Hypocrites why Puritaines we term, be ask't, in brief,
It Is but an Ironized Term, Good Fellow so spells Thief.
Well-working single-hearted Men in silence (such be some)
Will not apply, but saintish, not in Deed, but by the Dromme.
To Union that our stablisht Laws for public Prayer ties
Not all, is wondered, and offends obedient Ears and Eyes.
The rather, for known Humorists, Sots, noted Mal-Contents,
Here innouate: and each one to a diverse Sect conuents,
Too much irreu'rent, in, and to, the Church and Sacraments.
But leaving these, retier we to ill-drifting Rome and Spain,
Who^ does our Queen, next under God, from Europs Spoil detayne.
THE TENTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. LIVE.
IN Scotland, France, and Netherland, whilst Phillip, and the Pope,
Did Swords, and civil Tumults broach, of prizing them in hope,
Her Highness, through the highest Power, enabled was to aid
Those Countries, to defend her own, and Phillips to inuayde.
Of Scotland first, and then of France, and Belgike shall be said:
When first of other things shall be this short Remembrance made.
It is a saying ancient (not autenticall, I win)
That who-so England will subdew, with Ireland must begin.
Imagine Stukelies only name includes all that is ill:
He forging worth, and to our State Maleuolent in will.
Of bounteous Pensions was therefore possessed in Spain long while,
Until (for it a Nature was in Stukelie to begile)
The King, whom he had cozened long, him purposed to exile.
Then for the Pope the Fugitive a welcome Agent was:
(For nothing ill, might work us ill, has Spain and Rome let pas)
Of him he had an Army, that for Irelands Conquest sails:
When through a fight in Barharte that Expedition fayles.
But how had guiltles England then deserved such hostile Spite?
Her Rebel why relieved they? why armed they him to fight?
Why did? (why do I ask that know the Spanyard so ambitious,
The Remain Prelate pompious, and, which more is, auaticious?)
Why did, I say, Pope Pius Bull, and Gregory's Calfe disqueate
Our Sovereign, and her Subjects, that did never them mis-treate?
Unless for Princes to give Laws to theirs be to offend
Proud Spain, and Rome: if so, as so, let God the Quarrel end.
What else had England done, when they did foster there, with more,
Our Traitor Moereton, sent from them to stir an here-Vprote,
Which cost the North, two northern Earls, and their Consorts full sore?
He whispring, how that Bull had made Anathema our Queen,
Deptiu'd her all Authority, discharged her Subjects cleene,
Blessed all her Foes, cursed all her Friends, left England Anies pray,
And all for damned that did aid or her in ought obaye.
So arrogant, malicious, and mischievous is that Bull,
That Beelzebub, the Prince of hell, appears in it at full.
Why sent they it by Felton to be bishoped at Paul's?
Why fe'ed they Fitz-Morrice, that in Ireland marshaled Brawles?
Saunders, that false seditious Priest that fortified theare,
Why marched he with their Ensigns? Why did they those charges bear?
They shook our Hiue, and forced us forth to sting the^ when they fee'd
False Desmond, and the Rebel now, that as the rest shall speed:
For God against all Traitors has assured wrath decreede.
These Sturres, and more in Ireland, and a many Treasons here,
Have they abetted, to the King of Catholics full dear.
More than his paper Pellets too the Pope has been at cost:
His Alchumie, a dram to win, a pound of Gold has lost.
Was it for love they did erect Receptacles for Ours?
Or so by schooled Treacheries to add unto their Powrs?
Their Iesuists, our Iudasses, act so remote from Love,
As Faiths Relaps, Rebellion, and to Rege-cide they move.
Story, insatiate of the blood of Martyrs, and a many
Blood thirsty Priests, bloodier than whom nor has nor might be any,
Tutting their Natural Princes death, and Ruin of our State,
Do they, and then did nourish, when twixt us seemed no debate.
That Spanish-Iewish Atheist, and Lop-heauie-headed Leach,
(Unworthy a Physicians name) foul Lopas, we impeach,
And Parret, that aspyring Knight, hence bryb'd for duties breach:
Hence have been poysned of our Peers, whom Bribes could not orereach.
But what are these, and more than these, to it the Guizian Scot,
Fatal to Seas of blood, and to her own by earned lot,
Did with our Foes against our State and Sovereigns life complot*
Wherein King Phillip and the Pope especially wear hot.
Here, but in Reverence of her Son, an happy Prince in all,
Religion, Peace, his Subjects Love, of Emperie not small,
Precelling his Progenitors, a Iusticer upright,
Yea ouer-long it wear we should Particulars resight,
How Nature, Wit, and Virtue, deck his body, words, and mind,
Or, if his Fames Deminatiue in any thing we find,
It is but part of Majesty, through Puratizme declynde,
Yea, if for him, whom (and deserved) we have so firm a friend,
It might, I say, be spoke, not thus of Marie should we end.
Her Favors unto David Rize, offensine to the King
His Highness Father, but for him in Story would we bring,
With hers, and Bothuels double wrong to Eithers married Bead,
How they wrought Paricidie, how the treacherous Couple wead,
How, odious to their Own, with hard escape of lives they flead,
How, since our Prisnor, blood she sought, and much through her was head,
Yea all that Buchana^ does wright should largely here be read.
Yeat not her Infancy should be vpbraided with the blood
Of many thousand slaughtred Souls, when perjured Scots withstoode
Her Marriage with Prince Edward, which Eight Henry swore the^ to,
When they esteemed us Heretics (so Papists Oaths vn-doe.)
But, for th'aforesaid Reverence, touch we but Hers and Her,
That, indirectly, here did her abortiue Clame prefer.
CHAP. LV.
KIng James the fourth, that fayld his faith, and lost for it his life,
Had James the Fifth, by Margaret, our Daughter, and his Wife:
Fifth James, through Melancholy ends, for Ours against him good chance,
And left this Marie, whom the Scots, an Infant, wead to France:
Thus, from Seventh Henry's Daughter, she her Title did advance,
But howsoere by blood, or by our Laws, she here could clame,
It Is sure, too soon, and treacherously, she did prefer the same,
And first and last unto our Queen her self a Foe did frame.
Our Marie was no sooner dead, but that her G^izards arm,
And into Scotland Locusts-like in her Pretext did swarm:
Whilst she, in France, did undertake our royal Arms and Style:
Behoou'd therefore our Queen to stand upon her Guard mean while.
Lord William Graie, our English Mars, not Martial more than wise,
Did with an Army hence pack thence our dangerous Neighbor Guise:
Nor died few of Either part, whilst Marie thus would rise.
Since when the League did often her Right, with wrong too much, surmise.
Of Co^quests Spain, of Co^uerts Rome, our Queen does chiefly ba^r,
Against her therefore they chiefly wrought Conspiracies and War:
And not for Maeries Title, or her any virtuous Gifts,
Think that they her inleagued, but from her to plot their Driftes.
Her self mean while, false-Paradi'zd, besybbing Aesops Croe,
Vainglorious through the Foxes gloze, did end her song in woe.
Suffices what is said before, to show wherefore she flead:
Here was she taken, whom if Scots had taken, had been dead:
Put under Guarde: and so was meet should one that quarreld Ours,
And not her self alone, but had Abbettors foreign Powrs.
Yeat Princely her Allowance, and more stately, as is said,
Than had she been in Scotland: nor was Liberty denayde
Of Hauking, Hunting, and Disports: that, had she been content,
Her merriest and securest days a Prisoner she spent.
Scotland, though labourd of our Queen, would not receive her and
Such Treacher, though imprisoned here, proved she to either Land,
That death awaited her at Home: and had we let her go,
She was the Leagues shot-Anchor might our Queen and State o'rethroe.
Percie and Neuell, ancient Earls, This yet in Spanish pay,
(Though bacely ill, too well for him his Country would betray)
That other headed, both her Wreckes, we touch but by the way.
With that succeeding County, who concurring with his brother,
Once pardoned, still conspyred and (Laws Progress so to smother)
Dispatched himself: Paget and more, like guilty as those other,
Whose faults and falls had Rome and Spain their Father, her their Mother,
Omit we. No^folks House, from first of Howards made a Prince,
Though fauor'd of the Commons, have defected ever since.
As Absalom used Courtesy but as Ambitious smoke,
Last Thomas Duke of Norfolk^ so did his aspyring cloak,
Who^ promised faith once fre'ed, but that promise soon he broke.
Him for Confedrate with those Earls, rebelling Proofs did touch:
And with this Scottish Queen that he Intelligence had much:
Her Marriage that he closely sought, and her Escape pretended,
And in her Right, had fadg'd their wrong, her Highness Rain had ended:
Of Rising near to London, and to take it Plots they laid:
From Netherland the Spanish King had promised them aid:
From Scotland into Spaeyne should be the Infant-King betrayde:
Ireland meane-while with adverse* Arms should also be ore-layde:
And hereof, to, and fro, the Pope, wear Letters still conuayde,
All which, and more, directly proved, he, pi^ied, lost his head:
Nor ought his death, from being such, did stand his Son in stead.
So hardly find we Great-men in their Greatness satisfide,
Or for their Greatness, not to be of other Men enuide.
But what is All to those have All, when but in Trifles crossed,
Disgrace, or Greese, or Grudge, vn-queare no less than all wear lost?
Conclude we then, all Riches, Form, Pomp, Worlds-Applause, but Wind:
Conclude we then, to Monarchize is to command the mind.
Throckmorton yeat, more privy and more practicing than those,
With her, Mendoza, Papists here, foreign, and Land-leapt Foes,
Did Mischiefs that imported more our practiced State disclose.
But when of Parry, Babington, and their Attempts I think,
With whom this Scottish Lady in their bloody hopes did link,
All foresaid Practices seem then Epitomies to it
Whereto these folliall Traitors did themselves and Senses fit.
Our Sentinels, almost too late, the Larum bell did ring,
Yeat hardly then to arm her self our General they bring:
The Queen of Scots from Ours almost her Crown and life had priz'de,
Ear to prevent the same she would, by audience, be aduis'de.
When gentle Durance might not salve that Danger, did remain,
(Which God, and Nature tolerate) slay rather than be slain:
To which our Parliament advised our Queen, but long in vain*
So far was she from foing her, that sought her life and Rain.
CHAP. LVI.
NOw thirty six our greatest Peers and States had power to hear,
And to determine, and, as found, her to condemn or clear,
By Statute passed in our Queen her seven and twentieth year.
These noble Tryers, justly then examining the Cause,
With reverent Note of her, who heard and spoke to every Clause,
Did, after diverse Days so spent, adiudge, by Verdict true,
Her guilty of most traiterous Conspiracies, not few:
And then from Fotheringhaye themselves to Parliament withdrew.
Of this Infection, that our Peers and People had, and would
Remediles impoyson, if not medeine it we should,
By some Decision of the Lymme whence all the bayne did floe,
Our public Weals Physicians much did argue to and froe.
Did never English Parliament, fully conuented then,
Consist of Noblier, Learneder, Wiser, and Worthier men:
By these it was debated how this common Foe might live,
Without her death whom God to us a common Bliss does give.
Much was it labord, wished much some Course herein might hold,
But to resolve of any none had reason to be bold.
Her still obdurate Malice to her Majesty was clear:
If she preuaild, Religion was assurd an Altring here:
Our Nobles Crocodile, at home, and hence, our Foe-hop't Head:
Then must our Queen, Religion, Realm, or She for them be dead.
Wherefore from Either House were sent the chiefest Men, to crave
Her Highness that the passed Doom might Execution have:
Whereof She asked to be aduisde, and (earnest her to save)
Dismissed them with loving words, and bids them expect
Her Answer shortly: nor did She the sending it neglect:
Though contrary to it that all did, hopingly, affect:
For she, perplexed in that case, did lastly them direct
To study Means how Both might live, the Peril ouer-past:
Which much amazed: yeat solemnly they handell it at last.
Mercy to her, Malice in her might happily prevent,
Was said, but not resolved, for often she Mercy underwent,
When rose the Earls, and other times, yeat never did repent,
But of our Queen to be destroyed had made her Testament.
A straiter Guard, Bonds, Hostages, were also named in vain:
For, should she prize our Queen, who then durst her or the^ detain?
Or what were these to recompense the Loss we should sustain?
For Loyalty to take her Oath, was thought to purpose small:
Such Oaths she often had falsifide, nor thought it Sin at all
To break them to an Heretic (our Queen so Papists call.)
To banish her, were to possess our Foes of their desire,
For us to rid away the Smoke, and run into the Fire,
To set her free to make a Head for them against our Queen:
In few, no safety for us, but in her Death was seen.
So wholly by the Parliament concluded was, and so
Reported to her Majesty, still pitying her Foe.
In more sententious, learned, and delibrate sort, than I
Can set it down, past all touched here: So did her Majesty
In answering erst, and now to them her Answer Aunswer-lesse,
Sweet Adumbrations of her Zeal, Mercy, and Wit express.
But with her Oracle that bod them do, and do it not,
Played they as Alexander did with King Gordians Knot.
OF Spay^s huge Navy, touched before, great Rumor now was spread,
And that th'Inuaders meant to make this Scottish Queen a head:
For which continued doubt of her in English hearts was shead.
Not in the Vulgats only, but some Nobles of this Land,
Who had (not knowing it our Queen) then got into their hand
The Writ of Execution, that her Heading did purport:
The which was executed soon, and in a solemn sort.
This nature-frended Lady, had she bin as wise as witrie,
Who by the Massacres in France had learnt to leave off Pity,
Made there too apt for bloody Acts, the Pope for it too blame,
To take her death, too much deserved, her self did meekly frame.
She bids commend her to her Son, and will him to eschew
All Practices and Policies, for thence her Sorrows grew:
True Romish, Scottish, and true French, tell all my Friends I die.
When Meluin (unto whom she spoke) did, weeping, thus reply,
The wofulst Message, Madame, this that ever me befell,
When of my Queen and Mistress Death I shall the Tidings tell,
She, kissing him, says pray for me, and bids him so farewell.
Then of a debt was due from her she did the payment crave,
And that her Servants might enjoy those Legacies she gave,
And to attend her at her death some of her Own to have.
All which the Earls commissoned did yield unto: and so
She to the black-clad Scaffold, there to take her death, did go.
Now Mary Stewards Troubles shall have ending, once or twice
She said, and not to moan for her did give to Hers advise:
And whilst the Writ in reading was no more regarded it,
Than if it had secured, or concerned her no whit.
Beads at her Girdle hung, at end of them a Medall, and
An Agnus-Dei bout her neck, a crost-Christ in her hand.
They prayed her to set apart those popish Toys, and pray
In says to Christ, in only whom her whole Salvation lay:
And, offering then to pray with her, that Offer she withstood,
Alleging that our Prayers can do Catholics no good.
So does the Popes false Calendar of Saints of Sense bereave
Our Traitors, who dye Papists that therein it them receive.
Was never yet Religion heard so pestilent as this:
Their murdring us for Lawful, of their Creed a portion is.
So had they schooled her, and that her bloody Mischiefs past
Were meritorious, which the Pope would honor so at last.
That, even then, the Gospels Light illuminate her heart
Was prayed of Ours, whilst she with hers prayed, as pleased her, apart.
Then to her woeful Servants did she pass a kind a-dew:
And kissing often her Crucifix, unto the Block her drew,
And, fearles, as if glad to dye, did dye to Papisme true.
Which, and her other Errors (who in all did ever err)
Unto the Judge of Mercy and of Justice we refer.
If ever such Conspirator, of it impenitent,
If ever Soul, Pope-schooled so, that Sea to Heaven sent,
If ever one, ill-liu'd, did dye, a Papist, God-wards bent,
Then happy she. But so, or not, it happy is for us,
That of so dangerous a Foe we are delivered thus.
The bravely managed Journey of the County Sussex, who
Did merit praise beyond my Pen, Sir William Druries too
Made into Scotland, added to Lord Grets sayd-Prowesse theare,
Did lesser rid our Queen and Realm, their Realm and King of fear,
Than Mary's end: Who of her self all Treasons did prefer,
Against either State: our foreign Foes derived Pretexts from her.
But thus Elizabeth has salu'd, Ours, and Scotch Troubles. Now
Ensues we show her Aids to France, who wrought their Broiles, and how.
CHAP. LVII.
IT by a Politician a German (to whose lore,
Have Machiuilian French-Euents since sorted euer-more)
Before Queene-Mother, Charles the King, and others private, was
Aduisde a Monarch absolute in France to bring to pas.
Aristocratick Government, nor Democratick pleased
But where to one Man's Emperie is Monarchia seasde.
He told his Ttauels, and in States his Observations: how,
Besides the only Turk, he none a Monarch did allow:
Who suffers none by Might, by Wealth, or Blood, to ouer-top:
Himself gives all Preferments, and whom lists him does lop.
His Bands of Ianizaries, who are formed and nourisht still
From Childhood his own Creatures, hold all at his own will.
He out of these his Captains, and his Bassies does elect:
They, to deserve their Founders trust, his only Weal affect:
The rather, for their Dignities, and all that All possess
Determine at his will, behooues therefore not to transgress.
Save his Religion, none is used, unless in Conquests late,
And that of Policy, thereby to add unto his State:
Nor even there permits he of Religion to debate.
Nor walled Towns, nor Forttesses, his Empier does digest:
Except upon the Fro(...)ires, for securing of the rest.
His Subjects thus, Theirs, and the whole, at his Devotion, needs
No Imposts, Taxes, or the like, whence Tumult often breeds.
Discourst of his Experience thus, he then descends to it,
Whereby of Monarchia might himself the French King fit.
Whereas (quoth he) French Policy consists of Three Estates,
The Princes, Nobles, Commons, and each one of the other wates
For hearts and helps, and often the King is bridled of those Three,
Himself therefore, such Lets removed, sole Monarch thus might be.
Of ancient Peers, of valiant Men, great Lords, and Wisemen all,
By forced War, or fraudfull peace, to temporize the fall:
Whereto Religions quarrel then presented mean not small.
Mean while, until of them by turns wear Riddance, did behoue
To work them Mal-contents, the King to labor vulgar Love.
Immediately, even from himself, No whit at their Request,
To pass Preferments, not to them, but else as likes him best:
And but of Pieces ru^ous the Great-Ones to possess:
And when his Creatures shall grow to more, those Great to less,
To quarrel then those Nobles, when in them great hearts would lurk
That for the Soldier, or the sword of Justice, should make work.
So to provide that of the States be no Conuention named:
Religion not disputed of: Strong Towns, which often have tamed
The French Kings, be dismantled: And when things as thus be framed,
His Majesty (quoth he) shall hit the Mark whereat is aimed.
WHen this, and worse than thus, this worse than Machiuel had said,
With that Conuenticles Applause, so working was not staid:
For hence, if Accidents we shall observe, may be collected
The civil Wars and Butcheries in France to have effected.
Religion gave the color, whear though infinite were slain,
The Church reformed did not resist, yeat still by loss did gain:
For blood of Martyrs well is said to be the Churches Seed,
Where Massacres have plashed there is spread a triple Breed:
In Sense it seemed a silly Spring, should Europe ouer-floe,
Whence Luther his occasion took against the Gospels Foe:
As Scotlands foresaid Guizian Broils, even France her Tumults so,
From other then Religions cause did at beginning groe:
So (...)ph sold, and Christ betrayed, was meeter than was meant
Of Ben-Iamests, or by the false Iscarots foul Intent:
But howsoever ill haps well, Woe stays whence ill is sent.
French second Henry's Favorites, the Constable, and Guize,
The one of them ambitiously the others Hight enuies:
Each growing cross, and crossing, it to Factions grew at length,
Poor Huge^^tz undoubted then, nor dreamed they of strength:
Alone in Henry's, Francis, and ninth Charles their Reigns, of them
French Papists, as our Mary's, did to Martyrdom condemn.
But by such Law as Wolves do Lambs, those Innocents for most
Were slaughtered, whole Towns sometimes with these in the^ they roast:
And like now threatened Guize against the Saints in every Cost.
The Guizians (so that Faction shall in this Report be said)
Through Nonage of the Pope-taught King, grew Mighty and obayd:
Queene-Mother (Mischief-Mistres) in their Pageant featly played.
Mean while the Royals and the Peers they Practice to betray:
Some in the bloody Massacre at Paris made away.
But what offend I Christian Ears with horror of that deed?
From Sarazens, nor Savages, did ever like proceed.
Let that black Marrage-Feast, when were so many Thousands slain
O^ Saints, at peace with God and men, be never named again:
Let be a Law in every Land, to punish such as speak
That Christians should, like Hel-hou^ds so, with God and Nature break:
Far be it that Posterities should hear, that Charles the King
For such ^oule Murders, bon-fiers bod, and caused Bells to ring.
Yeat tell the Popes Procession, and his Iubilee for this:
For Popes be impudent, and bads their blessings never mis,
To have them Fathers of those Acts, no News at all it is.
But more than twice six years ere this the civil Wars begun,
When on the Lambs of Vassie did the Guizian Butchers run:
(...) when the Edict had given Peace unto the Church reformed,
And odious to the Papists seemed that Peace, who therefore stormed:
And then the Duke of Guize, who erst had figured for the Crown,
Hence calculating hopes, did set his bad Designements down:
Alonly quarrelling, till then, the Princes of the blood,
Who, partly quail'd, were yet vnkild, and to their tackling stood.
So with the Papists band's the Duke himself, not for Devotion,
But aduantagious seemed that Mean for blood-Drifts and Promotion
This Faction thus had Heart and Head, the Other yet unborn,
Till to the Prince of Condie flockt the Hugenotz, forlorn,
And told the savage Butcheries at Vassie newly made,
By ruthles and seditious Guize, on Thousands, whilst they prayde.
Like skathed Sheep, escaped from blood-sucking Dogs, they quake,
Imploring his Protection: which he then did undertake.
Thus, through Necessity, this Part had also Heart and Head:
Even after hundreds thousands such good Christians so were dead.
This known, to him from every Part the Persecuted fly,
So was the Prince of virtuous Troops possessed by and by.
CHAP. LVIII.
NOt Spain this while, that held for France great Signories, did sleep,
But through the Fingers into It, with lusting Eyes, did peep:
At least, by nourishing those Broils, all got She hopes to keep.
For It, whose Situation so Spayns scattred Realms disioynes,
Her Teeth had watered long, and now, to weaken France her Loins,
Against France she France does stre^gthe^ with the Soother of her gold:
And for that Purchase to the Devil, is feared, her Soul is sold.
Directions also came from Rome, that sets all on fire:
That, by what Right or wrong so ere, the Guize should still aspier:
To send the royal Bloods to Heaven or Hell, it skils not how:
Were Pardons sent for Murders: Bulls to clear Allegiance vow:
That, on Damnation, none persuade, much less of Peace allow.
And not alone against France this League was hallowed, but against all
That work the Gospel to erect, whereby the Pope might fall:
Was more than time, troe we, to go, should not the Church us call.
But call did they, and come did we, and to their labors fall,
When wear their Towns demolished, with Slaughters thear not small.
This busy Head of that bad League (for yet the monstrous Beath
Of Sextus Quintus and the Devil, the grand League, had not breath)
This Guize bereft us Calice, and in France our Pieces all:
Then fell in hand with Scotland, thence with us in hand to fall:
This, in his Niece the Scottish Queen her Claim, did all he might
To dispossess Elizabeth our Queen of regal right:
This on the infant-Person of his natural King had seazde:
And prosecuted now in France what Violence him pleased:
The Popes sworn Butcher, and proud Spayns Forerunner, to prepare
Her ways for France and England, which their Owners cannot spare:
This with the blood of Innocents made Channels ouer-floe:
Against this Cham, and his Beau-Peeres, invited English go.
Else, save that God can all, was feared Religion should have quaild,
And Spaniards, nestling over near, had easlier us assaild:
For on the Theator of France, the Tragedy was meant
Of England too: Wherefore our Queen her Interruptors sent.
How Ambrose, Earl of Warwick, did in France high Feats not few:
How bloody Claudie, Duke of Guize, a common Soldier slew:
How Francis, son of that Guize, did civil Broils renew:
The persecuting Francis, Charles, and Henry's, hence a-dew:
Which Kings, as said, to work themselves French Monarchs Atheists played,
Or doting overmuch on Rome, their Realm and selves betrayed:
The skarlet Borbone, whom the Guize a painted French King made:
Salcedo failing Monsiurs Death, which did the League conspier:
The Prince of Orange, murthred through Farnesian Parmas hier:
Renoumed Condie poysned, in his time the Leaguers fear:
How Pope-sent Saunders against our Queen in Ireland Arms did bear:
(For Leaguers then in Policy prevented Lettes each-wheare,
By Armies, or Armadas, or their scattred Iesuists, who
Have had small cause to brag that they with England had to do:)
The often sworn and for-sworne Peace, that happened in the while
Queene-Mother, Phillip, Pope and Guise, the French Kings did begile:
Queene-Mother for Ambition of employment, King of Spain,
To make his Usurpations sure, yea France it self to gain,
The Pope to keep his pomp in plight, Guise for the regal Ring:
How all, though drifting d^ffringly, at length to end did bring
The House Valoys, of Capets Stock, which Stock had quite decaide,
But that it pleases God the Crown in B^rbons House is staide:
How till the Barricados Feast, when Guise vn-vizard was,
Under Religions Cloak the Routes in wasted France did pas,
And after then, both Hugenote, and Papist too, if friend
Unto Valoys, or Burbon, sound like Enmity, or end:
Of Sauoy, (hoping France) his Aids, and ^ll success in all:
How Guise, and Lorraine, in the Pit for Henr^e dig'd did fall:
How Friar James, Pope-blest, and bribed of May^e, did Henry kill:
How unto Main, pursewing Broils, it wrought not to his will:
The Massacres, and Stratagems, did in these Tumults chance:
How God in all his Wars did bless Nauar, now King of France:
And how, next God, that France is French our Queen is Author cheef,
All These, thus blanch't, we leave, and shall of Belgic be as brief.
But be it first remembered how, even for the Parents sin,
God plagueth in Posterity: as came to pass, I win,
In second Henry's, of the Church reformed a bloody Foe,
(Though otherwise a worthy Prince, nor tache we him but so)
And Katherine de Med^^^s, whose Athisme wrought much woe.
These had sour Sons, not one of which did die a natural death,
All (...), (...) Males none extant on the Earth*
No marvel, even to David's Seed, for David* sin, hap't such:
And though the holy Writ contains that Story, yeat to tuch
This Purpose, let us hear it here: Example urges much.
CHAP. LIX.
OF holy David, and his House, the Man approved to be
By Gods own Mouth, to Gods own heart, the ^y Troubles see.
His Soul was ever godly firm, though frail in flesh as Man,
For who of Adams Seed from sin acquit them could or can.)
Our walls of flesh, that close our Souls, God knew too weak, and gave
A further Guard, even every Man an Angel Guide to have:
And Men to us be Angels, whilst they work our Souls to save.
For, ear his Fall, Man was not left unto himself so free,
But that he had a Law, and Those that should his Temptors be,
And tempted, then the Spirit, that for God himself was made,
Was dared by the Flesh, that to the Spirit erst obayde:
The Soul by either labored to thrive, or be betraide.
To err is proper then to Men, but brutish to persist:
With Praise, and Prayer, still to God, as David thriu'd, or mist,
He plied: more in loving God, than living godly blist.
V^gratefull Saul distressing him, or what ear then befell,
Or afterward, nor other then Domestic Greefes we tell.
The troublous Sequels Nathan told of David's House, when as,
To wanton it with Bethsabe, Vrias murthred was,
Effecting now, is only it whereto our Pen shall pas.
Thamar, Ammon, Absalom, Adoniah, also wrought
Unto their Father woe enough: let these on Stage be brought.
Now to the Tribes was David as the Zodiac to the Signs,
Even Signifer to every Prince that circled his Confines.
A Monarche great, in Acts and Fame more great, but great'st of all,
In that he was beloved of God, nor ceast on him to call,
Who rai^d him, often falling, for his Crosses wear not small.
Love-(...) M(...), (...) King of Geshurs Daughter, baire
To David (...) Ab(...)m, and Thamar peereles fair.
No^ ^a^rer ye^^ than vi^^uous, though disastrously she speade:
Su^^ is admyred Beauty that has Worlds of Mischiefs bread.
A(...)mon, whom Ahinoam bore to David, was the cause
Of hers and his own grief, in that he gave his Eyes no laws.
For Love is but a Term, like as is Echo but a Voice,
That This does babble, That does breed, or not, is ours the choice.
And Virtue curbs* Affection, and for Conscience flies sin:
To leave for imperfection, fear, or shame, no praise does win.
But not so happy he as fear, or shame, or ought, might stay
His rankled thoughts, but sick, lust sick, for Thamar Ammon lay:
And subtell Ionadabs Advise did her to him betray.
For never was Pretense so foul but some would flatter it:
No any thing so pestilent as mis-applied Wit.
Seem feeble sick, and when the King thy Father visits thee,
Then feign an Appetite to Meat by Thamar dressed (quoth he:)
Ask that she dress it in thy sight, and of her hand to take it,
When private so, thy Market be as thou do mar or make it,
Well pleased this Counsel: Ammon asks, and David yields anon:
Nor readier David to bid go, than Thamar to be gone:
Like Phil^mela, ^^attering (...)on she might go
With Tereus, that prepos'd her shame, was Thamar forward so:
When either Virgin was surprisde, wheare least they looked a Foe.
So gracious, portly, ^resh, and fair, and (which no less attract)
So modest, witty, affable, had Nature her compact,
That such as, in his Canticles, her Brother has purtrayde
His Loves Idea, litrally might Thamar such be said.
Goodly thus, and gladly then, and not suspecting harm,
She, entering wheare he lodged, did afresh the Leacher warm.
His leasing Sickness then to act by Art was more thau need,
For, seeing her, imagine all his Senses sick in deed.
More could she nor, more should she not, than she in kindness did:
All adding Fuel to the Fire, which yet from her lay hid.
Now, save of him and her, the Room was cleard by his devise,
When he did ask to eat, which she did bring him in a trise:
Full glad (good Soul) her Cookerie might please him any whit,
When not her Cookrie, but her self, his appetite did fit.
Concerning which he breaks with her, indeuoring her consent:
Whereto, amaz'de, she counter-works, nor would for ought relent.
How precious her Virginity, what sin it to defile,
How for their Fathers Lust much woe was prophesied ere-while,
How Incest was much more a sin, she wished him to way,
How permanent the Shame to both: Enough did Thamar say,
To have preserved Virginity, if lust had brook't a Nay.
But pleading tears and words lackt wait, by force he ravished her,
And having forced, he forced not to hide how he did err:
Nor more he loved her ere while, but hates her now as much:
Of Lust and unchaste Coiture still is the Sequel such.
Her now vn-virgin'd Eyes did shame to view the common Light:
She therefore would have stayde, at least not come in common Sight,
Supposing, by her Blusshings, all would aim her altered Plight.
But out his Doors by violence he shuts her, wherefore
Aloude she cride, with bitter tears, her fair attier she tore,
And did all Signs of sorrow, whilst the cause admired was.
But when her Br^ther Absalom found how had come to pas,
He comforts her in all he might, and to his house conuaies
His woeful Sister, wheare thenceforth, as desolate, she states:
Like Prognes sister pensive, but her moodes wear milder still,
This wanting will, not speech to rail, That wanting speech not will.
Contrary-wise thought Absalom of nothing but Revenge,
And with his choler think ye him these thoughts among to menge:
Did Cadmus, for his Sister rapt'e, so many Countries rome?
And shall I sleep my Sisters Rape, that may be quit at home?
For Rape of one, scarce honest, was at Troy such tenne-years Fight?
And shall one easy bloe seem much, sweet Thamers wrong to right?
Simean and Leui, worthy Sons of Israel our grand Sier,
Ye in revenging Dinas Rape have set mine heart on fire,
Even mine, that for a greater wrong should greater things acquier.
Poor Sychem, thou did love in deed, and Marriage Rites affect:
Lewd Ammon, thou did lust in deed, and then thy Rape reject:
Poor Sichem, she a Stranger was whom thou so much did wowe:
Lewd Ammon, she thy Sister was with whom thou had to do:
Poor Sichem, thou to prize thy love, did leave thy Gods for hers:
Lewd Ammon, thou to please thy lust, no God at all prefers:
But howsoeare in these, in this no diffrence shall remain:
Poor Sichem he was slaughtred: lewd Ammon shall be slain.
Nor more Maachas goodly Son in stomaking did threate,
Then did this News his Father now offensiuely disqueat^*
At point almost to act as much as Absalom did plot,
Even Ammons death, had not he been his Isiue first-begot.
For which he erst had hild him Dear, and present Nature wrought,
And that himself had amorous Slyps, is likely too, he thought:
But howsoeare, in woe enough, he ouerpafseth it
Which Absalom, in wroth enough, nor could, nor would, forgi^:
Two years in silence, neartheles, he labord of that fit.
To his Sheep-shearing David and his Brethren he inuites,
(Such as our Wakes, conuenting Kinnes to Feastings and Delights)
Now listen what Catastropha this Stratagem behightes.
The King excused his coming, whom his Son importunes so,
As Ammon, and his other Sons, had leave, and will, to go.
Unwilling though (by what Presage I wot not) David seemed
Of Ammens going: but what Fate ordained has none redeemed:
Go did he, wheare full merrily he frollicked that tide,
When, by his Ostes Attendants there, of sudden Wounds he did:
(Which after Bar quet did their Lord for only him provide.)
More skar'd than hurt the other Sons of David flead with speed,
Yeat ear their home-returne the King had notice of the deed,
And feared much their safety, till them he saw, and then
Was such confused sorrow, more was never seen among'st Men.
To Geshur Absalom escapes, three years an Exile thear,
Till David's kind relenting heart to Ioah did appear:
By means of whom, recalled home, he lastly purchased Grace,
Yea well-appay'd was David, if wear Absalom in place.
Loved never Father more a Son than him his Father lon'd,
Proved never Son ungrateful more than he ungrateful proved:
For having stolen the Peoples hearts, by affable Pretexts,
He faines his vows at Hebren, but the Diadem affects:
And, by collected Forces theare, distressed David more
Than S(...)le, the Cananites, or all, hap't after, or before:
Enforcing him to fly the Land. But dwell we not of this:
God never fauor'd such Attempts, or ever sailed His.
When David seemed, in common Sense, already on the hip,
Was Absalom himself ore-throne, whom God made ouer-slip,
What, wisely, false Achitophel had counseld him to do,
Whose Counsel not received, he hong himself, and worthy too,
Ambitious Absalom, now foiled, as on his Mule he flead,
Was carried underneath an Oak, wheare, caught-vp by the head,
(Eue^ by those bewtious Locks, of which, and him, such praise is read)
He sight (and cause he had) and said (or say he might) that All
Which so unjustly seek to clime, most justly so do fall.
But whatsoeare he thought or spoke, this holds autenticall:
We think no greater bliss than such to be as be we would,
When blessed none, but such as be the same that be they should
Had one Man all that all Men have, he nothing had, vulesse
He also had a Soul that All as nothing did possess.
Natures Mynion, Eyes Admier, and now in-ayred Earth,
(For, hanging, Ioabs ruthles spear had vented vital breath,
Although the King his counter-maunde should have contraried so)
Effected had his Fathers heart no Substance else but woe:
So kind and ouer-kinde was he in moving such a Foe.
But thus of this, and thus to him this following Cross did groe.
CHAP. LX.
TO epilogue our Tragedy, now Adoniah acts,
With whom, old David to depose, even ^oabs-selfe compacts:
Yeadiuers Captains did revolt, and with the Son rebel,
Which not a little grieved the King, that loved the young man well,
Who, next his brother, did for form, and soly now excel.
Remayn'd but Solomon and he, and he the elder Son,
Too forward yeat to practice Rule ear David's Reign was done:
But what God means is, Amen: The Scepter was behight
To Solomon, and Nathan moved the King to do^ him right:
Who, aged, caused his Diadem to ro^alize the head
Of Solomon, anointed now: which heard, the Rebel, flead.
So have we seen, not years farre-past, long-Plottings ouerthrone,
Even in a trise, to day a Queen, to morrow less than none:
Such was her Fate, but not her Fault, that stood for Mary's Throne*
Nor cite I this A Novelty, like Pul-backs many an one.
Repentant* Ad^ni^^ now unto the Altar flies,
(...) thereof: which one, that it espies,
(...) unto Solomon, that sent to fetch him Thence:
Which would not be, till swore the King to pardon his offense:
Whom^ (...) we now so pardoned, or rather in suspense.
^or though a Kings Competitor in one same Land may live,
^eat take he heed, the sleightest cause a cause of death does give:
Which happened him, ear happened this, inserted by the way.
David decea'ste, in Solomon was sole and sovereign Sway,
When (...), to prolong his life, did at the Altar stay.
Even he that in so many Brunts for David did prevail,
That, save for Adoniah now, Allegiance near did fail,
That, save for sheaded blood of twain, could none impeach of wrong,
Even this grand* Captain of the Hosts, a luckie Knight so long,
Hand-fasting now the Altar, clames that Privilege, in vain:
For thence he would not, and the King commands he th^are be slain.
Which Warrant did Banaiah serve: And so this Worthy died,
For Abner and Amasas blood, like-Worthies and as-tried.
With Adoniah now remains we act and end our Scenes,
To who^, might seem, small good was meant, what il soere he means:
Wheare crowned Might, and crossed Right so near together dwell,
Behooues that Forrest-flying Fear, whereof the Fox did tell:
Our factious Lancaster and York thereof could witness well.
Abisag, David's Hebe, that in comfort of his Age,
Attended him at Bed and Boarde, when natural heat did swage,
Howbeit still a Virgin, and the goodliest Wench alive,
Enamours Adoniah: at the least with her to Wiue
He drifteth, not detayned but for Salomons consent:
Of which he moved Bethsabe, for which she Suitor went
To Solomon, that thearewithall was only not content,
But also took occasion hence, of more, perhaps, than meant.
^^na^ah, by the Kings Command, did Adontah slay:
For Crime perhaps, perhaps because a Crown might come in Plea.
For Sal^mon, divinely wise, could Subtellizings sound:
That much the Ma^d knew David's mind, that Many she had bound,
Whilst gracious erst, with Benefits: her Kindred strong he found:
That ^oa^ and Abiat^ar wear on his Brothers side:
That his aspiring sleeps, nor must be slept, the King espide:
Or else-what? Adoniah was dispatched out of hand:
So sped his Su^e, so was confirmed to Solomon the Land:
If Others otherwise, not I as others understand.
Nor better Meede for Merits could these Dauidists allege:
Yeat did their Father eat the Grapes that set their Teeth on edge.
Then charitable, godly-wise, and continent, wear fit
Should Parents be: So prosper they, Theirs, and whom Theirs begi^*
Of Scotland, quieted by our Queen, and France, by her kept French,
Is touched: Of Belgike, long selfe-vaind, rests how the blood does ste^ch.
CHAP. LXI.
THe Inquisition threatened, wrought in ^etherlanders fear,
And Signs of altring Regment in their ancient State appear.
As ful-fead Children with their Food, by Peace this People play,
Till, in world-matchles Wealth, did them Security betray.
They hearing what King Philip meant against their State, did mind
What in the Fables Moral of the Stock and Storke we find:
For in the Lady Regent, and her Brother Philips Corse,
Their hearts presa^g'd like diff^ence (...) twixt Rigor and Remorse.
Armed was the Duke of Al^^, who by wars, by wiles, by (...)
Should co^quer, circu^uent, consume, those Lands, their Lords, the Good.
These to have his sufficed not the Spanish King, unless
He Monarchize their Land, their Laws, and Liberties depresse.
The other Part their Consciences and Privileges pleades,
Nor other cause than only thus to Armor Either leads:
For There, Elsewhere, and ever Spain, when Spain would Scepters lurch,
Concludes for Spain, though ever Spain begins for holy-Church.
No Army was as yet ariu'd, when as the Belgies send
To Philip their Submission, and their Loyalty defend.
If ought were done contrary to his Edicts (as indeed
Wear some too busy Protestants did order-les proceed)
They did transpose that Fault upon those Innouators rude,
Protesting all that Subjects should: and humbly too they sude,
(Vouching his Father, Uncle, Kings, and Emperors of old,
Who let their Liege-men, diffring from their own, Religion hold)
To suffer Consciences in them to God-wards uncontrolled.
For which, and for their Charters, did they offer Masses large,
And evermore to undergo all Truage, Tax, and Charge.
But Theirs to alter quite in all was it that Philip meant:
To plague therefore those seauenteene Shires was war-flesht Alua sent.
This, like a pleasing poysning Aspe, to act as he did arm,
At first Ariuall, Pardons did for passed Crimes proclaim.
That tractable kind People so he to his bent did frame:
Who wear not then by hostile Means men easily to tame.
He thus of them possessed, did then, by she Degrees, surprise
Their Towns, puts Garrisons in them, built Cittadels likewise,
Inducts the Inquisition, and strange Imposts did devise,
Calls pardoned Crimes in question, faines the Guiltles to offend,
And thus an Aspe, and poysnous more, proved Alua in the end.
For why? ambitious men seek, get, possess, and practice State,
With restles minds, by fawning Means, enuide, in haughty rate.
This privileged Province, and this Paradized Earth,
Thus stripped of her golden Fleece, and faintly drawing breath,
Was phisickt of Elizabeth, who with her English Balm,
Then much the poysnous biting of that Spanish Aspe did calm:
Even Pity preaching thus to her, that Nature is reuerst,
When as her self is not amongst her own Consorts dispersed.
She to that Countries Father, to that honorable Knight,
The Prince of Orange (armed then in Christ his cause to fight,
And for his Countries Weal) permits first Voluntary Aides*
And lastly, when that neighbor Fire too nearly her inuaides,
And their extreme Oppression did her Charity inuit,
(By Ambassies Spain often moved to do the Belgies right,
Howbeit touching Peace in vain) she franklier friends their Cause,
Who were enforced to defend their Faith, their Lives, and Laws,
Against their Souls and Bodies foes, and (which might all perceive)
Our cause was handled then in theirs, then theirs were ours to leave,
And (which had often aided us in many a Field and Fleet)
In ancient Love with Burgundy to break, was thought vnmee^e.
How thence tyrannous Alu^ was revoked, all too late,
When pitiously declined was their flourishing Estate:
Ere which Oppression, where the King had countles Profits thence,
Now Ownes he nothing there, not held with infinite Expense.
The Slaughters, Sackings, Mutin^es, the Kings Vicegerents sense,
How Horn, and Egmo^d, Cou^ties brave, through Aluas Athisme spead,
How Orange, through our Soueraigns Aids preuaild, how lastly dead,
How Anioy also, through her Means, became that Peoples head,
How now her Highness only-selfe, next God, does them secure,
Her valiant Warriors there, whose Lauds might special Pens allure,
And here meanwhile should ours, save that I cannot but divine,
Their Chivalry to be reserved for higher Muse than mine,
To which though some we leave, yeat (by their leaves) of some is said
Themselves they have misgouern'd, and their Companies be^rayd,
Some More regard of Tents, and Trash, in their Retreats have made,
Then of our craised men, may such Conductors low be laid,
And some too ruthles, rioteus, and of their Charge r^misse,
Have starued up in number more than Foe-slaine number is:
Thus some of some report, perhaps not true in all as told:
But somewhat somewhere faulteth, for no fire, no smoke be bold.
To be officious gets Friends, plain Dealing hated is:
Yeat better plainly to reprove, than fainedly to kiss:
We cannot also love our Friends, and flatter their A-misse:
How these and thus-like passed Thear we ouer-passe it here.
Note in our Queen, Religion wronged, it self did ever cheer:
And whear the Spanish Nimrod hunts in Monarchy to hold
All Christendom, through God, that Drist she chiefly has controld.
Nor did, nor does, nor shall it need, that thus to her be told:
Who would to God, but works no good, who seeks fame by ease,
Comes short of both, no less than Mappes to very Lands and Seas.
Not only thus, but in this while, her Fleetes have oftentimes
Set prosprously her Men on Shore, even in the farthest Climes:
Whence have they brought, by fair Co^merce, great riches to our Land,
Or glorious Spoils from such as did their peace or Prowse withstand,
Of which shall be digested here the Progress, in some part,
Though stately be the Subject, and too slender be our Art.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. LXII.
INexplicable Nature, by the God of Nature wrought,
Makes things seem Miracles to some, by some not Wonders thought:
And every Climates People, both as they are Men, and live,
Do differ: nothing, if observed, She, not admired, does give.
The Workman rather than the Work extol we though in her,
Not curiously, and all things to his Providence refer.
Who reads Sir John de Mandeuil his Travels, and his Sights,
That wonders not? and wonder may, if all be true he wrights.
Yeat rather it believe (for most, now, modernly approved)
Than this our Story, whence suppose he was to Travel moved:
Not contradicting though such Pens that write, perhaps more true,
That Penance him to Pilgrimage hence, of Devotion, drew.
Of noble Parentage and rich was Mandeuil exact,
To whom nor Feature, Actiuenes, not Peoples favor lackt.
A Lady of the royal blood, Third Edwards Cozen say her,
On whom, for rarest Raritie, might Arte-spent Nature stay her,
Inamours him: who held it sin, if ought he should omit,
Might please and prize his Lady, coucht in Courage, Cost, or Wi^.
But quite it quail'd his hopes to think he strained to reach a Star:
Often Reason therefore did with Love, Love did with Reason war.
She is too high: and what of that? it has, thinks he, bin seen,
As High have stoopt as Low: For Love, right-labourd, wins a Queen.
And can I hope that Beauty, which is Adamant to all?
Yea, Beauty, Natures Iuy-bush, each Passenger does call.
But should she love (Fool that I am to hope, that should despair)
Such Births as she not else must love, but as they licen'st are.
Yeat were it Mandeuil she loved, mislike it then that list,
Our virtuous Love, elsewhere, as here, should render us as blist.
O, would she love, it should suffice: such, not of vulgar Moulds,
Who^ once she blesses with her Love, for him she Sooth-fast holds:
The only virtue of which Love, all other Lacks controules.
Such were his Ebbes, and Floods, and down although in Love he sits,
Yeat, fearing Death and her disdain, his Heart devoured his Fits:
(...)* (...) not meanly passionate, he fared not as those,
Whose melancholy Fooleries be Pylots to their Woes.
Already was he gracious both with her and all the Court,
And, more to be, did exercise Arms, and each active Sport,
Nor was he Stoicall in ought, but affable in all,
And apprehends, even fleelingly, her Humors as they fall.
If sad were she, then sad was he: if merry, merry too:
His Senses liable to all, she did, or did not do
If her he heard to speak, he said Cassandr^ spoke less true,
If her he saw, hers praisde he more than Cythereas hew,
If odorifrous Sents he smelt, he fathers them on her,
If but her hand he touched, that Touch did highly him prefer,
But D^ified swore he him her bed-game Sweets might taste,
And swore his Thoughts: for where we love, eue^ there our Souls be plaste.
His Virtues and Officiousnes to her wards, so had wrought,
That unto little less than love she, by Degrees, was brought.
Then errant Knights, and every Knight, yea Kings, would ost defend
The Beauties of such Damsels as it liked them to commend:
And Prizes were preposde for such, whose Champions bore the^ best
At Tilts and Turnies, and his Dame was Sovereign ore the rest.
Such Iusts, in England to beheld, were now proclaimed, and
The Chivalry of Christendom conuented in our Land.
Three beauteous foreign Ladies, with Sir ^ohn his Lady stood
Competitors, to win the Prize, maintained with Champions good.
To show the fourfold March of Knights, whose Prowse should plead ano(...),
Under distinguished Flags her Form their Fancies waited on,
Their rare Accomplements, and each Devise to see or reed,
To show the richnes of the Prize, behight the Victors Meede,
The Damsels richer hew for whom such Triumphs were decreede,
The Cost, and great Concurse was there, were ouer-long to say:
In few, was nothing wanting that might honor such a day:
Now sound they to the Iusts, and now vn-horst was many a Knight:
For Foyles were Foyles: most bravely al their Sides and selves acquit:
And almost grew the day to end, before it could be seen
Who bore him best, when, mounted well, both Man and Horse in green,
A Knight appeared: his Banner had the Picture, and in gold
King Edwards Cozen Elenor was legibly inrould.
Against him ran right hardy Knights, that thundered on his Beuer:
But he unhorsed the most of them, himself vn-horsed never:
At least he lost his Stirrops, that incounters him, wherefore
Of Knighthood he, and Elenor the Prize of Beauty bore,
The Jewels set for Victory, and adverse Banners three,
Were yielded him: whilst Elenor did long her Knight to see.
But as they marched to depart, with Beuer shut, he made
To her a Conge: closely then he Thence himself conuaide.
Much wonder all, who, and of whence the hardy greene-Knight was:
But secretly, unknown of all, he to his Home did pas.
A Woman's Love is Riuer-like, which, stopped, will ouer-flow,
But when the Current finds no let, it often falls too low:
Fair Elenor wished nothing more than that she might him know:
Mean while the Fire of Love in her, from sparks to flame did grow.
But Mandeuil was more discreet, than that for Men's applause,
He would be known: as knowing that from Praise takes Envy cause.
To move the King threats death, in vain to labor her he wist,
Since many mighty Potentates had labord her, and mist.
She, he, and England seemed too near, his hopes, thought he, too far:
He absence therefore points to plead unto his Love in bar.
Of Ceur-de-Lion, Erigen, William the Pylgrim, who
Wrote Richards Syrian Watres, Curson, Glanuile, and Longe-spee too,
Long-shanks, ear King, his Knights, and of our English many more,
That through the triple Orbs did Arms and Travels undergo,
And famous thus alive, and dead, Here and Abroad, did groe,
He called to mind: resolved in mind his Life to finish so.
Bills of Exchange and all things else, prepared for Travel fit,
Unto his Friends, grieved he would go, he then imparteth it.
The King did give him Letters for safe-Conducts, of the Corte
Loath him to leave, he takes leave: But in more special forte
Of Elenor: good Sadness she thus spoke, as if in sport.
Some discontented humor sends you hence, as I divine,
Which, be whereso you shall, will be with you, be yours as mine.
Nay, Madam, quoth Sir John, twixt us this diffrence is to find,
I both in mind and body, you need travel not in mind.
Yes yes, quoth she, my Mind I wot meet may you far away,
If so, then give to it this Ring, and that I sent it say.
So, with that Riddle, and a Ring she gave, they kindly part:
Nor knew she him the Knight she meant, nor he to him her heart:
For, second to the greene-Knight (whom she thought not him) was he
Her Fauoret, of him therefore she would remembered be.
Now let us say the Lands, the Seas, the People, and their Lore,
This Knight did see: whom, touching which, not story shall we more:
But to our English Voyages, even in our times, shall frame
Our Muse: and what you hear of Theirs, of his the like do ame,
For Countries, not for Customs (then, and now, not still the same.)
Yeat interlace we shall, among, the Love of her and him:
Mean while about the World our Muse is stripped now to swim.
CHAP. LXII.
FRom then, when first my Father, ear my birth, was one of those,
Did, through the Seas of ysie Rocks, the Muscouites disclose,
We shall our English Voyages, the chief at least, digest,
Of which in this her Highness Reign have been performed the best,
And herea while let Mandeuil and his Beloved rest.
To name the diverse Peoples that in Europe be, wear much,
Not but remotest Regions, of our Natives seen, we touch.
But, Moderns, Ye (of whom are some have circum-sail'd the Earth)
Here pardon us your Sails, and give your proper Praises bearth.
Infuse ye Penn-life too into ore-taken Fames by death.
Caboto (whose Cosmographie and selfe-proofe brake the Ise
To most our late Discouerers, Debtors to his Advise)
Had us, ear Spain, possessed of that which Spaniards now abuse,
But, he inuitin^g, idly we did offered Gold refuse.
Yeat him to say for most the Mean, it wear not us to shame,
Of English new Discoueries, that yield us Wealth and Fame.
Reserve we to the Actors though (of whom lost some their Wealth,
Their lives a many, all at least endangered their health,
In trewer Perils, and more brave Achieuements, than the Tails
Of Jason and Ulysses, of their fabled Sea-toyld Sails)
The Glory of the dangerous Gole: Nor let us here forgit
(In which I first did breath this Air) London, preferring it.
Some Merchants theare, of Worth, did mind with Nations, then, unknown.
New Traffiques, and the Pass thereto was by Caboto shown.
By his Instructions and their costs three Ships were rigged out,
Hugh Willoughby the Admyrall, a Knight both wise and stout.
Next place (whose brave performance of Employments ever live)
To Chancellor, grand Pilot for that Voyage, did they give.
Now sail they for the Northeast Parts, Cathayas Shores to find:
Incountred with huge Seas of Ise, with stormy Gustes and Wind.
Scotland, Aegeland, Halgland, th'Isles of Roste, and Lofoot past,
Tempestiously Arzinas Rhode received Sir Hugh at last.
Theare he, and all of two his Ships, attempting bootles shifts,
Wear in that Climate Frozen dead, shut up with isie Driftes.
Thus died he and all with him, if so to die be death:
But no, says Heaven, no, says their Fame, suruiuing them on Earth.
Then Chancellor, his only Ship remaining of that Fleet,
For Fynmarke, at the VVardhouse sails with his Conforts to meet.
There day it is two months of length, and Mal-strands Poole it makes.
Such hidious rore, devouring floods, that ten miles distance shakes.
Wheare frustrate of his Friends in quest, with courage not deiect,
He for the Course preposed did his ventrous Sails direct.
KIng Arthur, Malgo, Edgar, once to have subdewd are said
Orkney, Gotland, Island, and those former in that Traide:
Gronland, VVireland, Curland, and cold Scrikfyn them obayde,
Newland, with others, and those Isles wheare men, save Eyes alone,
Are hid in hides of Beasts, and Beasts save Fish, have Fothernone.
Now Chancellor, ariuing mong'st the Laplande^s, at last,
They seeing uncouth Men and Ships, wear wondringly agaste,
(For ear that day was heard no Ship that churlish Pole had past.)
The Lapland Bay wheare he ariu'd, now called Saint Nicholas Bay,
Though Russiah, fifteen hundredth Miles from Mosco is away:
Theare Winterd he at Newnox, till Safe Conduct being sent,
Thence to their King on swift-drawne Sleads through frozen ways he went.
Not like Sarmatian Scithians (for the Moscouites be so)
He found them plain, but rather much in Pomp to ouer-floe,
They never in the Russian Court till then did English see:
His intertainment therefore was as stately as might be.
In sundry Rooms wear hundreds seen in Gold and Tyssue clad:
A Majesty, Augustus-like, their King inthroned had.
Let pass what paste in speech betwixt our Pilot and their King:
Full well could Chancellor demean himself in every thing:
Let pass how in Basilius Court most royally he fead:
Suffice it that our Agent of his arrant thither spead:
That is, that Ours might trade with the^, of which large leave is read.
More, not unworthy note, here of our purpose is to say,
But this be first of Mandeuil remembered by the way.
CHAP. LXIV.
WE left him formed a Trauelet (brave Pilgrim Knight farewell,)
And Elenor (sweet Soul) in Love, with whom she could not tell.
He travels for to leave his Love, not caring where he lose it,
She for her Love to find, it skils not whom, so him that Oose it.
The greene-Knight, be whosoever he shall, her heart had branded hers:
Wheare is that Second She that Love for Virtue so prefers?
Her only, speed howso he shall, his heart had branded his:
Wheare lives that second He that so, by loving, betterd is?
It Is often seen, Love works in Man a weak dejected mind,
It Is ever seen, a Woman's Love does alter as the wind:
Example then be Mandeuil for Men, not to be idle
In Amorous Passions: Labor is to love, at least, a Bridle:
Example too be Elenor: But let us say no more,
For Women ever alter, says the Gospel preached before.
Conclude we then, when Elenor and Mandeuil did die,
The Method of true loving did with them to Heaven fly,
For ever since too fervent in their Love are Men, for most:
But, Iris-like, in Women's Hearts Love too and fro does post.
One Stafford, of a Noble House, a Courtiour of good hauor,
A friend, and fast to Mandeuil, and in the Prince his Favor,
From Gyprus, from his Friend received two Letters, one was his,
The other sent to Elenor: and that purported this.
Of you received I a Ring, a Token to your Mind,
If so I met it: and it is my fortune it so find.
For if the Heart may, as it might, for Mind be understood,
My Heart is yours, your Ring so mine: Hearts interchang'd were good.
More did I fear, than ever in your Ladyship I found,
Disdainefull Looks, from those fair Eyes that me with love did wou^d.
Now speak I Love, far from those Looks so forceable to kill:
Howbeit that I love is not to work or wish you ill.
Not more than this (though Princes Frowns bear death with them) feared I:
For had you loved, the King mislikt, what had I for'st to die?
Wheare I have been (were blasphemy from Women to detract)
Great store of Beauties have I seen, but none as yours exact.
Courts also more than stately, with fair Ladies in the same:
Which seemed common Forms to me, remembering but your name.
When in the Holly-land I prayed, even at the holy Grave,
(Forgive me God; a sigh for sin, and three for Love I gave,
Against the fearce Arab^ans I the Soldans Pay did take,
When often, at O^set, for Saint George, Saint Elenor I spoke.
The Amazones, those lusty Girls, believe me liked me Well:
But nothing in the best of them but does in you excel.
I looked upon the sterile Lake where Heauen-fir'd Sodom was:
For one, thought I, here such as you not so had come to pas.
Most sweet and Sovereign Balsamum in Indian Fields I saw:
More soueraign sweeter Se^ts, thought I, my lips from yours could draw.
Nere Aethiop when the spice-sweete Well of youth I saw, I said,
My Lady lacks not hereof, Perfection needs not Aid.
I saw (nor wonder you I should, who sees you sees as much)
The only Phoenix: Foul, and Faier, but it, and you, none such.
But, flying thus about your Blaze, your Gnat does burn his wings:
To my despairing Passion more your praised Beauty brings.
Not Travel tiers my Love a whit, but Love does tire on me:
Which should I wish, me better, or you baser of degree?
Be still the same you are, let me exile my self for ever:
Two diffidenses I conceit will let me hope you never:
The first my self, unworthy you, the latter, and the least,
The Kings Consent: But, well I wot, Love is a Lordly Feast:
Aguize (so should you) so, and so despair is part releast.
One comfort is, before you doom is Execution done:
My voluntary Banishment already is begone.
Which if you never shall repeal, shall never end, or when
(Ah, can I hope it?) should you, not for us is England then.
Nor is it but our minds that make our native Homes our Grave)
As we to Ours, Others to theirs like parciall Fancy have:
Transmute we but our Minds, and then all one an Alien is,
As if a Native: One resolved makes every Country his.
Your Answer that by Pen our speech to this returned shall be,
Voutsafe it unto Stafford, for an Other-I is he:
In perfect Friendship no suspect, for two are one in all,
Community or doubling joy, or making grief more small,
But would you to an Unity of hearts twixt us incline,
Wheare Friendship is angelical, our Love should prove divine.
More write I not: blessed may you live: tears overtake this Line.
When (Stafford present) Elenor this Letter had perus'de,
She said, as elsewhere shall ensew: Now is in us infus'de
Fresh matter of Discoueries. How Chancellor he speade
Is said before: of Russia thus remains to be read.
CHAP. LXV.
AVaste and spacious Empier is Moscouie, in the same
Be Rivers, Tanais, Volga, and Boristhenes of fame,
With yearly hallowed Mosca, which the Primate having blessed,
(Whom to attend the Clargie, Lords, and King himself be pressed)
He thinks himself an happy Man may touch the yse-hewne Pit,
But him in Heaven already whom the Primat sprinks with it.
Euxinus, and the Caspian Seas, do wash those frozen Shores,
Which us with fish, oils, ho^ny, salt, furs, and good Traffiques stores.
More temprate be the Inland Parts: They reap what they do Sow
Within the compass of four Moons, inn all their harvest, mow,
And house their Beasts: Themselves keep close in Stoues until the Spring,
And sport with their face-painted Wives, hild thear a comely thing.
In Customs of the Greek Church, much corrupted, are they lead:
Monks, Friars, and Priests swarm theare, not more tha^ in their Portesse
read:
Nor more have Priests, or People, than a ceremonious care,
Gross Worshippers of Images, which in their Houses are:
In all too superstitiously devoted. Though the Pope
Theare stickell not, their Primate takes as large and pompious scope.
Besides these Christians (for unto themselves they arrogate
The soundest Christianity) are subject to their State
Idolators, that do adore even Devils, or did of late.
Not of the Samoeds rude-wrought Gods, or blood-Rites will we tarry,
Or of the Stone, near unto which did Willoughby miscarry,
To which bring Sailors whit-Meats, least their Ships should Tempests harrie,
But that same female-Idoll called Zelotibab, in part
Of Russia, or the Devil himself acting in it his Art,
Is worth the note. When ought amiss amongst them does befall,
An Instrument of Music, and a silver Toade withal
They lay before the Idol, and before her prostrate fall.
Then, Music sounded, he to whom the Toade shall come is slain,
(For come it will) when presently the man reuiues again,
And tells the cause why hap't the ill, and how to pacify
The angry Idol: which is done, though some for it should die.
The King by Monarchia rules, more absolutely none,
Great Duke of Russia late his Style, imperial now his Throne.
He holds a Majesty not mean, and all of All his Own,
When to employ their goods upon the common good is known:
Himself, both Judge, and Iuror, ends with Equity Debates.
Armipotent in Warte, and has subdewed mighty States.
An hundred thousand leads he forth against his Foes to fight,
That scorn both hunger, thirst, and cold, wounds, yielding, fear and flight.
Of cloth of gold, rich Stones, and Plumes, his royal Tent is pight:
Nor to his Soldiers skants he Gifts, that well themselves acquit.
But what particulate we thus, that much in few would write?
NOw wheare we left of Chancellor: he gracious with that King,
Obtained for our Merchants, as he wished, every thing.
With Letters then of Credence for himself, and Mart for them,
He puts to Sea for England, whom theyse about did hem.
But with undaunted Courage, to his never dying Fame,
All Difficulties ouerpast, to London safe he came.
Thence, after some aboade, with new Consorts, an other Fleet,
And Notes digested for their new attempted Traffic meet,
He did resayle to Russia, there received as before:
Chief Agents Gray, and Killingworth, bearded five foot and more.
In all things with the King for ours did Chancellor prevail,
And now our Age^ts knew their Homes, and where to make their Sail.
But now must end our Swan-song, now the Swan himself must end,
Even he, that toyld such tedious Seas his Countries weal to mend,
Returning Homewards, near at Home, even on the Scottish Cost,
Did wrack, and those aboard his Ship then perished for most.
But that he drowned his care to save the Russie, sent to us
In his Conduct, is said the cause: but drowned he was, and thus.
This Mart, thus set a foot, was Thence for Ob an other sought:
Wherein not little was it, that praiseworthy Borough wrought.
Of him and (whom I never can commend with praises dew)
Of Ienkinson ensues: But first of Elenor anew.
CHAP. LXVI.
YE heard how she his Letter read, whilst Stafford was in place,
Which having read, she stood as if astonished a space.
Her blusshing, and vn-blusshing, made that Stafford doubted whether
It pleased, or displeased: which, the troth to say, did neither.
Variety of Men to court a Woman is her pride,
Than which their Vanity of Men is nothing less espyde.
What are to us, but common hutts, those common hopes they give,
If then their Love does dye to us, when ours to them does live?
They Nero-like sing Troy, when Rome by them is set on fire,
Jest at our earnest. Let us now to ^lenor retier.
More modest she tha^ such (though most, in Men's behalf, might better)
And comes, quoth she, from Mandeuil this ill-come-welcome letter?
Believe me, Stafford, ill it comes that says a cause in me,
That from his Native home he should thus selfe-exiled be.
If amorous Hopes, or Hopes vnheld, to him from me had past,
I had indeed bin guilty, as too forward, or not fast.
But to the Cause, Effect, and all, not-guiltie, do I plead:
His Love is News, mine to despairewhat was it him should lead?
Our Court (I will not wrong the Man, nor flatter him a whit)
Can hardly show another-such for Person, Prowse, and Wit.
But as for me (setting apart my Birth, to which, or any
So borne, our State is interest) what am I more than Many?
If beauteous now (here let me chide his Indiscretion, who
Far from a Mean of it so mean does make so much ado,
And least perhaps he should have glib'd, a virtue does not note,
Whence love should spring, which makes me guess he does not love but dote)
If beauteous, as I said, what else is Form but vaiding Air?
Yea often, because assaulted often, it hurts to be fair.
And were not my Descent, and I a Favorite in Court,
My common Form, vnheeded then, might pass without report.
But, were my wishes mine, the Court by me should be the less:
So much it has of Vanity, and painful Idleness.
Since such is he, and of my self my self but so esteem,
Himself by Silence, me he wronged, disdainful me to deem.
I could be angry, were he here, with him for erring so,
Disdain (the Volgars Fault) is not in Gentry found, I troe.
But fear he did, and wisely too (for God forbid that I,
Unworthy that I am, should have endangered him to dye)
The Kings displeasure: Or, perhaps, impossible he thought
My love should equal his, or I a trans-Marine be wrought.
But if he intertain'd such thoughts, there also did he err:
Love is a lordly Feast, he writes, and I the same auerre.
For if (not rashly though, I hope) upon my Choice I stand,
My hand shall never give my heart, my heart shall give my hand:
Yea, so I live with whom I love, what care I in what Land?
With Women is too usual now Theirs, and themselves to sell
For Ioynters, by Indenture, with imperious Men to dwell,
And he does her, and she does him, with his, and hers vpbrayde:
But that I chiefly match for love shall, when I match, be said.
Good Days beget, bad Days try Friends, nor him a friend esteem,
Whom firm, as to thy self thy self, thou dare not to deem,
Say some: But Mandeuil, I see, of you accompteth so,
As of his firm and choycest Friend, then, least I tedious groe,
I tell thee, Stafford, next to one, is Mandeuil the Man
I could have loved, but I love, whom not vn-loue I can.
Yeat if you ask me whom, or where, that one beloved is,
I cannot answer whom, or where, yeat am, and will be his.
Madame, quoth Stafford, yet your speech has head, nor foot, nor Middle,
Not naming him, you end a Sphynx, and tie me to a Riddle.
Well, friend you are to Mandeuil, nor foe (she said) to me:
The greene-Knight, Victor at the Iusts a few years past, is he.
In sooth, quoth Stafford, if for him be resolute your Choice,
Choose not again, with you for him consort I also Voice.
Nor think, in that I him prefer, I Mandeuil reject:
Friendship may brook Triplicitie, and shall in this respect.
For your own sake, and for his sake (than Mandeuil no less
My Friend) I shall (his Souls desire) you of that Knight possess.
Almost an Ecstasy of Joy her from her self did sever,
Hearing of him, for whom her heart did hunt, and else should ever:
And though she did observe his soon Revolt from friend to friend,
And him thereof had tacht, wear not her private Cause to end,
Yeat was she silent touching it, and modestly pursewes,
In Quest of her beloved Knight. But tarry yet that News,
First Borough, Ienkinson, and what by them was done pe^use.
CHAP. LXVII.
IT is no common Labor to the River Ob to sail,
Howbeit Borough did therein, not Dangerles, prevail.
He through the foresaid frozen Seas in Lapland did ariue,
And thence, to expedite for Ob, his Labors did revive.
What he amongst the Vaigats, and the barbarous Samoeds notes,
Their Idols, Deer-skin Te^ts, how on their backs they bare their Botes,
In which, but Hides, securely they do fish those Seas all day,
And how on Dear they ride, and all on Sleds by Dear convey,
Do eat their Dead, to feast their friends their Children sometime slay,
Their store of Sables, Furs, and Pealts, fetched thence from far away,
How, at our ^ra^ and Lion Signs, their Frost and Snow is great,
Let be, and many things we might of this new Tract entreat,
By Borough found: whose Praise not much is Chancelors behind,
As Master in that Ship with him that first did Russia find:
And in this Northeast Trade, with Praise, do Pet and Iackman mind.
Yeat longer (for not largelier One yields Matter) let us dwell
Of Ienkinson. But where shall we begin his Lawdes to tell?
In Europe, Asia, Afric? For these all he saw, in all
Imployd for Englands common good. Nor my rejoicing small,
That from Elizabeth to Reign, and I to live begun,
Has happened that Commerce and Fame he to his Natives won.
NOw, under his Conduct, was hence unto his Home conuaide
The Russian first Ambassador, Here honored, whilst he staide:
Nor Captain Ienkinson was there less graced, where he wrought,
That all things to a wished end were for our Traffic brought.
Here-hence also a friendly League twixt either Prince effected:
Nor little is their Amity of us to be respected.
For, though the Moscouites from us be People far remote,
Yeat, if how Danes, and Norses, have invaded us we note,
And how the Russies, in the like Attempts, might hold them back,
For only it, were thence no Trade, ill might their Friendship lack.
From Mosco then by Iournies long the Caspian Sea he crossed,
Himself and Goods by Tartars often in danger to be lost.
Their Hordes of carted Tents like Towns, which Camels drew, their Kings,
By names of Murses, Seltans, Cans, to who^ for Pass he brings
The Russian King his Letters, how (and royally they troe)
With Wild-horse flesh, and Mares milk, him the Kings did banquet tho,
Their hawking for the Wild-horse (For their Hawks will seize upon
The horses neck, who chaffing tiers, and so is killed anon)
Their often Remoues for Pastures fresh (nor Grass their Pasture is,
But heathie Brush, few Cattle though do thrive as theirs with this)
Their naither use of Coin, or Corn (for Tillage none is theare)
Such Warriors, and Horse-Archers, as they live not whom they fear,
Their crosse-leg eating on the ground, Plurality of wives,
In Turkeman (So the whole is said) and more of their rude lives,
And how the Merchants, travailing by Carauan, that is,
Great Droues of laden Camels, Meat and Water often mis,
And how for us did Ienkinson in Bactra Mart begin,
Let pass, to pass to it for us he did in Persia win.
With this Memento, in Return from Bactra, diverse Kings
Sent in his charge their Legates, whom to Mosco safe he brings.
Thence did he sail for England, Hence for Mosco back again,
And, with our Queen Elizabeth her Letters, did obtain
The Mosicks Letters, to the Kings by whom he then should pas,
For Persian Traffic: And for this he thence embarked was.
NOw in Hyrcana, Shyruan, or Media, all as one,
Suppose our ^enkinson before King Obdolowcans Throne.
Though sumptious Cities he possessed, yeat for the Summers heat,
On airesome Mountains held he then his Court, in Pleasures great.
Of silk and gold imbroyderie his Tents, his Robes inchac't,
With Pearls and precious Stones, and Looks of Majesty him graced:
On Carpets rich they trod, rich Trains on him attendance gave,
With six score Concubines, that seemed so many Queens for brave.
Before his fair Pauilion was of Water clear a Fount,
Drink for himself, and his (for most of Water they account.)
Scarce Cleopatras Anthony was feasted with more cheer,
Of varied Meats, and spice-Conceits, than ^enkinson was here.
In formal Hawking, Hunting, Chase, not the^ came Tristram ^eere.
Such was this King for stately, such for affable, and kind,
There and abroad so loved, and feared, as like was rare to find.
Yeat, notwithstanding such his Wealth, his Signorie, and State,
He of the Persian Sophie held his Land, subdued late.
But in such friendship, as the Shaugh (the Sophie so is said)
Would yield to Obdolowcan in what so he should perswaide:
Which well in Ienkinsons behalf, but shortly after, made.
Him often questoned this King of Us, and Europs strength,
And him, with Gifts, and Privilege, for Mart, dismissed at length.
Silks, raw, and wrought, Spices, and Drugs, and more-els, worth the Mart,
Our Merchants fetch from thence, and there our Merchandise co^uart.
Things wisely thus dispatched there, with men for his defense,
And Letters from that King unto the Shaugh, he traueld thence.
In travel thitherwards, he grieves, in wonder, to behold
The down-Fals of those stately Towns, and Castles, which of old,
Whilst Persia held the Monarchy, were famous over all,
Nor Alexander won of those one Piece, with labor small.
The mighty Cities Tauris, and Persipolis, he past,
Two ruined Gates, sundred twelve miles, yet extant of this last:
The Giants Wonders on the Hill of Quiquiffs heard he told,
And of the yearly Obit, which their Maids to Channa hold.
This was indeed a wonder, for this Virgin so was bent
To Chastity, that by selfe-death, she Marrage did prevent.
Here Mandeuil, perhaps, had bin, and took occasion here,
To fear least Flenor in like might imitate too near:
Even Toys in Love discourage, Love from Toys resumeth cheer.
Of him therefore, whilst Ienkinson rests at his Iornies end,
With Obdolowcans Son, that on the Sophie did attend.
CHAP. LXVIII.
SO Knightly Mandeuil demeanes himself against the Foes
Of Melek Mandibron, that he in Egypt famous groes.
And, of himself, that Sultan did to Mandeuil commend
A greater Match, than else his Thoughts with hope could apprehend,
For virtuous, beauteous, Birth, and Wealth, a Match for none to me^d.
This Lady (also of the blood, and heir unto her Father,
A mighty Prince in those same Parts) he courteth now, the rather
To intermit that homebred Love, which seaz'd on him indeed,
As for to prove how such as he with such as she might speed,
And there experimented, here to cease or else proceed.
Fie, Mandeuil, how good so ere thy Merits otherwise,
In making Love vnmeant thou did thy self but mis-aduise.
Though thou could buzze about the flame, and keep vnskorcht thy wings,
Few safely play with edge-Tooles, sin to jest at holy things.
With women, made for Men, therefore soon won, yeat edging Suit,
With Marrage, praisde enough in him did first it institute:
With Women, who when all was made, and Man of all possessed,
Yeat lacks Man an Help, said God, and Man with Woman blessed:
With marrage, that legitimates our Propagation, and
Two Hearts in one transplants, in all befalne, or taine in hand:
With women, that no less attract our Senses them to leeke,
Than Hunger for to labor Food, or Anguish Ease to seek:
With Marrage, that prefers us, and stays us in content,
Vnanimieth weal or woe, as either us is sent:
In Nature Women, Marrage by Tradition, either twain
So sacret, and autentick, as we naither should profaine.
To trifle then or Them, or This, were not so slight a sin,
As that thy Virtues, Mandeuil, would fault, think I, therein.
But for she was a Pagan, and thy self a Christian theare,
And she the Soldans Tender, thou did form a Love for fear.
For that thou should reny thy Faith, and her thereby possess,
The Sultan did capitulat, in vain: the more thy bless:
For than a Woman evermore the Devil tempts less.
Yeat that they tempt, not theirs but ours the sin: for if I see,
And steal, a precious Gemme, the Gemme faults not, the Theft in me.
Howbe^t when to active and to passive love it groes,
And Women then shall alter, them as Devils then suppose:
And like of Men, if Men alike shall Reputation lose.
This fair Egyptian Lady (of the English Toy in this,
To wit, in forward Love to whom the farthest Commer is)
Might easly have bin won of him, not at an easy rate,
If to his Faith a Recreant had Miscrent bin his state.
But he, immovable as well in Faith, as former Love,
Did there so well, as he from thence with honor did remove.
On Elenor he still deuisde: yeat sometimes, to allay
Those Moodes, by mustring in his mind these thoughts, did thus assay.
Full soon the fairest Face, thought he, would cease from being such,
If not preserved, curiously, with tendering more than much.
Or age at least, and that not old, so alters it that was,
That Helen did disclaim her self, for Helen, in her Glass.
That great Physician that had lived, in health, an age admirde,
Did answer, asked the cause, not he had done as Flesh desirde.
Then Mandeuil bethinks him of the Labyrinth of Cares,
Incumbring married Men, and near that life, and love, forswares.
How tedious were a Shroe, a Sloy, a Wanton, or a Fool,
(All four a-like threatening Mislike, when time should Dotage cool,)
How seldom Women come vndow'd with one, or some, or all,
Or answerable Faults to these (to men not Crosses small,)
The Flattries, and the Fooleries, whereby are women won,
With fishing long to catch, perhaps, a Frog, when all is done,
And all that Sexs Infirmities, his Thoughts did overrun.
But like as Mothers beat their Babes, and sing them when they cry,
Loves Incantations so did he with Malice such defy:
The Amorous with the sea-Crabs gaet do angring Amors fly.
This humor, and the honor, by this Knight in Egypt won,
Ore-passe we, and in Persia see what Ienkinson has done.
CHAP. LXIX.
AT Casben hild the Shawgh his Court, who thirty years, and odd,
Had not been seen abroad, thereof by Prophe* sie fo^bodd.
Like Majesty he kept, as those great Monarchs did before
The Macedons subdewed them, of Wives he had like store,
Besides most bewtious Concubines, not less than fifteen score:
And yearly of the fairest Maids, and Wives, does make new choice:
When much the Friends, and Husbands, of those chosen do rejoice.
Him blesses he to whom does he one of his Relicts give:
Yeat Persian Shaughs esteem themselves the holiest Kings that live.
For when a Christian (whom they call an Infidel, because
He not believes in Mahomet, nor Mortezalies Laws)
Is called to audience, least the same prophaine wheare he does stand,
Must doffe his Shoes, and to and fro tread on new-sifted sand.
Our Sovereigns Letters to the Shaugh so Ienkinson presents,
Who, being ask't his arrant, said those Letters like Contents.
But new-made Peace with Turkey him of new-sought Trade preue^ts
The Turkish Merchants, fearing least their Traffic might decrease,
Had, by that Basha, mard his Mart that then had made that Peace.
The Sh^ugh did also question his Belief, and quarrel it:
So, well appaid is ^enkinson, if well away he git,
Whom, with our letters to the Turk the Shaugh, to send was bent,
Had not the Hyrcane Murzey Posts unto his Father sent,
And Obdolowcans Letters then dissuaded that intent:
When, with a Present for himself, he Thence to Hyrcan went,
And theare did him the heart-trew King most kindly intertayne,
And thence dismiss with Gifts, when he no longer would remain:
Nor only his Ambassadors unto his care Commends,
But moment of that Ambassie which he to Mosco sends.
There now suppose them well ariu'd, and bringing grateful news
Of weighty Messages, whearin the Mosick him did use.
Convenient time he nerethelesse, for Persian Trade attends:
Which Arthur Edwards, thither sent, succesfully theare ends.
This Edwards, and a many here unnamed, deserved well
In these Employments: but of All wear tedious al to tell,
For, saving of Discouerers we purpose not to dwell.
Else would we here revive, but that through Hakluits Pen they live,
(To him, your Fames sweet Trumpetor, Ye English, Garlands give)
A Catalogue of Names, that in this North, and Northeast Clymes,
Have more observed, and more deserved, than perish shall with times.
Nor be my Father here forgot: for he, amongst the rest,
Deserves in this General remembrance with the best.
And here, from out those churlish Seas, with Ienkinson we sail
To London, theare an aged Man, to tell this youthful Tail:
How he had past All Europe, seen all Leuant Islands, and
Greece, Turkey, Afric, India, Sur, Egypt, the holy Land,
And all the foresaid Lands in all imployde, and intertainde,
Of Emperors, and Kings, as if him self a King had reigned.
Rest may thy honorable Boanes, good old* Man in sweet Peace:
Nor have thy Phoenix-Ashes since been barren of increase.
But late had we a Foul like rare, used oftener Sea than Shore,
Often swam he into golden Strands, but now will so no more,
For, though he wear a dyuing Foul, to Heaven did he sore.
In England, not Arabia, now the Phoenix Bird is bread,
And evermore shall theare revive, when shall the old be dead:
The Maiden Empress, and her Knights their Enterprises rare,
Which now have pearst through every Pole, of all admired are.
Remains now, that we entreat of great Achieuements done
By English, in contrary Clymes, since first her Crown begone.
But ride we first at Anchor, though a roomesome Sea we have,
To listen Staffords Comforts which to Elenor he gave.
THE TWELFTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. LXX.
WHen Stafford sounded had, as said, the Ladies Loue-seaz'd heart,
He to a Banquet her inuites, and did for then depart.
Now to his Lodging (which had erst been Mandeuils also)
Comes Elenor, accompned with a crew of Ladies more,
Of which was one that Stafford loved, of her beloved: She
Instructed was by him of all should there effected be.
The Banquet ended, Dorcas (so was Staffords Ladies name)
Thus speaks unto Elenor, as if it wear in game.
In yonder Chamber (poynting to a locked Door thereby)
Has Mandeuil his Closet and no common Armory.
Full many things theare-in, quoth she, both rare and rich saw I:
Howbeit Stafford, even to me, did long that sight deny.
Wear he and all the rest abroad, wheare lies the Keye I wot:
Then said you sick, and sleepie, so the rest may hence be got.
Soon Ladies listen Novelties, and serve themselves with Shifts,
Not sooner Dorcas had devised, but Elenor it drifts.
So finely fayn'd she ill-at-ease that none believed her well,
Save Stafford and his Lady, so preposing as befell:
And all save only Dorcas, whom she prays with her to stay,
Did sadly leave her to her Rest, and that she rest did pray.
Mean while the Ladies and their Oste into the Garden walk,
Where Stafford did invent them Sports, and hild them pleasant talk.
The Ladies twain, thus left alone, the door they open, wheare
To them in complete Armor seemed the greene-Knight to appear.
The Burgonet, the Beuer, Buffe, the Collar, Curates, and
The Poldrons, Grandgard, Vambraces, Gauntlets for either hand,
The Taishes, Cushies, and the Graves, Staff, Pensell, Baises, all
The greene-Knight erst had tylted with that hild her Love his Thra^,
She saw, on Crosses and els-what, by Staffora so set out,
That to have seen her very Knight made Elenor no doubt.
At first she fears, but lastly finds the Armor was vn-man'd:
When skaerd, and cheerd, with Dorcas she did enter, theare at hand,
The Closet wheare the Prizes of the for said Iusts did stand.
These, and that Armor, Dorcas said, are Mandeuils, the same
Your Knight, that won himself, for Force, to you for Fair such fame*
But, Sweet, let this be spoke in Shrift, so was it spoke to me:
Long have you thirsted it, know I, which now you hear and see.
Though Stafford was by Mandeuil coniured to conceal it,
And I by Stafford, what is it but that I may reveal it?
What shame, a Gods name, can redowne to him, by being known
The Knight that honored both himself and you, as more might none.
Believe me, reason none his fame should thus obscured lie:
But whatsoeare the Scruple be, now out it is, for why?
To you lies bare my heart, and shall. With that (by pre-conclusion
Twixt him and Dorcas) Stafford made a mannerly Intrusion.
Why how now Ladies, sick, and heal, and taine so soon in ^a^me?
You should, quoth he, to Pownd, wear this a churlish Ruslicks fa^me.
In vain, I see, has Mandeuil forbidden me or sight,
Or speech hereof to Elenor: And Dorcas serves me right:
Bab'd be our Shrifts to women, of simplicity, or spite.
Well, Lady, (for by now I guess you know this Armors Knight,
And you, concerning other things, have read what he did wright)
If firm you hold for him (as you have said, and should do still)
For you, and him, and both, therein imploye me at your will.
Who mightier than the Sultan? Yeat, as Mandeuil me wrights,
A Lady of the blood, right fair, he him for Wife be hights:
But, wear she Empress of the World, his Resolution is,
She either shall be Elenor, or never any his.
Full well she knew those Sights, and at those Speeches did rejoice:
The greene-Knight had been Mandeuil, had been in her the Choice.
That Wish, the Man, his Worth, their Love, concurriug in this wise,
Had he been also present, what more Bliss could she devise?
Thence went they out into that Room where had the Banquet bin,
And theare was she about to speak, when came the Ladies in:
Full well appayde to see her cheered, and frained then her quaem,
(For nothing less than forged Panges, or what had past they aem.)
Then went they all to whence they came, and Elenor did plie
For Mandeuil: What was it now for him she would not try?
Often Stafford, She, and Dorcas did consult, and then conclude
This Course, not to be changed: which ear said, be first pursude
Of English, that in Afric, and in Asia, bring to pas,
That England now is famous, wheare but late unnamed it was.
CHAP. LXXI.
OF Northern Regions partly is epitomed before,
Of other later Voyages ensues a few, of store.
Great Personages cannot want great Poets theirs to tell.
Nor may they want, nor want o them would I, wrote I like-well.
But of some Meaners, that their lives have ventured no less,
Performed as much, Some more, and Some that have, as many guess,
Unto their Betters made the way to glory they possess,
Shall we digest: Or it we speak of great-Ones, they be dead,
For Writers aduantagiously are of the Living read.
Thy Reign also, Elizabeth, shall bound our Pen in it,
Which to our Theme infers Texts, no times yield more so sit.
Like amotous Escape from England as of Elenor to Rome,
Made Macham in Madera rear his hence-stolne Lovers Toome,
Then reigned here Third Edwara, when so trauel'd Mandeuil,
And in those days th^interring There of Machams Love befell.
A Chapel built be there, his name and hers engraven in Stone,
To Jesus dedicated (then, and England, there unknown.)
Of him, this Islands Port is called Machico, to this day,
Whom Afric Mores to C^stile, as a Wonder, did convey:
For in an hollowed Tree, or Trough, not having sail or Oats,
(The Ship they came in leaving him) discovered he the Mores.
By which discovery, and by his Instructions, did ensew,
The ^berians did Madera and Canaries Isles subdew.
Hence (else had Macham past our Pen) did time effect our Trade
For Guinie, in her Highness Reign acquired, and patent made.
For not in Mary's wear those Parts, as now, so fully found,
Yeat still to grateful Ears may those Negotiators sound,
To wit (although an Alien) good Pinteado, abused
By moodie VVindam, Guinte first, and Benyn, these perused:
Next Gainsh, then Towrson diverse times, and theare my Father did:
Since, rife that Voyage, Brasile, and to Cape-verd Isles beside.
Gold, ^iuet, musk, grains, pepper, woad, and iuory thence be brought:
In Barbary, old Mauritaine, like Trade this reign has wrought:
Of Afric, and America, by Ours no part unsought.
In Tewri^, Sirta, Egypt, Greece, the Turks whole Empier now,
Our Queen is gracious, our Commerce, and Agents, they allow.
Of World-admired Drake (for of his Worth what argues more,
Tha^ fame enuide? Some, for was his so rich, thought theirs too poor,)
And his brave Breeder Hawkins (yeat be honored every Pen,
That, howsoever, honor them as high resolved Men)
In Fiction, or in Mystery, to read would less delight,
Than would significantly some their glorious Ior(...)es wright:
The pains of such invited Pens such subject would requite.
Add Gilbert, Greenuill, Frobisher, of Knights to make up five,
All in their better Parts with God, with Men their Fames alive.
Add ^hilton, Oxnam, Fenton, Ward, Dauis, an other Drake,
With diverse here not catalog'd, and for a Cheifest take
All actions Candish, and of these eternal Pen-worke make.
And, for a gowned Cicero, and one that did not live
But to his Prince, and Country, Lawdes to VVaisingham do give.
The (...)ds, and Ae^eados, for Text, and Truth, might yield
Unto that learned Muse that should manure that plentious Field.
Was never Prince employed Peace, with praise, to profit more,
Or R^alme could, in the Reign of one, boast worthy Men like store:
Out Foes can also witness her armipotent, in few,
Religion, Virtue, Wealth, Peace, War, her Throne with same indue.
And here mine altered Muse this Theme surceaseth to pursue.
Of These, East- Indian Goa, South, and South-east People more,
And of their memorable Names those Toils did undergo,
Is one elaborated Pen compendicusly does floe.
Omitted then, and named Men, and Lands (not here, indeed,
So written of as they deserve) at large in Hakluit reed.
To him, and (who deserves like-well of England, both as Any
Have wrote of England) Camden, and to English Poets Many:
Of which are some (praiseworthy though) that tower their Wits too hie,
To make a Pitch for Love, when they at fairer Fowls might fly,
Now veil I Bonnet. Rest thee, Muse, abroad what need we rome?
Our seauenteene Kingdoms once, now One, yield Work enough at Home,
All which her Highness owneth now, as shall anon be said:
But of our English Lovers first be this Addition made.
CHAP. LXXII.
NOw at Constantinople (once Byzantium) in old Thrace,
Had Mandeuil to Stafford wrote should be his Wintring Place:
Next Summer would he be at Rome: That Stafford should direct
For either Place his Letters, which he, longing, did expect,
So S^efford had to Elenor the same informed, who,
And Dorcas, evermore their Loves did argue fro and too.
They may, quoth Dorcas, make more nice, but few or none, I troe,
That labor not of our disease: and why, I pray you, noe?
To be with God, what good more good? For it we all should ask.
But for by death it must be done, but few affect the Task.
Virginity, though praised, is alike performed, for why?
As much the Flesh is frail therein, as in the fear to dye.
What, was it said to all, but us, Increase and Multiply?
No Clarke will so expound that Text, God shield they should, say I.
All yield, that Marrage is no sin, if chastely then we live,
And Man and wife their Bodies each to other wholly give:
If so, as so is granted, what needs curious struggling then?
Since God and Nature formed Men for us, and us for Men.
Ill match those dallying Girls, pray I, that intertaine by Art
All Lovers, giving Hopes to all, of all to make their Mart,
And, having blaunched many so, in single Life take pride:
When not a Strumpet Men so much abhor, and more deride.
As Well as too remiss in choice, we may be too precise,
And lose, as Aesops swimming Dog, a Substance for Surmise.
But if we mark, in matching, this (which perfecteth Content)
That in the Man of Virtues be and Love a Couplement,
For either Fortune work we that we never shall repent.
We coyly may consume our Youth, till times may alter so
Or form, friends, wealth, or fame, that we out of Request may groe.
But lose that list their Prime, since now I have that may delight,
He shall participate my best, that must my baddet Plight.
For true it is, as Vessels of first Liquors ever taste,
Love, seasned so with Sweets of Youth, the same does ever last.
Nay should my Stafford (God forbid) less kind than think I prove,
I neretheles would still be his, in chaste and cheerful Love.
No men, troe I (the rascal Sort except) but women may,
In Patience, temporizing well, inform, and, erring, stay.
And reason (were there Scripture none, so bidding) we forbear
In men their Moodes, because of us they wholly take the care.
Admit we bring them Portions great, and beauty sought of Many,
Alas, what bring we one, that might not else have hap't to any?
For (let me speak it to no Blab) it is a Question, whether
That longer think it we, or Men, until we come together.
Well Wanton, well, quoth Elenor, if Men should hear your chat,
This last I mean, at least they would conclude for us in that:
Concerning which, upon my Tongue shall mine Opinion dye,
Though should I say to it, and all, Amen, I soothed no Lie.
Saint Stafford thine, Saint Mandeuil for me, God for us all,
I have bin, a(...), and will be still resolved, what ere befall.
In saying which came Stafford in, and wills them to dispatch
To Ship-boord: (for before had they determined of that Match.)
Already had he shipped their Stuff, lack't only they a board:
Which Opportunity did now that time and place afford.
How they escaped, or how disguisde, what skils it? escaped they are,
All three imbark't for Italy, and had the wind so fair,
That almost thither had they reached, before they missed wear.
For them great search, and sorrow much was made, but all in vain,
None knew or when they went, or whence, or where they did remain.
Here see you, what can mighty Love in either Sex effect:
Here see you also friends for friends nor weal nor woe respect:
Here see you one that feared to speak, is followed far to speed:
Here see you that a Woman dares, if she conceits the Deed:
Here see you one in love, not moop't at home, but mapping Lands:
Here see you how against all things else, for Ladies Virtue stands:
Here also hear what they, ariu'd in Italy, did see:
And first at Rome, when first shall this of Else-what spoken be.
CHAP. LXXIII.
Elizabeth's now-Monarchie ore seauenteene Crowns of old,
As formerly was promised, shall briefly here be told.
Before the Scots did plant them Here, owned ancient Brutaines All,
And still, take I, her Homager may England Scotland call:
Which ouer-passe, not now possessed, in this Account we shall.
Of either Land the Marches, and much more, for most now Ours,
The warlike Picts possessing Here, built Castles, Towns, and Towers,
(...)tes, Scots, and Romans (then our Lords) often daunting with their Powers:
T^^^^stly civil Strife, and Scots, disskingdom'd the^ from Hence,
Whom Orkney Islands, as is said, have harbored ever sense.
The Br^^aines, by these Picts of long oppressed with thraldom sore,
To be deliu'red of such Foes, did Saxon Aides implore.
So playing as did Aesops Horse, that angry with the Heart,
To be revenged, did crave in aid of Man to take his part:
Till when the Horse was never backed nor bitted, Either now
He having suffered, would have helped, but then he knew not how.
The Brataines, having called so the Saxons to their aid,
Could not be rid of them, to whom they had themselves betraide:
But by the same were they at length debelled into VVailes:
Each of whose Kings, of long time Three, in Englands Monarch fails.
The Saxons getting Brutaine thus (which they did England name)
At once of them in several Parts Seven Kings did rule the same:
All which, by Western Adelstane, in Monarchy was got,
Which since (save Iron-sids and the Danes once Deuide^t) changed not.
Five Irish Kingdo^s likewise add, now drowned in Englands Crown.
The Seventeenth was the Isle of Man, in Ours now also down.
Our Mandeuil, here cited, of Earl Mandeuil exact
In Stephens Reign so famous, Man, in Scots Possession sacked,
And with the Spoil of all that Isle thence, and his Brother, pack't.
Consent of times, Names, and Records, affirm, may seem, no less.
But Monteacute, Count Salsburie, it won, and did possess.
Of Percies after, Stanlies next, and still (guess I) holds Man,
From honorable long Descents: and from they first began,
All loyal, hospitalious, loved, still powre-full, and I pray,
That in that Noble house those Terms may neuer-more decay.
This Man was diverse hundred years a Kingdom, and not small,
Ruled Hebrides, the Orcades, to Thul the Islands all,
And chances there, and Changes, worth the note, did often befall.
As how the natural Incolants the Iselanders subdew,
Them Norses, ^rish them, them Scots, and English them, in few.
Beauchamp, the Earl of Warwick, (first, and last, and but a while)
Was King of VVight, Sixth Henry's Gift that Honor, and that I Will:
Which added, Eighteen Kingdoms, al possessed, ieke Englands Style.
These now, thus couched all in One, save Parcel Scots withhold
Of Penthland, and some barren Isles subdued to Man of old,
Since has one Monarch ruled, us has rendered secure:
Whereas Plurality of Kings did ever Loss procure.
Twice joined our Ilanders in one, when twice did Caesar fail:
Disioyning, He, Picts, Saxons, Danes, and Normaines did prevail.
The Spanyard, in Conceit, deuoures our Country, in no hope
But of Disiunctiues, who, thinks he, less love their Prince than Pope.
Let France admonish England, turned Religion turns not Spain
From thirsting France: Neutralitie brought late-lost Calice Baine:
And Spanish't-French live Peasants-like, that, French, did Princes reign.
Our Elders* illy did they well, for so should not be done,
Much less to causeles Arms against their Prince ought Subjects ron)
So badly brook't this Spaniards famed Espousall with their Queen,
That, even at VVestminsters Law-Barres, were harnest Pleaders seen,
Feared with the trooped Bands yt would that Banes with swords forbid:
Of which were pitied those that did, the Rest winkt-at, and hid.
Their meaning had it Praise, had not the Manner bin in fault:
The Manner now does hold, may none in selfsame Meaning hault:
But armed be every hand, and heart, hence Englishly to beat
Spayn, that our Bodies would inthral, Rome, that our Souls does threat.
Yeat (which has blinded, bridled, and beguiled, them many a day)
Their Inquisition wish I from the Spaniards rid away.
What good remains to wish the Pope, this, that had none bin borne,
From him to steal his ill-got Coin, from us to ship our Corn.
The best things brought from Rome, to us convert, troe I, to ill:
But new Rome left, of old Rome now abreuiat we will.
CHAP. LXXIV.
WHen Stafford and his double Charge to Italy were come,
In health, and rich (for hence brought they in Coin no little Some,
With Jewels of rare estimate, and else-what of great worth)
For Mandeuil they seek, and him at last did listen forth.
That in Constantinople yet he was, a Merchant said:
And thither Staffords Letter was to him with speed conuaide,
Purporting only that himself at Rome his coming staide.
Mean while in Rome (the Mistress once of all the world) they view
Such wonders, couch't in Ruins, as unseen might seem untrue.
Once was it compast, as is read, with fifty miles of wall:
Now some to twenty, some to less, in that account do fall:
It having Towers so many as the year has days in all.
From forty miles was water brought in Pipes o^ Arches thither.
Were vaulted walks through every Street, against Sun, and rainy weather.
The sumptious Bathes, with Palaces thereto of rare delight,
The roomesome Ponds, where very Ships some Festiuals did fight,
The Trophie Arches, where to life Triumphants were purtraide,
The Statures huge, of Porphyrie and costlier matters made,
The Theaters, Pyramides, the Hill of half a mile,
Raisde but of tribute Pot-sheards, so to boast their Power long while,
The Obelisks, of one whole Stone near forty yards or more,
Huge Pillars, carved in Masonrie with Prowse of Knights before,
The stately Bridges, sometimes Eight, now fewer, Tyber cross,
The Thirty goodly Gates, of which is now of number loss,
The huge Colosses, Conduites, and else-what, that showed a State
Beyond belief of ruined Rome, in part repaired of late,
They wonder at, and how the world could yield such Pomp, debate.
Though some the seven enclosed Hills, did ancient Rome contain,
Lie waste, or Vine-yards, more does yeat of Majesty remain,
Even in the Rubble of the old, than in the now renewed,
Though Rome retains a Statelines, nor fairer Pyles are viewed.
The round Pantheon, once the House of all the Heathen Gods,
Stands yet a Temple, but less decked for rich by too much ods.
On Auentine the down-fals are of Temples store to see:
On Tarpie of the Capitol, were wont their Guild to be:
On Palantine of Palaces, on Caelius signs of Plays:
Quirinall, Exquell, Viminall, of Bathes show brave decays.
These Hills, with Vatican and old Ianiculum ore-past,
Show we how Rome did rule, was ruled, and ruined at the last.
FRom Ianus (called Noe of some, ^aphet of some Noes Son,
And Iaphets son of others) Rule in Tuscan first begone,
Reigned in six hundredth twenty years of Latins Twenty one:
(Son of the Eight of which was Brute, first Soueraign of our Throne)
The last of these Numitor was, whom Romulus did kill,
And, building Rome, slew Remus, there to lord-it at his will.
* This City, then Receptacle for all, how vile skils not,
Of Italy by one and one the Sixteen State-Lands got.
Tarquinius reigned the Seventh in Rome, when for the Outrage done
Upon Lucretia, Kings did cease, and Consuls then begone:
When had two hundredth thirty years bin Kings, that much had won.
* In this estate of Consuls (Two, remoueable each year)
Rome flourished in Victories five hundredth years well near.
No age can boast like valiant Men, or Senators so grave,
That War, and Peace, unto the world at their Devotion gave:
Whose only naked Majesty not Armor then could brave:
Like Monarchy none ever had, or likely is shall have.
* When now the world was wholly Romes, and Pompei overcome,
Then Julius Caesar did Usurp the Commonwealth of Rome.
Had Thirty eight bin Emperors successively, when as
Did Constantine to Siluester Rome, by Donation pas.
* This Constantine (surnamed the great, Our heir, and of our blood)
Baptized of Siluester, did hurt, as hap't, by doing good:
When to Constantinople he removed the imperial Seat,
Rome proved too proud for Priests, or pride of Priests for Rome too great.
Besides, was little Policy in Partnership of Reign,
For Rome, and Greece, one Empier erst, was ruled as if of Twain:
Who also chose their Caesar's, that their private Turns did wait:
Whence, after at Bizantium Nine had held imperial State,
Rome by the Gothe Alaracus was sacked in barbrous rate.
And here the Roman Monarchy did palpably decline:
As does her Prelacie, and soon shall quite, may we divine.
But shall we yet digress of Rome, subiecting us so long?
Then least, as now your Ears, our Pen your Memories should wrong,
Remembered be wheare stayde our search of Countries, where left we
Of Manaeuil and Elenir, and wheare these Lovers be.
CHAP. LXXV.
ANon as Constantine left Rome, for Greece, to Sylvester,
(So called of living in the Woods, whence erst he durst not ster)
For consecrating after. Popes they golden Rites prefer,
And, hansling Rome with Heresies, in factious Schisms did err.
Scarce was it come unto the Third, when those that lived before,
(But few escaping Martyrdom) in Deserts, meek and poor,
Did wrangle for Saint Peter's keys, and Primacie of all
The christian Church: which to their Sea, though long, at length did fall.
Hence Dispensations, Jubilees. Pardons, and such racked geere,
Wear had at Rome: nothing, naught worth, theare had, not paid for dear.
Yeat not, till long, the Emperors they dared to provoke,
That now in choice of Emperors did labor greatest stroke,
And S^culers from church-Affayres in all did sequester,
But wrought that Seculers should all unto the Church refer:
Effecting so, that Emperors and Kings did kiss their feet,
Deposing, and disposing, them, and theirs, as they thought meet.
When now the blind seduced World was brought unto their bent,
And more their busy heads could not, ambitiously, invent,
Was Pope, and Pope, and sometimes Three: Popes poysond, Popes exild,
Popes strangeld, cozened Popes, a Pope deliuerd of a Child:
Was never heard such Tyrants, or of other Potentates
So many did miscarrie, through Ambition, and Debates.
But be observed, in highest pitch of Pride in Cleargie-men,
God still has wrought, Religion, Realms, and all have ruined then.
So, in her Roof, it fared with Rome: he whisel'd, and did swarm
From out the North Barbarians that against Italy did arm.
At sundry times the Goth, the Dane, the Vandale, and the Hunne,
With others, four times sacked Rome, and often the Land ore-runne:
Nor only so, but there did reign, in spite of who said nay:
Whence Cisalpine is Lumbardie unto this present day:
And Rome, which since our Brennus, none durst enterprise, was made
A Booty to each barbrous Force that would the same invade.
In vain the Roman Emperors their ancient Right defend,
For through seditious Popes the French begun where Those did end.
From Pharamonds to Pepins House they foyst the Crown of France,
And to the Western Empier then did Charlemaine advance.
From France to Italy again, to Germany from thence,
Whereas the naked Title has inured ever sense.
Thus erring Rome has, does, and will, our christian World vnqueate:
May therefore Princes join to race that Monster from his Seat.
What, will ye see a glorious God of earth? go see the Pope:
Aspiring Lucifer? who else? Truth fals't? reuersethe Cope:
Queanes like to Queens? There halfe-mile Streets afford no other Sort,
If Skarlet Hats mean while and Stoles have not ingro'st the Sport.
Full forty Thousand Cur^izans there, Ladies-like, do live,
That to the Pope for wantoning no small Reuenew give.
Their wives they mew from churchme^ there: whence does this Byword come?
More Privileged Harlots live tha^ honest wines at Rome.
Well, by their Fruits ye may them know. Thus is cast up this Some.
WHilst were those Broils in Italy, did many there reject
Obedience to the Emperors, who could not them protect:
So diverse Cities did themselves infranchize, growing States:
And each of them Dominion to her Commonwealth delates.
Wear ouerlong although we should but briefly ouer-ronne
The free- Italian States, of which the Spaniards part have won:
As Naples, Myllaine, royal That, and Duchy This, both twain
So peopled, fertile, pleasant, rich, as neither show their waine.
But should we speak of Venic's Pomp, the City, and the Site,
Too little should we speak, although too much we here should write.
But, Gallants, will you view the Court of Venus, and not so,
But Myrrors too of Courtesy? to rich-built Genoa go:
But far from drifting Florence keep, least Machiuels ye groe.
Ferrara, Vrbine, Mantua, Placence, and Parma are
Brave Cities, great for State, and please those which to them repare.
I wot not what this spacious Land does lack that Man can wish:
Air te^prate, fertile Grounds, vnmatch't for fruits, beasts, fowls, and fish:
Men valiant, rich, kind, courtly, and fair Academies many,
For brave and bewtious women do, nor need they yield to any.
Now to our English Trinity of Lovers let us return,
That still, in expectation of the Fourth, at Rome soiourne.
Theare, after Prayers, Church-times, Sights, and Stories sometimes read,
Amongst their merry Tales was this, how one, enamored, spead.
CHAP. LXXVI.
AFaire young wife of Lyncolne-Shire (if say our Author truth)
In traueling to London-wards, squir'd of a clownish youth,
Was by a Yorke-Shire Gentleman ore-taken, and together
This Cock of game, and Hen (as he supposed) of that Feather,
Do journey on: And, liking her, when words of course had past,
And nodding pricked on before her Serving Creature fast,
He thus began. Fair Mistress, since our Travel lies one way,
If so you please, one Inn, one Board, (and I for all will pay)
May serve us both: I also was about, one Bead, to say.
The Gentlewoman (formally then modest) blushing, said,
For Inn, add Board, as pleases you: And so her Answer staide,
But would you add the Third, quoth he, more would it please in deed.
What that you pay for all? quoth she, nay, so wear more than need.
Tush, that (And yeat best Orators to Women knew he Gifts,
And therefore named, Pay, as if by chance, to edge his drifts)
Was out, quoth he, at un awares: I also named, Bead.
You said you were about, quoth she, which still let go for dead.
Thus off and on they dialogue best part of all that day:
He could not win her to consent, nor would he take a nay:
For long a go the Calendar of Women-Saints was filde,
Few not to Opportunity, importunated, yield,
Thinks this our Northern wily Ladde, hearty, and hardy too,
Who never would giue-out: nor more, than thus, yields she to do,
That is, to bead: he swearing but to kiss, and her embrace.
Then merrily for Huntington they mend their former pace.
Alighted theare, for Supper he bespeaks the dantiest Cheer,
And either in one Gallerie had Chambers, somewhat near.
Betwixt their Chambers placed was a Southern Gentleman,
That by officious Signs twix't them to sound their Match began.
Her extraordinary Form, on work the rather sets
His heart, and Senses (such an hand of us such Beauty gets.)
Resolved at last of what was meant, and how therein to deal,
This Smel-feast from the bidden Guest, did thus the Banquer steal.
He gave it out, that all might hear, he early would away,
His Man fayn'd fear to ouer-sleepe, and would not down him lay:
But, when that all besides betook themselves to sleep and rest,
One while he walks the Gallerie, another while he dressed
His rustie Sword, which badly did the Northern-man digest.
In vain he cha^te, in vain he wished the Seruing-man were gone:
Nor durst he out to board his Love (for much it stood upon
Their Credits to be cautilous.) The Southern-man, this while,
Got to the Gentle-womans bed, and did (no force) beguile
Her Expectation: Swore you not? quoth she, and he did smile.
But, had he bin the Man forsworn, if God forgave the Sin,
She pardoned him the quo advi that he had trespast in,
And, for that Nights work, swore to swear no Man from like, I win.
This Chaer thus chaer'd, as closely as he went returns he back
Unto his proper Bed, nor long he sleeps ere thence he pack.
No sooner cleared was the Coast, but that the bidden Guest
Steals to her Chamber door, then locked, (for now she means to rest.)
A Malcontent retireth he, not dreaming what had bin,
But better Opportunity hopes at their next-nights Inn.
Next Morn they meet, when, blushingly (but angry not a whit)
Ha Sir, quoth she, I Will trust again your Oath, so kept you it.
Well, bite, and whine (quoth he) who trusts a Woman so is saru'd.
First museth she, then jests it out, soon finding how was swaru'd.
But thus the Northern-man did fail, that did no cost omit,
And thus the Southern-man prevailed, at charge no more then Wit.
The best is yet behind, but ere be told the Story out,
Amongst our Lovers, now at Rome, hear how was brought about.
AT Rome is Mandeuil ariu'd, Stafford and he are met,
To say their Greeting, for the much, were here too long a Let.
Of Elenor her health, and more, suppose not Questions few:
For yet full little Mandeuil of her Ariuall knew,
Nor shall, till of his Loyalty, and life, be further View.
At Staffords Lodging had he seen (as is The Italian Guies)
Two portly Ladies, Head and Face, all veiled, save their Eyes:
Twixt one of these, and Stafford, much of Kindness to have past
Had he observed, and thereupon thus breaks with him at last.
I have not seen the covered Dish, that so your Diet fits,
But much I fear it surfeit may, quoth he, your queasie wits:
Needs must I enter now the Lists, to combat Dorcas Foe,
Even Staffords reason that from Heaven to Hell is posting so.
I will not ask, nor do I care, what beauty, wealth, or wit,
Your here-found Mistres has, why you should home-left Love forgit:
But this, I know, not Rome affords whom more you might affect
Than her, whom wronged here I see, and more than seen suspect:
And wherein differs Man from Beast, but in Affections checked?
What, is she married. Then do ye superlatiuely sin:
Or Maid? I like not Maidens that so forwardly begin:
Or Curtizen? What does she with a Veil that is so vile,
As not to blush at shame, but, baer'd, is wonted to beguile?
But Married, Maid, or Curtizen, or what you please her name,
I like not him makes love to one, and wrongs the very same.
I tell thee, Stafford, be she good, or bad, thou here do court,
Thee I pronounce too bad, yt with fore-plighted Love do'est spourte.
Let it suffice my Friendship hates Absurdities in thee:
Far be it Trauelers should play the Spyder, not the Be.
I would thy courted Lady here, and her Consorte, heard this:
(A needles wish, next Room wear both, and over heard he is)
Then should they hear thee false to one, a Choyser is not here,
And, fearing like, suspect thy Love, of Precontracts not clear:
Or falsed Matches, finished in wrong of Others, might,
By still improsprous Presidents, detetre from wronging Right.
To honest Ears might this suffice to interrupt herein,
Or spoke I unto Harlots, this at least from Lust should win:
Al Touch-sweet, Tast-sweet, Eye-sweet, Eat-sweet, Sent-sweet, Soulesweet, is
A virtuous Match, but vicious Love in all contraries this.
Suppose this firm and naked Love, and Friendship, much to please
His Auditorie, seen, and not, and S^afford, to appease
His Discontent, pretends a soon Return for England thence,
And so this Parlie ended, and on either part Offense.
Stafford had said to Mandeuil, that Elenor, to try
Whether his Love did not with time, new Loves, and Travel die,
Required back the Ring she gave, which if he could her send,
She would believe him loyal, and requite it in the end.
That Ring, in this Regard, did he commend to Stafford now,
And, save to her, he give the same to none exacts a Vow.
The next third following day was fayn'd the time he would from thence,
Whom to accompany on his way had Mandeuil pretense:
Wherefore they feast their Friends, and the^ their Friends, amo^g'st the rest,
Unknown of him, was Elenor with Mandekil a Guest.
Such Art she used, and such Attier she wore, and who would look
For her at Rome? that present her not for herself he took.
Upon her Finger he espide his Ring, delivered erst,
Yeat silently deuoures the Grief, that to his Soul had pear'st.
He, and the rest, invited wear to sup abroad that Night:
Night, Guests, and Suppers end are come, when (grieved though in Spright
He, to recover back his Ring, did use this clenly slight:
In one had he a Mommerie devised and a Mask,
And every masking Mommer took a Lady to his task,
He her, with whom he had espyde his Ring, and Dancing donn^,
To look, as if for somewhat lost, to ground-wards he begone.
Was ask't what myste, he whispers her, that he had lost a Ring,
Which wanting in each Mommers Mouth, was made a penal thing:
Fair Lady, lend me this, quoth he, that on your finger is,
And (giving her a Tablet rich) for Gage accept of this.
Her Courtesy, his colored Want, and Gage, effected so,
That she, the Pawn accepted, did her loned Ring forgo.
Now on the Board wear cast the Dice, her turn was come to play,
Which Opportunity takes he, and shifts him thence away.
Nor knew she him, nor her knew he, for her she was indeed:
But thus he spead his purpose, and of this did thus proceed:
Which, ear we shall report, insewes our Jests Remain to reed.
CHAP. LXXVII.
AT VVare (in Hertford-shire a Town, not bettered, I win,
Of thorough-Faires, from Thence to Twede, for many an harbrous Inn,
Washed with the once ship-bearing Ley, by Alfred slu'ste in Three,
To dissipate the Dane-Fleete, that expugning Hertford be,)
Next day they timely took their Inn, had sup't ere Sun was ser,
Abroad walked she, unseen did he into her Chamber get.
First giving out he would to bed, least, mist, be marde the Sport,
And, least she fear, the day before had made to her report,
In Merriment, that oftentimes he walked in his Sleep,
And then nor Lock, nor Let, could him from Place, or Person, keep:
If in this fit I chance on you, be not afraid, quoth he.
But, if you come, I Will whip you thence, then best not come, quoth she.
Thus, and with this Preparatiue, he counts the Booty his,
And on the Rushes, underneath her Bed, he couched is,
And what with watch the night before, and wearines that day,
And to be fresh, anon, he slept, as soon as down he lay.
Mean while, a lusty Yeoman of a Northern Bishops, who
Was often there a Guest, and good, alights and goes into
The Gentlewomans poynted Room, and say what they could say,
There would he lodge, for that had bin his Lodging many a day,
Loath were they to displease him (for an Harbinger he was)
And then were Bishops bo^^tious, as they too and fro did pass.
For whenever they removed to Place, or Parliament,
Their common Meany (not a few) on Foot with Bows fore-went,
Nor niggardly was then to them allowed to be spent.
Themselves, with learned Chaplains and great Trains did follow then,
And frankly spent in every Place, relieuing many Men.
Yea, Monasteries, Colleges, Schools, Hospitals, Hie-waies,
Bridges, and like, were founded by the Prelates in those days.
But Laters could not so, for why? were Those so fleeced Theirs,
As but a thousand yearly Fee, some purcha'st to their Heirs.
But now be some (may such be long, and such to them succeed)
To whom in all does nothing want of reverent Worth indeed.
But say ye Sooth, have Cleargie-men Coshairers? tush a Lie:
To ask do Courtiers, Churchmen shame to offer Simonie:
And that should be such Fault, appears small likelihood, say I.
Obscurely more, with lesser Port, less hospitalious too,
The great-Ones never lived, nor racked their own, as now they do.
Then either this is false that thus they fleece, or this is true,
That even Consumption of their own, is Sacrilegers due.
But wander do we from our Jest, of that does thus ensue.
The Bishops man sups, and to bed, whilst soundly sleeps that other:
The Gentlewoman, barred that Room, is lodged in another:
That in the Bed fell fast a sleep, This underneath awakes,
And, in his creeping out, and up, no dinne at all he makes.
One heard he breathe, ar't there? thought he, have with thee by and by:
And softly kissed, wheare felt so rough, he feared to have kissed awry.
He grop't therefore her Face, and caught the Yeoman by the Beard:
And rudely starting up (not more in all his life afeard,
The^ buskling to his Sword) cride Thieves: That other in such taking,
As though he were a Man right good, he stood amazed, and quaking.
The Oste and Ostlers with a Light and Tools, then next to hand,
Came in, where he, almost vnstript, but wholly skar'de, did stand.
They wonder (for they knew him well) that he should be a Thief:
Good Sirs, quoth he, be still, we all deceived are, in brief.
Then, taking some apart, he told his Cause of being theare,
And prays their silence, and in Wine was washed away that Fear.
The Gentlewoman, hearing this, vn-Inn'd by day did peep,
And (honester than would himself) left him to wake, or sleep.
This stale-Iest told, Of Mandeuil now let us Promise keep.
WIth modest Mirth were ended now the Mask, and Revels, when
Unto their Lodging Stafford did the Ladies Usher then.
There Elenor was passing sad, and, being ask't, did tell
The Circumstances of her Ring in order as befell,
And shows the gaged Tablet, seen and known of Stafford well.
Her, weeping ripe, he, laughing, bids to patient her a while,
For Mandeuil supposde him wronged, and wrought, quod he, that wile.
But how for you he loves yours, it argues, and withal
A gentle-manly mind his great Exchange for value small.
Nor think I less, nor argue less of Love, and Gentry too
May what, in both preventing him, I mean, quoth she, to do.
His Tablet sent she, and therewith this Breuiat, by a Page.
Of you I ask not back my Loan, but take it, and your Gage:
Yours Either, Neither say I mine, Both shall be, I presage.
He musing of her Meaning, thus to her lets his be known.
Of you I ask not back my Gage, but take it for your Loan:
Mine triples yours, not yours, and yeat for Price gets yours, but One.
Not musing of his Meaning (which to her was not for News)
She of her Meaning also means that he no longer muse.
Now Mandeuil, though grieved much at Stafford, who^ he thought
In Rome to riot, Dorcas not esteemed as she ought,
And for his blabbing him to herthe which had had his Ring.
Against an Oath, means nerethelesse him on his way to bring,
And comes to Staffords Lodging, who prepared for no such thing.
But for a Bridegroom trimmed, and trim was All, and She for Bride
Him contradicted, when, as said, had Mandeuil espide
That likelihood: who, sighing, said, not henceforth will I chide,
But pity Stafford, now so far from wonted Stafford wide.
A Friend should not (not you will I in this Infirmenes) fly,
Alone of Dorcas wronged here not witness shall mine Eye.
Came you to Rome to lose your self, and find at Rome a Friend,
There to begin his Sorrows where your Senses make an end?
Or thrive they more, or travel less, may Englishmen, wish I:
Hence should they profit, whence for most they least do fructify,
How stoicall grows Mandeuil, quoth Stafford, since his Travel:
With you, for like, may I ere long, have cause no less to cauell.
With that, from out another Room to him, that would away,
Then Dorcas-like came Dorcas out, entreating him to stay.
What should we say his Joy, that his Mis-deemes did sort to this?
Was not a gladder man, and yeat anon he gladder is,
When Elenor, then like her self, to him came also out:
But whether gladder he, or she, thus met, shall rest a doubt.
That very day both Couples wead, but what they did that night,
Not men vnpractis'd can report, for Action, or Delight.
Nor creeded be this Loue-Tale of this Lady and this Knight.
THus, of what worth so-ere, is brought this Work of Ours to end:
More have we done, hence outed, more we purposed to have pend,
Which to intelligenced Men, more daring, we commend.
Well wotring, Acts heroic, and great Accidents, not few
Occur this happy Reign, here-hence, of purpose, blanched view.
Nor Perpetuity my Muse can hope, unless in this,
That thy sweet Name, Elizabeth, herein remembered is.
And this, hope I, does bode me good, that very day wherein
Was finished This, did of thy Reign year Thirtith nine begin.
May Muse arte-graced more than mine, in Numbers like supply,
What in thine Highness Praise my Pen, too poor, has passed-by.
A larger Field, a Subject more illustrious, None can ask,
That with thy Scepter and thy self, his Poesy to task.
Thy Peoples Prolocutor be my Prayer, and I pray,
That us thy blessed Life, and Reign, long bless, as at this day.
An Addition in Proese to the second Book of ALBIONS ENGLAND: containing a
Breuiate of the true History of Aeneas.
ACcept him (friendly Reader) where he is, not where he ought, and as he
speaks, not as he should. Misapplied he is not for Matter precedent,
howsoever the penning or misplacing may like or mislike for the English or
Order. Rather has my Remisnes borrowed of Decorum and your Patience, than that
a Patriarch of our Brutons should be abruptly estranged: Of Aeneas therefore it
thus follows:

Aeneidos.
WHen the reuengefull Flames of Tr^y, properly called Ilion, then the
principal City of all Asia, had perfected the more than Te^ne years Siege of
the Grecians expugning of the same, then Aeneas (howsoever by some authorities
noted of disloyalty toward Priam, in this not unworthily surnamed virtuous)
burthening his armed shoulders with his feeble and most aged Father Anchises,
that labored also under his load of the Trojan Gods and sacred Relics,
Aeneas (as I say) with such his Burden, leading by the hand his Son Ascanius
of the age of twelve years, followed not only of the beautiful Creusa his wife
the Daughter of King Priam, but also of a many Trojans participating that
common calamity, brake through the wastfull Flames, mauger the wrathful Foes,
into the fields of Phrigia. Theare the Air emptied of down-burnt Turrets, and
filled with smoke of fired Buildings, assured from their hearts more tears to
their eyes, than the benefit of their present Escape could promise them
comfort. Tr^y therefore not to be rescued, or Creusa (in this business lost
and perishing) to be recovered, Aeneas and his Followers imbarking themselves
in Simois, after long and weary Seafaring arrived in a part of Thrace called
Cressa, bounding on Mygdonia. Here Aeneas, purposing an end of his tedious
Saylings, and not meanly furnished of Treasure conuayed from Troy, laid
Foundation of a City (after the Founder) called Aenea. This City going
forward less effectually than was expected, Aeneas, supposing the Gods to be
yet opposite to the Trojans, knocking down a milke-white Bull pitched an Altar
to do Sacrifice. Near at hand were growing diverse shrubbed Trees, the Boughs
whereof (for the greater reverence and exornation of the present Solemnity) he
cutting and sliuing down, perceived blood in great abundance issuing from the
broken Branches: whereat long admiring, and with great terror and devotion
intercessing the Gods to reveal the meaning of that miraculous Accident, at
the length he heard a pitiful and feeble voice (for diuessly in those days,
did the Devils answer and give Oracles) thus answering.

Reason were it (Aeneas) that the Graves of the dead should privilege their
bodies from the tyranny of the living: but by so much the less do I esteem
my prejudice, by how much the more I know thee unwittingly injurious. Thou
Aeneas, in these Branches, thou tearest the body of thy unfortunate
Brother-in-law Polydor, Son to the likestarred Priamus. Troy as yet was only
threatened, not besieged, when my Father (as thou know) delivered me with a
world of Treasure to Polymn^stor the barbarous King of this Country, here
daungerles (as he pretended) to abide, as the Conseruor and Restoration of his
House and Empire, whatsoever should betide of him, his other Issue, or the
Wars then beginning: but the Greeks prevailing, Avarice, and the declining
State of Phrigia, imboldned my Gardein (fearles of Reuengers) to the murdering
of me: which he traytrously accomplishing on this Shore, secretly raked me up
in these Sands, without honor of better Sepulcher: and of my body (so has it
pleased the Gods, and Nature) are sprung these Branches, in tearing of which
thou torme^test me. Howbeit, in respect of my desire to profit thee by
foretelling of thy Destiny, I account me happily harmed: For know (Aeneas)
that in vain thou do build where the Gods deny thine abode: leave therefore
these defamed Coasts, and prosperously plant the Remain of Troy and thy
Posterity in the fertile Italian Clime.

The voice thus ceased to speak, and Aeneas, without further touch of the
forbidden Shrubs, continuing his fear finished the Sacrifice, and after the
Phrigian fashion solemnlie held an Obit to the Ghost of his murdered Kinsman.

THen, by this admonishment, he and his Trojans leaving the new reared City,
disanker from Thrace in quest of behighted Italy. But no sooner had they put
to Sea, the^ that the winds and the waves solicited (a Poetical fiction) by
the wife of Jupiter, so tossed and turmoyled the disparkled Navy, that the
horror of the circumstances continually threatening their lives, left only
hoped-for death as the remain of all comfort. At length, these instruments of
their long wanderings, and the causes of Anchises and of many noble personages
there perishing, cou^terpleaded (as is fabled) by Venus, tossed their
distackled Fleet to the Shore of Libya. Near to the place of their arriual
stood the beautiful City of Carthage, which Elisa (whom the Phaenicians for
her magnanimious dying, did afterward name Dido) had newly builded: Aeneas by
safe-co^duct received from her repayring thither, found such royal
entertaineme^t, that in respect of the present solace he had forgotten al
passed sorrows, and his hart-spent Trojans found bountiful supplies to all
their late endured scarsities. In the mean while Aeneas, for personage the
Iouilist, for wel-spoke^ the Mercuxilist, and no less fortunate under Venus
her constellatio^, with his comelines so intised the eyes, with his speeches so
inchaunted the ears, and with his virtues so enflamed the heart of the amorous
Cathagenian Queen, that hardly modesty discented that her tongue affirmed not
the love which her eyes outwardly blabbed and her heart inwardly nourished: In
the end, not able longer to contain such extraordinary Passions, in this order
she vented the same to the Lady Anna her Sister.

My trusty Sister, quoth she, (then sighing out a pause) how many great
Princes, since the decease of my late husband Sichaeus and our departure from
Tyrus, have in vain labored a marriage with me, has been unto thee no less
apparent, than of me hitherto vnapproued: but now (haled on I know not by what
destiny) our new-come Guest Aeneas the Trojan (whose matchless personage and
knightly prowess I partially commend not, all confirming of him no less than
I can affirm) the same even the same has supplanted my chaste determinations
of continual widowhood, with an amorous desire of a second marriage: howbeit,
to determine without him, as I must, were to be deceived of him, as I may.
What counsel? My self (Anna) ah my self to motion love were immodestie, and
to be silent less tolerable than death. I would (a violent no voluntary wish)
that Elisa knew her self beloved of Aeneas, Aeneas not knowing himself so
loved of Elisa.

Her Sister with a cheereful countenance promising comfort performed the same
in this answer. Dum signs (quoth she) have their speeches: not any that
observes your looks, but easily aymeth at your love: greater is the wonder of
your strickt chastity, than it would be a novel to see you a Bigama. That
privately peevish and curious, This publicly wish^d and commodious: Or ever
Carthage be perfected in the air, Elisa may putrify in the earth: What
Monument then leauest thou to thy Tyrians, scarce warm in A(...)k, than a
Cities imperfect foundation? Which being already an eye^ore to the wild and
warlike Libians, Barc(...)s, Getulians, and the rest of the Africans, shall
then be v(...)erly extinct, with the very name of the Foundres* but in
matching with so great and valiant a Prince as Aeneas, thou shall not only
live with whom thou do love, and by consorting thy Tyrians with his Trojans
strongly disappoynt the envy of those Nations, but (for Nature has not given
thee such beauty to die barren) being a wife, become ((...) doubt) a mother,
and by legitimate propagation so glad thy Subjects feareles of civil
dissentions. Who can then dislike that Elisa should so love? Bury Sister the
thoughts of Sichaeus with his dead bones, and prosperously prosecute and
prevail in thy sweet passions of Aeneas: Plie him with all provisions and
amorous entertainements: only for his Shippe-works feign delatory wants, and
by Winter be past he, partly coming, will (fear not) be perfectly reclaymed.

This counsel of Anna, though it heaped as it were Athos on Aetna, yet was it
praised and practiced of Elisa: for Counsel soothing the humor of the
counseled, howsoever unprofitable, is accounted pla^sible. Henceforward the
Queen (to be admired, not matched for her exquisite beauty, and rather
borrowing of Art than scanting Nature, as brave in apparel as beautiful in
person, and voted, even in her better part, to the love of Aeneas) so sorted
all her ^euices to his best liking, that shortly himself labored with her in
one and the selfsame pain of wished-for pleasure. Omitting therefore the
circumstances of their discourses, feastings, and all poetical faynings, only
proceed we, in few, to the Event of these their amorous Beginnings.

A Hunting was generally appointed, the Queen, Aeneas, their Ladies, and
Knights bravely mounted, the Stands were prewned, the Toils pitched, the
Hounds uncoupled, the Gamerowsed, a foot, and followed, when suddenly, amidst
the harborlesse Desert in the hotest pursuit, the Sky, ouer-cast with black
Clouds, showred down such fl^shes of Lightening, vollies of Thunder,
Haylestones, and Rain, that glad was every of the Tyrians and Trojans,
dispersing themselves, to shift for one, Elisa and Aeneas in the mean while
finding a Cave that sheltred them twain. Being there all alone, unknown of
and unsought for of their Servants, Opportunity, the chief Actresse in all
atte^pts, gave the Plaudiate in Love his, Comedy. Imagine short wooing where
either party is willing: their faithes plighted for a marriage to be solemnized
(with kind kisses among) he did what harmed not, and she had what displeased
not: A young Aeneas should have been molded, had he not bin marred (as might
seem) in the making. When this sweet Caulme in the sharp storm was with the
tempest thus ouerpassed, then came they both out not such as they entered in,
and were received of their Trains, attending their pleasures, not examining
their pastimes: and so having continued the Chase until night discontinued
their sport, they retyring to Carthage were sumptuously feasted of Elisa in her
Palace. During these their Alcion days (not generally liked of all) one there
was, a noble Trojan, that had these speeches to Aeneas.

Should thou believe (far be it from Aeneas so to believe) that the
Oracles of our Gods, behighting us the Conquest of Italy, were superstitious,
the^ believe also (vndeceiued may thou so believe) that our effeminate abode
here is vain and slanderous: to attempt that former without an Oracle, yea
with the loss of our lives, is honorable, because we are Trota^s: to
entertain this latter, invited and daungerlesse, reprochful, because we are
Trojans* Ah (Aeneas) have we shipped our Gods from home to be witnesses of our
wantonness here? Believe me, better had it bin we had died in P^r^gia, men,
than to live thus in Affrik like women. Consider also the place whereinto we
are now brought, and then conceive of the possibility of our here abode: shall I
tell thee? were there not (if in the mean while no other Accident cross thy
now bliss) were there not, I say, an Elisa here to love thee, or were there
not an Aeneas to be beloved of her, no sooner should the first deceased of you
be delivered of life, than the Suruiuors of us Trojans be denied this Land:
And then, (if we should prove so ungrateful as to resist our Relieuors) having
number, yet want we Munitio^: for neither our Ships be tackled, nor we armed,
but at the delivery and appointment of the Tyrians. Learn therefore (Aeneas)
after so long pleasure in love, at the last profitably and politickly to love,
and whatsoever thy play be in Affrich, let henceforth the Maine be Italy.
Meanwhile command (most humbly we desire to be so commanded) that thy
ships be secretly calked, ^allowed, ballaced, tackled, victualled and armed:
and then (thy self also reformed) wittingly or unwillingly to Elisa leave her
and her effeminate City: with Resolution nevertheless (ifthou so please) at
more leisure to love her. So effectually did Aeneas listen to this motion, that
giving order for the repayring of his Fleet, he promised a speedy and sudden
departure: and his men, not slipping opportunity, executed the same with as
effectual diligence.

It happened in this mean while, the Queen to mount the high Turrets of her
Palace royal, whear looking toward the Road, she perceived how earnestly
the Tro^a^s labored in trimming, pauasning, and furnishing their Navy: then
assuring her self not deceived, that she should be deceived, and descending as
it were maiestically mad, meeting with Aeneas, she said.

Before (A^neas) I beheld thy ship wracks and wants I believed some God arrived
at Carthage: yea when I knew thee but a man, my conceit honored thee with a
De^tie: but now these thine inhumaine Treacheries (not worthy the unworthiest
Titles) argue so far off from a Godhoode, as thou show thy self less
than a Man and worse than a Devil. What has Carthage not worthy Aeneas? I
assure thee, if any be so much, no city is more happy tha^ Carthage. But the
Queen pleases not Aeneas, oh that Aeneas had not pleased the Queen: the^
might I have bettered my choice for honor, or not have bewailed thy change
for the dishonor. But (ungrateful) will thou indeed leave me? Yea, then that
thou meanest the contrary nothing more false: but to derive thy departure from
any desert of mine nothing less true. If therefore the life of Elisa, the love
of Elisa, the land of Elisa, her wealth, thy want, her tears, thy vows, her
distress, thy dishonor, the delights of this Shore, the dangers of those
Seas, Carthage possessed, Italy unconquered, peace without war here, war
without peace there, thy wracks past, the Winter to come, any evils whereof I
warn thee, any good that I have wrought thee, and more good that I have and
do wish thee, if any thing said, or more than I can say, has or does want
Argument to seat thee in Afric, yet at the least for thine own safety stay
a more temperate season, urging in the mean while excuses for thine vnurged
departure: and so I flattered, shall either patient my self, or repent thy
fleeting in a milder Ecstasy. I did (well may I forethinke me so to have done)
entertain thee beyond the degree of an Hostess or the dignity of a Guest:
and yet (ungrateful Guest to so kind an Hostess) for such welcome thou have
not pretended a farewell. Thus, alas, finding thy love less than it ought, I
repent to have loved more tha^ I should, and because thou appearest not the
same thou were, I am not reputed the same I am: but as a ridiculous by-worde of
the Tyrians, the Stale of the Trojans, and the scorn of the Affricans: howbeit
(in truth) the fayth-plighted Wife of faithles Aeneas. But who will so
believe? Nay believe not so who will, thy departure shall be my death, my death
thy sin, thy sin the worlds speech, the worlds speech thy reproof, and
thy reproof my purgation. For were thy self Iuror and Judge of the more
offensive, my credulencie, or thine inconstancy, the Iuror could not but give
Verdict for Elisa, and the Judge sentence against Aeneas: then (if not for my
suite, yet for thine own sake) let me not plead tediously and without grace,
that plead so truly, and with more grief than for the quantity I may suffer,
or for the quality thou can censure.

Aeneas, not lightly gauled at her impatience (whom he still loved more than a
little, howbeit lesser than his now regard of honor) thankfully acknowledged
her great bounty, counter-pleading to have pretended a departure without leave
taken, vouching moreover the displeasure of his Gods for contempt of their
Oracles manifested by fearful Dreams and sundry Visions, as also the urging
of his ^ro^ans impatient of tarriance. So that he resting in Resolution not to
be won by wooing, or reclaymed by exclayming, the Queen became speechless
and senseless, and was in a swoune conuayed from his presence. In which
business he boording his Ships, in the dead of the night hoisting up
Sails, left Carthage to seek Italy.

THe Queen, not capable of any rest, by day appearing discryed from a Turret
the Road cleared of the Trojan Navy: then not willingly silent, nor able to
speak, She stood as stood Niobe after the fourteenth revenge by Latonaes
Issue: Which her then and after Extremities, to be glaunced at, not judged of,
briefly I thus decipher. Imagine a substantial and a palpable appearance of
Love, Wrath, Sorrow, and Despair, acting in their aptest habites and
extremest passions, and then suppose Elisa not only the same, but more
fervently loving, more furiously wrathful, more confusedly sorrowful and more
impatiently desperate. Imagine lastly the first three imagined Actors, after
long parts occupied, leaving the Stage to the fourth, as to the perfectest
Imperfection: and then from such imagined Stratagem attend this actual
Catastrophe.

A Wizard or Witch (the two common Oracles of many too credulent women) had
instructed the Queen, that an Immola^^o^ or burnt Sacrifice offered to the
Internal Deities, of the Armor, Ornaments, and all whatsoever the Relics of
Aeneas (...)t behind him at his departure from Carthage, would effectually
estrange the outrage of her passions, and ex(...)ct in her the very remembrance
of Aeneas. This Counsel (either for that at the first she believed it
possible, or for that opportunity so offered it self to practice the thing she
did purpose) Elisa entertaining opened the same to Anna her Sister: who, simply
vnsuspi^^ous of the sequel, provided secretly (as was given her in charge) a
pyle of dry Faggots, crowned with G^rlands for the disma^l Sacrifice: which and
Elisa her self in a readiness, Aeneas his Armor being her eyes Object,
became in this wise her tongues Subject.

With this, quoth she (eying the Armor) the craking ^roi^ns boast^d to have
buckled with the gallant Diom^des, not seldom to have offended the defenceles
Grec^ans, and after many loved blows at the sacking of Troy, valiantly to have
boorded his thence-bent Navy: this Armor profitable to my pr^iudice, there
defensive to him, to be here offensive to me, were it unnecessary to this
Sacrifice, should nevertheless burn for the same trespass. This Cup, this
Phrigian Cup, too guilty of too many Tyrian draughts, Assistants in forming me
audaciously amorous, shall now occupy these ceremonial flames as the then
Accessory to a contrary fire. These Bracelets, and these Earrings (by too
often and officious hands fastened and loosed with begged and granted kisses
among, and now less precious by the giver his practice) shall also ad
C(...)ders to the repentant payment of mine over rated pleasure. Lastly are
remaining only two Relics of that Recreant, this Sword, and Elisa herself.
But what? did dest thou (Aneas) leave this and thine Armor in Carthage, as if
in Italy thou should encounter another E^^sa? Inconsiderate that thou art,
albeit such fearelesse Co^f^icts best beseem such effeminate Captains, yet no
climate can affoorde thee one so foolish, and therefore in no Country expect
such Fortune. The Storm (ah from thence are these tears) sheltring us twain
lately in one Cave, was (no doubt) ominous to these evils: for then should I
have remembered, that like as Shelters are chiefly sought for in Storms, so me^
labor our favors only in extremi^^es: but their lusts satisfied, or wants
supplied, as of Shelters in Sunshine they estimate our bounty, leaving
thenceforth even to seem such as (in troth) they never were. But what is
natural, is of necessity, only let it be granted he is a Man, and it
follows necessarily he is deceitful. Fly, Traitorous Aeneas, fly vnfollowed
and vnfriended of Elisa: ever may the winds be contrary to thy Course, and the
Seas not promise thee one hours safety: ever be thy Ship drowning, and thy
self never but dying: often resayle in a moment, whence thou were sailing a
month: let no blaste from the Air, or Billow in the Sea, stir but to thy
prejudice: and when no horror and mishap has sailed thee, with thy dead body,
to the uttermost plagued, perish also may thy Soul unpardoned. But least mine
incharitie prove less pardonable than his I^iu^ie, I that will not live to
hear it so, heartily disclayme to have it so: pardon therefore, ye Gods,
(...) desiring it, and him deserving it. Troth is it this one Sacrifice shall
give end to mine infinite sorrows: but not (alas) with these burnings (rather
found guilty of new beginnings) but with my hearts blood, the latest Ceremony
wanting to this Exequse. Scarcely had these words passed her mouth, when with
Aeneas his Sword she pierced her Breast: so performing on herself a Tragedy
sought for, and to hers a terror unlooked for.

Whilst Dido, (so named of this her death, or as have some, not less
probable, of so preventing Htarba: menacing her mar^^age) was thus passionate
and did thus perish, Aeneas, after weary Sea-saring, much sorrow, many people
and places seen and sailed from, arriving in Sicisie, was ^oyfully entertained
of this ancient friend King Ace^^es, and there (as the year before at
Drapenum) did solemnize and Anniuersa^ie at the Tomb of his father Anchises.
The Masteries, feats, and active pastimes tried here by the Trojan and
Sicilian youth, with land and sea Skirmidges, the running, riding, leaping,
shooting, wrestling, and such like, with Bacing on foot and on horsback (this
last, a sport lately used of our English youths, but now vnpolliuckly
discontinued) Or how the Women of Troy (whereof many were also embarked from
thence) tired with the perils of the Sea, and intised with the pleasures of
Sici^ie, to prevent further sailing, fired their Ships (not without great loss
rescued:) Or how A^neas building there the City A(...), peopled the same with
his women, and impotent Tro^^ns: Or of the drowning and Reuise of Palinurus,
and many Occurrents happening here, at Cuma, Caieta, and elsewhere I omit, as
less pertinent to our purpose then the hastening of Aeneas into Italy.
Wherefore shipping him from Sicilie, I now land him in Latium: in which part of
Italy reigned and was Resident in his City Laurentum the King Latinus: to
whom Aeneas addressed an hundred Knights, one of them delivering this Ambassie.

Ignorant are we not, most gracious King (for in that Title art thou famous,
and in that trial may we prove fortunate) of thy Consanguinitie with the
Trojans, by noble descents from Dardanus our ancient Progenitor: neither can
thou but know that Troy is sacked, and her people for the most part
slaughtered: only know (if already thou know it not) that Aeneas our Duke
with a few his Followers, after more than seven years sailing, are lastly
(and lucki lie I hope) arrived in thy Country: Howbeit of many places, for
pleasure and ferulitie most worthy manuring, have we abandoned the quiet
possession: yea many the greatest Princes of Europe and Africa, have
voluntarily desired our Tariance denied: only infinite Seas have we sailed, and
more sorrows sustained to seek this Clime, from whence we Trojans derive our
Originals, and whither our Gods have directed us by their Oracles. This thy
Country, in respect of the bigness, may easily afford room for a new Troy
to be builded: A plot more spacious we do not ask, A smaller suite thou can
not grant, if with our present extremities thou also peise our purposed
loyalties. Never were we thy foes, and ever will we continue thy friends.
Seated we must be, and here we would be. We dare not disobey, the Gods
commanding it, nor would we discontent thee in demanding it: graciously
therefore conceive of our Petition, and gratefully receive from Aeneas these
Presents.

Having thus said, he in the name of Aeneas, presented the King with a most
rich Mantell or Robe, with an inualuable Crown of Gold enchased with precious
Stones, with the late royal Scepter of King Priamus, and with other Treasure:
which Latinus cheerfully receiving, returned the Trojans this answer.

Had not the Gods commanded your hither repair, which I gainsay not, were we
not of consanguinitie, wherein I disclaim not, Or my Kingdom not roome-some
enough to receive you, as it is, Or had ye not brought precious and peaceable
Presents, as ye have, yeat to dismiss Wayfarers vnrested and vnreleeued were
contrary to the Gods of Hospitality, and (which they defend that I should
therein offend) Latinus his honor. Over: fast he sits that securely
si^^eth: for as he that is timorous has (...) little providence, so he that is
feareles has too much presumption: yea less grievous are expected than
unlooked for evils. I speak not this as I fear to fall, but as I foresee I
may fall: for the vnpearching of others should be fore-preachings to us. Privy
am I unto your distress, applying the like possibility for me so to decline:
for who is privileged from beco^ming such? And who is such that would not have
succor? Sorry I am that ye have so ill cause to estrange your selves from
home, but glad that I am in so good case to entertain you here. Let Ae(...)
fear him and prosper ye in Italy: my land well may abide it, and my self
brook it. Yea more (for the Oracle of my mind consorts no doubt with those of
our Gods) Lauinia my sole daughter and heir, forbidden a Natives and behighted
a Strangers Marriage, has found a Husband and I a Sonne-in-lawe: at the least
I wish it would be, and hope it will be. Make my thanks to Ae^eas for his
Presents, and be you Masters of your Petitions.

The Trojans being then sumptuously feasted, every man on a given Courser
bravely and richly mounted, dismissed, returned, and Latinus his answer and
Present delivered, Aeneas, nevertheless as far from being secure as joyous
of such Tidings, knowing the good speed of a Stranger to be an Eyesore to the
people, and therefore not careless suspicious of it that might causeles
succeed, strongly inmured his Men in a new-built Fortress.

In the mean while their Arrival and Entertainment with Latinus occupied, and
for the most part offended, all Italy Enuiously stormed Amata Queen that
Lauinia her Daughter and Darling should be wedded to a Stranger, an Exile (as
she termed him:) and therefore, when she could not dissuade the King by
flattery, she incensed his Nobles and Subjects to resist it forcibly. On the
other side, Turnus, Prince of the Rutiles (in person exceeding all for
comeliness, and in Arms equal to any for his courage, to whom Lauinia was
before promised in Marriage) as Malcontent as any for being thus circumue^ted
by Aeneas, held a Counsel in his sumptuous City Ardea situate in the
territory of Latium, how to intercept the Trojans by wi^es, expel them by
Wars, weaken them by wants, disappoynt Aeneas, and possess himself of
Lauinta. Often sent he Messengers and sometimes Menaces to advertise Latinus
that he was promised he should, and to ass^re him he purposed he would enjoy
her or anger him. But by how much more Latinus was religiously vnremouable in
his Resolution for Aeneas, by so much the more did Turnus give loose raines to
his headie anger: Howbeit sufficient matter wanted for his malice to work
upon, until by evil hap his choler took advantage of this color. Ascanius
with diverse Trojan Gentlemen his Friends and others his Attendants, hunting in
a Forest not far from their Fortress, by chance did encounter, strike, and
chase a fair and well spread Stagge, which the Children of one Tyrrhus (the
Kings Raunger and Steward of his Grounds, a Man of no mean account amongst the
Latins) had from a Fawn nourished, and so entreated that no Beast might be
more tamer: This Stagge thus stricken and followed of the Trojans, taking the
readiest way to the house of Tyrrhus, and with bleeding haunches entering the
Hall, was first espred of Syluta or Ilia, a young Gentlewoman, in whose lap
he sleeping had often laid his head, and at whose hands he had many a time
taken Brouse, been kemmed, and trimmed. She* seeing the Stagge in such a
plight, almost swouned ere she could weep, wept e^e she might speak, spoke
ere she was comforted, and was comforted only in promise of Revenge. At the
winding of an Horn, came flocking (...) Heards-men, Shepherds, Plow-men, and
(...) of Grooms, finding Almon the eldest Son of Tyrrhus, and their young
Mistress Syluia grievously passionate, and the Stagge bloody and braying his
last, question no further what should be done, but were furiously inquisitiue
after the Doers.

In this mean time, by evil hap, Ascanius and his Company drawing by Parsie
after the Stagge (which they knew not for tame) were entered the view of this
Shoole of enraged Clownes: who all at once and suddenly, with such weapons as
they had or found nearest at hand, as Staves, Sheephookes, Dung-forks, Flayles,
Plow-staues, Axes, Hedging-Beetels, yea L^bbats newly snatched from burning,
and what not? fiercely assailed with downright blows the amazed Trojans: who
not having leisure to ask questions, courageously entertain the unknown
Quarrel* and so long and daungerously for either part continued this
confusion of blows and effusion of blood, that by now it was bruted at the
Fortress and at Laurentum, and was anon increased by rescue from either
Faction: neither had this Skuffling an end until night was begun: at what time
the Latins, Rutiles, and Trojans left the wild Medley, howbeit not
discontinuing their malice.

Of chief account amongst the Latins, were slain lusty Almon, and aged
Galesus, (this latter a man of an honest and wealthy condition) whilst he
unseasonably amongst blows delivered unregarded persuasions of Peace. The
wounded Corses of these twain did Turnus cause to be conuayed to the view of
Latinus, as Arguments of their common damage, himself with an envious heart
and an inuectiue tongue amplifying the same ^o the uttermost: not vnassisted
therein by the yrefull Queen Amata, or vnfurthered by the hurly burly of the
impatient People, all laboring the King to denounce Armor against the Trojans.

Latinus in this tumult of his Subjects, and travel of his Senses, assuring
himself that Aeneas was the man prophesied to the Marriage of Lauinia and
succession of Latium, dissuaded, but might not persuade with the headie
multitude. In few, with such efficacy did the dead Corses inuit it, the
Queen entreat it, Turnus affect it, and the People follow it, that lastly,
though against his mind, the King did suffer the Laurentines to rear on their
Walls absolute Tokens of imminent Wars: Thus found Turnus that which he
longed for, and Aeneas no less than he looked for, and either soliciting
succors, were not long unfurnished of hardy Soldiers: yea, in respect of
their multuous Armies, the Wars lately ceased at Troy, might now have been
said to be revived in Italy. But as in his Wanderings, so in his Wars, my
purpose is brevity: either of which the Lawriat Trumpetor of his glory has
so effectually sownded, that many might amplify, I could iterate, but not any
amend it: nevertheless in remembering of this History I have also used other
Authorities.

IT follows, After long Wars valiantly on either part performed, many great
Kings, Princes, and Personages perished: when lastly the Rutiles begun to be
repentant of their wrong, and the Trojans weary of the Wars, Aeneas and
Turnus meeting had these words: And first Aeneas.

Often Truces have we had (Turnus) for the burial of our dead, never treaties
of peace for the welfare of those alive: only once (as I have been ever)
did thou seem (thou did but seem) provident that no more should
miscarrie, offering me C^mbate, which I accepting have in vain expected: for
since thy mind changed, I wot not by what means, has changed the lives of I
wot not how many. But now, when for the palpable leasing thou should not
speak like Turnus, should thou deny the better of the wars to abide with
Aeneas, and yet I still be Aeneas, though playing upon that Advantage with
Turnus, even now, I say, my self do request thee of that Combat whereby
further Blood-sheds may happily be concluded. Believe me, were thou a Beggar
and I a Monark, yet (so much do I emulate, not envy thy glory) I would
hazard all in a Combat requested by thee so valerous a Competitor. But least
(perhaps) I ouer-breathe thy tickled Conceit with more selfe-l^king than is
exped^ent, know man, Turnus know, Nature, Birth, Art, Education, not
whatsoever else are in any thing more beneficial to Turnus, than that justly he
may envy as much or more in Aeneas.

To this answered the Rutile thus: Whether thou speak this (Aeneas) as
insulting over mine infortune, or as insolent of thine own felicity, or
emulous (as thou say and I believe it) of my glory, trust me, only if thus
in thy better success to abandon thy self to such offered disaduauntage be
not indiscretion, never heard I wherein to derogate from thy policy: but say
it indiscretion, yet by Jupiter (Aeneas) it is honorable indiscretion. Not to
encounter so heroical (for in thee I envy not that Epitheton) a Combattant,
is as contrary to my thought as contenting to my very Soul, and as contenting
to my Soul, as if A^neas were already conquered, and Turnus Conqueror:
either which I divine, at the leastwise I am determined to adventure. Be
provided therefore (Ae(...)eas) of courage, for thou prouokest no Cowarde, but
even Tu^^us, that would have asked no less, had he not doubted Aeneas not to
have dared to answer so much. Thus, and with these Conditions: that further
wars should finish, that the Espousall of Lauinia and Succession of Latium
should be the Prize to the Victor, a Combat to be tried by these twain body
against body was (upon Oaths taken and other Circumstances) agreed upon.

Now were they Armed, Mounted, did Encounter, and their Coursers breathless,
the Riders dismounting vigoriously buckle on Foot: both offend, either
defend, and neither ^ainted: Lastly (not with unrequited blows) was Turnus
disarmed: the Vanquished pleading for life, and the Victor not purposing his
death, had he not espied on his Shoulders the sometimes Baldrike of his once
especial Friend Pallas, King Euanders Son, whom Turnus in Battle
ouercomming had put to Sword: then Aeneas saying, only in this Spoil thou
shall not triumph, and only for his sake am I vnintreatable, shoffed his
Sword through his breast: Turnus so ending the World, and Aeneas the Wars.

Then was he peaceably wedded to Lauinia, and shortly after possessed of
Latium: After which, about three years he, dying, left his Kingdom to
Aseanius, and Lauinia with child. She at her time, and at the house of the
before remembered Tyrrhus, was delivered of Syl^i^s Post-humus (so called of his
being borne amongst the Woods, after the death of his Father.) To him (because
in right it was the inheritance of Syluius from his Mother) did As^anius
voluntarily resign the Kingdom of Latium: and of him (for his honorable
Regiment) were all the after- Latin kings called Syl^ij: Finally he hunting
and mistaken amongst the Thickets for a Stagge, was slain with an Arrow by his
Son Brutus. This Brutus for sorrow and his sa^^tie, accompanied with many
lusty Gentlemen and others of Aeneas his Trojans Ofsprings, imbarking
themselves, after long Sailing arrived in this Island then called Albion: whose
Giant-like Inhabitants (in respect of their monstrous making and inciuill
Manners said to have bin engendered of Devils) he ouercomming, manured their
Country, and after his own name called it Brutaine. And thus having begotten
Brutus an Original to our Brutons, I conclude this abridged History of his
Grandfather Aeneas.

FINIS.

