THE Poor Man's passions. AND Pouerties Patience.

Written by Arthur Warren. Anno. Dom. 1605.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for R. B. and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Sun.

To his kindest Favorer Master Robert Quarme.
DIssemble not Pen, paint thy naked mind,
Draw the Anatomy of perfect love,
And though Fortune to slender means thee bind,
Affectionate yet to thy Patron prove;
And tell thy friend, if Poverty may steed,
He shall not fail to find a friend at need.
Give him thy Passions, and thy Patience,
And in them both include thy loving heart,
Inuit him to thy Contents Residence,
And seast him there, to answer his desert:
That have no Current him to satisfy,
But love, affection, and gratuity.
Europe has Owners in possession placed,
Asia for her Subjects takes care,
Africa her Inhabitants has graced,
America has not a foot to spare,
And Indigence will not make thy Release,
Till some of these Possessioners decease.
Tell him, the Hand, that did this Pen direct,
If serviceable, shall on him attend;
Tell him, the Heart, that does his love affect,
By prayers his Humanity defend?
Tell him, that Passions must his Patience crave,
Till Poverty a richer Nature have.
Arthur Warren.

The poor Man's passions.
Tragical Heart, inuectiue terms collect,
Perturbe the passion of the worldly mind,
Deluding Objects of Content reject,
Counterfeit pleasures in a bundell bind,
And ouer-whelme them midst the Oceans wave,
Or them interre in some Cymmerian cave.
Resign possession of regardlesse Toys,
That hoodwinke thee in downefalles of distress,
Though in appearance superficial joys,
Yet tried prove but Counterpanes of bless:
I Will not bestow perusing on that lease,
Whose expired Date does at the sealing cease.
I Caitife, Cressus Royalty disclayme,
Discarding golden Crassus choicest store,
With Enuies darts at Epicures I aim,
And Dives Sumptuousnes I disadore;
For tell the Porter of the proudest state,
I scorn to knock at the securest gate.
Yet lowest Fortunes cross my lostly mind,
And apprentize my thoughts to servile law,
Which Nature to her Pupils never assig'nde,
And all to curb my grand Conceits in awe;
Such as lawless Necessities impose,
To gall the shoulder that this yoke would lose.
I live, yet loath to lead this loathsome life,
I breath, yet do suspire with painful breath,
I stir, yet storm to manage tedious strife,
And I shall die vntested in my death,
Doubting least mine Executors refuse
The statute of my Testament to use.
while Cross and Loss do countermand desire,
while will with want conioines a Combatine,
As powerful to set the Seas on fire,
Making the most against Patience to repine,
That ill Success in worlds unhappy state,
Makes hapless man much more unfortunate.
To controuerse with mine Adversity,
Is but with unarmed Breast to pierce a sword;
And so Philautus shall do injury
Unto himself, by his selfe-wild discord:
And yet these Oppositions who can brook,
That with one eye, or half a face does look?
Can Flesh and Blood, that loves to brave the best,
Pocket these wrongs and bury such abuse?
And can Humanity these pills digest,
Or like Melancholists get some Recluse,
To make their Orizons in Saturnes ear,
That sitting dumb does mute petisions hear?
A man's a man, though he have but a face,
A beardlesse face the world for to control,
But I in cloak depriud of guard and lace,
Poor patches for my fortunes must inrole,
To signify unto the Earth, what lot,
The Lack-lands of our lower House have got.
To monarchize a wretches woofull state,
Imports prowess, though but little power,
Once to command the world seems fortunate,
Though but a World conceipted for an hour,
Indigents may abound though but in dreams,
Fortune Flows not to all in Favors streams.
Demi-god Argent, and the Silver Saint
Passengers in their travel must protect,
And with the Tauerner their needs acquaint,
The Pennilesse no choice of Innes elect;
Hunger and Thirst needs must we wars proclaim,
And try the Combat, though we take the maime.
Physician Gold does fortify the lame,
With Argus eyes illuminates the dark,
Skilleth to shroud Sinners apparent shame,
In ships of Silver safe we may imbarke,
To cut the Seas, and cross by every coast,
In peace to take all Harbors for our host.
In vain the Monylesse their mones confess,
In vain the wealthlesse do their wants repeat,
In vain the wretches warble their distress,
In vain the miserable do entreat,
For helping hands the Needy to relieve,
Or mercies minds their much and good to give.
To sue, solicit, beg, beseech, entreat,
To smooth, sooth, flatter, and do what thou skillest;
To malice, menace, mischief, storm, and threat,
But Worlds vacuity with air thou fillest:
Requests naught feed the siluer-sucking mind,
No Penny does no Pater Noster find.
Love lives by loss, Don Lucre all commands,
Pitiful Complaints, doleful passions Sound,
But are not tuned by relieuing hands,
While miseries are weakest Motives found;
Son dutifies father, father loves Son,
And all is for Consideration done.
O would I could by virtues of my voice,
The Beggar from my presence but exile,
And on professions execute my Choice,
Or to desires my fortunes reconcile,
Then farewell whip, a sop hard to digest,
And Pill'ry, where men take but Pinch-eares rest.
I would not fear Freedom of Borrough towns,
Nor strictest Restraints of immured wales,
Nor severe presence of Officious gowns,
Which with Commands commend us to their hales,
To answer all Objects with cappe and knee,
And Abiects all the while reputed be.
Upon our Doom the dull'st will whet his brain,
If Fortunes Flower but begin to fade;
The rau'nous Cormorants will us constrain
A Common top for scourges to be made,
Lamigers creep to set on foot our harm,
The Blind to view our woes about us swarm.
Poorelings but Caterpillars they account,
Their proffits destinated to devour,
That Seas of sorrows shall our Souls surmount,
While Pride against Poor does floods of malice pour,
Adiudging us but Burdens of the Earth,
And Canker-wormes increasing Countries dearth.
Bears Arms against Peace, besieging our Contents,
Muster the troops of controuersing minds,
And of our Martyrdomes make monuments,
Testify their degenerating kinds,
Vnnaturallizing peruersest hearts,
To scandallize our lawdable Deserts.
Newgate, the worst gate, they protest too good,
Coldly to entertain such goldlesse guests,
These Cowards durst exhaust a Beggars blood,
And tyrannize in hindering our requests;
Our serious expectations cross with toys,
Plant obstacles to intercept our joys.
Help Heavens, poor Hearts poorer plaints may pour
To careless shores, and to relentlesse rocks,
Man is man's Woolfe, for man would man devour,
while Brother from Brother compassion locks,
Yet Trees him shade midst Sol-in-loos heat,
Beasts minister him food to be his meat.
The Crystal fountains quench the thirst of man,
The Dogs use dalliance, and on him attend,
The Ox draws, and the Ass does what he can,
The flocks withfleeces him from cold defend,
Yet goes it against the hair with him to spare,
The solace, which might cure his Brothers care.
Unreasonable Creatures can him show,
And senseless things in silence can bewray
Duty, which to his Neighbors he does owe,
Though deaf, blind, and hard-harted thus he stray,
And has such Mydas ears, as will not hear,
Though thence his Error to the world appear.
Man without many helps can hardly live,
Although his fields of acres know none end,
Yet does it worse then cut his throat to give,
To Impotents, to Indigents to lend:
Fondling, forget'st thou how thou borrow'st still
That hard'nest thus thine Adamantine will?
Diggers, and Dikers, Drudges, Carters, Swains,
Sheepheards, and Cowards, friend thee at thy need,
The poorest persons work thy richest gains,
Thy Dropsy with Commodities to feed,
Cobblers, and Curriers, Tinkers, Tanners all
Support thy state, else would thy fortress fall.
It Is work tyme-worthy to observe the ways
Of Worldlings, how prepost'rously they live,
That will not help, yet want helps all their days,
That without gifts live not, yet will not give.
O brazen fronts, o iron-metled hearts,
Whose quiuers surfeit with discourteous darts.
And all is to royallize their Progeny,
And eternize their Names in Mammons books,
Register their time-eaten Dignity,
Catch the Circumferrence in golden hooks,
Make Ignorance subscribe unto their will,
Persuade the Blind, the valley is a hill.
Summon a Parliament, which may have power
To contradict rulelesse Necessity,
Endowe Needs Daughter with convenient Dower,
To extirpate the roots of misery,
And ruina^e the edifice of wants,
In Pleasures plots to set Contentments plants.
Beggary men contemptible does make,
Rags with Robes assume no Society,
Irus with Cressus never hands did shake,
Tokens of Union to testify:
The Patch with Purple nere acquaintance took,
Nor Siluerlesse suits with the Lawiers book.
The widow Want soiournes at low-streets end,
While Monsier Money purchases a place,
His Consistory midst the town to spend,
Among Magistrates, Monarchs of greatest grace;
While to the Rich the world a Lorship gives,
Poverty always vndertenant lives.
O rich Worlds Darling, big thou do abound
With treasures, pleasures, health, wealth, liberty,
Hearts ease and thoughts wish at a wink are found
Thy mutable Humors to satisfy,
All joys desired attend thee at a beck,
As though thou did both fate and fortune check.
Little thou carest what cares I endure,
And less thou feel'st what force I suffer must,
My dolours can no rest from ruth procure,
While as thou list thou can agglut thy lust,
Flowing in Oceans of profoundest wealth,
While wretch I want helps to support my health,
My Palate dry, my lips seem parched with thirst,
Belly thinks throat cut through the lack of meat,
Yet Seconds strive not who shall be the first,
To minister means what to drink or eat,
Small scraping mundifies my trenchers clean,
I need no Diet to conserve me lean.
Physic farewell, thou never shall take cure,
Against surfeiting to practice remedy,
If seldom meal may make complexion pure,
Fairensse my formal face shall beautify,
Make me Pigmalions pictures counterfaite,
While staruing stomach for a crum does wait.
When Thirst like Aetna'es heat does cause me crave,
Some slender potion Appetite to drown,
And begging I sweet liquid cannot have,
The Butler with his bowl so black does frown;
Then run I to a River, (...) fair Brook,
How comfortable does thy current look:
There I in all Humility prostrate,
Bowed on bare knees, and empty belly laid,
Sue for a suppe at kind Banks mercy-gate,
Where of the water I am not denaide;
Twixt lip and liver, water wine is made,
To flourish life, which did commence to fade.
Thus solaced incontinent I rise,
Bowing in token of my thankful heart,
With best Cursey, that Duty can devise,
To gratify the Runners kind desert:
Away I walk after this humble greet,
As though I quaffed had the Nectar sweet.
When wooluish Hunger on my stomach gnawes,
Inuocates Custom Victu'alls to provide,
Teeth ruminating on their empty jaws,
As if they durst no longer dull abide,
Since Appetite precepteth them to dress
For dying Nature some reviving mess.
Then I importune, and solicit Cook,
For one cold cut I tender him my love,
With hollow eyes and fleshlesse cheeks I look,
To pity so the pitiless to move:
With Egle wings he flies to lock the door,
Is not at leisure to reliue the poor.
Thus do these iron hands Compassion shut
From souls surcharged with sorrow through their need,
who never helps unto the helpless put,
Nor spare superfluous things our wants to feed,
which swell with fat, surfeit with dainty fare,
Unmindful of their needy Neighbors care.
The Belly-god with gourmandizing full
Excludes empty Appetite from mind,
Bibbers beere-swollen eyes with quaffing dull,
Think they can no where any thirsting find,
Gluttons in Lethe lake drown Penury,
Drunkards imagine no throat to be dry.
Midst this perplexity I make my moan
To God, to man, man not regarding God,
I sigh in sorrow, and in grief I groan,
Scourged with Persecutions piercing rod,
O it is a Hell on earth all to endure,
Which daily men to mischief men procure.
Nature, that first gave life, decreed a law,
That Mortals Earths-fruites should in Common hold,
When Times Corruption private profit saw,
Things gratis given must be bought and sold,
And then Division striued for a store,
To mar what golden Age had made before.
This seeing I all Adams sons forsake,
Ominous seeming in their odious sight,
And to my Meditations me betake,
To seek the Cause, why they deny me right:
Such Difference I find twixt store and dearth,
That Rich count Beggars Bastards of the Earth.
Because we are not elder Brethren borne,
Apparent Heirs to earthly Heritage,
Hence hautie Worlds Inheritors us scorn,
As not begot in lawful Marriage,
The harm is ours, the injury was theirs,
To take all, ere we borne were to be Heirs.
These monster-natur'd People I forswear,
And to mismembred Syluane Satyrs go,
Pouring my plaints into their brutish ear,
So making them familiar with my woe;
I warble forth a vvretches doleful cries,
To prove what pity in their bowels lies.
These lodge a better Bounty in their Breast,
These Heathen harbor more Humanity,
One may in surer safety with them rest,
Than with his Brethren full of Tyranny,
They will conduct you to their mossy cave,
Where part of their provision you may have.
This moved the prudent Hermits to forsake
Country, Acquaintance, Parents, livings, land,
And in the Wilderness a Cell to make,
where they secured from injuries might stand;
Though moss, not down they vsd in sted of bed,
And were with hips and hawes for Dainties sed.
It Is Ease enough, whereas may lodge Content,
It Is cheer enough, where Nature is suffis'd,
It Is Right enough, whereas no wrong is meant,
It Is love enough, where no hate is devised,
Better to live alone in peace and rest,
Then among the multitude, and be oppressed.
My sourged Wits do wave with strange desires,
When Melancholy does these planets note,
My Soul to be a Soliuage requires,
Entreats Earths Center for some place remote,
There could I draw sweet and contented breath,
where friends faigne not, nor foes pretend my death:
The Clifts, the Rocks, the steepy Roughes, and Dales,
The Mountains, Promontories, Harbors, Plains,
Inhabitable Islands, Creekes, and vales,
Estranged Continents, resortles Maines,
Groves, Desolations, and untrodden ways
My wandering steps with weary pace assaies.
Some unfrequented woods I seek to find,
Some unknown Deserts journey I to see,
what Solitarines has there assign'de
For such, as her Inhabitants shall be,
The Earth I survey for the secret'st field,
To prove what entertainment it may yield.
I meet with Lynx, and with the Lion fell,
with beastly Bears, Tygres of Hyrcanie,
Calidons Bore, like Cerberus in Hell,
That wrongs and wounds all Persons passing by,
The Basan Bulls, the Irish wolves I see,
All which impose no violence on me.
The Lynx, that is the clearest Beast of fight,
Seems to shed a shower of Crystal tears,
The Lion, Monarch for his matchless might,
Offers no force, to load my life with fears;
Tygres are tame, Bulls hurt me not with horn,
vvoolues are like Lambs by them I am not tonne.
My misaduentures do them all amaze,
Of mine Afflictions they remain in awe,
On my mishaps, and my misfortunes gaze,
As though they so strange objects never saw,
So forlorne-like I pass, so vile so base,
That they relent to view my ruthful case.
Thus I with eyes of farre-discerning mind,
Home-ward convert a distort Countenance,
In esperance acquaintance some to find,
which might eye-witnes unexpected chance,
Earths Cormorant, here to thy scandal see
The mercy, which the merciless show me.
Mask thy hard forehead, to obscure thy shame,
Viewing unreasonable Creatures kind,
That savage, wild, and brutish are by name,
And yet by Nature of a better mind,
Then thou, that do thy self a monster make,
while that a Beast does man's Idea take.
Yet Genius has framed thee a man,
Time and Experience joined assisting hand,
Art has performed, what knowledge practice can,
And all is but to number Ocean's sand,
It seems Impossibility to be,
To make a Metamorphosis of thee.
Thou will not alter, but from Have to Hold,
From catch to keep, from much to gather more,
From Cottages to farms, from lead to gold,
From Competence into superfluous store,
Thy Nature naught to such but envy yields,
As have a meadow greener then thy fields.
What is it to beg, but to be counted base?
What is it to borrow, but to be denide?
When Poor are trespas'd, they learn Ploydons case,
And must for recompense content abide,
Yet give the Rich but an discourteous look,
It proves a forfeit by their statute book.
It Is wrong to them, if any pleasant live:
It Is pain to them, if any sit in ease:
It Is grief to them, if any one do thrive:
It Is death to them, if any them displease:
They do prohibit that a horse should bear,
But golden him, that silver spurs does wear.
Degrading us with contumelius spelles,
They touch, attach, and summon us with shames,
To our discredit ring reproachful bells,
And Catalogue us with inhumane names,
Vagabonds, varlets, villains, vassalls, slaves,
Rogues, Caterpillars, Runnagates, and knaves.
O Heavens, ye have heard these wrongs and more,
Earth is eare-witnes of these injuries,
Produced to punish, and depose the poor,
With more then su^ble villainies,
That mauger (...) the oppressed cry,
And death it is, that wretches may not die.
Goods, Cattles, Fees, Lands, (...), and gold,
Issues, Rents, Proffits, Fines, and (...),
Worlds Argonauts from ouer-whelming hold,
Midst Floods, Rocks, Seas, and gulfes of miseries,
While Poor her person with the path does wear,
Bucephalus must Alexander bear.
For in wealth consists worlds Nobility,
Honor, Preferment, fri^dship, love, and all,
Birth, Learning, Virtue, is but Beggary,
Least Hap it (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) ball:
Who is the Lord, but he, that has the luck;
Who is the man, but he, that has the muck?
If Asses thus to Honors height ascend,
Load but with silver burdens, golden pa^s,
If Manhood thus on Mou^s depend,
Which having this all other merits lacks,
Then Glory shall detain Desa^ reward,
And virtues will not (...) ^gard.
Then amongst the Ladies may A (...),
And hold a Dis^affe, or ruin Carpet Knight;
Ulysses may his (...) madness give,
And plow the sands, and in his ^ome delight,
To Cowardice the (...) (...) yield,
Mars sit indignifide in Honors field.
Custom maintain (...) (...) in things,
Or changed, for better (...) wish,
Good Friday has the Capon by the wings,
While Easter day is fea^ b^ with fish,
The Poor midst Richimens meple is forced to fast,
And still into the S^ (...) ^cast.
Who presents Pouer^y with pin, or ought,
Pining in Pen^y, naked with need?
Venson and Fatlings to the Rich, are brought,
Jewels and iems their e^es delight^ feed;
Whether go gifts, but to the wealthy hand?
Who sit in Chaires, but they that best might stand?
All to the tune of Ars^ versie goes,
Cart draws the Horse, them both the Devil drives,
Men's public friends convert to private foes,
And these wounds most the harmless Patient grines,
The vvealthy best the^ter succor might,
But they will no wrong ^pt, nor proffet right.
Cousen Diogenes, did thou survive,
Mine heart were freed from a thousand fears,
If Pilgrim, thou could prosprously ^riue,
Midst the Caniculars of our luck less years,
Could thou fadge with the world in thy state,
I would thee for example imitate.
Remember, how they once did Dog thee name,
Now Curre, and worse then ill, they would thee call,
Bannish thy presence to thy future shame,
Not spare a tub to cover thee with all,
But intercept the Sun from warning thee,
If them thou find such, as they prove to me.
The shestring Hedge personates Beggars house,
The trees, the fields, and bushes are his mates,
Some silly Baucis poor Philemons spowse,
Forgotten and forgone of greater states,
His Raiment, Rags, indecency his lace,
The Rent his Cut, his habits so to grace.
The Cynick once with Candle in his hand,
At noone (...) man in Macedoni^ sought;
were he Suru^your of the spacious land,
He scarcely should descry a courteous thought,
That had Compassion to commiserate,
The Indigence of some distressed state.
This frozen-harted Age so coldly loves,
That Charity exting ^shed is found,
Beneficence but ver^ (...) proves,
While Promise does but expectation sound,
All are content to father Dignity,
Yet few will Parents be of Courtesy.
Had I but honor, all I would advance:
Had I but wealth, I would enrich the poor:
Or strength, I would the weakest countenance:
Or had I skill, I would recure the love:
There should no penny of reward be named,
Till I had made strength, wealth, and Art ashamed.
Is It not a dis^ine to Humanity,
That money should thus tyrannize on earth?
Or Niggardize our fames indignifie,
And on the faculties raise needless dearth?
The Arts are liberal, then why should price,
Bury such gifts in obscure Avarice?
What Penury of Paper Scriueners find:
While Bills, and Bonds, Indentures, Leases, Deeds.
The worldlings to their words performance bind;
Though no Prouiso for Relapse of needs,
The Poor bare Ec^oes are content to take,
While Rich with wa^ and writings bargain make.
While writs and warrants, Executions, Rests,
Lurk like Hyenna, Debts to apprehend,
while careful Creditors perturbe their breast,
In secrecy their Messengers to send
Unto the Bank-rupt, that has broken day,
And does not levy, what he ought to pay.
These troubles are become so common trade,
That Shoulder-catching does the unthrift gall:
Such Custodies for Evidences made,
That they devour the timber, steel, and all;
They must have double gates before their door,
To stop the false, and to expel the poor.
The Needy no key, lock, chest, closet lack,
They without artificial continent,
Include in Belly, and support on back,
what Heaven gives, or niggard Earth has lent,
No folds for flocks, no treasuries for gold,
But they have present use, that all can hold.
Deneers not Ducats are the Sums we make,
Pence and not pounds the charges we bestow,
Slender dole, and no large Donations take,
Gratuity, the payments which we owe;
Yet vvorldly Pomp, which does our eyes allure,
Suggests, we should not this disgrace endure.
Conjecture what we think, when we behold,
A vvealth-enobled vvorldling, to abound
With rings, and precious things, with gilt, and gold,
As such a second worthy were not found:
How true suppose yet proves our Poore-mans ey,
when all these tricks and trims it does espy?
How feign it would relinquish homely head,
And riuet to Objects so fair in sight;
Whose robes and plumes so gloriously are spread,
The gazers to amaze with rare delight!
My dearest Treasures should be cheaply sold,
To buy a minute, these Rares to behold.
One of mine eyes to ieopard could I brook,
On silks, scarses, Sattans, jewels, bracelets, chains,
On cuffes, and ruffes, and Novelties to look,
Although the price thereof procure my pains:
Such difference in my muck-blinded mind,
I betwixt their worth, and my want do find.
One of their fingers craves more sumptuous cost,
Then all my Carcass to inuest the same,
So gloz'd with gold, with pearl so imbost,
Whose pricefull value they at Hundreds name:
Almost I am persuaded, that it shall
Never to dust through times oppression fall.
For Iuries Solomon, that did abound
With rarest Ornaments, that Art has wrought,
Nor Scriptures Lilly, was so royal found,
To equallize what shows they forth have brought;
To make beholders at these sights admire,
And the Ambitious hang on their desire.
Caesar, whose troops enforced the Earth to groan,
With vvarriours weight in his triumphant days,
Numbered no more to guard his regal throne,
Then do attend the Rich in all assaies;
For all the Earth is theirs to be inioyd,
And all the world are theirs to be imployd.
The vvinters frost nips not the Rich with cold,
Their purse prevention against all plagues procures,
Their steeds in stables stand, their flocks in fold,
The Poor (poor Heart) all Detriments indures,
Wealth never wrincheth griued with the gall,
Alas it is want, that ever feels the fall.
Bare Need constraines the eldest foot to trot,
Through frost, through flint, through fire, though leg be bare.
Ice never too cold, never Sun too hot,
To work our woe, and to increase our care,
Although Disease and Death our lives possess,
Wealth stands vnmoou'd to pity our distress.
But with a Crucify they on us call.
But with their help they add grief unto grief,
But with their might they wrest us to the wall,
But with their loves they leave us no relief,
Fie on that call, help, might, love, and that deed,
which makes our wounded heart the more to bleed.
But ask my staff, the witness of my woes,
what crackes, what knockes, and strokes it has endured,
As secret shield against professed foes,
By whom my black and blewes have been procured;
It Is worn, it is torn, spoiled, and foiled, and cut in twain,
To weaken force, which would augment my pain?
But ask my Scrip, the Cubbord where I lay
My crusts, my crumes, my Commons, victuals, meal,
And it my fortunes will in brief be wray,
How niggardly with me these Earthlings deal:
If fasting fare in diet I surmount,
For ever me an Heretic account.
while Aristippus in the Court does seed,
And fats his crammed Corpse by flattery,
I in the Country entertain my need,
with herbs and roots of Natures charity,
And for my private food search common fields,
which Contents Plenty in abundance yields.
I think how Heavens gave the Desolate
Manna, and Quails, and Honey from the rocks,
Beautifide those hearts unfortunate,
Opened their Treasuries with Mercies-lockes,
That thought they Egipts garlic, onions lost,
They found provision of a dearer cost.
Is It true Elyas, that the Ravens brought
Such comfortable Nutriments of meat;
And so means of thy Sustentation wrought,
when thou had naught but secresies to eat.
Not daring in the worlds appearance stand,
Fearing Oppressions tyrannizing hand?
In air Camelions foster vital breath.
In flaming fires the Salamander feeds:
In Seas the Fish secure themselves from death:
Mowles in Earths bowels do expel their needs:
Then will I not in doubtful state despair,
while I may live by water, fire, earth, air.
These Cobs resemble Saturn, that devoured
The stone Abider in the steed of Jove;
And all the floods of their desires are poured,
To make a Sea of what they chiefly love:
They covet dross, and do contemn the gold,
Omit the good, which men by virtue hold.
Yet they themselves shroud in security,
Against adverse Oppositions fortifide,
Bear Arms against that trouping misery,
Which circumuents my Soul on eu^ry side:
They are not troubled with a touch of woe,
While we midst Legions of misfortunes go.
Seas, storms, waves, tempests, and contrary wind,
Did poor shipman Acaetes ever cross,
In calmest Ocean he did shipwraoke find,
Which did convert his lucre into loss;
While wealthy Merchants safely do arrive,
And at their pleasdre prosprously athriue.
Thus Passions get a habit in my life,
Making it tractable to Fortunes frown,
While we live Soldiers in sinister strife,
Contending to attain a Laurel Crown;
Yet Mercenaries find a time to rest,
which is as much, as happens to the best.
Horace, did not Cobbler Alphenus live?
Why Usurer Alphius did no more,
Yet though the Fates to all like breathing give,
Fortune makes them not Stewards of like store;
The doubtful lots are so unequal found,
That some must want, while others do abound.
The Seas Amalchi'um always frozen stand,
want flagrant Phoebus to dissolve the same;
And poor are ever more deprived of land,
whose former lot the Senior worldlings came,
On the Philosophers stone they erect
The edifice, which chiefly they respect.
And they have power to turn Fortunes wheel,
As most contents their auaricious mind;
They skill choicest Commodities to feel,
Although their eyes with earthly dust are blind;
Unable to discern that royal thing,
which does enrich the Beggar, grace the King.
These Sysiphusians have a stone to turn,
A wandering thought to rumble up and down,
with Tantalus in expectation burn,
Covet the Country and affect the town:
For what they stoop to take, too low does lie;
And what they reach to catch, ascends too hic.
These with Ancaeus plant the sprowting vine,
Hedge in their garden, Orchard, Hearbory,
Yet never taste of their expected wine,
By Calidons bore intercepted die,
For Fates prevent them with their tuskish wound,
Before the Sweet fruits of their sweats are found.
Some Deianira venomed shirts them send,
From worldly ^ole to draw their love,
That midst their mirth with misery they end,
Their hearts from joys enjoying to remove:
Then Hercules from reason runs to rage,
And Death denies them of an elder age.
These Fatlings feast, while as I pooreling fast,
They dine, I pine; they sweetly sleep, I wake:
They leave, I lack; I want, they plenty wast:
I seek a crum, while choice of Cates they make,
Their fast is dearth of stomach, not of meat,
Mine is because I have not what to ear.
These are vainglorious, lewd, unjust in life,
Desperate, discontent in death they be,
Sedition-sowers, stirrers up of strife,
While Heirs for Inuentories disagree,
These Purgatorians, though forgot in grave,
Ora pro nobis must remembered have.
Funeral pomps, tombs, Ceremonies, Rites,
Epitaphes, month-minds, Dirges, Candels, Bell,
Rabbles of irreligion, Flatring writes,
To intercept their passage into Hell,
Their Memories in Chronicles must live,
When Truth should them scandals sepulcher give.
Yet false tears stepdame-like their partings ha^
Of friends, acquaintance, Kindred, children, wife,
Scrikes, cries, sighs, and sobs circumuent their grave,
Though death of one to twenty gives life,
For many Souls are comforted with that,
Wherewith one Epicure fed one so fat.
Might I heir to some Usurer be found,
Whose gorged chests surfeit with cramming gold,
Whose coffers with Commodities abound
So full, that they no sterling more may hold:
Rome Rascals then make space and grace for me,
Whereas my worship shall in person be.
I would elect, Flaunt, Cut, and Swash for mates,
For choice Companions, pleasure, mirth, delight,
For equals, Gentells, Honourables, States;
Ajax would not presume to prove my might:
Mylo would bear his Bull, and let me go,
Malicious Momus durst not be my foe.
Dignity seem inferior, and too bad
To be my shadow, Science would attend,
Invention practice Arts to make me glad,
Poetry my profession would commend,
Dutiful Loyalty would humbly greet
My Person, passing the prospicuous street.
But now the worst are censured too good,
The Miscreants, the Abiects, the forlorn,
Adiudging Baseness borne of better blood,
A corner of my Company do scorn:
So odible an Object am I thought,
Contemned, forsaken, loathed, and set at naught.
Yet Miser thus disparaiged I live,
Succor and means of maintenance to me,
The heat, the air, the vvoods, and waters give,
Though Fortunatelings hate it so to be,
I borrow not, doubting to be denide,
I steal not fearing my life should be tried.
Come staff, and manage mine unhappy hand,
Scrip, guard my Shoulders, burden light to bear,
Three merry mates we against the Sun will stand,
Solace to see, that comforts none can hear,
The lighter purse, the less the cares are found,
Hark, while I whistle to the winds a round.
Arthur Warren.

POVERTIES Patience.
DEpart ye Discontents like Reprobates,
For Patience all Adversities indures,
In rarest Disposition imitates
Herb Panace, that all diseases cures,
Heales interne maladies of wounded minds,
And salues the sores that Physic saluelesse finds.
Credit not vain Persuasion, that deludes
Fond Tractability with fallacies,
And such inducements forcibly intrudes
Into Credulity with Sophistries,
That man, whom Reasons Index should direct,
Suggested is true judgment to neglect.
Ask Contentation, what is Felicity,
And ask Felicity, what is Content,
Ask life, what is the death of misery,
And ask dumb death, what makes life permanent:
Peruse the Contents of contented mind,
Thou naught, but Patience registered shall find.
Tell Expectation, Hap does frustrate Hope,
Through frowning Fortunes fatal Accident:
Tell Avarice, Virtue has larger scope,
Where to erect the Mansion of Content:
And tell Content, that Suffrance drew the plot,
Fit for foundation of so happy lot.
Tell India, that gold's but yellow earth:
Tell Greece, that words are but a breathed sound;
Tell Ceres, that all Plenties have their dearth;
Tell stoutest Troy, Hector is mortal found;
And tell thy self, that wealth, Art, store, and strength
Proves frailty, want, error, and need, at length.
Discretion, censure which is better found,
Much to possess, and nethlesse live in need;
Or to enjoy but little, and abound,
So Competence Necessities may steed:
Brooks satisfy thirst with convenient store,
The spacious Oceans liquid can no more.
Yes, Seas may swallow, Currents seldom drown,
This world includs such Gulfes of overthrows,
For vvealths Deluge may ouerwhelme a Crown,
When Desires floods to inundations grows,
Sourging and sinking that waue-tossed mind,
Which sails Impossibilities to find.
And therefore Resolution, seal thy thought,
Soon to surrender thy dismembered state,
Because Contents Perfection is not bought,
Such firm Prouiso has been made by Fate,
Whisper Chorebus in the ear, that Clay
Proves loosing gamster, with a knock to play.
For know, Corruption will thee apprehend,
When Sheriff Death shall execute arrest,
And to thy sepulcher thee Captive send,
To soiourne there, till thy Debts be confessed,
Till Sums be paid, till thou acquittance have,
Or Creditors Release thy Credit save.
Sword, sheath thy sharp, it is neither edge, nor point,
Nor target, Buckler, shield, nor skill, nor might,
That gives protection to thy safest joint,
when maistring Destinies proclaim their fight,
Chalenging a Quicunque vult to play
About with them, for Conquest of the day.
Gnatho, Fates have no ears to entertain
The sugared phrase of soothing Parasites,
And Ostentations brauings are but vain,
There Is no regard of proudest Th^asonites;
For Adulation proves but idle breath,
Great words small wind, when they solicit death.
Prostrate thy person Magnanimity.
For Pompey does, and Potentate thou must,
Can Alexander lease his Chiualry?
No it is expired, and he dissolved to dust:
Where Is he, that would Achilles armor have?
Ajax in earth, Ulysses lies in grave.
Cyrus his mouth with bowls of blood has filled,
while Tomyris the royal Butler played;
Hell holds the Cob, that bigger batnes would build,
with Soul consulting not to be denaide:
So their Desires some augmention meant,
while sleeping thus they dreamed not of content.
But Affectation, I have past my word
To Justice Conscience, worlds Court forsake,
whose Secretary Fear does it record,
That in Contents Cell I must Mansion make,
And like a Hermit in that Residence
Be weded, and converse with Patience.
And from the many-headed multitude
will sequester my presence and estate,
In secret scene my Comedy conclude,
And privately with Meditation mate,
Then farewell pleasure, and adieu delight,
I Will yield to Fate, that must with fortune fight.
Pomp, Riot, Ease, delicious, costly, vain,
Glory, gold, my Regeneration see,
Self-love, hope, pleasure, lust, desires, and gain,
I have subscribed with you at two to be,
Presumption fly with Dedalls son, and fall,
Drowned in the sea, which men Ica^ean call.
Intemperance, do not on Venus look,
Chastity I have vowed to deify,
And register my name in Vestas book,
And Cupids temples, gods, and Saints deny:
No myrtle, no mellodious warbling string,
Nor pair of Doves for sacrifice will bring.
Tell Danae Virginity repelles
The goldenst shower, that from Heaven falls,
And him, that Jove in Fortitude excells,
Where maidenhood secured is in walls,
When Constancy, Faith, and Perseverance,
The Castle guard for life's Continuance.
Rich Tagus Runnet, which with gold do run,
I will not wash my gilded wish in thee,
Beauty, which shinest to outbraue the Sun,
For thy love I Will not Prides Corriuall be:
The Alcumists I Will in defiance hold,
Which durst convert base Objects into gold.
Inhumane Macheuilles I will abjure,
And not be friend to Virtues enemies,
Troops of Antagonists I will procure
To depose their presuming villainies,
Constraining them to tergiuerse with me,
When Contents prowess shall approved be.
Pleasure, on Earth-wormes make intestine pray,
And with thy golden bait delude the blind,
No frauds my circumuented Troy betray,
Though Synon for this Action be assigned:
So greedily I gape not after gain,
In short delight to swallow endless pain.
Sirens harmonious Sonnets founding sweet
Send no misinformation to their mind.
Which nauigate their Commonwealth to meet,
And after travel Ithica to find,
Ulysses to a pillar will be bound,
That so he may escape home safe and sound.
Circe, thy Potions want effectual power,
To intercept the passage of the wise,
Calipso's dregs cannot retard one ho^e
The voyage, which Discretion does devise:
Bewitching world works none impediment,
To stop the Mortifides resolved intend.
Yet Poverty seems title of Contempt,
A graceless word, a derogating Name,
Which Honors Court from presence does exempt,
As scandal, which indignifies the same;
I have none ensigns of apparent worth,
Nor Ornaments, to set my Person forth.
I challenge no possession of a Crown,
which earthly Realms or Royalty bestows,
I fear not fatal force of Fortunes frown,
which to the proud Precipitation owes,
I sit meek, mild, inferior unto all,
So low I am, lower I cannot fall.
With Usury I have no league of love,
with Pride I claim on Consanguinity,
Yet though I cannot Fortunatus prove,
worlds expectation I will fallify,
And one day be possessour of that place,
which holds these fronted titles in disgrace.
Favor is but fading uncertainty,
Majesty some decaying Monument,
Love but a labarinth of misery,
Riches are but Administrations lent,
Then will I scorn Earths excrements, pelf, dross,
And, till I come to Heaven, bear my cross.
Roman Carbilius first refused his wife
For Barrennes, but Natures bare defect:
So this world lothes our incommodious life,
Our wedlock by di^orcement to reject:
Because we do not yearly fructify,
With Fortunes sprowting Prodigality.
Campania is not our Na^iue seat,
Which the Italians judge their fertill'st lands,
But I about sterilitie must beat,
And for Annuities employ my hands:
while Wealth in largest seas his ship may put,
with slender Hulke the Caspian streights I cut.
Advancement, bear an eye unto thy state,
Securelesse Royalty, live circumspect,
Ignorance, no dominion arrogate,
Phaeton, thine Ambition correct,
If love incensed be against what is desired,
He will confound thee, ere the World be fired.
Empires rule not with moderate Content,
Scepters join with terrestrial Diadems,
Mansolus has but fading Monument;
Then basely I esteem these Indy Iems,
As for all Treasures found on seas or land,
I admit none of them to touch my hand.
When saw the World me roab'd in rich array?
Or counterfeit in colors Esopes Py?
Or countermand earths fashions every day;
Or with the Peacock gaze on bravery:
Or like Lisicrates, against Nature black
White hairs, that old I might seem age to lack?
When trauell'd I in vvagon, chariot, Couch?
Or Abbot-like with cushions cockred ease?
Or had of Pleasures any tender touch?
Or eyes with beauteous visions did I please?
Or when my stomach did I fill and feed
with choice of meats, or one meal more then need?
Less leafes do fitter lower shrubs become,
And lower sails less boats do better guide,
Less paces sooner bring the lighter home,
And safer we arrive with lower tide:
Great tides have floods, floods waves, waves dangerous be,
Take through the fords, if thou will pass with me.
The Egyptian Island Chemnis always swimmes,
Tossed hither, thither, up and down with wind,
So worldly love, so Worldlings wandering limbs
Course to and fro Commodities to find:
Acquainted are with rarity of rest,
Feeling disturbance of care-cumbred breast.
The Cercyraei were not more perplexed
with warring oppositions of their foes,
Then Wealth is with inquietation vexed,
while it from land to seas a coursing goes,
Sending Inquiry to descry that store,
which makes the Owner to affect the more.
If in a Senate house Content could live,
Then Office might adorn the Frankize gown,
If that a kingdom could sufficient give,
Then Majesty might dignifie a Crown:
If Fates surprised not men with purging fan,
Presull and Prelate were a happy man.
Centurions then might on their guards be stout,
And Generals might troops of Armies hold,
Iustian then were manumist from doubt,
But Death the Shepherd plays, brings them to fold,
No Magistracy length of life can give,
Caninus but seau'n hours did Consul live.
The Ox, which of Clytumnus Current drinks,
Transformed is into a Color white,
But who so tastes of Contentment, thinks,
Earths invitations can him not incite,
To be translated into any mind,
But those Conceyts, which Patience seeks to find.
Although no Bacchanalls I celebrate,
To banish wit by sence-exiling wine,
Though I my stomach do not ded^
To Luxury, and with the Glutton date,
Yet does Abstemius Crystal water find,
And Curious foot to content Natures mind.
Essei were certain Religious Jews,
Abstaining from flesh, women, oiles, and wines,
Contenting Nature but with Dates and dewes,
Never killed fatlings, never robbed vines,
To flatter Palate, or feed Glu^ony,
With Cates and Delicates variety.
His Kingdom ravenous Erisicthon sold,
And of so many Millions kept no mite,
Exchanged his daughter Protea for gold,
To satisfy his Royal Appetite;
Not thus content against Nature did rebel,
And of his own Flesh a devouring fell.
The Troyan horse, made by Epeus hand,
Had no such Belly Hundreds to contain,
Though it did swallow, City and the land,
Which Pryam ruled, during his happy Reign:
This vvoulfe, his Realm in gourmandizing spent,
Tasting no sweet Ambrosin of content.
Divine Content, thine Altars I Will frequent,
Offering a mite with hand, talents with heart,
Fortune to greatr ^ifts will not consent,
Then goddess, let desire stand for desert;
And prove propitious to thy poorest Saint,
That does thy godhead with his lot acquaint.
Sweet Virtue, patronize my Patience,
Though but Beggar to Biggers I appear,
Protect me with thy sacred Providence,
Thy Suppliants petitions Ioue-like hear;
And for me Glories paradize provide,
Above the Earth to have me dignifide.
Dismember limbs from Body of Delight,
which in times process must disiointed be,
From Sensuality my senses right,
which may conglutinate my love to thee;
Make perfet Union twixt Content and Poor,
And knit that Gordion lasting evermore.
Give not Abundance, least I should forget
The Giver, when such surplusage I see,
Give not too little, least I die in det,
Unable so to tender Charons fee;
The golden Mediocrity I crave,
To quite the world, and me conduct to grave.
I covet not that penetrable way;
Divulged to the Common Multitude,
I Will not at passage with the Vulgars play,
But steps into the narrow streits intrud^,
Not griuing though I leave my shoes behind,
So I the perfet path to Heaven find.
what is it a pleasant journey to enjoy,
And in a painful Inn be ente^*
Cursed are lodges, that the guests ^oy,
where Trauells Recreation should be (...):
Tread hard by day; s^ ease at night ^e ^ound,
Lament in life so joys in death abound.
Employ me not in Superfluities,
whose sums surcharge a well-addicted mind,
which Marthaes conversation occupies,
To prosecute such earthly suits assigned:
Disburthen my Conceits of vvorldly cares,
which little Time to think on Tempe sp^res.
Let divine Contemplations be my treasures,
And sacred songs my choicest harmony,
And Virtues Recreation my pleasures,
And Hope the Prologue of my Comedy,
Oh with what action would I g^ce my part,
Had I a scene according to desert.
Pronuntiation should make Pride ashamed,
Such sweetness in distinction, Are in gesture,
My gravity in face may not be named,
Nor Ornaments i^brodred on my ^sture;
That muddi^ eyes, base lamps, and earthy lights,
Durst not behold the Objects of these sights.
The Mellodie of Cher^bins me grace,
And Millions of Man me attend,
Societies of Angels me embra^e,
Their time the S^ints Communions with me spend,
And robes of Righteousness I have in store,
My person in Jove's presence ^o decore.
And yet Earths Vulgars me indignifie,
And on my habits cast dis^full (...),
Obraid me with odious vnd^ncy;
But worse objections I then these have borne;
Better Coceipts I have of rater things,
Which men unto the bliss of blissings brings.
I Will converse with my private Pilgrimage,
Meddling with Earth so little, as I may,
Let Solitarines me patronage,
Until by Death I Natures due repay;
Yet I with Fortunes hand encounter must,
And bear arms, till I be dissolved to dust.
Let Contents Coslet guard besieged life,
Armor of Proof upon my Shoulders lay,
Direct me Soldier in this vale of strife,
On Earth my Captains ensigns to display,
Though I unfortunate loose gains, gain loss,
Under the durance of the hardest cross.
Its Hart-griefe to survey my woeful wounds,
Death-passions, but to touch my miseries;
These Troubles taste Digestions strength confounds,
Courage sits daunted at these doleful cries,
Hell cannot add one plague unto my pain,
That circumsept with mischiefs thus remain.
Earths Daemogorgon armed against me stands,
To ruinate my Castle of Content,
Hellish Briareus with his hundred hands,
Against my Patience has his forces sent,
But I have vowed to loose my life in field,
Ere tergiuerse, or coward weapons yield.
Triumphant Victory shall me attend,
And Confidence mine enterprise embold,
Till gloriously mine Honors do ascend,
In Majesty's Palace their Court to hold:
That Admiration wonder shall anew
The miracles of mine exploits to view.
Harpocrates thy Silence strangleth words,
while hot multiplications fire Debate,
Bring flax to flame, and proffer Battle swords,
And Authors are of life-suruiuing hate;
There Is such Omnipotence in Loyalty,
That yielding, it obtaines the Victory.
O it is a bloodlesse Conquest to submit,
No maymes, no martyrdoms therein are found,
Rashness proves Argument of slender wit,
while Providence in whole skins sleeps sound,
with Laurel leafes subduing stoutest foes,
while wild-heads by the ears in armor goes.
Revenge with Cocyx selfe-conceipt confounds,
while Time might salve the bleeding'st injury,
Precipitation scarred is with wounds,
while Suffrance purchases Security:
O there is such Operation in Content,
That it does right the wrongfull'st detriment.
Admit I seem but homely in my House,
My Commons course, my food no dainty fare,
Notable lodge a Friend, nor feast a Mouse,
Next Neighbor to want Penury and Care;
Nay, Care I leave to carking Dives charge,
whose treasured wealth his tortured woes enlarge.
Suruay mine head, search if thine eyes can find
True Testimony of care-martyrd Heart,
Or Evidence of discontented mind,
Compelling Natures color to depart,
Planting a White, resembling Northern snow,
which does possession of griefe-tenures show.
My feature seems as fair, as Fatters be,
As comely, as the grossest of the land,
As healthful, as the Richest are to see,
Nay they are diseasd in head, foot, face, and hand,
with dropsy, fleame, knobs, plurisy, and gout,
with falling evils, itch, and breakings out.
Humors and tumors, botclies, byles, and sores
Their chiefest senses dang'rously displease,
These are the issues of superfluous stores,
Surburth'ning Nature to provoke disease,
To suffocate the Conduit of their breath,
while Riot causes Surfeit, surfeit Death.
VVealthlings suppose their parting peale they hear,
See Deaths Idea with his maze in hand,
If Bell but whisper in their guilty ear,
Dreading that coram nobis they must stand,
And being c^lpable, to fear begin
Incuitable Judgment for their sin.
All Objects their Capacity offend,
Least sudden perrils should abridge their breath,
And Tasters must their trencher-meales attend,
Least nutrimentall Diet hasten death;
A former Mouth must practice on their meat,
And brook their breakfast, ere they durst to eat.
Roots, Onions, garlic, and the Hermits meal,
Proves better feasting then this dangerous fare:
which seeks a scratch of Hungers nails to heal,
And catch a wound, that bleeds with mortal care:
(Digestion) I securely vow to fast,
Ere fearfully feed on so dear repast.
Nay more, the Belly burthned, Brains are dull,
The body glutted, vices load the mind,
The head is empty, when the womb is full,
The Corpulent do slender knowledge find,
For Abstinence and Temperance attain,
The mark of Honor, and the means of gain,
A little Cottage, common cloth, short meals,
Is safest Seat, best Raiment, surest health,
Not chargeably impayring Publique-weales,
And seldom da^ify man's private wealth.
It Is sumptuous lodge, rich vesture, dainty fare,
That rob the purse, and make Revenues bare.
Double and Treble Chimn^is mounting fair,
Observe the single Hospitality,
All spent to build, and buildings to repair,
which should support oppressed misery,
Great halls, large tables, gold, plate, little meat,
Feed but the eye, while mouth has naught to eat.
Apollo's divine Oracle confe^,
Aged Aglaus far more fortunate,
Then was king Gyges in his royal rest,
Amidst the mountains of his lofty state,
Aglaus never past limits of his land,
Gyges detained all that came to h^nd.
Agathocles among his Sycanian Lords
Did earthen Vessels at his table use:
Like president P^rsenna King affords,
To teach that none Humility refuse:
In jewels their Ability might eat,
But they discerned it bettred not the meat.
Poison is powered in the golden Cru^e,
The Aconite in richest Bowls is laid,
As with foul treason under fairest truce;
So worldlings are in costly Cups betraide,
Fie on those goods, though glorious to be seen,
which have Efficients of destructions been.
King Dionisius knew the restless state,
Which to the perrill Potent^es possess,
Experience taught him in what dangrous gate
They enter, which to Kingdoms have access,
While by a hai^e (...) naked Sword hangs down,
Ready to fall upon the Princes Crown.
What proves Abundance but abundant Care?
what is wealth: Plenty but Poverty of Rest?
Treasures are tortures, which do never spare
with ledden thoughts to onerate our breast:
Elect Riches of a diuiner sort.
Choose Burdens which thou better may support.
Content in Celles seems richer by degrees,
Then Discontent enthroned in Courts of Kings;
One dish of fruit more worth then twenty trees,
Sufficient consists not in many things:
Naught is enough for him that wants naught,
Much is too little, whereas more is sought.
Resolve me vvorldling, midst thy goods, and ground,
Herds, Flocks, Corn, Oil, Fruits, Silver, Gold, and gain,
What Contentation in this store is found,
But Competence where with life to sustain?
Will not this gilt prove Guiltines of mind;
When thine Account love shall unworthy find?
Miser, durst so much on one mouth bestow,
As might a pettie-Commonwealth suffice?
what does Possession such Revenues owe
Unto one Helluo's hellish Avarice?
Condition knows, thou had it to impart,
Some portion thereof to the needy heart.
So Admiration once beheld an Ass
Laden with roast, burthned with costly meat,
With curbing bit in mouth the plains to pass,
Finding not nettles, hay or grass to eat,
His fortunes did some worldlings imitate,
That fools and beggars are in richest state.
That pine in plenty, starve amidst their store,
That want in wealth, and in abundance need,
That maugre Superfluities seem poor,
And Nature with no Contentation feed:
Man's heart so small gorg'th not a kite one hour,
Yet would it Earths Circumferrence devour.
Must Man needs drossy Muck his Master make,
which Fortune has apprentiz'd for a slave?
And can Humanity with Patience take,
That Baseness should of him dominion have?
I dare not call thee Ass, but ask thy self,
What ears thou have, that harknest so to pelf.
Does money purpose to (...) might?
Does wealth imagine to discredit wit?
Have Riches Confidence to conquer Right?
Does gold boue Virtue undertake to sit!
Fie, will Moria shoot beyond her aim?
And challenge more then justly she can claim?
How should Humanity it self behave,
And not with Oppositions be oppressed,
His scourged ship from Scilla's throat to save,
In harbor of Security to rest?
Vain Desperation seems in misery,
More vain Presumption in prosperity.
Pryam, that princely Governor of Troy,
Father of Sonne^ coequallizing Kings,
In the maturity of rarest joy,
Midst tenure of inualewable things,
was slain, and Time by Destinies deferred,
To have his murdered Majesty inte^'d.
Hector his He^e, had Time bestowd success,
Prince of the worthies, Mars for Chivalry,
was impotent Fortunes force to suppress,
And must shake hand^ with like Adversity;
Bearing the bu^hen of vnprosprous strife,
To make untimely Period of his life,
The City flowed with tears at this distress,
Grief sounded Clamours at his overthrow,
And Cordial Dolours did their hearts possess,
Since youth did leuy debts, which Age should owe,
An hundred noble Courages did quail,
And thousand Ladies did his loss bewail.
No princely Pomp can Potentates secure,
No earthly Kingdoms can eternize life,
Prosperity no safety can assure,
Since Fortune has his frowns, Atrops her knife,
Two too inexorable still have been,
That blind Director, and that fatal Queen.
These Two uncertain are, yet certain be,
Fortunes pleased help, Fortunes displeased hate,
The Destinies are bribed by no fee,
To lengthen life, or days to breuiate:
No term has interest in their good will,
They save in shipwracks, and in harbors kill.
Now Demonax should prove a Puritan,
Instructed by Philosophy to hate,
Siluers receipt in time of Adrian,
Unfit to be these Mony-mongers ma^e,
which morgage Souls, and their Salvation drown,
In depth of diuing for a golden Crown.
Concupiscence with Lucre falls in love,
Demonica durst Ephesus betray,
If Brennus will a bounteous Briber prove,
Treasons demands with treasures sums to pay;
Eryphale will have her husband sold,
while gold blinds worldlings, worldlings grope for gold.
Temptation, vanish, with seducement die,
which golden Mountains durst by promise give,
Suggesting Commonwealths of Dignity,
while as thy Creditors in scandal live;
For what proves glory on an Empire placed,
But plodded means to make a man disgraced?
Don Romulus no fallacies could find,
But Brothers death, poor Rhemus must be slain,
To satisfy his all-affecting mind,
Moeties seemed insufficient gain,
Daily the Diadem as fair appears
Unto his lustful eyes, as second years.
Therefore enacts, that such as should ascend
The Roman walls, this scale with death should buy,
To Celer this observance does commend,
Rhemus gets up, dreading no treachery,
which dear attempt exhausts his dearest life,
Concluding so that twin-borne Brethrens strife.
Mismurdred Rhemus, by this time thou know
Dignities value, fading fruits of gain,
what satisfaction thou to Honor owst,
And what preferment Scepter-sutes attain;
Oh if that Brother spare not Brothers blood,
At Aliants hands who expects any good?
A wolf in woods, them equally did nurse,
But Romulus retained the woluish mind,
Lamb-natur'd Rhemus might his fortunes curse,
while Destinies had such events assigned,
One kingdom is not capable of twain,
One Temple cannot Abel hold and Caine.
The beauteous Solstice of a Crown does blind
The clearest Argus eyes, that ever live,
what man is he, that might a kingdom find
And Parents, Children, Brethren, would not give?
Princedoms seem sweet pills, pleasant is a Crown,
He that has no throat would them swallow down.
Yet lofty Cedars overthrown are found,
with boistrous blasts of ruine-threatning wind,
when Iunipers stand steadfast on their ground,
And seats of surer Residence do find;
Fortune Presumption to preferment calls,
To give the heedlesse Climbers headlong falls.
Profit provoke, bids the Niggard hold;
Pleasure persuades, motive Method speaks,
Dives will hoord, though hang in Hell for gold;
Epicures gourmandize, though Belly breaks:
From sugared baits what caueats can forbid,
Though thousand harmefull hooks lie under hid?
Darius will his Horsmans Counsel use,
Process of his Direction execute,
will not O^bares decretalls refuse,
If his devise him Ruler constitute,
If Horses bray may him proclyme a King,
He puts in practice the ignoblest thing.
Philoxenus the Parasite did wish
His throat in length a Cranes neck might exceed,
To feel the pleasures of the sweetest dish,
Taste pleasant drink his appetite to feed:
with Phago placing his felicity
And summum Bonum in his gluttony.
Few with Phraortes worship Temperance,
Sardanapal^ lives e^minate,
Scyron hardneth his thi^ish Countenance,
Roman Sarmantus proves a ^coffing mate,
And none with Z^ that Content desire,
which Horace of Mecenas did inqui^.
When Zancles hundred four years had suruiu'd.
which term does naught but imperfections gain,
Nature a Miracle in him contrived,
Making his jaws young teeth a new retain,
Such is the Custom of the vvorldly mind,
That loosing life, Abundance seeks to find.
Years Parents are of Mutability,
And Mutability Natures decay,
Time is the Trumpettour of secrecy,
Though Revelation plead upon delay;
The ey-deluding shows are shadows found,
Mortality to Dissolution bound.
Palaces, Temples, Castells, Cities, Towns,
Towers, and Turrets equal to the skies,
Subverted by resistl^sse fortunes frowns,
Leave naught, which their memorialls testifies;
Harvest and hook those fertile furlongs grace,
Where vvalls and vvindowes once had royal place.
King Pryams Parlour made an Hearbory,
With Floras favors seems red, white, and green;
Those halles with fruits and flowers fructify,
Where quandam Lordings princely to be seen,
Led Courtly dances in their Ladies hands,
Like Thetis tripping on the silver sands.
Honor is but a worthless word of grace,
To sooth Ambitions praise-attending ears:
Beauty but Blossoms in a flouring face;
And Pleasures but delights commixt with fears;
Then Honor, Beauty, and Delight are vain,
Since in them all no Certainty does reign.
Diogenes once passing near to Hell
Beheld Mydas, that sometime lived a King,
Now in Infernal Beggary to dwell,
Base, ragged, dispossessed of every thing;
And laughing said, ah ah my golden Ass,
Is It possible the world comes thus to pass?
The Sequels of precedent Pleasures move
Purification to relinquish dross,
And earthly approbations to disprooue,
And make concealment of apparent cross,
Since Rich are poor, and Poor are rich at last,
When fatal lots are on our limits cast.
Lazarus midst his suts of miseries
Solicited the Gluttons careless gate,
Dives in flames of Phlegeton now cries;
Not heard of him, whom he heard no^ of late,
The law of Talio like for like does pay,
To quite all kindness there succeeds a day.
Since Cornucopiae filled with fruitful things
To Penury by Destination turns:
Since Riot unexpected Damage brings,
Since ceasing Ease in ceaselesse torments burns:
Pleasures and Plenties I Will not Comforts call,
But Perturbations, and forsake them all.
In fack and Cinders (...) be,
Part of my limbs vncouerd in the cold,
I Will not my body cloth beneath my knee,
That earthen eyes may clayen feet behold;
To note (since they resemble brittle sand)
That I on Frailties weak foundation stand.
That living man may dying mould respect;
Though Power cannot Impotence prevent,
It may repair some Natural defect,
That sinful Soul die not impenitent:
Our manhood weak our matter being dust,
Subject to Death, to Mother Earth we must.
Nestor suruiuing Natures common length,
Nor Agamemnon with his Majesty,
Nor Polyphemus with robustous strength
Can countermand the Doom of Destiny:
Fire can the hardest vvood to cinders burn,
And Time the strongest flesh to Ashes turn.
There shall no (...) be shown,
But Kings and Clownes in one Condition be;
Twixt Court and Cottage no distinction known,
Between the high state and the low degree:
For Irus dies, and C^s does no less,
Wit, Beauty, Hon^, Wealth must make a mess.
Then ringed Fingers (...) with gold,
Then cursed Tresses beautifide by A^,
Then fashions, and ruffes ranked fouresold,
Then locks and looks witness of proudest heart,
Then painted Cheeks, roling eyes lures of lust,
Shall perrish, ro^, consume, and come to dust,
Then Helen lustful Venery shall ^ue;
And Clytemnestra abjure homicide,
whose murdrous hands her loving husband ^lue,
That thought in safety with his wife to bide:
And Giant Cacus curse unlawful gains,
when Pluto paies the stipend of his pains.
And Nero shall lament midst ^arfull flood,
Whose Rigor life's effusion did affect,
Daily exhausting many Millions blood,
Which Tyrant he in Justice should protect;
Medea loathe her Necromantick spell,
For Magic Art when witches burn in hell.
Tell Rhodope the Harlot, how she spent
Charaxus patrimony, Chattels, goods,
And him forth with to Seas a Pirate sent,
His fortunes to experience in the floods;
And ask her, whether there will come a day,
For pleasures and extortions use to pay.
One Continent must Alexander hold,
Whom many Provinces could not contain,
That wept, and weeping his Attendants told,
He grieved least he none other World should gain,
To chronicle the Conquests of his hands,
Because the whole world Phillips subject stands.
Admonish thus a Worldlings climbing mind,
That Destinies do his desires deride;
Thou at his hands Ingratitude shall find,
And he will thy Directions not abide;
But with the Adder stops indocile ear,
Unwilling wisest charmers voice to hear,
Folly has got a habit on their head,
This head misguides the selfe-conceited will,
The living meditate not on the dead,
But full with errors their affections fill,
Yet where is safety, health, joy, comfort, ease,
Or Contentation, which can last and please?
Then blessed Patience, fortunate Content,
Sitting inferior to the lowest seat,
Privilege from external Accident,
which does with Fortunes scourges Worldlings beat:
The Poore's but poor how ever Tempests blow,
But Rich-men may strange alterations know.
What Metamorphosis will then be seen,
when Pilgrims princelike shall inthroned stand,
And shall live Regents, which have Vassals been
Holding a scepter in immortal hand;
Then gold for dross, and glory for disgrace.
Equal to Saints the meanest shall embrace.
When fading Bale shall ceaselesse blessings bring
Then farewell vvinter of Aduersityes,
when Flora with her euerflowring spring.
All seasons, Summer, Autumn dignifyes:
Then part colored flowers, and the rose,
Shall feed eyes humor, and delight the nose.
Then strained Mellodie shall pierce our ear,
whose sense from ear descends to the heart,
when songs for sighs, and mirth for mones we hear,
who would not wish with us to bear a part?
Grieve not, though now discords of tunes abound,
This iarring one day will be music found.
Soul sequester thy thought from vanity,
vvorldly Advancement in dishonor hold,
And do not Angerona dignify,
Although she proffer pleasures manifold:
If thy Desires on earth their pleasures take,
Twill cost thy life, before thou can awake.
An Oracle Protesilaus told,
That what Greek first entered the Troyan land,
Should die, which danger could not him withold
But he first takes this enterprise in hand;
The prophecies accordingly succeed,
For Hector killed him that performed that deed.
Beware by this example, how thy mind
Adventure make for transitory things,
For subtyle Fates the secret'st searcher find,
And finding him, ad respondendum brings.
Possess not, but pass through this earthly cell,
where no Contents, but misaduentures dwell.
Here Is naught but passions, penury, and pain,
Sickness, and sorrows, slanders, rumors fears,
Drudgings, and grudgings, envy, strife, disdain,
Damage, and discontents, frowns, terrors, trates,
Prisonment, poison, cauills, curse, and cross,
Servitude, thralldoms, labors, dolours, loss.
Here Is naught but filth, and frailty, griefs, and galls,
Troubles, and travels, force, fraud, wrath, and wrong,
Folly, and frensy, snares, cares, climbing, falls,
Show me a man among Mortals, that is so strong,
which can support the burden of one day,
That does all these loads on his shoulders lay.
Atlas, that bears Heaven on his back,
Presumes not this weight to undertake,
Invincible Sampson would sinews lack,
which for this durance might him able make:
These all so insupportable appear
That Giants would their impositions fear.
Hercules toils in number, Nature, name,
Cannot with these discouragements compare,
Their name to tasks, to twelve their number came,
Their nature bridled with a little care;
Part wrought with force, part wrought with fallacies,
But these pretend impossibilities.
They seem as odious as the Gorgons head,
As terrible as ^ping Lions jaws,
Or Cocatrice whose sight brings fatal dread,
As horrible as were the H^pies claws,
That doubts before, behind misfortunes stand,
Despair above, dangers on every hand.
Yet Patience in a Castle of content
Wincks at these Objects, ouer-heares the sound,
But waighes not words of the Impatient,
Whose spirits full of Discontents abound,
I smile to see the corpulent still feed,
Laugh to behold the vvealthy stand in need.
Empty-way-faring men with pencelesse purse
Durst sing in thiefes presence dischar'd of fear,
When full Powch does his Misaduentures curse,
And (will he, nill he) for a pass paies dear,
That Poverty returns safer, home,
Then Riches with such royalty can come.
Armath'oes ride on rocks, ships sink in sands,
Meet with storms, tempests, gulfes, vnprosprous wind,
When safely Pinnages arrive to lands,
And wished Calmes for Navigations find;
Charibdis, Scylla, Syrtes, wracks, and wave,
On lowly Barks no lofty power have.
If Adam through forbidden fruit for sooke
Those Eden pleasures of felicity,
If that Lots wife for one retorted look
In pillar of Salt found such misery;
These Sodom apples I will not behold,
That inward are but dust, though outward gold.
Virtue join hand in hand with Poverty,
And we will walk socur'd from bonds of fears,
Not surprised with preventing misery,
Till Iubile proclaim those joyful years,
when we in Heaven shall be resident,
To reap the fruits of Patience and Content.
Arthur Warren.

FINIS.

