A BRIEF INSTRVCTION. BY WAY OF DIALOGVE, CONCERNING THE PRINCIPAL points
of Christian Religion, gathered out of the holy Scriptures, Fathers, and
Councels.

By the Reuere^de M. George Doulye Priest.

Luci succedit nox, Sapientiam autem non vincit malitia. Sap. 7.

CVM PRIVILEGIO. Imprinted at Louaine by Laurence Kellam. Anno 1604.

THE PREface.
ALL heresies, (Christian reader) as other dise^ses whether of the body,
Su^ius, and Cochlaeus. etc.
or of the mind, have their beginning, increase, state, and declination; this
of Luther, and Caluyne began to be published in Germany about the year of
our Lord, The Duke of Saxonye aspiringe to the Empire. The Prince of Co^de; the
Admiral, and others in France.
1517. and a little after in France, where it increased so much with liberty
of life, joined with interest, and pretensions of temporal Princes, as it
stirred up those furious rebellions, vvarres, and other tragical actions,
which we have seen, and heard of in those countries, as also in Flanders,
The Prince of Aurange in Flanders.
and other parts of Christendom, wheresoever it has come within the
compass of Europe, out of which it has not yet crepte, albeit, (as the
Apostle speaks) it has crepte like a ca^cker: 2. Timot. c. 2. verse. 17.
the poison whereof infectinge so many provinces, came into our country* by
occasion of the inordinate affection which king Henry the eight took to
Anne Bollen, mother to the late Queen Elisabeth (beheaded afterward for her
just deserts by the said king her husband) for whose sake he broke with
the Sea Apostolic, and took upon him the title of Supremacy in spiritual
matters, to have some color to put away Queen Catherine his lavvfull wife,
whereunto the Pope could not be brought, for that he judged the divorce to be
vnjuste, and contrary to Gods holy law.

By this occasion haeresie took root in England, under King Henry; spronge
up in King Edvvardes days, under the gouerme^t of his protectors
(afterward executed for treason) and came to that state in the reygne of
Queen Elisabeth, as the politic governors of her council (who had founded
their authority. and greatness in the advancement of the same, presumed
(after they had taken away the life of the renowned Princess Queen Marie of
Scotland) they could so establishe it, that they should be able to bannish
Catholic Religion for ever out of England. But the contrary has happened, as
in all other heresies, and like attemptes of ages past may be seen; the
unsearchable wisdom of almighty God, co^foundinge the vain cogitations,
and shallovv devises of mortal men. In the dominions of the Archeduke
Ferdina^do:


Now in Germany, and in those Northern countries adioyninge, after so long,
and so great desolation, we see great progress of the Catholic faith, In
Hungary Transyluania, Zuizerland, Polonia, etc.
where every day (God be thanked) towns, cities, and whole countries,
vvearied with heresy, cast of this infamous yoke, and embrace that truth,
which their forefathers professed, with much more fervor then there was
before heresy entered amongst them. In Flanders the like; and where the
country is not oppressed with vvarres, or rebellion, the piety, devotion,
and Christian life of the people is incomparably bettered, since they have
delivered them selves from the thralldome of these erroneous, and Apostata
doctrines. France is risinge apace, by the memorable example of the most
Christian King Henry the. 4. who being deceived by heretics in his youth,
has shaken them of, and their pestilente counsayles, since he is come to more
mature years, and through his wisdom, and valor obtained such quietness
in his kingdom, that neither he has now any more cause to fear them,
neither was it known (peradventure) since Charlemayne, that any King of
that Country has enjoyed that crown with more prosperity. The like
example vva^teth only in England, (and to Gods omnipotency is as factible as
in France) where King Henry the eyghtes succession is ended, for the
which, and the inordinate desire he had to have children, after twenty
years roygne with renown, and glory in the eyes of all Christendom
vvhilest he lived a Catholic, after diverse royal exploites, and the increase
of his regalities, by the most sacred title of defender of the faith, gained
with that vvorthie, and Kingelie work written against Luthers doctrine,
he most miserably left God, and his Church: and that seed is now wholy
extinguished vvherevvith heresy was sown, and should have been perpetually
maintained in our country: and the persecutions past have served for nothing
less, then for that they were principally intended, but contrarievvise
kindlinge charity, and the love of Christ in Catholic souls, have not
only conserved, but augmented, and illustrated the faith above all
expectation; so as we see the benediction of our Savior, and the regions
white, and read^e for harvest, whose reapers constantly labouringe in this
cause, patiently expecte Gods providence, who, when time shall require,
will put into the hearts of those in whole hands the government is, to
mitigate the rigor of penal laws, whereby the publishinge of Gods truth,
may with more svveetenes go forvvard; which when, and howsoever it shall
fall out, in the mean time, experience does teach, that some form of
instruction is necessary, for the informinge of those poor souls which
hitherto have known no other Religion, but that wherein they were borne,
and by which they are taught through the importunate clamours of Caluins
ministers, to detest the Catholic Religion, before they know it: for so we
coming to tell our own tale, they may judge with indifferency, and learn
to distinguish betvveene true Catholic doctrine, and heresy, which is that
we especially pretend: for if Catholic Religion were as the malice, or
ignorance of these sectaries teach, and make the common people believe, it
were not only folly but mere madness to be a Catholic: but the contrary
will here quickly be seen, and what conuenience, and excellence harmonye,
our Religion has with all truth, and reason, and the light, and majesty.
which it carries in it self, by which alvvayes it has ouergrovvne, and
confounded all sects, and heresies, in the world, and that if the adversary
have any shevve, or appearance of Religion, it is with things usurped, and
stolen from us or counterfeyted by imitation of the Catholics, no other wise
then apes imitate men, Tertullian. Lectantius. Vincentius, Li^i^. etc.
and the devil the vvorckes of God (as some of the ancient fathers have
noted: the rest, and that which is meerlie their own, being nothing else
but dross, baggage, and beggerie, as any man of judgeme^t not preoecuppated
with passion will easily discern, even by the readinge of this little
Dialogue, little in volume, but great in substance, for the great, and
importante matters it conteyneth necessary for our salvation, the greatest
affayre, that we can treat of in this life: which was first written for
the help, and instruction, of particular friends, not without some imitation
of Saints Austen, who made his Enchiridion with the like intention: and
allbeit I have framed the style thereof to the understanding, and reach of the
most, yeat I hope the learned will find satisfaction; and the more curious
vvittes wherein to discourse, and entertayne them selves. And that no man may
complain of the brevity, which I have affected, co^prifinge so many
importance quaestions in so little a volume; for such as desire to see the same
matters either more copiously handled, or more authentically proved, besides
the most learned of our age, whose writings I have perused, and especially
those of Cardinal Bellarmine whom I principally follow in this
instruction, because his Doctrine is particularlye recommended by the Sea
Apostolic I have quoted in the margent the grauest ancient vvriters of all
other times; Motu Prop. PP. Clem. 8.
who being lights of the world, and miracles of nature for their
talentes, and judgment, have always follovved this infallible guydestarre
of the Catholic truth, to whose books faythfullie cited, I remitte thee
(gentle reader) desitinge only, that thou vvilt voutchsafe to accept herein
my good will, which is all the revvard I expecte of this labor at thy
hands; the praise, if any good shall ever grovve of it, being due to God
alone, the author, and fountain of all goodness, who ever keep thee, and
direct thee in the way of truth, and eternal salvation.

Thy seruante in our Lord JESUS George Doulye.

A BRIEF INSTRVCTION, BY WAY OF DIALOGVE. concerning the principal points of
Christian Religion, gathered out of the holy Scriptures, Fathers and Councels.
Master. ART THOU a Christian?


Disciple. Yea sir, by the grace of God.


M. Why do thou say, by the grace of god?


D. Because I am not a Christian by my own merits, nor of my father, nor
mother, nor any other pure creature; but by the goodness and mercy of God, and
the merits of Christ Jesus


M. And what is a Christian? A Christian.



D. He that being baptized, believes and professes the law of Christ. Vide
1. Pet. 4. Act. 11. Tert. de prae. crip. Cyprian. l. 4. Ep. 2. Atha. Ora. 2.
contra Ar. August tract. 113 in Io: and Ench^. c. 5.



M. And what is the law of Christ?


D. That which our Savior delivered to his Apostles and their successors, and
is truly and only taught in the catholic church of Rome, now, and ever since
our Savior.


M. What benefit or dignity receaveth a man when he is made a Christian?


D. He is made the child of benedictio^, the adoptive son of God, and
inheritour of heaven, if him self do not put impediment to the same.


M. Are there any that deny this law?


D. Yeas truly.


M. Who are they?


D. All infidels as paynimes, Jews, and haeretiques.


M. What is an heretic?


D. An heretic.
He which, being baptized, does vvilfully deny any article of the catholic
Romain faith; or believes any thing that is contrary to the same.


M. So that it is not sufficient to be a Catholic, for a man to be
christened, except he also believe, and profess the said Romain Church, after
he comes to years of discretion?


D. So it is; and when it shall be necessary, also he is bound to dye for the
confession of the same.


Of the sign of the Cross. CHAPTER. I.
M. WHAT is the^ the sign of a true Christian or Catholic? The Figure of the
holy Cross.



D. The sign of the holy Cross.


M. Why ^oe?


D. Because in it our Savior Jesus Christ Redeemed us; and this sign has
alvvayes been used in gods church, not only in the Sacraments, but also in all
actions of this life, as well humane as devine.


M. Vide Basil. l. de Sp. S c. 27 Naz. orat. 1. in Iulia. Hieron. ad Eust. d.
custod. virg. Et ad Fabio. de vestib. sac. etc. 9. Ezech. ^ffrem. ser de S.
cruce Tert. l. de cor. militis Orig. homil 8 in Evang. Augu. tract. 118. in Io.
Atha. in vit. Anton. Eusebius. l. 1. and 2. de v^^a. Co^sta^. Tripar. l. 6 hist.
c. 1 Ruffin. l 2 hist. c. 29. Cyril. Hiero^. Cath. 4 and 13.
From what, or whom did he redeem us?


D. From sin, and the Devil whose prisoners we wear before.


M. How must the sign of the cross be made?


D. The ordinary manner is with the whole hand, or three principal fingers
of the same, to touch first the foreheade, then under the breast, and then from
the left to the right shoulder, saienge: in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy ghoaste. Amen* or in latin: in nomine Patris, and Filii,
and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.


M. Is there any other manner of blessinge your self?


D. Yea sir; as the priest does when he says the gospel, making with the
thumb a cross upon the foreheade, against evil thoughts: an other upon the
mouth, against evil words: and the third upon the breast against evil
works, which proceed from the heart, saienge: by the sign of the holy
cross, from al our enemies deliver us good lord, to which is also joined the
former blessinge^ In the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Amen.


M. Is there any mystery signified, be sides, in this blessinge?


D. Yea sir. First the mystery of the blessed Trinity; and then that of the
holy incarnac^on, when our Savior came down from heaven into the Virgens
vvon be.


M. How are these mysteries represented in this sign?


D. In that he says in the name, and not in the names, is given to understand
the unity of God; and by the name, is understood his divine power and
authority, the which is only one in all three persons. Those words of the
Father, of the son, and of the holy ghoast, do declare unto us the Trinitye
of the persons; which, notwithstanding, have one and the self same
divinity and essence, power, vvisdome, bou^tie, etc.


M. And how is the incarnation represented by this sign?


D. Because it represents the passion of our Savior, and consequently the
incarnation of the son of God who for our rede^ptio^ was made Man, and
crucified.


M. Why do you dravve your hand from the head to the middle, and then from the
left shoulder to the right and not from the right to the left?


D. The first to signify the proceedinge of the son from the f^ther, who is
the fountain and beginning of the other two persons. the second by touching
both shoulders, signifies the procedinge of the holy ghoast from the father
and the son, which is done from the left side to the right to signify that
by the passion of our Savior, we are tra^sferred from things transitory, to
eternal; from sin, to grace; from death to life; vvherby it appears that
this holy and wholesome sign, is as it wear a brief sum of our whole
faith, and Religion.


M. When must we use this holy sign?


D. As often as we begin any work; or that we be in any necessity,
especially when we rise, or go to bed, or go forth of doors, at the
e^tra^ce in to the church, and when we eat, or drink, etc.


M. And why do you make this sign so often, and to what effect?


D. Because it is the sign, livery, and recognoisaunce, vvherby we are
distinguished, as the true servantes and soldiers of Christ, from all the
enemies of holy churhe, as Gentiles, Jews, Turks, and He retikes. Secondly
because by this sign we invocate the help of God in all our works. And of
ten times we are delivered by the virtue thereof from many perils, as well
temporal, as spiritual; the Devil fearinge this sign, and flyenge from it, no
other vv se then malefactors do from the Kings officers and justice;
especially when it is made with faith, and confidence in Gods mercy, and the
merits of Christ our lord.


M. The name of Jesus.
And why do you put of your cappe and make curtesy, when you name Jesus.


D. Because the Apostle teaches us, that there is no other name vvherin we
ca^ be saved: and that in this name al knees shall bow, as well of heavenly
and earthly creatures, as of al things under the earth.


Of the obligations and duties of a true Christian. CHAP. II.
M. FOR what end was Man created? Christian duties.



D. To love, and serve God in this life, and afterward to see and enjoy him
in the next, vvher in does consiste our everlasting felicity.


M. You have ansvvered well; but tell me, what is a Christian bound to
know, for the attaining of the said end, after he comes to the use of
reason?


D. Three things


M. Which are they?


D. First to Know what to believe. Secondly to Know what to pray or ask
Thirdly to Know what to work or do.


M. And how Shall we Know what to ask?


D. In Knovving well the Pater noster, etc.


M. And how shall we Know, what to believe?


D. By Knovving the creed, or the articles of our faith.


M. How shall we Know what to work?


D. If we Know well the comaundements of the law of God: and those of our
holy mother the Church: and discern what are mortal sins, to the end we
may fly them.


M. You say well, but tell me, have we not need of some supernatural help,
for the discharge of these obligations?


D. Yes sir: for we have need of three supernatural virtues, which most be
planted by God in our souls.


M. Which are they.


D. Faith to be able to believe well: Theological virtues.
Hope to be able to ask or pray well: and Charity to be able to work well.


Of the Creed. CHAP. III.
M. GO to then, The Creed
let us begin with faith, and tell me what we must believe?


D. I have already told you, that the principal is the Creed.


M Why then recite the same?


D I believe in God the father almighty etc.


M. Tell me what is the Creed?


D. It is a confession of the principal art^cles of our faith.


M. Who made it?


D. The Apostles.


M. To what end?


D. To inform us in our faith.


M. Faith. Ephe. 2. Heb. 11. Basil. ser de fid. confess. Aug. co. Epist. funda.
c. 5. Ber. Ep. 190. Chryso. 1. Cor. Hom 4. Greg. Homil. 26. in. Evang. The
Church
What is Faith?


D. Faith is a gift of god in our souls, with the which we do firmly and
catholikely believe all that god has revealed, unto us, according as we are
taught by our holy mother the church.


M. Is The Church then witness sufficient for to know and distinguish all
that God has revealed?


D. No doubt sir: for as much as she is illuminated, and assisted always
with the holy ghost; and therefore cannot err.


M. What is the holy Catholic Church?


D. Genesis 6 cant. 4 et. 6. Esa. 5. ^t 20. mr. 12. In. 5. mat. 5 13. 1 Petr. 3.
Apoc. 22.
Yt is the visible congregation of all true Christians, and Catholics, which
are scattered over the whole world, whose head next under God is the Pope.


M. Who is the Pope?


D. The Pope is the holy father, Bishop of Rome, The Pope. Vide Iren. l. 3. c.
40. Te^t. de praescrip. Clem Alexa^. l. 7. Stro. Ci. prl. 1. Ep. 6. l. 4. Ep.
2. Origin. l. 1. periar. Arnob. P. 130. Aug. in Ep. 265. etc.
successor of saint Peter, and vicar of Christ* upon earth to whom all
prelates, and Christians whatsoever are bound to obey, as to Christ his true
and lavvful lieutenant.


M. How know you that the Pope is saint Peter's successor?


D. By the infallible authority of the scripture, the universal tradition of
Gods church, the certain succession of all Roman Bishops ever since saint
Peter unto this day, and last of all the testimony of all learned doctors,
fathers, and Catholic vvriters, since Christ came into this world.


M. And what call you Tradition vvher of you mentioned even now. Tradition.



D. Tradition of the Churhe and such as is of authority to prove or disprove
in matters of faith, we call all that doctrine which without writing
has been by word of mouth left unto us either by Christ or his Apostles
or their lavvful successoures and therefore to be honored and believed. Vide
1. ad Thessalo. 2. and Chrysos. Theo philact. OE cumenium ibid and eosdem super
1. ad Cor. 12. Basil de Spiritu Sa^cto cap. 29. Vincent. Lirine^s. Tertul. de
praescript.



M. And how prove you that saint Peter was made Pope and president of Gods
church by our savior?


D. By those words, vvherin he bad him feed his flock three times together,
and especially when he gave him the keys of the Ki^gdome of heaven, and
authority that whatsoever he should loose upon earth, it should be loosed in
heaven; and what soever he should bind upon earth, it should be bound in
heaven: which was the greatest power, Joan. 20. and 21. Mat. 16.
that could be given to any mortal creature.


M. And cannot the Pope err in matters of faith, and Religion, as well as
other te^porall Princes.


D. No: for our Savior says to saint Peter, that he had prayed for him that
his faith should not fail: Mat. 16. versic. 18.
and therefore he calls saint Peter the rock; saienge, upon this rock I vvil
build my Church, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail; all
which would be other wise if the Pope could err, who is the fou^dacio^ of
this whole buildinge; as for te^porall Princes they have no power in matters
of faith, and Religion; saying our Savior commands to give to Caesar, that
which belongs to Caesar and to God, that which belongs to God. and much
less have vvoomen to do in this, who (as saint Paul says) ought not to
open their mouths nor speak in the congregation.


M. So that you make the Pope and saint Peter all one in this cause?


D. Doubtless: even as the father and the children are all one in the title of
inheritance; and as the churches body continued after saint Peter, so her head
must needs continue also on earth.


M. Saint Peter at Rome. 1. Petr. 5. Irinae. lib. 3. c. 3. Tert. de praescri.
et in Scor. Clem Alex. 7 Strom Eusebius. Ecclesiast. his. lib. 2. c. 14. and 15.
Hieron. de Scriptor. Eccles. Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 3. Aug. co^tra Petilia. l. 1. c.
51. et Ep. 91. and. 93. and 164 Amb. ser 66. Nicephor lib. 2. c. 36.
You make no doubt then that saint Peter was the first Bishops or poPe of Rome?


D. None at all sir. For as much as it wear madness to call it in question,
being so certain a matter, and so received amongst all Christians, as any
other article of our faith; as all histories and ancient and modern vvriters
do testify, and to this day there remain manifest arguments of the same in
Rome.


M. Why, have you any relic of his in that city?


D. We have both his, and saint Paul's whole bodies, and their heads ar yeat
to be seen, vvher are extant the most sumptuous and ancient temples in the
world built over them, for their memories: saint Paul being beheaded by the
svvord, the same day that saint Peter was crucified, under the Wicked
Emperor Nero, after that he had been Bishope twenty and five years of that
city.


M. You have reason: but let us return to our first purpose of the Creed. And
first tell me: (...) other (...) when he been (...)
how many articles there be of yt?


D. There be twelve: vvhearof the first belongs to the father: the six
follovvinge to the son; and the last five to the holy ghoast, which are the
three persons of the blessed Trinitye.


M. What is the mystery of the holy Trinitye?


D. Truly sir that is to deep a question for me to expound But it is
sufficient: The Blessed Trinitye.
for me to believe that which the Church does teach; which is that the
blessed Trinitye is three persons and one God only.


M. Yt is well ansvvered. but do you Know no similitude, by the which you
may in some manne^ declare it?


D. Yes for sooth. for as our soul being but on alone, yet has i^ three
powers, to vvit^, understanding, memory, and will, which powers are all
one things with the soul: even so, the persons of the father, of the son,
and of the holy ghoast, are all three one God.


M. The similitude is good: but let us speak a word or two (...) every
article by it self. And first what do you profess by the first article?


D. I profess, and believe that the^ is a God, although we do no^ see him
with our corporal eyes and that this God, is one only and therefore it is
said believe in God, and not in Gods, who fills, rules, governs, sees,
and knovveth all things, even the most secret thoughts of man's heart. And
therefore vvorthely called Almighty, and Maker of heaven, and earth: because in
deed he has created of nothing them both, and all creatures that in them are
contained; and can also if he list reduce them to nothing. Yea if he did not
continually sustain and uphold the^, they would return to nothing of which
they were made. And therefore the conservation, government, order, and being of
these creatures, do infer of necessity the infinite power, vvisdome, and
goodness of almighty god; without vvho^ no creature could have had
beginni^ge: and this, the very heathens. Aristotle, and others of good
understanding, did co^prehe^d


M. And what is meant by the second article? And in Jesus Christ his only
son our Lord.


D. It is given us to understand, that our Savior Jesus Christ is the true and
onley son of God, and to him coaequall, and coaeternall* the which is called
our lord, first, because he has (joyntelye with his father) created us, and
so remains our lord, and master, as much as his father; and furthermore, for
that with his labors, and passion he has bought us from the bondage of the
devil.


M. But tell me the meaning of the third article: how is it said that he
was Borne of the Virgen Marie, The mystery of the Incarnation. Isai. 9. Mat. 1
Joan. 1. Luc. 1 Romans 81. Cor. 6.1. Petri. 6.
and conceived of the holy ghoast?


D. Because this son of God, and second person of the holy Trinity (by the
Work and virtue of t e holy ghoast, in the womb of the Virgen Marie our
blessed Lady) Took and united to the person of his divinity, our human
nature; that is, a true body, and soul eue^ as ours is, and so remayninge
still God as he was, became also by his incarnation true Man. So that, as in
his divine generation he had no father, but Taking of her the whole substance
of his body proceeded from her in his birth with out detrimente of her
virginity, even as in his resurrection he came forth of the sepulcher with
out openinge the seal and closure thereof.


M. And what is contained in the fourth article: He suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried?


D. The most profitable mystery of our Redemption; for the greatness of the
offense and injury done unto Gods majesty, required a satisfaction of
infinite valor and dignity, which none being able but God to perform,
Christ being true God and man did by his death on the Cross most fully
accomplish, vvypinge away our sins with his precious blood and passion,
and giuinge us vvithall, therein, a most lively pattern and example of his
virtue, especially of his pati^nce, his humility, his obedience and his
exceedinge charity.


M. If Christ has satisfied his father for the sins of all me^, how comes
it to pass that so many are damned, and that we have so much need to do
penance for our sins? was not the passion of Christ sufficient?


D. Yes: but as Christ has satisfied for all sinners, so it is necessary to
apply this satisfaction, in particular to every one that desires to be
partaker of so great a benifite. And this is done by faith with use of the
Sacraments; with good works; and particularly with penance, and therefore,
although Christ has suffered and satisfied for us, we must notvvithstanding
(if we will not be damned) apply, by penance the same to us.


M. I like your answer well: but tell me, have you never heard any example
that may give light to this doctrine?


D. No truly sir, but I vvolud be glad to learn it.


M. Why then, take this example. If there were one Man, that for Charity
would take such pains and labor, as by his endeavors he might gain monye
sufficient to pay all the debts of this city and should put it all in one
treasure house, to the end it might be given to all those that should bri^ge a
vvritte or bill of receipt from him; This Man no doubt on his part might be
truly said to have satisfied for all, and yet many might remain skill
indebted, because they would not (either for pride, or for sloth, or some
such like cause) go to ask his vvitte and carry it the treasure house to
receive the money.


M. Recite unto me, now, the fifte Article?


D. He descended into hell and the third day rose again from the dead.


M. I pray you tell me, how it i^ said that Christ rose the third day,
being buried on friday a^ night, and rising on sunday before day?


D. Sir, it is sufficient to verify this speech that he was in his grave
some part of these days: albeit if you reckon the hours, which he there
abode (and vve^re as many as he lived years in this world) you shall find
the sufficient to make up three vvh^le days, of almost twelve hours a
piece.


M. But tell me: when Christ dyed upon the Cross, as his soul de parted from
his body, did his divinity also forsake the same?


D. No for sooth, for the person of his Godhead was always united still both
to the body and soul: although they wear separated the one from the other
for a time.


M. And whether went his soul when it departed from his body upon the
Cross?


D. Yt descended into hell.


M. Which hell? For in hell there be many places.


D. Yt is true. Limbus Patrum. Vide Eccl. 24. Psalm. 15. Osse. 13 Zac. 9.
Collos. 2. act. 2.1. Pet. 3.
there be four places; one of the damned; an other of Purgatory, a third of
children that die without baptism; and the fourth which was called Abraham's
bosom, and now is commonly termed Limbus Patrum: because all the saints and
holy Patriarchs of the old testament remained there until Christ's passion,
Christ's descensio^ in to hell. Zach. 9. Eccli. 24.1. Petr. 3. Act. 2. Irin. l.
5. Iustini Dialog. cum Tryphone. Aug. Ep. 99. and. 57 and de fide ad Petr. c.
2. Ambros. lib. 3. de fide. c. 3. Orig. m. Ep. Romans c. 5. Basil. in Ps. 48.
Ruff. in Symbolo Hieron. in Ep. ad Ephesios. c. 4. and in c. 9. Zachar. and in
c. 2. Ionae.
when thither he descended and delivered them.


M. So that you make noe account of those, that interpret hell, for the grave
or sepulcher? which interpretation, indeed, is erroneous, frivolous, and
contrary to all the authority of Gods church, and Doctors of the same. but
what think you of those Caluinists (for they do not all agree) which say
that Christ, upon the Cross, and before he died, suffered the pains of hell;
and that this was necessary for our Redemption.


D. No doubt, but this is a more gross, and damnable opinion, then the other,
and well worthy of the pains of hell whosoever does teach or believe it;
and therefore no vvonder if Caluins own scholars forsake hi^ in this point.


M. Why, what reason have you against them?


D. First because this opinion diminishes the worthiness of Christ's Passion,
as though it wear not sufficient, unless his soul despair it (as Calvin
says) vvheras in truth one drop of his sacred blood, had been most abundant,
for the infinite worthiness of his divine person, that offered him self in
sacrifice for us. Secondly, for that desperatio^, being the greatest sin
that can be, yea one of the sins against the holy ghoast; if Christ had
despaired as Calvin blaspheameth, nether should saint Paul have truly
excepted Christ from sin, Which did no sin, neither was guyle fund in his
mouth.
nor the Scripture say, Qui peccatum non fecit, nec inuentus est in ore eius
dolus. Thirdly, because all the damned are hated of God; which to say of our
Savior, we are impossible, of whom God the father says: this is my beloved
son, in whom I am well pleased: be sides many other reasons which are not
necessary for so manifest an heretical blasphemye.


M. And went none unto heaven before Christ?


D. None sir: because he first opened the gate: of his fathers Kingdom; and
was the first Man that took possession thereof.


M. Yt was good reason: but tell me what is Purgatory?


D. Purgatory Vid. 1. ad Cor. ex Orig. hom. 12, and. 13. in Iere. and hom. 6.
in Exodu^ Aug. de fide, and oper. c. 16. in Ps. 37. and 8^. in lib. 21. de
ciuit. c. 26. Gre. 4. Dialo. c. 39. Bed. in c. 3. Lucae. and Mat. 12. Cyp. lib.
4. Ep. 2.2. Machab. 12. Diony. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7. Chrysostom. hom. 41. in 1.
ad Cor. c. 3. and hom. 3. ad Phil. Epif. co^tra haer. heares^. 75. Damas. or
pro de functis Greg. in Ps. 37. Co^c. Carthag. 4. c. 79. and 95. To let. 11. c.
12. Brachare^se. 3. c. ^4. The Pope^ pardons or indulge^ces. Vide conc. Ancyr.
c. 2. and 5. Neocesarien. c. 3. Nicenu^ 1. can. 11. Chalcedon. act. 1. and 13.
Laodice^se. Cabilon. Rhemen. Lateran. sub Inno. 3. c. 3. and 62. Lateran. sub
Leone. 10. Sess. 9. et 12. Trid. Sess. 25 Innoc. 1. Ep. c. 7. Gregor. 1.
instit. station. Sergius ante a^nos. 600 in lapide mar morco Romae. Gregor. 7.
a^te annos. 600. and ep. 6.9.23.56 58. Urban. 2. conc. Claramo^tano. Paschasius
2. council. Lateran. Alexan. 3. etc. Vide etia^ Bellarminum toto libro de
Indulgentiis.
Purgatory is a place of torment, vvheare the souls of those that depart in
the love and grace of God, and have not made sufficient satisfaction for their
sins by penance, are purged, before they pass in to glory, as the holy
Scriptures and fathers do teach, and by reason is convinced.


M. And is it lavvfull to pray for these souls?


D. Yea it is both lavvfull, and charitable.


M. What prayers or suffrages are most effectual to help them?


D. Above all, the holy sacrifice of the mass: but the Popes perdons, and
other prayers and good works of true Christians, are also beneficial, and
profitable unto them.


M. Why: has the Pope any power over the dead also?


D. The Pope being Christ's chief vicar upon earth, has authority by virtue
of his office, to apply and dispense the treasures of Christ, and his Church
whose passion, and other his saints and martyrs merits, he can apply to
mitigate their pains; cleanse them from sin; and prepare the^ for glory.


M. Why, is not the Passion of Christ sufficient of it self, but that you
will put in the merits of saints and martyrs?


D. Yes, it is not only sufficient but also abundant yet if Christ will have
his saints partakers of his glory in this world, as well as in heaven, who
can gain say it? even as a King which goes to the war, and is
sufficiently furnished of munition and monye, may (if he will) accept of any
his subjects offerings, and by spending their goods together with his own,
make them partakers of his Victory and glory.


M. It is well said* but what means it when it is said an hundred or a
thousand years of pardon or indulgence? can any man be bound to so long
penance?


D. No truly, in this shortness of life that we have: but by reason, that, in
the primitive Church, for every mortal sin men were wont to do penance
many years, and that now devotion and charity is vvaxen so cold, that one man
will sometimes co^mitt tvve^ty or forty mortal sins in one year: and by
that account de serve a^ 100. and sometimes a 1000. years of penance.
except penances wear shortened, and pardons enlarged, in this fraylty of
man, it would be hard to give God and the Church satisfaction.


M. Truly so it is, and more is the pity, but hereby we see how justly we
call the Church our mother, and the Pope our father, seeinge they deal so
gently with us. But let us go forvvard with the Creed: and tell me the
meaning of the sixth Article.


D. The sixth article is. He ascended in to heaven, and sits on the right
hand of God the father almighty. Which ascensio^ being full forty days
after his Resurrection, does so assure us of the verity of all the mysteryes of
his life and passion, as there can be no further doubt of them and this as the
conclusion of the rest, does manifestly assure us of the great glory, and
majesty, which now he retains in heaven.


M. And what means it, to say that Christ after his ascension sits on the
right hand of God the father? has God the father any right hand?


D. No sir, for he is a spirit and has no body, but when we say he sits
on the right hand, the meaning is, that Christ in that be is God, has the
same glory, honor and power with his father, not inferior nor superior but
equal: and in that he is man, God the father has given him more glory,
honor, and power, then to all the Angels and saints in heaven.


M. Let us come to the seventh article; which is, From thence he shall come
to judge the quick and the dead. Do you Know how this judgment shall be?


D. Yea Sir, for it shall be as saint Paul says, in great terror and
majestye in the Voice and trumpet of an Angel: at what time the whole world
shall be destroyed with fire, as it was with water in the deluge: which day
no man shall Know how near or far it is of: the dead shall rise, and those
that are then living shall presently die, and suddenly rise again, to the
end they may have their due to death. At which time shall cease days and
nights, mariadge and merchandise and all these other things which we now
see used in this world.


M. To what purpose then shall those be judged, which have already in the
hour of their death received their final sentence and verdicte?


D. For diverse causes, and first, because the body, with the soul, shall
have his judgment of pain and glory everlasting, which before it had not:
Secondly, for the glory of Christ's saints, which as they wear in this
world persecuted and evil entreated, so there they shall be in the sight of the
whole world, by God, glorified. Thirdly, for the glory of Christ, because
having been unjustly condemned, and of many neither Known not honored as
was convenient: so is it good reason, that there should come a day vvherin the
whole world either by love or force, should both Know him and honor him as
their King, lord, and sovereign. Fourthelie, for the confusion of the proud
enemies of God. Lastly for the glory of God him self, against all Atheistes
and incredulous persons, who (measuringe Gods providence by their own
carnal desires) because they see often times the just to be afflicted, and the
wicked to live in prosperity, think that God does not well govern this
world: But, then, they shall see that all this has been by Gods high
wisdom and goodness, vvherby he shall there as justly condemn the wicked
for their sins, as he does (here in this life) reward their slender good
works, with temporal commodities. As contrariwise, his servantes in this
life be punished for small offenses, to enriche them in the next, for their
good works, with an infinite treasure of glory.


M. What is comprised in the eight article, I believe in the holy ghoaste.


D. That the holy ghoast, the third person of the holy Trinitye, is the same
God, of aequall power with the father and the son the other two persons
of the blessed Trinitye. And he is called the holy ghoast, or spirit, because
all other spirits (whether of men or Angels, though never so holy) have of
him received all their sanctification; to whose goodness are also attributed
all other gifts and graces of God, which are reparted in the whole
Catholic Church.


M. What means it that the holy ghoast is painted in the form of a dove,
and some times in the form of fire and cloven tongues?


D. Not because the holy ghoast has any corporal form or shape, of him
self, but to represente unto us in the dove, the holy simplicity, purity,
and zeal of those souls which he replenisheth. And in the fiery tongues, is
signified the coming down of the holy ghoast (ten days after Christ's
Ascension) upon his Apostles and disciples, whom he, then, filled with all
Kind of Knowledge, which is signified by the light of that fire: with
charity, which is signified by the burninge flames of the same: and thirdly,
with eloquence which is signified by the fiery tongues, all which were
necessary for the publishing and propagation of his gospel.


M. Now then declare unto me the ninth article. I believe the holy Catholic
Church, the communion of saints. How do you believe the holy Catholic
Church, and how shall we be able to distinguishe it from all other synagogues
and heretical congregations?


D. I believe the Catholic Church, as our dear and louinge mother, which
therefore will never deceive us; and credit her as Christ's true spouse,
which therefore can not err; for the which also saint Paul calls her the
pillar and firmament or foundation of truth, and to whom our Savior,
ascendinge in to heaven, promised the holy ghoast to remain with her, and to
instruct and teach her all truth.


M. And what signs can you give me, vvhearby I may Know which is the
Catholic Church.


D. Those which this holy Creed and the Creed of the counsel of Nice does
put, which are infallible and sufficient.


M. Which are those?


D. These four, Vnam, Sanctam, The signs of the ^^^e Church.
Catholicam, Apostolicom. That is to say in English, One, Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic. To the which we may add the fifte. Romanam, That is the Roman,


M. Why? may not the Heretics say the same of their Church also?


D. No: for they (first) are not one, The first sign, One. See Vinc. ^yrinens.
Tertull. Epiphan. Philastr. Augus. Cypr. contra haereses Ephe. 4. versi. 5.
because they are divided into many sects, and some are Lutherans some
Caluinists, some Puritans some Protestants, others of the family of love, and
so forth. and as Bozius de sig Eccl. records in these fevve years since
Martin Luther fled from his monastery and begone to teach this new and
lice^cious doctrine from whence all these other pety sects are derived, they
are increased and multiplied to an 150. and more, different one from an other,
as has been seen in other times and heresies which alvvayes have worn the^
selves out of credit by this means: for as it is the privilege of truth that
it can be but one (as a straight line by no art can be made but of one fashion)
so all that is not grounded in truth is subject of it self to multiplicity,
as crooked lines once varyeng from strayghtnes may be made of a thousand
contrary fashio^s. And for that heresies be nothing else but Doctae fabulae,
cunning lies (as S. Peter calls them) like to the fictions of players and
poets, 2. Petr. 1.
notvvithstanding for a while they please the people for noueltyes sake, yet
for that the nature of man is so affected to truth as he cannot but embrace it
being sufficiently Known; it follovveth, that the understanding once
thoroughly convinced with the truth does consequently reject and detest
whatsoever is contrary unto it And in this manner all heresies have come to
naught as no doubt but these of our country will also do, for
notvvithstanding the interest and authority of Princes, the industry of
politikes, and the art, eloquence, and endeavors of their authors, may for a
while support them, yet they quickly wax stale and out of request, and the
authority, majesty, and evidence of the Catholic truth prevaylinge with the
vvyser sort, excludes by little and little these other noueltyes, and buryeth
them in perpetual oblivion, for that (as Zorobabel said) Magna est veritas,
and praevalet. 3. Esdr. 4.
Heresies have diverse authors and founders, and so consequently diverse forms
of service, and far different articles of Religion; but the Catholics use
the same Mass and Mattins and all other necessary ceremonies thereto
bebelonginge throvvghout the whole world and their profession of faith is
one and the same in all countries.


M. If this be so, how then are there so many orders of MoncKes and friars?
who are of diverse religions, some being Bernardines, Benedictines,
Carthusians, some Augustines, Dominicanes, Franciscans, Jesuits, Carmelites
and the like.


D. All these agree uniformly in all things that belong to the self same
Catholic faith and religion, Sacraments, and other ceremonies of the Church?
and do differ only in habit, hours of prayer manner of doing penance, and
rules for their devotion, agreeinge all in the substance of a religious life,
Religious Vows.
which is the observance of these three vows, poverty, obedience, and
chastity: so that, albeit the common people do sometimes call them diverse
religions by reason of their different habites, yet no Catholic man doubts
but that they are all of the self same Catholic faith and religion.


M. And is it lavvfull to vovv these things, See Genesis 28. Levitic. 27.
Numerar. 1. Deuter, 23. Iudic. 11.1. Reg 1.2. Reg. 15. Ps. 75. Eccli. 5 Baruch.
6. Matthew. 14. Mar. 16. Act 18.1. Tim. 4. Luc. 20.1. Cor. 7. Cypr. fer. de
natiuitate Christi Ambros. lib. at Vr^^is and Epist. 82. Hic r^^d. 1. aduersus
Iouinian. and Ep. 22. ad Eustochiu^ August. ser. 16. and 62. de^^e in
Euchiridio^ c. 121. l. 1. de adulterinis co^ jug. c. 14. lib. de Sacta V^rg. c.
14. Na^^ de Virgi^^tate 2. Ma^ha^. 3. Matt. 19. Apoc. 14.
or may a man be able to Keep them?


D. Who doubts, but such as are enemies of virtues especially since Christ
him self did praescribe the same to his Apostles, though not as commandments
ye at as counsels, biddinge them to sell all they had and give it to the poor;
and teachinge the^ obedience, by his own example: and comparing those which
live chaste to the Angels in heaven who neither mary nor are married.


M. Why are there three principal counsels, and no more?


D. Because these counsels serve to take away the principal impediments of
perfection which consists in charity, and the impediments are three: that
is to say, the love of worldly goods, which is taken away with poverty: the
love of carnal pleasures, which is taken away with the vow of chastity:
the love of power and honor, which is taken away with obedience. So, as
by giuinge unto God our temporal goods, by poverty; our body, by chastity;
and our souls, by obedience; we come to make a sacrifice or holocaust unto
God of all we have: and so, dispose our selves unto the perfection of charity
in the best manner that in this life is possible. Free Will. Genesis 4. Leuitici,
26. Deuteronomy. 30. Eccli. 13. 1. Cor. 15. Apoc. 3. Iren. l. 4. c. 9. 71. 76. Justin.
cont. Tryphone^. apog. 1. and 1. q. 9. Clem. padagogiae l 1. c. 6. and Stromat.
l. 1. c. 5. Tert. de exhortat. castitatis. l. 2. cont. Marcione^ Aug. co^tra
Pelag. l. 1 c. 2 and l. 2. c. 5. and 10. and de gratia and libero arbitr. c.
15. and 18. Ambros de vocatione ge^t. lib. 1. c. 5. and lib. 2. c. 9. Hieron:
cont. Iouinian. lib. 2. Ep. 146. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 23. and ad Galat. c. 3.
and bo. 3. in (...) ad Tim. 1. Co^c. Carthag. and Arausic. c. 8. Leo. Pap. ep.
184



M. How can a man vovv that which is not in his power to fulfill?


D. Virtue, with Gods grace and assistance, is in the power of our free will,
if we do our duty. for God can never be vvantinge in that he has promised.


M. And has a man Free Will.


D. Without doubt sir: for by free will, a man differs from a beast, and
otherwise God in vain should give him counsel, or commandment to do any
thing: and should unjustly punnishe him or damn him, when he does amiss
because if he vvanted free will he could do no other.


M. Why then may a man be justified by his own Works, with out faith? may
that be?


D. Justification. See Conc. Trident. Sess. 6. c. 8. 9. D. Paul. ad Romans Galat.
Cor. D. Iacobus. D. Pet. Ep. per totum
No for sooth, for faith is the foundation of all justice, without which no
man can please God. Yet it is not only our faith that does justify, but a
lively faith, that is faith with charity and good works, for without
charity (which gives form and life to our faith) althoughe'd man could
work miracles he could not be saved for Sant Paul says that although he
had faith to move mountains: etc. Yet all profits him nothing without
charity and the grace of God, which in substance is all one and saint James
says that faith without good works is dead.


M. But is it not enough for our justificatio^ and salvation, that God does
impute Christ's justice unto us?


D. No sir, Good Works. D. Jacob. c. 2. versi. 19. Ezec. 18. Ps. 14 Matt.
19.25. 2. Cor. 5. Ioa^. 5. Tit. 3.1. Petr. 1.1. Ioa^. 2. Apoc. 14. and vlt.
Clem. Alex. lib. 5. Stroni. Chrysostom. hom. 25. in Mat. and 30. in Joan. Naz.
or. in S. Lanacrum. Cyril. lib. 9. in Joan. c. 9. and lib. 6. cap. 1.3 and 4.
Hieron. in cap. 3. ad Galatas Ambros. de vocation. gent. libr. 1. cap. 8.
August. de Vita Christi. 14. and de fide and operibus cap. 14. and in Psalm.
31. Gregor. homil. 38. in Euang. Trident. Sess. 6. cap. 16. Basil. lib. de
Spiritu Sancto. cap. 24. etc.
for grace and Christian justice is also inherent in the soul, and this
imputative justice is a mere fiction in favor of sin, puttinge wicked men
in hope to go to heaven without virtue, pehance, or observance of Christ's
holy law.


M. So that faith only does not justify, without Good Works?


D. No forsooth, for the Devils do also believe and tremble: and as the body
is dead without the soul, so is faith without good works and charity so
that only a lively faith does justify, that is faith with charity.


M. What are these works which you call good?


D. To love God above all things, and my neighbor as my self, to fast, and
pray, and give alms; with all other works of mercy and justice, as the
Angel Raphael taught Tobias.


M. You have ansvvered like a clerk. but let us return to the other signs
or marks of the Catholic Church: what is the second?


D. The second sign Holy.
The second is Sanctam, that is holy for in it, only, are all holies, as
especially the Sacraments which are the conductes, of Gods grace, vvherin is
true holiness.


M. But being so many sins in it, how is it called holy? See cant. 4. Ephe.
5. 1. Pet. 2 Iren. l. 3. c. 40 Aug. in. Ps. 85. Enchiri. c. 56. Greger. 1
Moral. cap. 6. Bern. sermon. 3.



D. Because (it notvvithstanding) there are in it alvvayes the gifts of the
holy ghoast; and because, out of it, there can be no holiness nor salvation;
and the very sinners that are in it, have the holy faith and baptism.


M. And have not the heretics and Jews also Sacraments?


D. No: for first, the Jews are now infidels as well as the Turks and
Paganes, because their Sacraments and Ceremonies all ceased when the law of
the new testament was published, Ceremonies of Baptism See Dionys. Areopag,
lib. de Eccles. Iie rar. Tertull. libr. de coronae militis. Amb. de initiandis
myster. Orig. ho. 5. in number. Leo. Papa. Ep. 81. Innoc. 1. Ep. 1. ad Decent.
Eugen. Conc. Tol. 4. can. 2. Isidor, etc.
and they wear bound presently upon the promulgation thereof to forsake them.
And heretics have no true Sacrament, vvihch they acKnovvledge, (Baptism only
excepted, which is not theirs but ours,) nether is it of effect, by them, but
by the intention of the Catholic Church.


M. And is the Baptism of an heretic, then, sufficient?


D. In substance, having form and matter of a true Sacrament, and the
intention of the Catholic Church, it is sufficient: but the Ceremonies which
they leave out (as the insusflation, Exorcisme, chrisme and the like, are in no
wise to be neglected where they may be conveniently supplied; because they
have also their virtue, mystery, and benediction; and have been alvvayes in
use, ever since the Apostles time, in Gods Church.


M. You say right well. for there is no Catholic ceremony, Joan. 9.11.20
Luc. vl. Mar. 7.8. Matt. 8.14.
idle, superfluous, or superstitious: but rather most necessary, venerable,
and full of mysterye and comfort. but tell me, is it not sufficient for
salvation to be predestined, allbeit he be no^ baptized? Predestination. See
4. Reg. 14 Eccli. 18. Sap. 11. Ezech. 18 1. ad Tim. 2. 2. Petr. 3. etc.



D. Alas, sir, what have I to do with predestination, vvihch is a thing in
Gods eternal mind before either I or the world was made, and therefore
passing man's capacity to comprehend it: vvherin is to be observed that many
deceyu^ them selves by mistakinge the true signification of the word: 1. p.
q. 23. art. 5.
for Praedestination as Sant Thomas teaches is diversely understood; sometimes
for the cause of predestination, which is Gods eternal appointment and
disposition; and sometimes for the effect of praedestination, which imports
our eternal salvation, and the means vvherby we must attain unto it. And
for that both the holy Scriptures and fathers use the word sometimes in one
sense, sometimes in an other, the unlearned oftentimes taKe occasion to
confound them selves and their own consciences in the speculation of this
mysterye. No man can tell who is predestinate or who is reprobate: but this I
Know and am certain, that except a man be christened, and Keep Gods
commandments, he cannot be saved, and God comma^deth nothing that is either
(...) reasonable or impossible, at therefore as it behooveth us n^^ to be
curious in searching Go^ secrets, so it imports us not be negligent in the
execution (...) that which belongs unto (...) but according to S. Peter's
co^^ sail to make certain our vo^^tion by our good works.


M. Well then, to return to (...) Church, is there any reason ^^hy our Church
is called holy, (...) not that of the Heretics?


D. That there is; for, in the Cath^^^que Church have been all (...) saints
that ever wear; an^ never vvanted many holy (...) renowned for their virtue
(...) sanctity of life, testified by (...) numerable miracles and by sh^^ding
of their blood for Cath^^^que Religion, and virtue, which sanctity of life
proceeds from the holy doctrine, Sacraments and other helps that Christ has
left us in his Catholic Church, no otherwise then precious fruyts, and
svveet smelling flovvers take their virtue from the root from whence they
grow. VVher upon it follows that it is impossible that any man truly
believe and observe that which the Catholic faith commands and teaches
but that he must be endovved with grace and virtue vvherin true holiness
consists and only those Catholics be not virtuous who break the laws of
Catholic Religion vvher contrariwise it is manifest, that one may observe
all that the Protestants or Puritanes prescribe to be Kept and believed, and
yet be no honester a man the^ there good masters the famous apostataes Martin
Luther and John Calvin were, whose doctrine (as all other sects and
heresies) of their own nature, induce men to sin. For as the honor done
unto the Idols of the Panims, Cupide, Venus, Bacchus, and such others vvho^
falsely they esteemed as Gods did authorize and bring in all liberty and
levvdnesse of life, s^ the erroneous opinions of these late sectaries,
persuading the people that they have no fre^vvill* nor any need of good
vvo^Kes, Confession, satisfaction (...) penance for their sins, and the like,
but that it suffiseth, for al^ only to believe, has opened s^ broad a way to
all dissolution, (...) it may vell seem, that under the cloak, of Christ's
name, an^ visard of the Gospel, they inde^^ adore the same filthy Idols (...)
the blind and carnal gentilit^ howsoever amongst them, some (rather deceyved
by heretics, then such indeed) may, by reason of their natural inclination
to virtue and modesty, be with holden from those excesses whereunto other
wise their erroneous belief does provoke the^, as amongst the Moors, Turks,
Jews, and other infidels, some moral honest men are to be found. But you
shall never find, that any man habituated and accustomed to sin, has been
co^verted to virtue and holiness of life, by the force of any Religion but
only in and by the Catholic faith, of which are proprely understood those
words of the Prophet. Lex Dn^i i^maculata co^verte^s animas, the law of God
is unspotted and co^verteth souls; And by which only me^ become, saints, and
gyving their lives in testimony of this faith are truly called Martyrs, of
whose merits and of all other holy and spiritual benefittes and graces, The
communion of Saints. Ps. 118. Romans 12.1. Cor. 12. 2. Cor. 8. Ephe. 4. Coloss.
2. Philippens. 1. Ioa^n. 1. Aug. Enchiridio^. c. 36 ser. de tpe. ^81. The
Third sign Universal. Ps. 2. versi. 8. Mat. 28. Ma r. 16. Luc. 24. Cypr. l.
de vnitale Ecclesiae. Bas. Epist. 72. Hieron l. 4. in Isai. c. 12. Anbros. in
Ps. 39 Aug. in Ps. 9 reg. in regiset alibi, and
all Good Catholics (as children of the same mother) are made partakers.
Whereupon also follows an other article in the Creed. The communion of
Saints.


M. So that there can be no saint, nor Martyr except he be Catholic,
although he die for his Religion?


D. No undoubtedly; for it is not the punishment as S. Austine says but the
cause and intention, that makes a Martyr.


M. Well, go forvvard then with the other marks of the Church.


D. The third is the name Catholic, which signifies Universal and
follows of the reason above said. for that is the true faith, and
consequently must needs be but one. As we see that it is received generally in
the whole world, amongst all nations unto the farthest ends of the earth
and has flourished in all ages ever since Christ, The Fourth sign Apostolic.
Vide. D. Basil. l. de Spir. S. c. 27. Tertul. de praescript. cap 36. Leo. Pap.
ser. 1. de Petr. and Paulo Irenae. l. 3. ad^^rsus haereses. c. 4. Aug. Epist.
50. ad Bonifa. and ibi. 1. ad Honoratu^, and tom. 6. contra Ep. Fundam. c. 4
and l. 1. co^tra Crescomiu^ gramat. c. 33. hist. Triparsitam l. 9. c. 19.
vvher as other sects remain in corners, and as they breed of corruption, so
they dure not long, nor by any of them was ever any nation converted to
Christ.


M. Which is the fourth mark.


D. This word Apostolic. for by continual succession of Popes and Bishops
from Christ's Apostles, we can prove that our Religion has ever endured in
the world, never corrupted nor interrupted even unto this day. which no
heretic can say, but that he is presently convinced of nouelty.


M. That is very true; and especially of the sectaries of this age, which
began all with their master Luther in the year of our lord 1517. But tell
me also the fifte and last note, The fifte sign Roman Vide Mat. 16 5. Leo.
and 5. Mar. in festu^ Apostolor. Orig. tom. 1. in proemio periarchen. Anaclet.
Pap. Ep. 1. Chrysostom. de A^^st. Petro and Paulo Hieren. Ep. ad Da^^sum.
Ter^ull. de praescript. cont. haeret. c. 36.
why do you call it the Roman faith?


D. Because saint Peter (on whom, as upon a Rock, our Savior built his
Church, and promised that his faith should never fail, saienge that hell gates
should never prevail against it) first planted and possessed that seat,
together with saint Paul: and afterward, (they being the principal
Apostles) sealed the authority of the same with their glorious Martyrdom.
Since when, even unto the Pope now lyuinge, was never any heretic nor
Apostata in that holy chair; and there have been in it many worthy saints
and Martyrs.


M. So that whosoever does not buyld on this Rock, or build besides it, can
not be constant nor assured in Religion.


D. Very true: and moreover, he may be sure that his buildinge will perish, as
it appears in all the heresies of times past, which now God be praised are
consumed, though for a time they raged with sundry persecutions, like waves
of the sea, against this immovable rock of our Religion. And the Like end I
hope for, shortly, of all these present sectaries.


M. You have great reason. For heaven and earth shall pass, but this word
and promise is euerlasstinge. But tell me if the case so stand, what
foundation do those seculare Princes build upon, which take unto them
selves the title of supremacy in Ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs?


D. Upon the sands and shalovves of flatteringe courtiers, and covetous
politiques, Cromwell and Cranmer, after war do executed for traitoures. K.
Henry the. 8. deceived by evil counsel, which was the first K. that e^^er
took the title of supremcye on him. Hughe Latimer Peter Martyr Martin Bucer,
Ridley. etc. ^o gro^ that eue^ Calvin him self, their chief Catangeliste
vvrote against yt, reprehe^dinge therefore, K. Harry, though with more
liberty, the^ became so sleighte a Companion to speak of so potents a prince.
See his preface upon Amo^.
who to enjoy the fat morsells of Abbey lands, and Church goods, first put
this false persuasion in their Princes heads, soothinge their ravenous
pretensions with the vendible doctrine of hungrye ministers, who for their
private interest, envy, and ambition, made sale of their own conscience, and
shipwreck of the whole common wealth, by preachinge this gross and
erroneous paradox, having no one sentence word, or syllable, in holy
scripture or any aunciente writer for it.


M. Why, do not the scriptures often say that the King is to be honored,
and feared and the like.


D. I grant you: but what coherence or consequence has this with making
the King, or Queen, a Pope, or Bishope, or supreme head of the Church, which
is all one, saying them selves grant that a woman or seculare person though
a Prince, can not do the office of a priest, Pope, or Bishope, as to minister
the Sacraments, preach in public, give holy orders, or the liKe, which are
annexed, and can not be denied to him which in truth is head of the Church, no
more then it can be denied in civil affairs, that a King if he list may
supply the place of an Esquire Knighte, Mayre, or, Constable, or any other
office, which is subordinate to him self in his own Kingdom, because the
greater and superior power does all vvayes include the lesser and the inferior
jurisdiction.


M. If this be so, those that be Catholics and live under such a Prince as
VVoulde take this title upon him, will hardly be thought true subjects,
for they re conscience being contrary thereunto, it seems to follow that
they serve their Prince but by halues, that is with their bodies only.


D. Perhaps it seems so, but in truth it is far otherwise, for Good
Catholics Know that all subjects are bound in conscience, to obey their
lavvfull Prince in all things belonginge to his regal jurisdiction, and
dignity, though he were an heathen, or infidel, and therefore serve him with
their souls also, so long as the King does not command any thing
against God, which I hope no Christian will do: But protestauntes, and
politiques, which turn with every proclamation; and parlamente, even in
matter of faith also, I ask you with what conscience or soul they serve
their sovereign? do you not Think that these companions if it should
serve their turn, vvoulde be as flexible with their bodies, as they are
with their souls all ready, and so serve him in deed with neither half,
when he should have most need of their service, saying there can be no
durable obedience but that which is founded in true Religion, as appeared in
the famous example of the Emperor Constantius, Eusebius. libr. 1. de Vita
Constantin. Zozom. lib. 1. c. 6
who by the constancye of his servants in Religion, tried their fidelity
and trust to his person, all be it the trial were made in a Religion which
him self did not follow.


M. But how can you excuse this point that the King by submittinge himself
to the Pope in Church matters, must needs put a bridle in his own mouth,
and deprive him self of his chiefest liberty, by taking such a yoke on his
shoulders?


D. If I did not see before mine eyes that the most Christian, and vvithall the
most puissaunte Kings of all Christendom Think this subjection no
disparagemente to their greatness, nor abridgemente to their liberty, and
florishe most gloriously under this estate, I should peradventure think
you had some reason to propose this quaestion: King Edgar. K. Edward the
first and the third. K. Henry the fifte. etc.
but being as it is, yea and that in our own country never Kings more
triumphed and prospered either in peace or vvarres, either by sea or land,
either at home or in foreign countries, then those which were most
obediente to the Popes authority, what bridle or yoke call you that which
so many Kings, and Emperoures have carried with increase of their honor,
and comfort of their conscience, especially saying the obedience we
exhibit to the Pope as Christ's Vicar is referred most directelie to the
honor and glory of God, Cui seruire regnare est, Gods service is a Kingedome.
as the Proverb affirms? And I pray God they which rejecte this yoke,
rejecte not God him self, as once he said in the like case, 1. Reg. cap. 8.
to the people of Israel, when they refused the gouermente of Samuel the
Prophet, and asked a King.


M. Why? Think you it were not conueniente, that the Pope at least for
the Catholics comfort and ease should dispense with them to the end they
might so content the better their Prince, when he shall exact this
spiritual obedience at their hands?


D. In no case: for as much as in so doing must needs follovv confusion in
all Ecclesiastical discipline, and Christian men should be left without a
judge or vmpyre to decide and determine all doubts and controversies, which
may grow in Religion, especially consideringe that no estate is more
occasioned to give scandal unto the common people, neither have any sort of
men more grievously erred in all matters belonginge to true Religion and Gods
service, then Kings them selves, as (to omit all other examples) the holy
scriptures do testify, that amonghste all and so many Kings of God^ chosen
people, there were bu^ three only that Kept Gods law, David, Ezechias, and
Josias: Eccl. cap. 49.
the rest every one, more or less fallinge them selves, or permittinge
manifest idolatry. Besides which allbeit the Pope vvoulde he can not dispense
in this point no more then in any article of the Creed, for as much as both
this and all other articles of the Catholic faith are commanded and
commended to Christians by Christ him self, whose divine precepts
especially be longing to faith as this does of S. Peter's primacie, which
Christ him self appointed, the Pope cannot change.


M. You have said arighte and by this you see, it follovveth that no
temporal Prince ought to press his Catholic subjectes in this case,
except he will also compel them to deny God, whom they are vndoubtedley
persuaded to be the author, master, and commander of this doctrine: but let
us return to our former question are there any more signs marks of this
true Church.


D. Yea sir, many: in so much that the learned have written whole volumes of
the same. But these five are enough for me, being founded in such substantial
reasons, as are, the Principality, unity, sanctity, antiquity, and,
universality* of the Romain Church how think you?


M. Mary I think passinge well o^ it: and vvishe that we all may have grace
to persevere in it. and when God should so dispose, to leese all our goods and
lands, yea and our lives also for the same.


M. You have said enoughe of the Church, and by that little you have said of
the communion o^ the communion of saints, you have sufficiently given to
understand, how great a benefitte it is to be a member of such a charitable
and blessed body: but tell me, as all Catholics living enjoy this communion
of each others prayers, merittes, and good works; do those also participate
of them which are excommunicated by lavvful authority? Excommunication.



D. No sir* for therefore they are called excommunicated, because they are
deprived of this communion of saints, and are as branches cut of from the
tree, or members from the body, which consequently do not participate, of
that good humore which is spread amongste the rest of the branches which
remain united. Where by may be gathered, what great acco^pte ought to be
made of excommunication, saying he can not have God for his father, which has
not the Church for his mother.


M. And are the excommunicate out of the Church, as well as heretics and
other infidells?


D. They are sir. But with this difference, that Jews and Turks are out of
the Church because they never entered in-to it by baptism; The heretics,
which are baptized, but have lost their faith, are forth, because they are
fled or run away of them selves, like strayde or lost sheep, whom the
shephearde does, with his hook, compel some times to return to his flock
again: But the excommunicate, because they have baptism and faith, are not
fled of them selves, but are driven forth by force, by the pastor and left
like scabbed sheep for pray to the wolves, except, by humility and
obedience, they return again to the fold.


M. What is meante by Remission of sins, Remission of sins.
which is the tenthe article?


D. There are in Gods Church three principal benefittes, Mat. 16. Ioa^. 20.
Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 2. Chryso. lib. 3. de Sacerdotio. Ambr. l. 2. de poenit. cap. 2.
which are specified in these three articles follovvinge. The one which is
both in body and soul, which is Life aeternall; the next is of the body
only which is, The Resurrection of the flesh; And the third is of the soul
alone, which is, The remission of sins, which we receive in the Sacraments
of the holy Church, and especially in baptism and penance, which (like
heavenly medicines) do cure our spiritual maladies, that is, our sins. And,
saying that there can be no greater good then to be in Gods grace, because no
thing ca^ hurt him whom God defends, so there can be no greater
mischief in this world, then to be in the state of sin, which makes a
man Gods enemy. For, who can defend him, with whom God is angry? What
greater good then can any man receive then the remission of his sins? Which
gives life to the soul and is only to be had in Christ's Catholic Church?


M. The Resurrection of the flesh.
What is then understood by the Resurrection of the flesh, which is the
eleeuenthe article?


D. This is, that other benefitte o^ the holy Church. For all though all me^,
as well bad as Good shall return to their natural^ life again; ye at shall
the life o^ the wicked be rather a continual death then true life, because
they rise to perpetual torments. So as the true Resurrection, which is to
desirable life, shall be only of the just which shall be found with out sin.


M. I would feign Know of you, whether the same bodies shall rise again,
or other like them.


D. There is no doubt, but the same: for other wise it should be no true
Resurrection, which is understood when the same body rises which died and
fell before. Besides, other wise how should the body be partaker of the
glory or punnishmente of the soul, in reward of the Good works which
they in company wrought together. And saying God is almighty, as we
profess in the beginning of the Creed, we need not vvonder, if he bring
to effect that which to us seems impossible. As in deed naturally it is,
when a body is once burnt (for example) and brought to duste or ashes, to
raise it to life again.


M. I vvoulde be glad, you should also tell me, in what age or stature we
shall rise, because we dye in diverse, some oulde, some you^ge, some great,
some little, etc:


D. All shall rise, not only in the same sex in the which they wear in this
world, but in the same age and stature which they should have had at the
term of thirty three years, Aug. de tiuit. dei libr. 22. c. 15. and 20. and
17.
at the which our Savior him self did rise from death. And if any of the
elect had been blind, lame, a dvvarfe, or with any other deformity in this
life, yeat shall he rise fair, sound, and whole, of co^petente and
sufficient stature. For the works of God are perfect and therefore vvil
correct the erroures and defectes of nature.


M. How do you interpret the tvvelfte article which is of Life
everlasting. Life Everlasting.



D. It signifies a full and perfect felicity of body and soul, which is
the greatest and last good which we gain by being in Gods Church,
comprehendinge in it, in respect of the soul, that the understanding shall be
full of vvisdome, the will full of bounty and charity, so as it can not
sin at all: in respect of the body, it shall have health with immortality
and impassibilitie, so as no thing can hurt it; it shall have beauty with
cleernesse, so as it shall shine like the sun; Luc. 20. Apocal. 5. and 20.
Aug. de ciuit. dei libr. 20. c. vlt.
it shall have agilitie or nimblenesse, joined with such subtilitie, as in one
moment, it shall be able to move from the farthest part of the world to the
other, and from heaven to earth, so as no body ca^ hinder the passage; it
shall have that strength and force, that without any bodylye sustenaunce, it
shall serve the spirit in all things, fearinge nothing. Their riches,
shall be to need nothing; their honor, to be Gods children, Kings, and
spiritual priests for ever, and aequall to Angels; Their power, shall be to
do what they will them selves, their delighte, unspeakable: their joye
endless; their peace aeternall.


M. And shall all men have all these things in aequall degree.


D. No for sooth. But every one shall have his glory and joy, in proportion to
his merittes; yea, with out envy or discontentmente of any. Even as the
stars, though all be in the firmament, yeat some are greater then others, or
as a father, which should make for many chilldren of diverse growth or
stature, garments of cloth of gould though there is no doubt but the greater
would have more cloth then the little one, yeat should the least be most
content with that garment which would best fit him, although it were
less in quantity then the rest.


M. You have ansvveared me like a devine. And by this, you may learn the
opposite miseries of the damned, that not only shall be deprived of all this
happiness, and glory, but shall be oppressed also, with the contrary
afflictions, torments, and perpetual calamities, amongst the which are
especially a most teadious enuaye of the elects felicity, and the bitter
worm of conscience ever gnavvinge, without rest, the just guerdon of
mortal sin, from which God, of his mercy, defend us. Amen.


The Pater noster.
Of the Pater Noster. CHAP. IIII.
M. WELL then, say me the Pater noster.


D. Our father which art in heaven, etc. Mat. 6. Luc. 11. Aug. Enchirid. cap.
14 and Ep. 121. c. 11. sermon. 182 de ^pe Tertul. l. de orat. Cypr. sermon. 6. de
oratione dominica. Ambro. l. 5. de Sacrament. c. 4. Innoc. 3. lib 4. demystiis
missae. cap. 17.



M. Who made this prayer?


D. Our lord Jesus Christ, who first said it with his sacred mouth.


M. To what end did he teach it his disciples?


D. To teach them, and all those that should follovv their doctrine, as often as
they would pray, in what manner they may lift up their souls and hearts
unto God to crave his help, grace, and mercy.


M, Why, where is God?


D. In heaven, in earth, and in all places: how be it in heaven especially he
manifests him self unto his elect in glory: where upon, it is said Our
father which are in heaven.


M. But why do you call him father, rather then lord or God?


D. Because thereby we are remembered of the great love he bears us, and like
wise the love we ought to bear one toward an other, being all brethren
as we are and children of so good a father. And therefore it is said, Our
father, and not my father or the father only. And for the same cause, all
Catholics also use when they speak of our Savior, to say Our lord and not
the lord, as some nouellers are accustomed to speak.


M. You have ansvvered right; now tell me, what is comprised in the rest of
this prayer?


D. Seven petitions, vvherin we ask the principal things that we can
ask of God.


M. Which be those?


D. First the honor and glory of God in the first peticion, which is,
Hallowed be thy name, and is as much to say, as that his holy name may be
throughout the whole world, as well in heart as mouth of men, confessed,
Known, adored, praised, and blessed as it ought to be. And because this ca^
not be done with out his help and grace, therefore we ask it of him, and
that in the first and principal place of this prayer.


M. And what is meante by the second, which is, Thy Kingdom come?


D. The meaning is, that as in the first we asked for the glory of God,
which is the end of our creation, so in this, we crave for that which we
ought most to esteem next to Gods glory, that is our aeternall salvation,
which is finally to be accomplished in his everlasting Kingdom of heaven,
where, we do expecte for the quiet, peaceable, and secure possession of all
true and perfect felicity.


M. Let us pass unto the third petition. And tell me, what is signified by
these words. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.


D. We ask in these words, grace to keep well the law of God; And it
was convenient, that after the second petition of aeternall bliss, should
follovv the request of that means which is the principal and most
necessary to attain to the same, which means is the observance of all his
commandments; because in them his will is made Known unto us. And it is
added, as well In earth as in heaven, because we should procure to obey God
and keep his commandments, with the same perfection, promptness and
willingness, vvherevvithe the Angels obey him in heaven.


M. Let us come to the fourth petition: how do you interpret these words,
Give us, this day, our daily bread?


D. We ask in this petition, principally, our spiritual bread, which is the
sustenaunce of the soul, especially the blessed Sacrament of the alter, the
word of God, prayer, and every other spiritual help of grace, which is
the life of the soul. Secondly, we ask for our corporal bread, by the
which is understood all that is necessary for the mantenaunce of our bodylye
life, whereby we desire that God will help and bless our possessions,
lands, and labors, to the end we may without stealinge, fraud, or other
injustice, gain our living honestly and with peace.


M. And why is it said daily?


D. Because we ought to content our selves with Gods ordinary allovvaunce,
as well for the spirit as the body, without desire of curious and
superfluous things, especially, remembringe that we are pilgrims and
strangers in this life.


M. What do we ask in the fifte petition? forgive us our debtes, as we
forgive those that be debtors unto us.


D. We ask perdon of our sins at Gods hands; and as it wear oblige our
selves to forgive all those that offend us: Christ our master giuinge us,
hereby, to understand, that we must look that God will deal with us in
the same manner as we deal with others.


M. Declare me now the sixte petition. And lead us not in to tentation.


D. We ask Gods assistance, in those combats which (undoubtedly) all those
that serve God must pass with our common enemy the devil, of whom we can
have no victory, except God help us. But one goodly documente vee learn in
these words, which is, that the devil not only is not able to overcome us,
but not so much as to tempte us, except God do permit him. Which
permission, is only that which is meant by these words, And lead us not in
to tentation.


M. There remains the seauenthe and last petition: But deliver us from all
evil. Of what evil does he speak in this petition?


D. As he spoke in the fifte, of evils paste; and in the sixte, of evils to
come, that is of the dangers of tentation; so here, we pray to be delivered
from all evils present, whether it be of prosperity, or adversity, whether
of body, or of soul; and that in general, not in particular; As from
poverty, sickness, persecution, and the like: Because often times, that
which seems to us vvoulde be good for us, God sees that it vvoulde hurt
us; and contrary wise, that which seems unto us, some times, to be evil,
God sees vvoulde do us good; and therefore, we request that he will
deliver us from all that, which he sees vvoulde be ba^ for us. Whereby
also, appears the excellency of this prayer, which compriseth in so fevv
words, all that possibl ^ie we can crave at Gods hands.


M. You make often mention of evil, and of our enemies: I pray you tell me
who are they, and which is the greatest of them?


D. Our enemies, are, the flesh, the world, and the devil; and of all
evils, sin is the greatest: Yea worse and more abominable then the devil
him self, who by sin only of a beavvtifull Angel became that he now is,
an ougly vvretched devil, and malignant Satan.


M. And what means this word, Amen.


D. It is an Hebrew word, and signifies as much as, so be it: or I desire
it may be so.


Of the Aue Marie. The Aue Marie. Vide Lucae 1. Co^c. Ephesians. ca^. 13. d.
Hieron. co^tra Heluidi Ambr. l. 2. de vriginibus and super Luc. and Ep. 81.
Bern. bom. 2. super missus est. Augus. de natura and great. c. 36. and ser. de
assu^ pt. Iren. l. 3. c. 31. and 33. and l. 5. c. 19. Chrysostom. Basil. and
Iacobu^ in liturgiis. Niceph. hist. eccles. l. 1. c. 2. and 8. and lib. 14. c.
2 and 46.
CHAP. VI.
M. HITHERTO You have ansvveared very well; now tell me, do you make prayer
to none else but to God only?


D. Yeas that we do, to all the saints, to the Angels of heaven, and
especially every one to his Angel guarde, and above all (next under God) to
our blessed Lady the mother of God the Virge^ Marie; Virgen as well before,
and after, as in the birth of our Savior. Who being exalted above all
creatures, as reason is, and taken in to glory both body and soul, is the
most worthy advocate for sinners, by way of prayer and intercession.


M. That seems strange to give and attribute the same title unto her, which
the Scriptures give unto our Savior. For he is our Advocate.


D. Sir, we putt great difference, notwithstanding: for our blessed Lady
is our advocate by way of prayer and intercession, but Christ, by way of
merit and justice for our salvation; And therefore, as the Church never says
to him, Ora pro nobis, because he is not only man but God also: so no
Catholic uses to pray unto her, with, Miserere nobis, which is, have mercy
upon us, Invocation of Saints. Vide 1. Reg. 15 4. Reg. 5. Job. 5.2. Machab.
1.15. Isai. 37. Job. 12. Dan. 10. Ierem. 15 Matt. 18. Ps. 67.1. Cor 14. Apoc.
17 21. Orig. l. 8. co^t. Celsum. Cypr. sermon. de m^rtali. Ba^il. ^o. in. 40.
marty. Naz. in C^p^ Athan. Basil. Hieron. cont. Vigilant. Athan. ser. 2. de
deipara Ambros. lib. de vi dais. and orat. 2. in mort. f^at Aug. lib. 7. de
bapt. co^tra donat. cap. 1. Greg. lib. 12. moral. cap. 13 etc.
because we Know, she is but a creature.


M. Why, if she be but a creature as all other saints are, how is it not an
injury to God, to pray unto any other but to him, since he has invited us
saying, come unto me all you that are laden, etc. Whereby it should seem,
we have no need to seek to any other mediator.


D. You say well, if by prayenge to saints we forsook God; but being, that
therefore we pray unto the saints because we may the more easily and
speedely come unto him, and be the better accepted of him, there is no doubt of
dishonouringe God, while we pray unto them whom he him self has
glorified, and vvoulde, they should be of all creatures honored; even as it is
no diminishinge, but rather encreasinge of any Princes majesty, to have many
honorable servants and subjectes, and to make remonstrance that he does
esteem them.


M. But how can the saints and Angels see us, or hear our prayers?


D. By seeinge God, in whom they see and hear allthinges pertaininge unto
them. For if we know that the holy Prophets, while they year lived, could
see and hear all things that God revealed unto them, though they wear far
distant or long after to come; much more, we are to believe the same of the
saints and Angels which are still in Gods presence.


M. But does not the Scripture attribute this title unto God only, that he
knovveth and searches the heart and reins? how, then, can the saints being
creatures, have so great a privilege.


D. Sir, it is true that God only has this attribute of his own power or
puissance, and therefore the saints, not of them selves but in him, and by his
revelation, do know the hearts thoughts of others, yea and mortal men may
know also all the secrets of my heart, if God should disclose the same unto
them?


M. I like very well of your answer. But then I vvoulde feign know the
cause, why the heretics do so much impugn this point and especially the
honor done unto the blessed Virgen Marie?


D, The reason is manifest. For the Scripture says, that God would put
enmitye betvveen the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, as
heretics are; falsely impugninge the true praise and honor due to our
blessed Lady, as also diverse of the Sacraments, good works, penance,
purgatory, and such like especial helps for man's salvation. Yea supposing
the insatiable envy and hatred that the devil has against CHRIST and all
that is his, it is no marvel that the heretics, who (as Saint Polycarpus
calls them) be primogeniti Diaboli, do hate and oppugn the honor of our
blessed Lady, who has so strait and near alliance with our Savior. And
how can it otherwise be, but that those who possessed with the unclean
spirit, have no other scope of their whole life, and Religion, but mere
liberty and sensuality should be without devotion to her which is the true
Maistres, mother and mirrhour of all chastity and purity? Besides that she
having alvvayes been the bane and overthrow of heretics in all ages, no
vvonder if they who are nothing else but a fardell and new brood of old
heresies, are guyded by the same spirit that their forfathers were, and use
the same malignity against her that those used.


M. Truly it is so. But tell me, has the Church any usual prayer to the
saints and especially to our Lady?


D. To the saints we use the letanies, and other devout prayers in
particular; but to the blessed Virgen the principal is the Aue Marie.


M. I pray you say the same. Vide Athan. sermon. de deipara. Ambros. Luc. 1.
Chrysostom. in liturgia. Aug. ser. 2. de annu^cia. Fulg. sermon. de laudibus Mariae
Bern. ho. 5. in missus est etc.



D. Hayle Marie full of grace our lord is with thee; blessed art thou amongst
all women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb JESUS, holy Marie mother
of God, pray for us sinners, now, and in the hour of our death. Amen.


M. Tell me, who made this Aue Marie?


D. Our holy mother the Church, taking the words of the Angel Gabriel when
he came to salute our Lady the Virgen Marie, and some of the words of saint
Elizabeth in her visitation, and the rest is added by the Church. so, as
consideringe that all these words, being either of God by his Angel
Gabriel, Our Blessed Lady without sin. See S. Damas. orat. 11. de natiu.
virg. et orat. 2. and 3. and l. 3. de fid. c. 2. D. Laure. Justin. ser. de
annuncia. and lib. de cast. co^. animae. cap. 7. and in fascic. amo. c. 7.
Idiota^ de conte^pl. Virg. c. 2. and 6 Seduliu^ lib. 2 paschal. S. Vince^t.
Fer. sermon. 1. de natiu. and 2. de nati. virg. D. Aug. lib. de not. and gra cap.
36. etc. 5. co^t. Julian. c. 9. S. Cypr. de Card. op. Christi. c. de nati.
Christi Amb. ser. 22. in Ps. 118. D. Hierony. in cap. 10. Eccl. Sophro. Ep.
Synod. in 6. syn. act. 11. S. Brun. in. Ps. 101. Richard. Victor. in cant. cap.
26. and. 42. and lib. 1. de Emanuel c. vlt. Pet. Daemia. ser. de natiu. virg.
and sermon. de annunc. Arator. lib. 1. in Act. Apost. D. Jacob. in Liturg. cit. a
6. syn. cant. 32. and 7. syn. act. 3. Conc. Francford. Ep. ad ep^os Hispa.
Origin. bo. 1. ex var. Andre. Cretens. sermon. de assumpt. Euthi^^i. sermon. de
zon. virg. D. Ansel. lib. de concep. vir. c. 18. cit. a D. Th. in. 1. d. 44. q.
vnic. ar. 3. Theodoret. l. 3. in cant. Irenae. l. 3. co^t. haer. cap. 35.
Hippol. orat. de sanctificat. Cyril. bo. 6. in Council. Ephesians. Epipha. haer. 78.
Innoc. 3. sermon. 2. de assumpt. Hesyc. Concio. 2. de B. V. Fulbertu^ Carn. ex
Canis. lib. 1. cap. 7. Ansel. lib. de excel. virg. cap. 9. SS. Basil. and
Chrysostom. in suis liturg. etc.
or of the holy ghoast by the mouth of Saint Elizabeth, and his spouse the
Catholic Church, we may justely say that this prayer was made by God him
self, or by the holy ghoast.


M. What do you think worth the nothing in this Aue Marie?


D. Besides the petition, I note four especial praises and commendations of
our Blessed Lady.


M. Which be they?


D. The first in those words, Full of grace: for in this she did so a bound
that she never had in her soul any blotte or stain of sin which might
hinder or diminishe the same. I say sin not only, Actual, whether, Mortal,
or Venial, but not so much as Original sin it self. And vvithall she was
so plentifully endovved with all kind of virtues and gifts of the holy
ghoast in the highest degree and had vvroughte so many and so meritorious
works in Gods sight that she was made vvorthie to mount above all the
quiers of the Angels both in body and soul.


M. This seems much. For why then do you not attribute the same to saint
Steven and other saints which are also said to be full of grace.


D. The quantity and abundance of grace is to be measured by the greatness of
the office and dignity which God has called every one unto. Now because
the greatest office that ever was given unto any pure creature was to be the
mother of God, therefore our Blessed Lady was made capable and filled with
greater grace then any other pure creature. And so both Saint Steven and other
saints though never so full, being so far inferior in office and
dignity, must needs give place in comparison of the graces of our blessed
Lady for this is not unlike to many vessels, who allthough they be all full
of balm or other like precious licoure, yeat one does often hold more then an
other.


M. Tell me now which are the other praises, which you say are comprised in
this prayer.


D. The second is in those words Our lord is with thee: Where by we know
that God in singular wise did always assiste the blessed Virge^ even from
the first instante of her conception, gouerninge, keepinge, and defendinge her
as a most rich treasure: so as she never offended in thought, word, nor
deed. The third is contained in those words, Blessed art thou amongeste we
men: Because she only amongst all women had that privilege to be both a
maid and a mother. A mother I say of such a child which is more worth then
a hundred thousand children of other women. Albeit she may be said also to
be the mother of great multitudes of children: for as much as all good
Christians are brothers of Christ, and consequently are children of our blessed
Lady though not by generation, yeat by tender love and motherly affection
which she bears toward all. The fourth is in those words, Blessed is
the fruit of thy womb JESUS: For as the praise of the fruit does redounde
to the tree, so the glory of the child must much more redou^de to the honor
of the mother. And even as every true living tree though it have once borne
fruit remains with sufficient vigoure and virtue to bear every year the
like again; so our blessed Lady as the true tree of life having once borne
God as the peculiar fruit of her womb remained still not only with
sufficient, but with more abounda^te grace, merit, and virtue the^ before, to
become his mother again once every year; if so it seemed either convenient to
Gods high wisdom and providence, or needful for man's Redemption: whereby
it appears how fit this similitude is: and no vvounder saying it is no man's
but the holy ghoastes invention. As contrarievvise those co^parisons are of the
devil which are by her enemies invented to diminishe her praise and dignitye.


M. I like this well: but if our Lady as before you said, be in heaven both
in body and soul, what Lady is that which sta^des upon the altar and in
other places of the Church.


D. It is not our Lady but her image only, by which we remember her which
is in heaven, and in that respect we do it honor and reverence.


M. But as there be many images, are there also many Ladies?


D. No forsooth: but one only, which is alvvais in heaven.


M. How then do Catholic people use to call upon our Lady of Loreto and
others our Lady of Guadalupe, or Monserratto, or our Lady of Rhemes or of
walsingham, which are all in diverse countries.


D. Sir we call her so with diverse names by reason of the manyfould
benifites she does obtain for us by her prayers in those places.


M. What do you ask of our blessed Lady? do you peradventure ask
forgiveness of your sins, or the grace of God, or life everlasting of her?


D. No sir. For we ask those things of God, both her and our creator.


M. What then do you ask of her when you pray unto her.


D. That she vvillbe our advocate and mediatresse before her blessed child to
obtain all this for us. Invocation of Saints.



M. And do you pray to the saints in like manner?


D. Altogether, remembringe always notwithstanding that there is no
saint aequal unto gods mother, and therefore none that deserves like
honor, and reverence, of all true Christians.


M. But may a man say the Pa^^r Noster, or, Aue Marie, to the honor or
invocation of any other saint or Angel?


D. Yeas doubtless, having this intention, either to pray unto God that for his
saints or Angels intercession (who as Christ says in the gospel do
always see his fathers face) he vvoulde have mercy on my soul, or to crave
of the saints them selves that they will offer that prayer I make to God for
me.


M. Why, will God refuse our prayers except the saints do offer them for
us?


D. No: but he does the more vvillingey hear them, when they are offered unto
him by his friends, which we because of our sins, for the most part are
not.


M. You say well, for our Savior calls his Apostles friends, even when
they were in this world with him: but tell me when ought we principally
to recommend our selves unto them.


D. Truly at all times but especially in our distress and upon their festival
days.


M. Holy days and Relics of Saints. Vid^ Basil. ho. 26. in Mama^ te^
martyr. Eusebius. libr. 13. de Athan. Ambro. in. 22. Lucae. and sermon. 9 in sancto;
Geruasiu^, and Protasium Chrysostom. ho. 66. ad populu^ Antio chenum Hieron. Ep.
27. ad Eustocbiu^, and Ep. 53. and lib. co^tra Vigila^t. Damas. lib. 4. de fide
cap. 16 Aug. in ps. 88 l. 22. de ciuit. c. 8. in ps. 110 7. synod. act. 3
Chrysos. de Babyla mart. Victor. African. de persecut. Vandalica.
And what cause may there be why the Church does keep their days holy and
reverence their relics?


D. There are many but especially five.


M, Which are they.


D. The first is to glorify God in his saints, seeinge the vvonderfull
works he has alvvais wrought by them: The second, because by the honor
which is done them in earth, we may the better understand the glory they
enjoy in heaven: The third, that thereby knovvinge their lives and virtue we
may be exhorted to imitate and follow their example, fith they were mortal
men as we are. The fourth to increase our devotion toward God by bearinge
affection and love unto such worthy intercessors. The fifth because our mother
the holy Church will honor her children after they be dead; who vvhiles
they were living did honor her, and often times dyed for her defense:
whereupon also we pray before their relics because the same wear in
their life instruments of their holy souls to do many good works, and
shall be in the resurrection lively and glorious bodies, and in the mean time
remain unto us as pledges of the great love they bear unto us, in
remembrance of which we pray unto them that they will help us; as we
remember to honor them, in what we may.


M. Are there any other prayers to our Lady, or to other saints, or Angels,
which we may use.


D. Many: as the Salve Regina, and diverse other anthemes, hymns and orisons,
which the Church does use and we may likewise say every man according to
his devotion.


Of the 10. The ten Commandments.
Commandments. CHAP. VI.
M. NOW That you have told how we should pray, Vide Exodus 20 versic. 34.
Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 4.5.10. Mar. 5. versi. 19 22 Mar. 10 12. Luc. 10.18. Romans
2.13. Jacob. 1.2.4.
and believe well, tell me how we may know to work well also.


D. By knovveinge the commandments of the law of God, and of our mother the
Church to keep them, and by knovving mortal sins to fly them.


M. How many are the commandments of the law of God, let me hear.


D. They are ten the three first belong to the honor of God, the other
seven to the profitte and good of our neighour the first is. I am thy lord thy
God thou shall have none other gods but me, which is as much as thou shall
love and honor one God only above all things.

The second, Thou shall not swear, nor take his holy name in vain.

The third, Thou shall keep holy the sabbath day, that is all sundays and
holy days.

The fourth, Thou shall honor thy father and thy mother.

The first, Thou shall not Kill.

The sixth, Thou shall not commit adultery.

The seventh. Thou shall not steal.

The eight, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

The ninth, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife.

The tenth, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods. And these ten
commandments are comprised in two, which is to love God above all things
and thy neighbor as thy self.


M. Tell me, The first Co^maundeme^te. Images. Vide Athan. ser. 4. co^t. Ari
anos. and l. de passio. mag. salua. c. 14. So zom. l. 5. c. ^0 Basi. l. de Spu.
S. c. 18. Ar^. l. 1. de co^sen^^ Evangelist. c. 10. Greg. l. 9. Ep. 9. l. 7.
Indictione 2. Epis. 57. and 169. Damasc. lib. 4 de side c. 17. and tribus
libris de Imaginibus. 7. Synodus act. 2.3.4 6.7.8. Synod. can. 3. and 7.
how shall we keep the first commandment.


D. If we serve and adore one only and true God, expectinge from him all our
help and succor and askinge the same of him as the author of all our good.


M. But why do you make no mention of forbidding Images or ydoles as it should
seem it is in the tvventyth of Exodus where the law was given.


D. Because that was but an addition or explication of the first precept by
reason that the people of Israel at that time were much given to ydolatrie and
did often offend in worshipping of ydols whereof by the grace of God there is
now no danger amongst Christianes.


M. How then does the Catholic Church use images as well graven as painted.


D. The Church does use them for remembrance of Christ and his saints whom
they represent unto us, and serve for the instruction of the ignorant and so
are therefore called commonly the books of the unlearned; and to help our
devotion toward them, and in this respect only we do the^ reverence and
honor, which is not forbidden, but with the adoration of Latria, which is
proper to God himself, for so that people did worship ydols then; but there
is great difference between an image and an ydole.


M. Why what is an idol?


D. An idol is any thing visible or invisible whether it have image or no,
which is falsely worshipped as God. As were Iuppiter Mars and Venus, etc. of
the gentiles, who indeed were devils and wicked spirits which deluded the
people, to the which are reduced the adoration of any of Gods creatures as the
sun and moon and some times beasts and plants of the earth, which the
Gentiles, and Panims did and do (in some places) honor and serve as Gods.


M. So that the honor done by Christians to the Cross, images, and other
holy things whatsoever is finally intended to God him self, and not to those
creatures.


D. Doubtless: for it were great folly to think that a piece of paper,
wood, or brass, or any like metal should be Christ, our Lady, or any
Saint, for it were not so much lack of Religion, or knowledge, as want of
natural sense, and judgment, for the very beasts can distinguish betvveene a
living and mouing^ creature and a dead thing immovable, and so you never see
a greyhound run at a caruen or painted hare, nor a hawk to sease upon an
artificial partrige.


M. It is very true but tell me did God him self ever command any image to
be made?


D. Exodus 25. Nume. 21.3. Reg. 6. and 7.2. Paralip. 3. and 4.
That he did, as the images of the Cherubins over the arc, of the brazen
serpent in the vvilldernes; and the temple was full of graven images and
pictures, as it appears in the scripture.


M. How then? is Gods commandment contrary to him self in the tvventith of
Exodus?


D. No: God forbid; but in the.20 of Exodus he only forbad the caruing or
making images or ydols to honor, or vvorshippe as God, Deuter. c. 30.
versic. 17 etc. 4. versic. 19
as in Deuteronomie Moses him self explicateth this precept saying, Least by
error thou deceived should vvorshippe the^ as gods, or believe in them,
as other Gentiles round about them did then do: but these other images he
commanded to be made because they were for Gods honor and service.


M. So that images if they be rightly used are laudable and contrariwise
being abused are damnable.


D. Even so: and therefore the same brazen serpent which Moses made for a
figure of the Cross and Christ crucified, when it grevv in to peril of
ydolatry was broken and consumed to dust by the good king Ezechias. 4. Reg.
18.



M. But tell me, have you ever heard of any other kind of ydolatry besides
this corporal and external? Heresy is Ydolatrie. D. Hieron. in Osea^
prophetam. saepe. and in relic; Prophetas.
for the holy fathers of the Church and especially saint Hierome does say that
all heresye is ydolatry.


D. It is vvery true sir.


M. Why? how can that be, or what reason can you give for it?


D. Because they erecte unto the^ selves an idol of their own inue^tio^,
and the hda^y work of their ovvvne brain which they follovv, defend, and
honor, even to the engaging of their souls, and hazard of aeternall
damnation against all Scriptures, traditions, learning, and authority of all
Saints, Doctors, and the whole Church of God, wherein, in deed they make a
false God of their erroneous doctrine and private fancye.


M. Truly you have reason; for in the like sense Saint Paul calls
covetousness the vvorshippinge of idols, because they prefer riches before
God, and his glory: but one thing I vvoulde yet fain know of you: for what
cause they use to painte God the father like an old Man, and the Angels like
young men with wings and other garments? for I hope you know that they
are spirits and have no bodies.


D. I know it very well: but God is so painted because he so appeared in
vision unto Daniel the Prophet, Dan. 7. versi. 5. and D. Tho. in 4. d. 48. q.
1. an. 1.
partly to represent Gods antiquity, and aeternitie, before all other things
created: And the Angels are painted in that form before mentioned, to signify
their beautiful and vigorous nature, being always ready pressed to go and
execute whatsoever God shall command them, as pure and immaculate ministers
of his divine Majesty.


M. And how or with what sins is this commandment broken?


D. With many and sundry offenses; but especially those that are contrary to
the Theological virtues: as infidelity, desperation, and hate of God, all
Atheism, heresy, scisme, superstition, ydolatrie, vvitchecrafte, sorceries,
and the like whatsoever is doe^ by the help or invocation of the devil.


M. Vide Exodus 20 31 Deuter. 5. Leuit. 23. Isa. 56. Hiere 12. act. 20. Apoc. 1.
Ignat. ad Phil. Hieron. cap. 4. Galat. Aug. lib. co^t. Adim. c. 16. Ep. 118.
and 19 ser. 154. Leo. Ep. 81.
But we have said enough of the first commandment: tell me how must we
keep the second?


D. In not svvearinge, except it be upon necessity, and that with truth, and
reverence.


M. So that if a man swear a lie or doubting whether it be true, he sins
mortally every time.


D. So it is, if he use deliberation, for it is a great injury to God (who is
truth it self) to call or invocate his holy name in testimony of falsehood, as
by such svvearinge is done.


M. And why say you just, and necessary.


D. Because, although it be truth, if it be not lavvfull, and being true and
lavvfull, if not necessary, it is still a sin, at least venial, to swear
at all.


M. But if a man swear by our Lady or other Saints, by the Cross or any
other creature, as a man's soul, life, etc. by bread, drink, etc. shall he
sin against this commandment?


D. Yes doubtless, because he that svveareth by any creature, calls it to
witness in the truth of his creator, who made the same, and so in effect
calls God to witness, which is to swear by him: which kind of oathe is
more manifest, when, svvearinge by any creature is added the name of God
also: as for example, to say by this fire, or bread of God, etc.


M. What words then may a man use, to affirm any thing to be believed?


D. I would say in truth, or for certain, truly, verily, etc. for these ar
no oaths.


M. But tell me are we forbidden all so by this commandment, of blasphemy
and breach of vows?


D. No doubt: as well also as of oaths and vows wherein we promise or
purpose to perform any evil thing, or sins against Gods holy law: for
such oaths and vows are better broken the^ kept; yea we are bound to
break them. And the same obligation we have of vows made to our Lady, and
the Saints, for they be understood as made unto God, though referred to the
honor and glory of our B. Lady and other his Saints in whom he dwells.


M. But do you understand well when a vow is made?


D. Sir as I take it, a vow is not every purpose, and much less every desire
to do any thing but it is also necessary that there be made there of an
express promise with the mouth or at least with the heart, and that of a
thing which is good, and pleasinge to God, and therefore to be with
diligence acomplished.


M. You say very well: The third Commandment. Exodi. 20. Leuit. 18.24.
Deuteron. 23. Ps. 12.33.75. Eccli. 5. Ecclesiastic. 23.27.23.27. Hieremi. 4.
Zach. 6. Matthew. 4.1. Tim. 5. Jacob. 5.
tell me now how you must keep the third commandment.


D. According as the Church has determined, which is not to do any servile
labor on sunday, nor feasts of Saints, and to hear a whole mass upon
such days: and therefore likewise we should spe^de those days in prayenge,
readinge spiritual books, hearing of sermons, and other works of piety,
and mercy.


M. If on the feast or holydaye there can be no servile vvorcke done, how
do we ringe the bells, and dress the meat and table upon the said days
for these are also servile works.


D. Sir it is true: But this commandment is understood alvvayes with two
conditions. The first, if such forbidden works be not necessary unto human
life: The second, if they be not necessary for Gods service, as you see both
those are that you have named: and besides these conditions, it is lavvfull to
do servile works upon the sunday or feast, when there is license of the
prelate, and cause sufficient.


M. How comes it to pass, tha^ the Christian people does not observe the
sabbath, or satterdaye, as the Jews did, seing^ the commandment speaks
of the sabbath.


D. Because Christ our Savior with great reason has chaunge^ and translated
the sabbath into the sundaye, or dominica^ day, as he did the Circumcision
into Baptism, and the Pasquall lamb into the B. Sacrament, and all other
good things of the oulde testament, into other better of the new; and with
as good reason does the Catholic Church keep the dominicall day, in memory
that the creation of the world began on it, as the Jews their sabbath,
because the said creation ended thereon, besides that upon the sundaye CHRIST
was borne, rose from the dead, The fourth Commandment. Vide De^ter. 5.
Eccli. 34. Prou. 23. Tobiae. 4. Romans 13. Ephesians. 6. Coloss. 3.1. ad Tim. 4. Amb.
lib. 5. Exameron. c. 16.
and sent down the holy ghoast upon the Apostles; which three principal
benifites of our Redemption are recorded in the observance of the sundaye.


M. And the fourth how must we keep it?


D. By doing our duty to our parents and elders, as well spiritual as
temporal and obeyinge our superior in all honest and lavvfull matters.


M. So that our pastors and magistrates are included in this precepte also;


D. So it is: though especially and principally it be spoken of our parents,
to whom we are bound by law of nature to serve, and help in their
necessity; as on the other side there is no doubt but in virtue of the same
precepte the parents also and superiors are bound to have the like care to
nourishe, govern, and direct their children and subjectes.


M. And why is there added to this precepte rather then to any other, the
promise of long life to those that fulfill it?


D. Because it is good reason that he should not enjoye long life, the which
dishonors them by whom he has received the same.


M. And how shall we keep the fifte? The fifte Commandment. Deuteron. 21.
Genesis 9. L^uit. 19.24. Mat. 5. Ephesians. 4. Coloss. 3. Jacob. 2.1. Ioann. 3. etc.



D. If we neither kill, vvound, nor hurt, any neighbor in his person, nor
desire him any mischief in our heart, nor rejoice when it happens:
remembringe that he is made to the image and likeness of God. And that which is
said of killinge others is as well also understood of killinge our selves:
and if any saint, or holy vvoma^, in the defense of the Catholic faith, or
the virtue of chastity, have killed them selves, we must persuade our selves
that they had particular and manifest inspiration of God so to do, for,
otherwise they could not be excused of a most grievous sin, God only being
absolute master of man's life: so as the magistrate him self can not do it
but in defense of justice, and representinge Gods place.


M. But why say you not desiringe, etc?


D. Because he that hates his neighbor, or desires his harm, or for this
does fly his speech, or refuse to salute him, does not keep entirely this
commandment: and hate, and rancoure being the root of murder, are therefore
especially forbidden in this precepte. The sixte Commandment. Leuit. 20.
Deuter. 22.23.25 Prove. 11. Eccli. 41. Ps. 14. Ezech. 18. Mat. 5. Romans 5.1.
Corint. 6. Luc. 6. Ephesians. 4.5 Thessal. 4 1. ad Tim. 5.



M. Touching the sixth commandment there needs here no further declaration:
but can you tell me any remedy against the sins therein and in the ninth
also forbidden?


D. There are many: but the principal is to fly the occasion thereof, to be
very circumspect in gouerninge all our senses well, especially the eyes; to
eat and drink with moderation; to fly evil conversation; not to read
dishonest books, nether speak nor hear any vvanton words nor songs.


M. You have ansvveared to the purpose, The seventh Commandment.
but now tell me also how we must keep the seventh commandment.


D. If we nether take, Leuit. 19. Exodi. 20. etc.
nor damnifie, nor retain unjustly other men's gods against their vvilles,
nor giuinge counsel, aid, nor favor to such dealinge.


M. And what other sins are reduced to this precepte, which forbids all
stealth and rapine?


D. First, all frauds, which are used in buyenge and fellinge, and like
bargaynes. Secondly, all vsurye, which in truth is plain robbery. Thirdly the
taking of those things which other men have lost and keepinge them to him
self, without inquiringe for the true owner, fourthly, he which does
appropriate to him self things belonginge to the community and other the
like, which are damageable to our neighbor, as to spoil his corn, or
grass or burninge his house, or barn, killinge his catell, or the like: all
which oblige to restitutio^, with out which the sin can not be forgiven.


M. And the desire to take away or steal an other man's goods if he could,
The eyghte Commandment. Leuit. 16. Exodi. 23. Deuteronomy. 36.19.27. Proverb. 12.24.
Ephesians. 4. Colloss. 3. Jacob. 4 1. Petri. 2. Apoc. 21.22.
is it not a sin against this commandment.


D. It is a sin in it self, but rather against the tenth commandment
which does forbid this desire.


M. Now tell me how the eight precepte is to be kept.


D. Not only in auoydinge false witness, but murmuration also, and not
discoueringe other men's faults or sins that be secret, although they be
true; except it be with a good intention to whom it belongs to remedy the
same, by avoiding also rash iudgmente, and all kind of lyenge.


M. And do you know to distinguishe those offenses, which are committed
against this commandment?


D. Yea sir, for concerning lies there are three sorts: the first which is
hurtefull, which is especially prohibited in this precepte, as when a man in
judgment does give false evidence to the damage, or prejudice of his
neighbor. The second, which is called officious, as when a man tells a
lie to deliver his neighbor or friend from some danger. The third which is
termed idle, which is neither to help or hurt any other: But these two
kinds are not so great sins as the first, yeat are they still at least
venial sins, for we ought not to tell any lie for any good in the world.


M. And how do you distinguishe the other sins which are forbidden in this
commandment.


D. There are also three kinds of them, to the which the rest are commonly
reduced. The first is called contumely or reproach: which is an injurious
word spoken with intent to dishonor our neighbor, as to call him, ass,
or fool, base companion, and the like, howbeit if they should be spoken in
jest or to admonish and correct, as some time the father does to his child,
or the master to his scholar, without meaning to do him injury, then is it
no reproach nor sin, or at least but venial. The second is detraction, or
backebytinge, or slander, of the which has been spoken allreadie; The third
is malediction or cursinge, which when it is done with hate and desire that
it may take effect, is a most grievous sin, as on the other side, when it
is done only of leuity, jest, or soddaine anger without deliberation, it is
less evil, but still a sin, as ill beseeminge the children of God by
adoption, as all true Catholics are, out of whose mouth should never proceed
any thing but blessinge, or words of benediction.


M. And is he that breaks this precepte, bound to restituction?


D. Doubtless he is, for good name is much more precious then wealth, or
riches: which all me^ know are to be straitvvayes restored if they be taken
away vnjustely; but restitution of good name being more difficulte then the
other, obliges discrete persons to bevvare the more of it.


M. The ninth and tenth Commandment. Deuter. 5. Eccles. 18.25. Romans 13.1.
Thessalon. 4. Jacob. 1.
To conclude then since you have already expounded the tenth, tell me how the
ninth must be observed.


D. Even as the sixte, by procuringe as much as is possible, a pure heart and a
clean in Gods fight, who does expecte the same at our hands.


M. I do not doubt but you understand that in this precepte as well the
woman as the man is forbidden this desire: but I would feign know of you
whether every such desire in man or woman be a sin although they give no
consent thereunto?


D. Sir I have been taught, that S. Gregory puts three desires of evil or
carnal desire; The first of suggestion or tentation, to the which if a man
presently resist he sins not at all, but rather meriteth. The second of
delight, whereunto though sense incline, yeat the will and reason have not
consented, and this for the most part is not without some venial offense.
The third degree is, when unto suggestion and delectation our will and reason
add their consent in such sort, as a man remembering what he does
willingly and vvittingly, does notwithstanding abide, and go forvvard in
such desire, and cogitation; and this is a mortal sin, which is properly
forbidden in this commandment.


M. So as you see, in the ninth is forbidden in Unlawful desire, all that is
forbidden in the sixte, By unlawful doing, but I vvoulde feign see whether
you fully understand what is contained in these two precepts.


D. There is principally contained the prohibitio^ of adultery, which is,
when a man does sin with an other man's wife: and this I say, principallye;
because the ten commandments being a law of justice, and adultery a sin
against the same virtue, as by which sin honor is impaired, it comes
fit, that after the prohibition of murder or man's laughter vvherby life is
deprived, should be prohibited adultery vvherby honor is stained and losie:
D. August. q. 71. in Exodus
yeat is it to be noted that by the same precepts are also prohibited
secondarilie all other sorts of carnal sins and offenses, as for example,
Sacrilege, which is to sin with any person that is religious or consecrated
to God: Inceste, which is to sin with any of ones own Kindred: Rapte,
which is to sin with a Virge^: Fornication, which is to sin with a
single woman but allreadye corrupted, as a widow, or common harlotte; and
other sins more abominable in this kind, which therefore ought not to be
named amongeste Christians.


M. All this is true which you have said; yeat vvoulde I feign see, whether
you know vvherin it is founded, that fornicacatio^ is a sin, for it seems
the party so offendinge does no body any i^jurye or damage at all.


D. It is founded in all laws of true and right reason, the law of nature,
the law of Moses, and the law of grace. In the law of nature, for we read
that the Patriarche Judas Genes. 38.
vvoulde have put Thamar his daughter in law to death because being a
widow, she was found great with child; so as eue^ then it appears,
that by the instincte of nature men Knevv that fornication was a sin:
afterward in Moses law in many places fornication is forbidden; Deuter. 23.
and in the Epistles of Saint Paul many times we read, 1. Corint. 6.1. These.
Gal. 5. Ephesians. 5.
that fornicatoures shall not enter into the joy of paradise. Neither is it
true that fornication does not damage any body; for it does damage the woman
her self which therbye remains infamous; yt hurts the child thereof
borne, which becomes illegitimate, it does injury to Christ, for we
being all his members, who so commits fornication is cause that the
me^bres of Christ becomme members of an harlotte; 2. Corint. 6.
and finally it does injury to the holy^ ghoaste; 1. Corint. 3.
because our bodies being once temples of the holy ghoaste, who so does
defile his body with sin, does defile and profane the temple of the holy
ghoaste. And therefore it is certain that not only this foul offense is by
this precepte prohibited, but all other actions of uncleanness and lust that
te^de thereunto, though it be but a vvanton look, if it be directed to this
unlawful desire or vvorcke, according to that our Savior taught in the
gospel, Matthew. 5.
where in deed he expounds the force of these commandments, that who
has seen a woman with evil desire, has in his heart committed adultery or
fornication.


M. You hane ansvveared well: but I vvoulde also ask of you, what you
think of the tenth commandment, and why the desire in theft is forbidden
as well as theft it self, as also in the sins of the flesh a fore said;
yeat concerning murder, or man's laughter, we see no particulare precepte
against the desire thereof; is it because theft is so grievous a sin in Gods
sight?


D. Sir it is certain that through this offense came the accursed Judas to
fall into that horrible treason against his master our B. Savior, and
every day we see that those which are given to stealinge go also further,
and kill oftentimes even in the bye way, without any hate or rancoure at
all, but only to enjoy a little monye or substance, which those poor
passengers carye, and God permits, that he, which robs others, little
enjoys the same* and so we see, that Judas came to hang him self; and
thieves for the most part come to fall into the severe hands of the justice:
now the cause why God has not so expresselie prohibited manslaughter which
is only committed by cogitatio^, may be for one of these two reasons, either
because forbiddinge the vvorcke it self, it might well be gathered that he
also forbadde the desire: or because having as it were shut the door to
evil desires of intereste and pleasure (which lightelie are the cause of
theeuinge) by puttinge the sixte and seuenthe commandment corresponde^t to
the ninth and tenth, it might well seem that he had shut also the door
to the desire of murder, or manslaughter, because for the most part these are
never desired but for commodity, or delighte, which should thereof follow


M. I would know also of you, if you can tell the reason why God having
forbidden all unlawful desires, there are no human laws that forbid
the^, but only the works them selves, and the effects of them.


D. The reason is manifest, because men although they be Emperoures, or
Popes, do not see men's hearts, and therefore can not judge of their
thoughts, and desires, much less punish them, and consequently it were to
no purpose to forbid them: but God which does discern the heart and reins
of men, ca^ punish also evil thoughts, and desires, and therefore does
justely forbid them.


M. Now then since all these are contained in the two precepts of louinge God
and our neyghoure, tell me how is the precepte of louinge God above all thingh
to be under stood.


D. By louinge and esteeminge God so much that neither for goods, honors,
parents, friends, no nor for own life, nor any thing else in the world,
we will forsake him nor le^^ to do his holy will.


M. And how shall we help our selves to do the will of God?


D. If every morninge as soon as we rise, we do remember him and his
benefities toward us, giuinge him thanckes, and crauings his favor, and
help, that we do not offend him that day, but may do alvvayes his holy will
and pleasure.


M. And at night before you go to bed, what were good to be done to the
same purpose?


D. It were good after thanckes given for this benefittes received of his
mercy, Examininge of conscience.
to take account of your soul, touching all the thoughts, words, and
deeds of that day, and secondelye to ask of him pardon for all that has been
done amiss, until that present hour: and thirdly make full purpose with
his grace to amend our lives and saying some prayers to that purpose.


M. And as concerning the love of our neighbor what say you?


D. Sir it is sufficientlye plain of it self, to do as we vvoulde be done
unto in all things, according to the law of God and natural reason.


M. Meditation or me^tall prayer.
You have told well how to examine a man's conscience; I pray you tell also
vvherin meditation and mental prayer does principally consiste, that we may
exercise the same accordingly.


D. Supposinge recollection to begin vvithall, and some conueniente subjecte
or matter to discourse upon, it consists especially in these six actions of
the soul. The first, to know the majesty of God and of his mysteries. The
2. with devotion to adore the same majesty. The 3. to actuate his love with
all our heart. The 4. to thank him for his benefittes, etc. The 5. to offer
our selves vvholye to him. The 6. to ask graces and favors of him.


Of the five Commandments of the Church. The Precepts of the Church. Luc.
10. Mat. 18. Conc. Lug dun. c. 3. Matiscon. 2. c. 1. Triburense. c. 35.
Agathe^se c. 21.47. Aurelian. 1. c. 28 Gangrense. c. 19. Mogunt. 5. c. 34 35.
La teran. 56. Inn^c. 3. c. 221. Trid. Sess. 14. can. 8. Ignat. Ep. ad Philadel
Tertull. l. 2. ad vxorem.
CHAP. VII.
M. WELL now since we have said the 10. Commandments of our lord, let
us h^are which are the precepts of our holy mother the Church.


D. They are principally five.


M. Which are they?


D. The first is to hear Mass on sundays and holidays.

The second to confess once a year at least.

The third to communicate, at Easter or the Pasque.

The fourth, to fast when holy Church commands.

The fifth to pay tithes, and first fruytes, to the which you may add also
the sixte, not to celebrate marriages prohibited by the kpequen vvhtdopr Church.


M. And how understand you the first commandment. The first Precepte.



D. That we are bound to hear a whole Mass, and that with attention
every day which the Church commands to be kept holy, except for sickness
or some other just cause.


M. Why do you say attention?


D. Because in time of Mass it is not lavvfull to talk or treat of any matter
else, but attend to the words and action of the priest.


M. And have you any prayer to say at the elevation?


D. Diverse sir: but I am wont to say this we adore thee Lord JESUS Christ
and give thee thanks and praise for with thy Cross and passion thou have
redeemed the world, I beseec the lord to forgive me my sins.


M. And what prayer say you at the liftinge up of the chalice.


D. I say thus: we adore thee most precious blood of our Savior Jesus Christ
which was shed for all man kind upon the tree of the Cross.


M. And the second commandment how do you understand?


D. That every Christian as soon as he comes to the use of reason, is bound
to confess him self once a year in the lent at least, as it is the custom
of the Church.


M. Why say you once a year at least?


D. Because at what time a man is in danger of death, or is to receive the
blessed Sacrament, The Sacrame^te of Confession. Vid. Ioa^. 20. ibid. Cyri.
Chryso. Gre. bo. 26. Mat. 18. Cyp. 1. Ep. 1. Hilari. can. 16. in Mat. Hieron.
Ep. 2. ad Heliodo. Chrysos. l. 3. de sacerdotio Aug. l. 20 de ciuit. cap. 9
Ioa^. 11. and ser. 18. and 44. de verbis domini Ambr. ad virgin. lapsam (...)
lib. de poenit. Tertull. l. de poeni Hieron. ad Demetria. Chryso. ser. de
poeni. Co^c. Flore^t. (...) Trid.

For vocal Confession. Vide Clem. Romans Ep. 1. Dion. Areopag. Ep. 8. Tertull.
lib. de poenit. Cyp. sermon. de lapsis and l. 1. Ep. 14 Basil. q. 229. and 288.
in regulisbreuibus and Epist. 3. ad Amphilochiu^ Aug. hom. 41 49. 30. ex 50 and
l. 2. de visi ^a^. infirmoru^ c. 4 Leo Ep. 80 and 91. Jacob. 5

For Contritio^. For Satisfaction see. Vide Psalm. 37.50.118. Isaiae. 30. etc.
Ps. 34.50. and 68. Isai. 56. Hierem 6.22. Ezec. 18. Ioelis. 2. Mat. 11.16. Luc.
9.10. Romans 6.1. Cor ^1. Ephesians. 4.2. ad Cor. 7. Colo. 3.1. Paral. 21.1. Reg. 11.
Ionae. 3. Mat. 24. Mar. 14. Lucae. 7.1. ad Cor. 9. Tertullianus supra citatus.


and finds him self with mortal sin in his conscience, he is bound also
to confess by Gods commandment; for as we sin often so we should desire
to confess often also.


M. And what are the substantial points of this holy Sacrament.


D. Contrition, which is with the heart, Confession vocal, which is with
the mouth, and Satisfaction, which is with works of penance: which is to
be understood, that the penitent besides the true sorrow of his sins
committed, have full purpose never to offend again, and so confessinge them
with humility, and confusion, have the mind to accept with a-good will
that penance which shall be enjoined hi^ by his confessarius, and procure to
fulfill the same with all speed convenient, consideringe the great favor
that God does him to perdon the aeternall pains of hell, and content him
self with a temporal punishmente, much less then that which his sins
deserved: whence follow also these other fruytes of this Sacrament; first,
that our good works done in Gods grace, and afterward lost by sin, are
recovered again, and yealde us the reward of them as before: The second is
that we are loosed from the bands of Excommunication if perhaps we had
been subjecte unto it, being restored to the Communion of the prayers and
Sacraments of the holy Church, Excommunication.
conversation with the faith full, and Christian burial: of all which
excommunicated persons are deprived. Thirdly and lastly, we are made capable
of the treasure of those indulgences, and pardons, which with this condition
the Popes holiness does often times grant.


M. It is cunningly aunsvveared: but can you tell me how a man may make a good
confession.


D. By keepinge these three conditions: that it be humble, sincere, and entyre.


M. And what call you humble.


D. When he which confesses his sins, in his heart does acknovvledge him
self a grievous sinner, and unworthy to have perdon of his sins accusinge
him self with great subjection, reverence, and fear, as he which talks
with God.


M. And how shall it be sincere and true?


D. By tellinge only what he himself has committed, without mentioninge
any other, and that neither more nor less then he has done, without
excusings him self or accusinge other.


M. And how must it be entyre?


D. By declaringe all that he can remember, not concealinge any thing for
shame, or other worldly respect, because it is an injury to the holy ghoast,
and a sacrilege against this holy Sacrament, and the party other vrise
doing, keeps the devils counsel and be comes his secretary.


M. How then may a man examine well his conscience, to be sure to confess
all as he ought to do it?


D. By conferringe his conscience with the 10. Commandments of God, and
those of the Church, and the mortal sins, and works of mercy, remembering
the place, and persons with whom he has conuersed, and the things wherein
he has been occupied?


M. You have said very well, and remember that you do so your self, when
you go to onfession: but tell me if an heretic should ask you, how any man
can forgive sins but God only, what can you answer?


D. That of his own authority it is true, that God only can forgive sins,
but by his commission, any other his lavvfull minister in Gods Church.


M. And cannot the priest, absolve from sins without confession?


D. No certainly.


M. Why so.


D. Because he sits in confession, as Gods minister or magistrate in
judgmente; and no judge can well give sentence without hearing the cause or
evidence.


M. And must a man give evidence against him self?


D. How else can he hope for forgiveness? since no man knovveth the heart of man
but him self and God almighty.


M. Did Christ ever give this authority to his Apostles, and disciples, to
forgive the sins of others?


D. Matthew. 18. Ioann. 20.
Never did he say or do any thing more manifestly, or in more plain terms,
as it is clear in the Gospel; whose sins you shall forgive, or loose in
earth, they are forgiven, or loosed in heaven, and whose sins you shall
retain, or bind in earth, they are retained or bound in heaven.


M. Why, can the priest also retain sins?


D. What else does he, when he denies absolution to such as are impenitent,
or disobedient unto him in confession; especially when they conceal any
thing from him, which they ought to discover, and will not.


M. Therein is reason; for in truth how can a man have his wound, or sore
cured if he refuse to show the same unto the physician, or surgeon? but tell
me last of all, what is satisfaction?


D. It is the doing of penance for the offense done against God, on our
selves, by prayer fasting, alms deeds, and the like good works, and
especially by restoringe other men's goods, or good name, if we have taken it
from them, or done them any injury what so ever.


M. So that it is not sufficient for a Catholic man to be sorry for his sins
in heart, and to confess them in particular to the priest, but he must also
do penance for them either in this world or in purgatory.


D. Certainly so it is, except peradventure by virtue of holy graynes or
medalles well applied, the same be prevented, for the Popes indulgences, or
pardons do much mitigate our obligation in this behalf. The third and fourth
Precepte. Genesis 1.9 Leuit. 10 Number. 6. Iudicu^ 13. Mat. 3. Mar. 1. Luc. 1. Act.
15. E^^d. 24. Deuteron. 9 3 Reg. 1^ Clem. Romans Co^stitutution. Apostol. c.
16.13.19.20.21. Ignat. ep. ad Philadelphie. Hieron. ep. 54 ad Marcella^. Basil.
hom. de jejunio Ambr. ser. 23.25.34 36. and 37. August. libr. 30. contra
Faustu^ and contra Adimantu^. c. 14



M. God be thanked that he has given so many comfortable and svveet remedies,
against man's fraylty, sins, and misery: but proceed unto the third precepte.


D. It is so plain it needs no further declaration.


M. You say well; but how understand you the fourth of fasting.


D. That every Christian after he comes to the age of 21. years, is bound to
fast the lent, and four imber weeks, and all the other vigiles, and fastes
which the Church commands.


M. Why? is it not enoughe to fast from sin, but that a man must fast from
flesh, and vvhitemeate also.


D. To fast from sin vee are bound every day and hour in the year, and the
holy days most of all other, yea and all the days of our life by consequence:
Ioelis 2. Tobi. 12. 1. Reg. 14 Paralip. 20. Ionae. 3.4. Esdrae 8. and Esther 9
Mat. 6. Mar. 2. Luc. 2. Act. 13.1 Cor. 7.2 Cor. 6. etc.
but that fast which is bodyly and corporal, is to help this which is
spiritual, as we see it often in the Scripture commanded, and therefore is
limited to certain times and seasons.


M. Epiphan. baeresi 75. Amb. l. de Iej^nio et Elia. Chrysostom. hom 1. and 2. in
Gene ser. 1. de Iej^nio. Theodore. Epitome d^uinorum decretorum. The fifte
Precepte.
And why the lent more then any other time of the year?


D. Because it is in imitation of our Savior, and for a preparation to the
holy week of his passion, and the great feast of his Resurrection, wherein
we ought with Christ to arise and amend our lives hereafter.


M. Now say then, how is the last precepte to be understood


D. To give unto God for every te^, one (and not the vvorst) according to the
custom of the Church, The Mass. S. Cypr. lib. 2 Ep. 3. Eusebius. l. de
demo^strat. Evang. c. 10. Aug. contra Faust. l 6. c. 5. Mart a^is ep. ad B^
^^gal. Justin martyr dialogo co^tra Tryphon. Irenaeus. l. 4. cap. 32.33.34.
Chrysos. in ^. 95. Aug. l. 18 d^ ciuit. c. 35. and l. 19. c. 23. Hier^^^m. ad
Marcellam^^ Euagr. ^^ma ^ Epiphan. haere si. 55. Aug. in Pi. 33. and Ep. 23.
ignat. ad Smyrnen. Vide Malach. c. 1. Dam. 12.
and country.


M. Truly you have ansvveared very sufficiently; howbeit by reason you say
we are bound (as ^t is true) to hear Mass on all holy days. I would gladly
hear whether you understand what the Mass is, and the ceremonies thereto
belonginge.


D. The Mass is the true sacrifice, of the true body, and blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, offered unto God for all men, inuisibly on the altar,
but really and truly as it was by him self on the Cross.


M. And is there in it both a Sacrament, and a sacrifice also?


D. Both sir. a Sacrament in that it gives grace to the worthy receauers
thereof by way of communion, a sacrifice in that it is offered by the priest
unto God on the altar, for him self, and the people, according to the
Prophecy of Malachie, and Daniel, which call it the clean oblation and
perpetual sacrifice?


M. And why did Christ appoint this sacrifice?


D. Because God was never served without sacrifice, Gene^. 4.8.14. Exodus 12.
N^^a^^. 28. and 29. Hippolitus I de consummat. mu^di. Chrysosto. hom. 49.
operis imperfecti in Matt. Irenaeus libr. 4. cap. 32. August. libr. 10. de
ciuita. cap. 21. and libr. de cura pro mor tuis agenda. cap. 1. lib. 22. de
ciuita. cap. 8. Gregor. libr. 4. Dialog. cap. 57. Beda libr. 4. historiae
Angilcanae cap. 21. Dionysi. Areopag. de Ecclesiast. Hierarchia cap. 3. and
Epistola. 8. Sancti Iacobus, Basil. Chrysostom. in liturgiis. Chrysostom. hom.
77. in Ioan^e^. and homili. 18. in Act. Apost. Cyprian. libr. 1. Epi^^l. 9.
Epiphan. haeresi. 75. D. Hieronym. 1. ad Ti^^^ Clem. Romans Epistol. 5. Ambros.
in. Psalm. 38. and ^. 1 efficior. cap. 18. August. libr. 9. confess. cap.
11.1^.13.
since the beginning of the world: and for that our Savior ordained a
better form of religion then ever had been, either under the law of nature,
or the law of Moses, he appointed also and gave us the greatest sacrifice
that could be possible; which was him self in the Mass.


M. The Mass has many parts in it, tell me wherein begins the true body
and blood of our Savior to be present?


D. Straight upon the words of consecration, which is at the elevation, at
what time it is especially adored of all true Christians.


M. And who was the first that ever said Mass in the world?


D. Our Savior Jesus Christ in his last supper, Vide Orig. homil. 3. in variis
Naz. orat. in. Gorgonia^ Chrysostom. hom. 24. in. 1. ad Cor. and homil. 61. ad
populum Antiochen. Aug. in Ps. 98. Amb. lib. 3. de Spiritu Sanct. cap. 12.
at what time he made his Apostles priests, gyuinge them power, and
authority to do the like, and to make and teach others that should succeed
them.


M. How chau^ceth it that this word (Mass) is not found in holy Scripture?


D. Because the names of things are given upon sundry occasions, and our faith
is not grounded on words, but in things, and substance, for in like manner
neither these words, Trinity; Incarnation, Consubstantiall, and the like are
to be found in holy vvritte, yeat Christians believe constantly these mysteries.


M. You answer to the purpose but tell me may not those words of our
Savior vvherevvith he did consecrate be understood by a figure?


D. The real presence of Christ in the B Sacrament
No sir, in no wise at all, for being the most important mystery of all other
which ever he taught his Apostles, if he had spoken by a figure, he him self
would have expounded the same, as he did many others of less moment: besides
that, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Corint. 11. Aug. Ep. 86. Ch^^sost. hom. 17.
Operis imperfecti The^philact. and Be da^^n 24. Luc Aug. lib. 3. de ^^^^bua^g.
(...) 2^ Tertull. ^.2. ad vx^r. Cypr. sermon. de de lapsis. Orige. hom. 13. in
Exodus Basi. ad Caesariu^. Hieron. in prolog. co^tra Iouin. Eusebius l. 6. bis. c.
36. Ambro. in Saty^. Theodoret. in Theophili vita. 26 Euagr. l. 4. c. 35. Aug.
ho. 26 ex quinquinquinta. Basil. ad Caesariu^ pat. Cyril. Alex. Ep. ad Calosci.
Eusebius Emiss. hom. 5. de paschate Co^c. Trid. sess 13. can. 3. Consta^tie^.
Basilie^s
the gospel makes no mention of any such meaning. Thirdly, the Evangelists
and Saint Paul, all in one manner rehearse the whole matter without any
mention of parable or figurative meaning, which in other occasions they do
very often as saying, Quae sunt per allegoriam dicta, that is, which are
spoken by an allegory or figure, etc. And lastly, all men in their last will
and testament speak as plain as they can possiblye, and you know well this
was our Saviors last will and testament which he left unto the world, and
to his spouse the Church, the night before he departed this life: neither could
he, or Saint Paul speak any thing more plainly, neither did ever any Doctor,
holy father, or interpreter of holy Scripture doubt of this propre sense of
our Saviors doctrine, except he were an heretic. For allbeit some one
father, or other has said, that when our Savior gave his body, he gave
also a figure of the same to his Apostles, yeat never any interpreted these
words in that manner, which is that, we here especially speak of. Now
that the thing it self may be ministered and yeat a figure, it has no
contradiction: as for example, if the King of England should cause a comedy
to be made of his receauinge to the crown, and him self vvoulde play the
Kings part, it is manifest, that one and the self same person should be
both a figure, and the thing figured; the representer, and the thing
represented; which in this Sacrament is also manifest, Christ his bodre
(which is reallye present) representinge the same body that suffered for us,
and in the shape of bread, and wine, signifienge the nourishme^te of our
souls by his grace, The ceremonies of the Mass. Vide loca infra citata.
to which end this Sacrament is chiefly ordained.


M. You have said enoughe of this point of the real presence, tell me now
the meaning of the ceremonies which are in the mass, Diony. Eccles.
Hierarch. c. 3. Jacob in liturgia Cle. Romans l. 8. Co^stit. Apostolic. Cypr. de
caena du^i. Aug. Ep. 57. ad Dardan et ep. 59. ad Pan. Bas. ad Amfilochiu^ c.
27. et in liturgia. Cyrill. Hieros^l. catehe. 5. Chrysostom. ho. 14. ad Ephe ho.
5. ad Colo. et ho. 36 in. 1. ad Cor. ho de Ada^ and Eua. ho. 24. in Act. Apost.
et ho. 4 de dei natura and hom. 24 and 41. in. 1. ad Cor. and ho. 51. ad
populu^ Antioch. and ho 17. ad Hebrae. Canones vetere. Dura^. in ration. etc.
and first, why this Sacrament is ministered to the people under one kind.


D. It is ministered unto the people in such sort, first because Christ him
self did some times so minister the same as in Emaus, as also the Apostles
after him did, as it is to be seen acto. 2.20.27. etc. Secondly, to avoid
many inconveniences and perils of sacrilege, which by ministringe under both
kinds often happened. our Savior having left no precepte herein, but only
to priests, and benige certain that whole Christ, is under either kind in
the Sacrament; and the mass although it be said in short space does represent
the most high and worthy matters that may be, even since Adam unto the end of
the world.


M. Tell me how and in what manner and that with breuity.


D. In this matter for that the Church has determined nothing, there be diverse
opinions of Catholic Doctors, but the more common interpretation it this:
first that the confession which the priest makes before he goes up to the
altar, as also the Kyrie cleysons do represent the world fallen by Adames
sin, and cryenge for mercy.


M. But then what does the Gloria in excelsi, Epistle, and Gospel signify
with the Creed?


D. The Gloria signifies the nativity of Christ, for then was it first songen
by the Angels: The Epistle does represent the old testament, whence
oftentimes it is also taken, and particularly the coming of Saint John
Baptist. The Gospel signifies the coming and preachinge of Christ: and
because the jews alvvayes refused to believe in him, the book is carried to
the other side of the altar to show that the Church and Gospel was
translated to the gentiles who did believe and receive it, and because in the
end of the world, the Jews shall also be converted, the book is returned
after the communion to the first place, and so the Creed does show the fruit
that has come of it, in the whole world.


M. And why does the priest make a Cross in the book at the reading of the
Gospel, and then on his forhead, mouth, and breast?


D. To show that no Christian ought ever to be ashamed of Christ's Cross and
religion, which he is bound to confess with his mouth, and never deny it, if
ever he should be put to it, and last of all to believe it inwardly in his
heart, and to live accordingly; and therefore he does also kiss the book to
show du^ty and love to wards it.


M. And what does the offertory signify done in such silence?


D. The time that Christ after the resurrection of Lazarus, hid him self
from the Jews, and offered his future passion to his aeternall father.


M. Say on the rest also, why does he join the water with wine in the
offringe?


D. To signify that he joins the peoples prayers, with his own in this
sacrifice, and especially to represent the water which came forth of our
Saviors side, together with his most precious blood: and for that it is
most probable that our Savior did so mixte the wine, which he did in his
last supper consecrate.


M. Tell, what signifies the preface and the rest.


D. The preface does signify, and represent the entering of CHRIST into
Jerusalem, upon Palm sunday: The first memento, represents when he prayed
in the garden: as the second does his prayer on the Cross, which is signified
in the altar: The eleuatio^ signifies his lifting up upon the Cross, when
he was first nailed thereunto, the three times that the priest takes the holy
host in his hands, the three hours which our Savior hanged alive on the
Cross: the breaking of the same, signifies the sacred wounds, and greefes
of his bitter passion, but chiefly the departure of his soul, and blood from
his holy body, which is broken into three, parts, to signify that the
benifitte of his passion does redounde unto the Church militante, patient, and
triumphant, and therefore the priest says also three times Agnus Dei.


M. What call you the Church patient?


D. The souls that are in purgatory, and have special comfort^ by this holy
sacrifice, and therefore the third part of the holy host he lets fall in
to the chalice.


M. And why do the people in diverse countries rise after the communion and
stand till the priest give his benediction?


D. To signify the firm estate of Christ's Church after his Resurrection unto
the end of the world, when our Savior shall give the elect his blessinge,
as he did in his Ascension to his Disciples that were present; as the readinge
of the Gospel in the end does also signify the preachinge there of, by the
Apostles, in the whole world.


M. So you see how the holy Mass, is a perfect compendium or abbreuiation of
Christ's life, and passion, whereby you may learn, with what devotion,
reverence, and attention, you ought always to hear it, and how vvillingely
you ought to repair to it: But you have forgotten to tell the meaning of the
priest vestme^tes, wherein he goes to the altar.


D. Sir; the Amiss, does signify the cloth, where with Christ was blinded
vvhiles the Jews did buffet him.

The albe, that garment which Herod put on him, when he despised him, and
sent him back to Pilate: The girdle, that rope vvherevvith he was tied to the
pillar, and vvhipped: The maniple, the haulter vvherevvith they tied his
blessed hands like a malefactor; and the stole likewise, the rope vvherevvith
they tied his neck, and led him from place, to place, in his passion: and
last of all his vestment signifies the purple robe which Pilate put upon
him, when he shevved him all disfigured to the Jews saienge, Ecce Hamo:
which all have also moral meaning of those virtues which priests should
have in them, and have correspondence, with those ornaments and garments,
which God in the oulde testamente commanded the high priest to wear in
time of sacrifice; which also had their mysteries, as diverse aunciente
vvriters and the holy Scriptures them selves do declare.


M. I see well that the Mass is a true and perfect representation of
Christ's Passion; and the priest thus vested, of his person; and the altar, of
the Cross. But what do the chalice, patene, and corporalles mean?


D. They proprely represente the like, which our Savior used in his last
supper, and moreover, the chalice signifies his sepulcher; the patene, the
stone rouled to the door of the same: the corporalles the fyndon, wherein his
blessed body, was envvrapped by Joseph of Arimathia, before it was laid in
the sepulcher; and all those things having their particular signification
together with the ceremonies of the holy Mass, do stir up to devotion
and and piety, as well the people present as the priest him self, and
keeps him with attention to the mysteries which he has in hand: and no
doubt was one especial reason why God almighty in the oulde law, did
prescribe the use of so many and so diverse ceremonies in those sacrifices
which were all but a figure and shadovv of this.


M. Surely I cannot but vvonder to see the wisdom, and sweetness of holy
Churches ceremonies, which are so decent, devout, and significant; but why
are there candles of wax on the altar, and lighted always at Mass, yea
although the sun do shine on the altar?


D. In the beginning they were used of necessity, by reason of the
persecution in the primitive Church; because for the space of 300. years the
most chappells, and oratories which Christians had, were in dark places or
under ground, for fear of Jews, or heathens, etc. As the Emperors in Rome,
till Saint Helens time, and her son Constantine the Emperor, as is yet to
be seen in Rome: wherefore the Church retains her custom, which has
also other mysteries.


M. What mystery do wax candles signify?


D. First they represent the last supper of our lord, when he said the first
Mass that ever was, by candle light. Secondly, for that the wax signifies
his virginal flesh; the week, his soul; and the flame, his divinity:
Thirdly, they put us in mind of the good works vvherevvith he taught us to
shine, and give light to the world.


M. You have fully satisfied me, and from hence forth I hope you will learn
to make less account of all, that those profane sectaries, do bark against
Catholic customs, and traditions, for I see well there is nothing without
just cause permitted. But to conclude this whole matter tell me how ought a
man to hear Mass, and what benefit he receives by the same.


D. Mass is to be heard with attention, reverence, and devotion, upon both
our knees, except at the Gospel, and as the custom is in some places to the
middle of the Creed, when the priest adoreth: and joining our prayers with
the priest in every action. The commodities or benefits we reap by hearing
Mass, ^r five. 1. increase of Gods grace. 2. in diminishinge the pains of
purgatory. 3. facility in obtaining what we ask of God. 4. particulare help
to avoid sin. 5. great succor from God to escape all dangers that day.


Of the Seven Sacraments. CHAP. VIII.
M. FOR as much as you have made mention often times of the Sacraments, The
Seven Sacraments.
and the grace which they cause, tell us how many are there in the Catholic
Church. Vide Mat. 26 28. Joan. 20. ad Ephesians. 5. lae cobi. 5.1. ad Tim. 4. Conc.
Florent. Constant. Colonie^ se, Trident.



D. There be these seven. Baptism, Confirmation, Euchariste, or Communion;
Penance, Extreme unction, Order, and Matrimony.


M. Who ordained these Sacraments; and why?


D. Christ our Savior, that by them he might communicate his grace, and
merits of his holy passion unto us.


M. How are the Sacraments to be received?


D. With true repentance of other sins, and confessinge them also if the
party be in mortal sin, howbeit in baptism because it is the gate or
entrance to the rest, confession is not required.


M. Are all these Sacraments to be received of every Christian man of
necessity?


D. No forsooth: for order and matrimony, are both volu^tary, but the rest
cannot be omitted without sin, when time requires they should be taken.


M. And may these Sacraments be received more then once.


D. Sir: Baptism, and confirmation or bishoppinge, and order cannot but once
only; by reason of the Character which these three do imprinte in our
souls; the rest may, according as just cause shall be offered, often be
received; especially confession and communion ought to be much frequented for
the great need we have of them.


M. I vvoulde feign know of you some reason of the number of the Sacraments;
and why they are seven.


D. The reason why they are seven, is this: Because God in gyuinge us
spiritual life, vvoulde proceed as he is wont in gyuinge life corporal: in
the which we see that first it is necessary to be borne into this world;
to the which aunsvveareth baptism whereby we are borne by grace unto God.
The second necessary thing for this our corporal life, is growth, or
strength, to the which aunsvveareth confirmation; whereby, the grace we
received in baptism, is increased and fortified. The third is, to be
nourished, which in spirit is done by the holy Sacrament of the altar. The
fourth is, to be cured, when a man is sick, to the which aunsvveareth
penance, vvherby grace once lost is recovered. The fifth, in the time of
combat to be armed against the enemy: to the which aunsvveareth extreme
unction in the hour of death, what time our infernal enemy does most
assault us. The sixth is, that there be some to rule, and govern men that are
newborn, and increased, which in spiritual life is performed by holy
order, or priesthood. The seuenthe, that there be some which attend to the
multiplyenge of mankind, which in the Church also is necessary in respect
of the faithful, and is by the Sacrament of matrimony with revere^ce and
dece^cie accomplished.


M. I vvoulde know also of you touching baptism, what is necessary for
the perfect ministringe thereof, and whether any but a priest may baptize?


D. It belongs principally to the priest, or to some other in holy orders in
the priests absence: but in danger of death, it belongs to any other man,
or vvoma^, and they may fully discharge it; yeat no vvoma^ ought to do it, if
a man be present. And for the perfect manner of baptism, (which is good
that all me^ should know) are required these three things: first, that the
person that does baptize have intention to give truly this Sacrame^te, as
Christ has appointed it, and to want this vvittingelie, were a most
grievous sin. Secondly, is required to wash or sprinckle the child with
true, and natural water. Thirdly, at the self same time when the water is
povvred of the child baptized, to say with all these words, I do baptize
thee in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghoast.


M. And why are Godfathers and Godmothers used in this baptism?


D. To solemnize and assure the better this most necessary Sacrament, and to
aunsvveare in the childs behalf to those quaestions which the priest does
ask him, vvhervppon grow and follovv these two obligations, the one that the
Godfather and Godmother have care to instruct their Godchilde in matters of
faith, and good manners, when the parents therein should fail: The second
is, that by virtue of this action the parents of the child, the child him
self, and they, co^tracte a spiritual kindred; in which respect grows
prohibition of marriage betvvixte the said persons though this spiritual
impedimente be not extended to so many degrees, as betvvixte those that have
natural kindred.


M. Then tell me the effects of these Sacraments in particulare, The Effects
of the Sacraments.
and what is first the effect of baptism?


D. It makes a man become the child of God, and inheritoure of paradise, it
cancelleth all sins, and fills the soul with grace, and spiritual gifts.


M. What is the effect of confirmation, or bishoppinge?


D. It does fortify a man that he have no fear to confess the faith of
Christ our lord, and so makes us become true souldioures of our Savior.


M. And what effect does the holy Euchariste work?


D. It nourishes charity, which is the life of the soul, and does increase
the same every day more, and more, and so gives strenghth against venial
sins also.


M. What is then the effect of penance?


D. It does release the sins committed after baptism; and does make a man
return to the frendshippe of God; sin having made us his enemies.


M. What is the effect of extreme unction?


D. It does wipe away the relics of sin, it fortifieth the soul in that
last combat with the devil, and it helps to restore the bodily health, if
it be profit^ble for the health of the soul.


M. And what effect has the Sacrament of order?


D. In it is given power to consecrate the B. Sacrament of Eucharistia, and to
minister the other Sacraments to the people, and with all it gives virtue,
and grace to priests, and others that have taken orders to do and execute
well their office.


M. Last of all what is the effect of matrimony.


D. It gives virtue and grace to the^ which lavvfully are joined, to live in
marriage estate with peace, and co^corde, and to breed, Ephesians. 5. 2. Cor. 7.
and bring up their children, in the fear of God, to the end they may have
comfort of the^ both in this world, and in the next.


M. You have aunsvveared very sufficie^telie touching these points: but
because our adversaries pike many quarrels at these Sacraments, which in
deed they deny, I vvoulde be glad also to hear how you ca^ aunsvveare some
fevv quaestions concerning the same, and first how baptism is ministered to
children, and infantes, which know not what they receive, or take, when
they are Christened.


D. Sir, the reason heerof is, the great necessitye which there is of
baptism; because whosoever dies without it, or desire at least of it,
cannot enter into the Kingedome of heaven: Io. 3.
and because young children are tender and in danger to die with great
facility, being not of capacity to desire baptism, it is necessary to
Christen them with all speed possible: and allbeit they know not what they
take, the Church does supplye by their Godfathers, and Godmothers what in
them wants, which is sufficient; for as by means of Adam we fell into
sin, and disgrace of God all though we then knevv nothing of it, so God is
contented that by means of Christ's Church, and baptism we should be
delivered from sin, and return into his grace allbeit we know nothing,
nor think not of it.


M. And what mystery is there in it, that in Confirmation, the forehead of
the party confirmed, is anointed.


D. Because as in baptism by the water, and vvashinge is signified that the
grace of God does cle^se the soul from the spots of all sin; so in
confirmation, by annointinge is represented the effect of Gods grace which
does, as it were, annointe the soul to comfort, and strengthen the same,
against the Devil, that thereby he may with the more courage confess the
Catholic faith without fear of any torments, or death it self, when it
should be offered: and therefore it ought to be given as soon as the child
is come to the use of reason, because then he begins to profess the faith,
and has need to be confirmed, and established in it: allbeit when this
Sacrament for just causes cannot be administrated, as sometimes in grievous
persecutions of the Church it happens, it is to be noted, that this
Sacracramente is not absolutely necessary to salvation.


M. And has this Sacrament any other effect?


D. It has; for it imprinteth in the soul of man a marcke which the divines
call a Character, which can never be extinguished, and is the cause why this
Sacrament can never be but once received, as before has been specified, that
as by the Character of baptism, a man is known to be a Christian, that is of
CHRIST'S family, so by this he may be known to be one of CHRIST'S
soldiers, which always c^^e the colors or badge of their captain;
vvherevvppon it follovveth that they which after they have received this
Sacrament, go to hell, shall have most deep confusion; for every one shall
see that they had made profession to be souldioures of CHRIST, and yeat
afterward rebelled so dishonourablye against him.


M. But tell me also touching the blessed Sacrament of the altar, how it
comes to pass that CHRIST being reallye there, yeat we seem to see,
small, touch, and taste, the same bread or wine that before, as far as
sense can lead us.


D. Transubsta^tiation.
You say well sense; for reason, faith, and religion teach us other wise:
wherefore also this Sacrament is called of some the Sacrament of faith,
above all other, because no sense but that of hearing, Romans 10.
by which faith is taught us, has any true judgment of this mystery; no
other wise then by the Scripture we know that Lots wife was changed in to
a pillar of salt, and yeat retained the shape of a woman: and therefore as
then in that mutation, or conversion was changed the substance of Lots wife
within, yeat remained the figure without; so in this mystery, the inward
substance of bread or wine is truly changed, and transmuted into the real
body, and blood of our Savior, and yeat remain outvvardlie, the figures
and forms of bread, and wine as before; which allthough it seem strange,
especially in that point, that so great a body, or person, should stand
under so small a form, and accidente, as is that of the host consecrated,
yeat to Gods omnipotence nothing is impossible; Matthew. 19.
as him self said of a camel, that God could make to pass through the eye
of a needle, though to men it seem alltogeather impossible: and if we
reflecte with attention upon the natural actions of man's bobye, and soul,
we shall find many, that will seem no less strange then this; and many
effects that be euidente though we cannot well comprehend how they be
done; as for example how so great bodies as cities, seas, and mountains, and
the like, in their whole exte^sion or greatness, are comprehended, and
lodged in so little a compass as a man's eye; yea which is more, in the very
point where the eye does exercise his operation: and in a man's memory, we
find sufficient room, and capacity for a whole world; vvhereat Saint
Austen himself did so vvonder, D. Aug. libr. 10. confess.
admiringe Gods vvorckes so incomprehensible unto us.


M. And could you give some such other similitude, vvherby it may be declared
how the body of our Savior may stand in so many diverse places, at there
are hosts in diverse altares?


D. Truly sir in Gods vvorckes it is not necessary to understand them, but
it is sufficient to believe them, for we are sure that God cannot deceive us;
yeat can I give an example also of the same: for our soul, it is certain
that it is but one alo^e in the whole body, and all the parts thereof;
whole, and all in the head, and whole, and all in the feet; yea whole, and
all in every toe, or finger, and any other the least parcel of our body;
how then should it seem incredible that God should be able to do that with
the body of his son, which we see he has allreadie done with the soul
in our bodies, puttinge it in so many, so differente, and so distante parts
of the same: and we see in the same lookinge glass, vvherin first we could
see but one whole sace, after it is broken into an hundred diverse pieces, it
serves (being the same glass) to represente the same face, and that all at
once, in an hundred differe^te parcells, and places, and if you will have an
other example, no less familiare, then hard to be understood how it is
done; the same voice of a man that speaks, is heard entyre, and whole, and
received all at once, into the ears of an hundred thovvsande persons, if so
many be present.


M. But I desire to know of you also whether when Christ comes into the
host, he forsake his place in heaven to come to the altar, or remain yeat in
both places.


D. To this I aunsvveare, that he remains in both places, and never moves
from his place in heaven, no more then the soul of a child which is yeat but
a foot long, when the same child is become a man of five or six foot hye,
does remove from that little lenghth it had before, but continues in the place
it first was, and yeat in grovvinge, of the body, occupies those other four
or five foot more of space, then the body had in his childehood, the soul
remaininge without growth, or greatness in it self, as it is manifest in all
spiritual substance.


M. And why is this so precious, and admirable a Sacrament, Kept always
in the pix upon the altar?


D. For the comfort of all true Christians, The B. Sacrament in the pix.
and more commodity of the sick, when they should receive their, Viaticum,
and especially to help our devotion, toward his bitter passion, vvherof
he willed us to have perpetual memory, which by this means is most
conuenientelie performed, his presence being the most effectual pledge of
his love toward us, both then, and ever; with which inte^tion it is not
only so kept in the pix, or sanctuary, but often times also carried in
procession, to the singular joy, and comfort of all true Catholics; no
other wise then in the oulde testamente was the arcke of propitiation, as he
did not only give the people of Israel, Manna, to eat, as now his hodye to
communicate, but willed them also to keep a vessel full of the same, Exodus
16.
in remembrance of all his benefittes toward them, in their delivery from
Aegypte.


M. But what can you aunsvveare to the adversary which is wont so
impudentelie to calumniate this point, as for example, if the B. Sacrament
while it is in the pix, should be eaten with worms, or carried away with
a mouse, or bitten of a dog, and the like, is it not a great absurdity,
that he which sits on the right hand of his father, should be buried in
the bellye of a beast, or keepte in a box, and the like indignities?


D. Sir, this is but a little mudde which these base minded fishermen stir,
Steph Gardener.
to entangle ignoraunte souls, and of some is vvorthelie called the devils
sophistry; for if we do reflecte, and remember what CHRIST for our sake
suffered in his passion, and upon the Cross, being so vvhipte, and buffeted,
bespetted, yea cruellye, and despightefully abused, as he was, his most
precious blood being in abundance povvred upon the ground, and trodden
under the feet of those accursed Jews, and Gentiles, which put him to death,
(and who can say, but this was worse then if a dog should have come by
chance, and licked it?) Yea I put the case that some raven or crovv had
seized upon him after his soul was departed, or the like: if I say we
consider what he then suffered for us, being indeed passible, and subjecte to
the offense of his flesh, and body; we shall easily see, that all the
indignities he can now suffer, being immortal, and impassible, (as he has
been ever since his resurrection) are nothing indeed at all, but illusions of
heretics, and enemies of this B. Sacrament, to auerte the minds of the
simple, and ignorante, from the belief, and devotion to it. I vvoulde feign
know if there can be any worse bellye, breast, or mouth the^ that of Judas
Iscariote, or can there be any creature more odious, loathsome, and detestable
then the Devil? and yeat the Gospel tells us, that to the one he gave him
self in this Sacrament when he knevv his traiterous intentions; Mat. 42.26.
Mar. 1. and 14 Luc. 4. and 22.
yea afterward admitted him to Kiss his venerable face, and to the other he
permitted him self to be visiblye, and corporallye carried in his ouglye
pavves, from one place to another, even to the pinnacle of the temple: and
shall we fear now least his majesty be impaired, when only the
accidents of the host be perished under which he is impassiblye placed? it
is to clear, that allbeit a dog or mouse or any other beast, may defile or
abuse this garmente, or canopie of his, under which he inuisiblye sits,
yeat his person, body, or blood, cannot be annoyed by any, creature; and
those that have Christian affection, by these inconuenie^ces, which in this
vale of misery that most adoreable Sacrament sustaineth, make an infallible
argument of Christ's unspeakable love toward us, that for our sakes
vvoulde put him self into such contingence, and this in my conceyte may serve
for this objection.


M. You have reason: but tell me, sei^ge we ought so highelie to esteem this
Sacrame^te, what preparation may we best make to receive it vvorthylie?


D. There are three things required: the first, that a man go to confession
before, and procure to be in Gods grace, when he goes to communicate: for one
of the causes why it is given in the form of bread, is to signify how this
Sacrament is to be given to the living, not to the dead, to nourishe the
grace of God, and to increase it in us. The second is, that we come fasting
to it alltogeather, that is, not having eaten any thing at all, or droncken,
at least from midnighte before. The third is, that we understand well
what we do, and that we come with devotion to so great a mystery; and
therefore, this Sacrament is not given to infantes, or fools, or any person,
that has not the use of reason: and allbeit the Church command, Cap. Omnis
vtriusque de panit. and remissio.
(as has been spoken,) to receive at least once a year, in the Pasque or
feast of Easter, yeat is it wholesome, and profitable, to do it more often,
according as each ones Confessarius shall direct him.


M We have said enoughe of this Sacrament: and I vvoulde ask you another
question about the Sacrament of penance, or confession, which hitherto you
have not aunsvveared; and first, how can it seem reasonable, that a priest
which him self lives ill, and is vicious, (as some times they are) should
be able to give absolution from sins, which is a power so supreme, and
caelestiall, and which the Aungells them selves cannot do.


D. This has the same difficulty in the Sacraments of our adversaries, who
notwithstanding doubt not, but they have their effect, allbeit they know
well that the vvorste priest of the papists is ordinarilye, of better life,
then the best protestaunte ministers: but howsoever, in this we need say no
more then that which Saint Austen aunsvveared to the like objection; that is,
D. Aug. lib. 2. contra litt. P^tiliam.
that Christ allbeit he knevv the Pharisaees to be hypocrites, yeat he vvoulde
not derogate from their power, and authority of Moses chair, vvherin they
sat, and did discharge, though with evil life, that priestelie function.


M. And does it not seem unto you a melancholicke matter, to have such
solicitude, and live with such continual care of a man's soul, and after
all to put him self at the feet of a sinful man, as well as him self,
and there to throvv his own honor in the duste, and as it were to sou^de
against him self a trumpe of infamy?


^. It there were any other board or table to save our selves upon, after
the miserable shipwreck of our souls, or if it were possible to gain
heaven with only beleeuinge, and live as we list, or if true virtue, and
valor could be gained with loyteringe, it might well seem (as you say) a
melancholic life, to stand in such awe of Gods displeasure; 1. Petr. 1. and
(...).
and to vvorcke our salvation in fear, and tremblinge as the Apostle Saint
Peter does counsel us: but the case so standinge, as in deed it does, and
that this life is a momente whereon depends aeternitie, I assure my self it
is most true which the Scripture affirms, Proverb. 28. versi. 14.
Beatus vir qui semper est pauidus, Blessed is the man that is always in
fear; and again, Melius est ire ad domum Luctus, Ecclesiastis. ^. 7. versi. 3.
quam ad domum conuiuij, It is beter to be in a house of mourninge, then a
house of banquettes; and Solomon after the trial of all pleasures, Ibid. c.
2. and ver. 2.
confessed that, Risum reputani errorem, and gaudio dixi, quid frustra de^
ciperis, I accounted laughter as an error, and to gladness I said, why
art thou in vain deceived. And consequentelye it must needs be madness for
auoydinge a little humiliation of our selves in this world, and that by
Christ commanded, to endaunger the exaltation of our soul to future, and
aeternall honor. But to speak more to the purpose, I deny that in our
religion this follovveth, but rather the contrary, as by experience we see it
daily verified, that none live more merry, and at hearts ease, then those that
most often go to confession, and make most diligente examine of their
conscience; because a good conscience is in truth a daily banquete, the
Scripture also teachinge us, that the just man does always begin with
his own accusations, Prove. cap. 18. versi. 17.
Iustus prior est accusator sui. And the frivolous fear of infamy by
confessions, molesteth no wise or discrete person, consideringe the dreadful
obligation priests have of silence in this behalf; which is so great, as
none greater in the whole law of nature, God, and his Church; yea so
strayte, that allthoughe he should suffer all torments, and tyrannies
possible, he is bound notwithstanding, to keep it with such rigor, as
neither by his looks, gesture, words, nor any other action, or sign, may
be gathered, or suspected any thing which was disclosed to him in
confession: and this is so exactely observed, and so known to all
Catholics, as of all other things this least troubles the^, God so
svveetlye prouidinge that never any inconvenience has ensued of this
confidence in confession: and a thousand commodities both spiritual, and
temporal, every day seen, and experienced in this kind; no frendeshippe, or
fidelity in the Christian world, being comparable to that, which is every
where found betvvixte the penitente, and the ghoastelye father. And the lack
heerof, Norimberga.
even in some countries infected with Luthers haeresie, has been discovered to
be of so great consequence for the common wealth, that they wear not
ashamed to ask again of the Emperor Charles the fifte, the use of this
Sacrament, as besides others the learned Sotus then the Emperoures confessoure
does testify. Sot. in. 4 sent. d. 18. q. 1 ar. 1 Sur. in histor.
wherefore happy be that infamy, or disgrace, which does put us in
credit, and grace with God, and blessed that trumpe which does confound us
in this world, that we may eschew the dreadful terror of that other
trompette, which in the voice of an Archaungell, must call us to account in
the later day, at Gods Tribunal; where they that now be ashamed to confess
their sins in the ear of CHRIST'S minister, must have patience (and
without remedy) to have all their offenses published in the ears, and eyes
of all the world: allbeit even in this life we see every day, that nothing
is more ordinary in our unfortunate country, then to see the best^
protestauntes dye in despair, and live with a continual hell of their
conscience, their Religion teachinge them to know, and giuinge them liberty
to commit sin, but not affordinge any remedies to be rid of it, nor
means to disburden their conscience thereof; only the vain imagination of a
lively faith excepted, which in deed is to ridiculous a refuge, for so
greeuious a tormente as mortal sin brings to a Christian conscience.
VVheras on the other side the Catholic faith, as it teaceth to fly, and
fear sin, as the face of a serpente; so after yt is committed, has many
helps to overcome it, and especially this most comfortable Sacrament of
confession, as they best know, that are most acquainted with it.


M. I like your discourse, and I could for a need recounte you some notable
examples in confirmation of this verity, but we have been to long allreadye
in this point; let us come to the next: why call you the Sacrament of the
sick, extreme unction?


D. Because it is the last of all Sacramental Unctions; for the first is
given in baptism; the second in Confirmation; the third in priestehood; and
this the last in our infirmity, which also ordinarily is given in the
end of our lives, at what time it is wont to be taken, allthoughe some be
therein to negligente, and differ it longer then is conueniente; for this
Sacrament in deed is not to be required before there is danger of death, nor
to be differred till the sickness be grown so great that there is no more
hope of life, to the end it may be more effectual to him that takes it so as
the true time to take this Sacrament is, when as physicians judge that the
sickness is perilous, and that humayne remedies as it may seem are not
sufficient: which is the cause why this holy oil, is not given to the^,
which are put to death by justice, because they neither are sick, nor have
hope to live, as is manifest.


M. Your aunsvveare contents me, and for as much as of holy^ order, I need
not here enquire any further, consideringe that this Sacrament belongs
only to mature, and learned persons, and such as have no need of our
instruction, I will only ask you a word or two, concerning the
Sacrame^te of Matrimony, and so conclude all this matter: I pray you what is
necessary to make true matrimony?


D. Three things: first, that the persons be able to have copulation, that
is, have sufficient age, be not kin within the fourth degree, have no
solemn vovv of chastity, and the like. Secondelie, where the Council of
Trente is received, that there be witness of the contracte, and in
particulare, the Curate, or Parish priest be present: Thirdelie, that the
consent of both parties be free, voluntary, and without force, or fear of
importance, and that it be expressed with words, or signs thereto
aequiualente; so that vvhichsoeuer of these three fail, the marriage, or
matrimonye were not validous, or effectual.


M. 1. Corinthians. 7.
And which is better to marye, or to be a Virgen?


D. Saint Paul has allreadye resolved this quaestion, saying that he which
joins him self in marriage, does well; but he which does not, with intent
to keep his virginity, does better: and the reason is, because, allthoughe
matrimony be a Sacrament, and represente the inseparable union of CHRIST,
and his Church, (which is the cause that there is no power upon earth to
dispense, or give leave for those that are once lavvfullye united to change
for an other, be it man, Math. 13. Ambros. libr. 1. de virg.
be it woman) yeat in effect matrimonye is but a humayne thing, but
virginitye is a thing Angelical: Matrimony is according to nature; but
virginitye is above nature: and not only virginitye, but vvidovvhoad it self,
is better then matrimonye, as diverse of the holy fathers affirm, expoundinge
that parable of our Savior of the good seed, Cypr. de babitu virg. Hieron.
lib. 1. co^t. Iouinia^ Augu. de serua^d. virg. c. 44.
which fructified some thirty, which they apply to marriage; some
threescore, which they refer to widow; and some a hundredth which they
accommodate to virginity.


M. And which of these Sacraments is the principal?


D. The Real presence. Vide Ignat. ad Smyrnens Theodor. Dialogo. 3. Areopag.
lib. de Eccles. Hierarch c. de Euch. Justin. Apolog. 2. Irenae. lib 4 c. 32.
Origin. hom. 9. in Leuit. Athan. ^rat. de fide ex Theodor. Dia logo. 2. Eusebius.
Emyss. hom. de corpore. D. Basil. in regulis breu. 171. Epiph. in Anchorat.
Theophil. Alex. l. 2. de pasch. Ambr. l. 4. de sacram c. 5. Hieron. q. 2. ad
Hedibia^ Aug. in ps. 33 and 98. Bern. sermon. de Caenae D. Chrysostom. ho. 83. in
Mat. Hilari. l. 8. de Trini. Tertul. l. 4. co^tr. Marcion Damas. l. 4. de fide
Orthodoxa c. 14 Conc. Nicen. Ephesinu^ Trident. cit. Goinge to Haereticall
Churches.
Sir the blessed Sacrament of Euchariste, or Communion, because in it we do not
only receive the grace of God (as in other Sacraments) but also the true
body of Christ him self, being really present, true God, and man, under the
visible form of bread, transubstantiated into his body, who is the fountain
of all grace, and goodness.


M. What ought a Catholic man to do to be devout unto this blessed
Sacrament.


D. Three things: first, to visit the same every day once in the morninge,
and once at night before he go to bed; secondly, to receive it often with
reverence, being first confessed, and coming fasting unto it. Thirdly, to
accompanye it always when it goes abroad.


M. What difference is there between our communion, and that of the heretics?


D. Very great as can be: for ours being a Sacrament, theyres is none at all,
nor gives any grace, nor has any goodness in in it, being a naked elemente of
this world, and nothing but bread, and wine only, and whosoever honors
the same, commits ydolatry, and sins deadly to receive it.


M. God forbid then, that any Catholic should communicate with them in any
such a false, and feigned Sacrament: and do you think it is lavvfull to go to
their Churches with them.


D. In no case, for Saint Paul teaches us that there is no communication of
light, and darkness, of the table of God, and the table of the devil, nor of
Christ, and Belial: For what else are their Sacraments but the calves of
Samaria, and their Churches, but the altares of division, and their ministers
but the priests of Hieroboam, mere lay, and saeculare persons, and by
saeculare power erected against the union, truth, and honor of true
Solomon's temple, CHRIST'S Catholic Church, and doctrine; and I pray you
what proportion, or comparison is their betvvixte the dignity of the
honorable order, and unction of Melchisedech, and the letters patentes of
Queen Elzabeth to make a Bishop?


M. Why, Haeretiques, Christ's enemies.
do you make them to deny Christ also?


D. In words they confess him, but in effect they utterly deny him, and his
kingdom.


M. How so?


D. Because his kingdom is the Church, partly in heaven, triumphante, partly
in earth militante, partly under the earth patience, from whence they take
away Limbus Patrum, Limbus Puerorum, and Purgatory, and so leave him nothing
but hell: upon earth they corrupt, and dismember his holy Scripture, they
pull down his Images, Altares, and Churches, they abhor, and abolish the
sign of the Cross, like as devils do; they deny his spouse the Church, and
mother of truth; they take away her Sacraments, they hate Gods chief
Vicare, and lieutenaunt general upon earth, and call him Antichrist: they
despise all her Doctoures, and ancient fathers: they bannish all good works,
of penance, and perfection; all orders of Religion; and Christ's holy body,
and blood in the holy sacrifice of the Mass, they blaspheme, and throvv out
of their Churches. In heaven they blaspheme his saints, and refuse to pray
unto them, or to his blessed mother: they rejecte the help of his Angels, and
as much as in them lies, they take away all relics, and venerable memories,
of his honorable servants: I pray you what have they left him, or what
remaynes next, but to deny him, or his father, as many of them do daily,
more, and more degeneratinge into atheism, the more is the pity.


M. Truly so it is: and you have reason therefore to avoid all communication
with them in things belonginge to Gods service, even as for bodylie health
you vvoulde fly the plague; for there is the chair of spiritual pestilence:
But tell me what else remains to be fayde of the Christian doctrine.


D. There remain to rehearse the works of mercy corporal, Works of Mercy.
and spiritual.


M. Which be they?


D. The works of mercy corporal are seven. First, Mat. 25. Tob 12.
to feed the hungry. 2. To give drink to the thirsty. 3. To cloth the naked.
4. To visit the sick, and imprisoned. 5. To lodge pilgrims. 6. To redeem
captives. 7. To bury the dead.


M. And what are the spiritual?


D. First, To give good counsel in doubtful cases. 2. To teach the ignorant.
3. To comfort the sorrowful. 4. To correct or direct those that err. 5. To
pardon injuries. 6. To have patience with our neighbors fraylty, or
imperfections. 7. To pray for the living, and dead.


M. Have you learned any cause, which may excuse a man from obligation of
these vvorckes of mercy?


D. Three causes I have heard do excuse, the first, for want of ability,
as he which lacks knowledge, can not give counsel, and Lazarus could not
give alms, but take them only, God so disposinge that the rich procure to
save their souls by the way of mercy, and the poor by the way of
patience; the second is, when there is no importante, or notable necessitye,
for we are not bound absolutely to succoure, but those, that have no means
to help them selves, nor other that will do yt for them; allbeit the truth
is, that the true merciful mind, never expects such vrgente necessitye, but
is ready to help all, and at all times. The third is, when a person is in a
state of higher perfection, then that he is bound to attend to these
obligations of active life, as are Heremites, or Anchoretes, and contemplative
persons, which notwithstanding with their prayers, may supplye their
temporal want, or inability, for this is all so one, and not of the least
of the spiritual vvorckes of mercy.


M. Rehearse also the virtues, gifts, and beatitudes.


D. Theological Virtues.
There are three Theological Virtues, faith, hope, and charity.


M. I pray you tell me, saying you are come so far, if you remember the
particulares of these Theological Virtues, and why they are so called.


D. They are called Theological, (which as I have been taught is a greek
word) because they especially depend of God, and have him for their
particular objecte. And the first, which is Faith, Faith.
has this propretie, and office, to illuminate the understanding, and eleuate
the same to believe firmly, all that which God by the means of his Church
Catholic does reveal unto us, allbeit the thing it self be otherwise
hard, and above nature, or natural reason, as for example, that a Virgen
should bear a child without detrimente of her virginitye, and the cause
hereof, or r^ther the ground is, because faith is founded in the infallible
truth of God, which is impossible to be false.


M. And what things must we necessarily believe with this virtue?


D. Principally, and distinctelye the Articles of the Creed; or at least
those, which the Church does solemnize through the year, as CHRIST'S
Incarnation, Natiuitye, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, the coming of the
holy ghoaste, and the B. Trinitye. Secondly, all that ever shall be declared unto
us, as true, by holy Church, and thirdly, in vvorcke to show we are
Christians, when we are bound thereunto: as for example without necessity,
only for the Churches precepte to abstain from flesh on fasting days, and
the like which haeretiques will not.


M. Hope.
And what is hope, or what is the office thereof?


D. It is a supernatural virtue, where with we hope in God, and the propre
office thereof is to lift up our will to the hope of aeternall faelicitie,
to the which we can not aspire by humayne forces, and it is founded in the
infinite goodness or bounty of God, which he has manifested unto us, in his
son JESUS our Savior, by whom he has adopted us, as his coheyres to the
kingdom of heaven, if we (being helped with his grace) do vvorcke
accordingelie.


M. Charity.
And what is Charity?


D. It is a supernatural virtue, which exalts our souls to the true love
of God above all things, not only as he is author of nature, but also as
giver of grace, and glory, which are both supernatural: and vvithall it
extends it self, to love all other creatures, which ought to be loved for
Gods sake, as especially our neighbor, which is created (as our self is) to
Gods image; which virtue is therefore of Saint Paul called the greatest of
these three, 1. Corint. 13.
because whosoever has it cannot be damned, D. Thom. 22. q. 25. ar. 3.
except he first loose his charity, and who has it not can no way be
saved allbeit he has faith, and all other gifts, and virtues.


M. I am glad to hear you speak solike a Divine: let us see if you be as
cunninge in the Cardinal Virtues, and first what, and how many be they?


D. Cardinal Virtues.
They are four, and are so called, because they are the chief of all moral,
and humayne virtues; prudence, which governs the understanding; justice,
which rules the will; temperance, which guydeth the sensual, or
concupiscible portion; fortitude, or provvesse, which moderateth the irascible
part of the soul.


M. Prudence.
You have spoken like a cunninge Philosopher, tell me then what is the propre
office of Prudence?


D. To show in every action, or designemente of ours, the due end, and
purporte, with the means convenient to obtain the same, with convenient
circumstances thereto belonginge, and therefore is vvorthilie called the
queen, and maistresse of the other virtues, like unto the eye in man's body,
or salt to our meat, or the sun in this world. The contraries of this
virtue are imprudence, which others call temeritie, rashness, or
inconsideration, and craft, or suttletie, whose quality is to seek out the
end, and means thereunto, but refers all to his own private commodity,
and interest, which in truth is the greatest follye of all, because it leeseth
the chiefest good of all, which is God, to gain a little vvorldelye
co^tentment.


M. Then what is justice, Justice.
and her propre office?


D. Justice is a virtue which gives unto every one his own, and so her
duetye is to make aequalitie in all human affairs, and contractes, which is
the foundation of peace, and concord: for if every man would be contented
with his own good, there would be no war, nor discord, and this virtue
has also two contraries, injustice which takes more then is due, and
inuadeth other men's goods; and rigor or excess of justice, which is when a
man seeks for the extremity in all things.


M. Fortitude.
What is Fortitude, or valiau^ce, and her duty?


D. It is a virtue, vvherby we are made prompte, and ready to overcome all
difficulties, in a good, and just cause, even death it self, when it is for
Gods glory, and to perform our duties, as appears in valiaunte
souldioures, and Catholic martyrs: the vices opposite hereunto are
tymorousnes or fear, and audaciousnes, or foolehardinesse.


M. Temperaunce.
To conclude then, tell me what is temperance, and what is her especial
office, and duty.


D. It is a virtue, which bridleth all sensual delights, and makes that a
man do use them with such measure, and moderation, as reason commands. The
contrary vices are intemperance, and insensibilitie or sencelesnes, which is,
the first: when excess is committed in eatinge, or drinkinge, the second,
when a man refuses that necessary, and alovvable pleasure which naturally
is found in eatinge, yeat fevv in this later offend; such is our frayltie.


M. And the gifts of the holy ghoast, which are they? Gifts of the holy
Ghoaste.



D. The gifts of the holy ghoaste are seven: sapience, or wisdom,
understanding; counsel, fortitude, knowledge, piety, and fear of God.


M. To what effect are these gifts, or wherein do they help us?


D. Effects of these gifts.
They help us to attain the perfection of Christian life, and make as it were
a ladder to heaven, beginning from the last, which is also the lowest, to
wit, the fear of God, and may serve for the first step: the second is
piety, or godliness, because of Gods fear it follows, that we desire to
fulfill his holy will, and pleasure: the third is knowledge, because he
which is desirous to do Gods will, craves at Gods hands the knowledge of
his commandments, and God by diverse means, as good books, and preachers,
and holy inspirations, does teach him what is necessary. The fourth, is
fortitude; because he that desires, and knovveth how to do Gods will, and
serve him, finds also many difficulties, and tentations of the flesh, the
world, and the devil, and so by this gift is strenghthened against them,
and ouercometh.

The fifte is Counsel, vvherevvith the enemies craft is encountered, and
vanquished, because he uses vviles when forces fail him.

The sixth is Understanding, because a man being well practiced in action,
God draws him forwards to contemplation, and teaches him to understand,
and penetrate the divine Mysteries.

The seventh is Sapience, or wisdom, which is the top of perfection,
because he is truly wise, which after he comes by contemplatio^ to know
the prime cause of all things, which is God, adds thereunto charity,
vvherevvith he ordains all his actions, and directs them, unto God as the
final end, and ^omplement of all things.


M. What, and how many are the beatitudes, or blessings which CHRIST has
taught us?


D. Beatitudes.
The beatitudes are eight.

1. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

2. Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the earth.

3. Blessed are they which mourn, for they shallbe comforted.

4. Blessed are they which hunger, and thirst after justice, for they shallbe
satisfied.

5. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find mercy.

6. Blessed are the clean of heart; for they shall see God.

7. Blessed are the peaceable, for they shallbe called the children of God.

8. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for justice sake, for theyres is
the kingdom of heaven.


M. This seems such an other ladder of life, as was that of the gifts of
the holy ghoaste, can you tell me the manner of it also?


D. Yea sir; for in the first three steps, or degrees our Savior teaches
us to take away the impedimentes of perfection, which leads us to true
beatitude, and these impedimentes which are ordinary, and general in this
life, are first; the desires of riches, against which is the voluntary
contempt of them, signified in the firsth beatitude: the second of honor,
against which is meekenes the second beatitude, which teaches us to yealde
to all men, and fly emulation: the third is of pleasure against which is
penance, and sorrow of our sins with contempt of this world, insinuated
in the third beatitude. In the other two next folovvinge, is put down the
perfection of active life, which consists in justice, and mercy, a^ it is
plain in the fourth, and fifth beatitude. In the two last^ follows the
perfection of life contemplative, which is taught in the sixth beatitude, to
consiste in cleanes of heart, and in the peace of our souls, which is
prescribed in the seventh because then is the kingedom^ of our souls at rest,
and truly pacificall, when to contemplation is joined perfect charity
which makes us true children of God, and like vnt^ him.

The eyghth, as Saint Auste^ says, is indeed no new degr^^ of perfection,
but it declares unto us a manifest sign, to know that party which is
arrived to perfection, that is to say, to suffer vvillingelie persecution, and
affliction; for as the goulde is tried in the furnace, so is the just man
proved in tribulation, by which he is afterward exalted in life
everlasting, according to the measure, and quantity of that, which he has
suffered; which is one of the principal causes, why God has permitted so
many persecut ons in his Church, giuinge to his dearest friends, most
occasions to imitate him in this, as to whom he has allotted greater
participation of his glory, and majesty in heaven; and all these comfortable
beatitudes, so reco^mended unto us by our Savior, were never understood
either of the vain philosophers of oulde time, or the licentious heretics in
all ages, who put their felicity in far differente matters.


M. And which are the four last things.


D. The nouissima.
The four last things are these, death, judgment, or doomes day, hell, and
heaven.


M. Have you any good points co^cerninge these things in store, to help
your devotion according to that of the wise man, Remember thy last things,
Eccl. c. 7. ver. 40.
and thou shall never sin?


D. I have (Sir) of death these three points of consideration: The first that
it is most certain, and no man can escape it; The second that the hour
thero^ is most uncertain, and many dye, when they least^ think of it.
Thirdlye, that i^ death all designementes exp^^^ and every man repentes him o^
all things amiss committed, or om tted. Of judgment; other three: first,
that it is of the most importante thing of all other, that is life, o^ death
aeternall. 2. The judge shallbe such a one which knovveth all things, and no
man can avoid his sentence, or resist his power, and execution: 3. It
shallbe in the sight of the whole world, so as no man can hyde him self. Of
hell: that it is so large as it comprehends all kind of torments, that can
be ymagined, so long thrt it shall never have end, so deep that there
shallbe no kind of comfort to mitigate the bitterness of those pains. Of
heaven. 3. other directelie contrary to those of hell; to be in joy, and
pleasure unspeakable, aeternall, most comfortable, without mixture of any
grief, or sorrow; to which we may add, that the joys of this presents life
are alvvayes little, short, and fevv, yeat mingled with many miseries, as on
the other side, the vvoes of this world are also fevv, short, and little,
and mixte with some kind of consolation; so as we may well conclude, that
they are clean out of their vvittes, which for love of the commodities of
this life, or fear of present tribulation, leese the title they have to
future comfort, or fall into aeternall damnation, from which God deliver us.
Amen.


M. Which are the fifteen Mysteries of the Rosarie? The. 15. Mysteries of the
Rosarie.



D. There are five which are called joyful, which are these.
1. The Annuntiatio^ of the Angel. 2. The Visitation of Saint Elizabeth. 3.
The Nativity of our Lord. 4. His Presentation in the Temple. 5. His
Disputinge being a child with the Doctors.
Other five are called sorrowful.
1. The first is Christ's prayer in the garden; 2. His VVhippinge at the
Pillar. 3. His Crovvninge with thorns. 4. His Caryenge of the Cross. 5. His
Crucifienge, and death.
Other five are called Glorious.
1. The Resurrection of our Lord. 2. His Ascension. 3. The Cominge of the
holy ghoaste. 4. The Assumption of our B. Lady. 5. Her Crovvninge above all
Au^gells.
M. And what is the Rosarie, or beads, can you tell?


D. Very well (...); it is nothing else but a form of recitinge the Pater
noster, and Aue Marie under a certain number for the exercise of our devotion
to CHRIST, and our B. Lady: and as there be diverse manners of recitinge,
these prayers so have they also diverse names as the Corona, which is in
honor of the. 63. years which our Lady lived in this world, and the
Rosarie, which is in honor of the Mysteries of CHRIST'S life, and Passion,
to the number of. 50. three times repeated, saying. 10. Aue Mary's for every
Pater noster.


M. And why say you so many A^e Mary's, and so fevv Pater nosters?


D. This no doubt was first instituted according to the devotion of the
inue^tor, or first author of this form of prayer: but because the great
Patriarche Saint Dominicke did in his time recomme^de this form of prayer to
all Catholics against the haeretiques of his time, it has ever since been in
especial estimation, and most freque^telie used of all Christians, the
Catholic Church having ever this custom to give more honor, and reverence
to those things which are most ^mpugned by her adversaries, as may appear
in the great honor is exhibited to the holy Cross, the B. Sacrament, and
the mother of God, whom heretics have always especially blasphemed, and
impugned. And allbeit the number of the Aue Mary's be greater, yeat does yt
nothing derogate from the service of God; saying all is principallye, and
finallye directed, and referred to his honor.


M. And is there any reason, why they should be ten rather then nine, or
eyghte, or any other number?


D. None but that I have specified, except peradventure because this number
also in Scripture is sometimes esteemed as sacred, and somevvhat appropriated
to holy things, as being the perfection, and sum of all primitive numbers;
for the which cause some note that the Magnificat, which our B. Lady sange
with such exultation of the holy ghoaste, conteyneth just ten versicles,
and is therefore compared to that decachorde, or instrumente of ten stringes,
vvherevvith her progenitoure King David was so delighted.


M. But were these numerall Mysteries (think you) the cause why this form
of prayer was instituted?


D. I think not truly; for allbeit these mysteries be very conueniente, and
help our devotion, yeat I have heard that the true beginning of these
numbers in prayenge was to help our memory, thereby to discharge this
exercise with more facility, and certainty.


M. Have you any example in the Scriptures, or Ecclesiastical Histories
vvherby this matter may be authorized, for the sectaries do very injuriouslye
speak of it.


D. No vvonder sir, for they herein follovv that spirit, of pride, and
impiety, which leads the^ more blinded in greater matters also: but we
are little to regard what enemies of devotion, and virtue calumniate, so long
as we are sure the wisdom of holy Church approves our doings, and it is
euidente in the Scripture that David did seven times a day pray, Psalm. 118.
and praise God, and Daniel three times every day adored tovvarde the holy
city, and Saint Bartholomew we read did bovv his knees to pray an hundred
times in every. Dan. c. 6. ver. 10.
24. hovvres: and Ecclesiastical aunciente histories record some. 1300.
years since of an heremite called Paulus which did carye. Pallad. ad Lausum.
sect. 20. and 21. Niceph. l. 11. c. 36. Cassiod. lib. 8. tripart. cap. 1.
300. little stones in a scrippe about his neck of purpose, to help his
memory in discharginge the task of prayers which he had appointed him self
to recite every day to Gods honor: and Saint Macarius was wont besides
his other labors to say every day an. 100. particulare prayers, and a
certain Virgen of the same time. 700. all which had need of some such
instrumente to help their memory, and now also to this day, the religious
heremites of Camaldoli in Hetruria use the Corone, or beads of. 33. Pater
nosters, and so many Aue Mary's in honor of the years which CHRIST lived
in this world: and some have not amiss noted the proportion, that there are
just so many syllables in the Aue Marie which the Church now uses, as
there are Aue Mary's in the Corona of our lady, which are 63. as has been
spoken.


M. Why were it not enoughe to say once the Pater noster, and Aue Marie, can
not God as well hear us with one, as with an hundred prayers?


D. This objection is ordinary to protestants, as well in this as in many
other matters, the devil being an enemy to much prayer, and therefore vvoulde
feign have it quickelie concluded; but this was not the spirit of our
Savior. which vvatched whole nights in prayer to give us example; nor of
the Prophet David, and Hieremie especially, who seem to be delighted with
repeatinge the same manner of speech when it was such as pleased the^, and
was to the purpose, as particularly in the Psalms is euide^te where
nothi^ge is more ordinary, and usual then to say sometimes every second
verse, And his mercy is for evermore.


M. I need no farther answer for this: let us pass to some other matter.


Of the Seven Capital Sins. CHAP. IX.
M. WELL now let us speak of sin, Seven Capital Sins. Vide Cassian.
Collat. 5. and l. 5. Greg. l. 31. moral. cap. 3^ Chrysos. hom. 43. ad popul.
Antioch. Prosper. ad Demetr. and l. 3. de vita conte^platiua cap. 2 Greg. lib.
23. moral. c. 7. and lib. 34 cap. 17 17. Isidor. l. 2. de summo be^^ c. 31.
Bern. de gradibus humilit. C^ss. degri^cip. vit.
tell me how many kind of sins are there.


D. Two: that is original, and actual.


M. What is original sin?


D. It is that sin, vvherevvith we are borne and have as it were by
inheritance from our first father Adam, and is purged by baptism.


M. And actual sin how is it divided?


D. In to mortal, and venial, and of mortal, some cry for vengeance to
heaven, and they are 4. some are against the holy ghoaste, and they are. 6.
and some are called Capital, and are. 7.


M. Which are the.7. deadly sins, and why are they called Capital, or
deadly.


D. They are these: pride, covetousness, lechery, wrath, glotony, envy, and
sloth, which are called deadly, or mortal, not because they are always
damnable, for they may be so sleyght in some circumstance, as they vvoulde be
but venial, but because they are the roots, or heads of all other, and are
the principal, and therefore called capital.


M. What is the difference betvveene a mortal sin, and a venial?


D. A mortal sin does kill the soul, depriuinge it of Gods grace, and love,
which is a kind of spiritual life inducinge life everlasting. But a venial
sin does only weaken Gods grace in us, and dispose the soul to further
evil, which is, to wax cold in Gods service, and love.


M. Why is it called venial.


D. Because it is more easily pardoned, and so often times it is forgyuen
without confession, by contrition, by hearing mass, by taking holy water,
or holy bread, knockinge on the breast, by the bishop, or preachers
blessinge, by saying the Pater noster, or confiteor, etc.


M. And is the use of Holy Water gathered out of the Scripture. Holy Water.



D. It may right well, for in the old law there were diverse waters of
purification, appointed by God, but this which we use that it should be
perpetually kept in all Churches, Breular. Romae: and in eius vita.
and houses, was ordained by the glorious Martyr Pope Alexander the first of
that name, and the sixte Pope from Saint Peter, and by daily experience we
find, that yt has great virtue against the devil, and all his practices.


M. But tell me, if a man in mortal sin do any good work, as alms, or
fasting, etc. shall it avail him?


D. Not for merit of grace, or glory, but for temporal good, and health; or
happily to bring him into knowledge of sin, and true repentance, they may
profit him.


M. Much ought we then to fly all mortal sin, seth it breeds so evil
effects, depriuinge us of God, who created us; of glory, which he promised
us; of the merits of CHRIST his Passion, which redeemed us, and of the
fruit of all good works which might otherwise with his grace save us: but
say, if you know any remedy against them.


D. Sir there are many, but especially prayer, and alms deeds, with
fasting, the obtaininge of the. 7. contrary virtues, and diligent guarde of
the three powers of the soul, and of the five corporal senses.


M. Which are the. 7. contrary virtues?


D. Humilitye, Liberality, Chastitye, Patience, Temperance, Charity, and
diligence, with alacrity in Gods service, for sloth, is a sadness, heaviness,
or as it were a vvearynes of devotion, and godliness.


M. Powers of the soul.
And which are the three powers of the soul?


D. Memory, understanding, and will.


M. Which are the five corporal senses?


D. Seeing, hearing, smellinge, touching, and feelinge.


M. But since you made mention of the. 6. sins against the holy ghoaste, I
pray you tell me which are they?


D. Desperation of salvation. 2. presumption to be saved without merits. 3.
to impugn the known truth. 4. envy of an others grace. 5. obstinacye in
sin. 6. final impenitence.


M. And what propretie have these sins above other?


D. This: that as sins committed by ignorance are said to be peculiarly
against the son of God, to whom is attributed Sapience, or wisdom, and
sins of frayltye are said to be against the father, to whom is attributed
power, and might, so sins of pure malice as all these are, are said to be
against the holy ghoaste to whom is attributed bounty, or goodness; which
is contrary to malice, and therefore are said to be vnperdonable, either in
this world, or the next, because such sins very rarely come to have true
repentance, even as a disease is termed incurable, when although it is not
impossible, yeat it is very hard to recover of it.


M. And which are the. 4. sins that cry for vengeance?


D. Voluntarye murder. 2. the sin of the flesh against nature. 3 oppression
of the poor 4. to defraude the work man of his wages.


M. Why are these sins said to cry into heaven?


M. Because they are so manifest, that they cannot be excused, and God has
often times extraordinarily shevved his auersion, and detestation of them, by
most severe punishments, and unexpected discoueries of the offenders.


M. To conclude, tell me how you say grace before meat, and after, for this
also belongs to a Christian to know.

D. Before meat, I say thus, Making the sign of the Cross.

BEnedicite Resp. Dominus Nos, Grace before meat.
and ea quae sumpturi sumus been dicat Deus Trinus, and vnus. Pater, and
Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus. Respond. Amen.

And after meat, I say thus.

LAVS Deo, Pax viuis, After meat.
Requies defunctis. Pater noster, etc. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem.
Respond. Sed libera nos a malo. Amen.

Agimus tibi gratias Omnipot^ns Deus, pro vniuersis donis, and beneficiis tuis,
qui viuis and regnas in saecula saeculorum. Respond Ame^. CHRISTVS JESUS cet
nobis suam pecem and suam benedictionem, and post mortem vitam aeternam.
Respond. Amen.


M. One thing in this matter you must needs answer me, for I have
differred it of purpose to this place, Service in the vulgar tongue.
as the best vvherin the case may be decided, and it is this: what should be
the cause why Catholics are so addicted to the Latin tongue, that not only
their office of the Church, as mass, and matte^s, and the administration of
the holy Sacraments, the Scripture, and all solemn ceremonies are discharged
in this tongue, but that the grace it self which is a private, and
domestical matter they scarce know to do it but in this language.


D. For diverse substantial considerations.


M. Which be they? for I vvoulde be glad to hear them.


D. First in respect of the Scripture we deny that which haeretiques so
often objecte that the people is prohibited to read it in the vulgar tongue:
Index libror. prohibit. edit. a Pio. 4. rega. 4. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 8. and
cap. 9.
for so it be done with discrete leave, and permission of the ordinary, or
Ecclesiastical superior, and with hope of fruit, and utility to the reader,
it is every where granted even by the Popes authority as now you see the
Remes testamente is permitted in England, thought in public, and commonly
without distinction of persons, it be with just cause forbidden. And this
being so aunciente, and received a custom in Gods Church as it is, and that
in the whole world, this were enoughe to satisfy any modeste mind: but it
is also confirmed even by example of Gods chosen people in the oulde
testame^te, 2. Esd^a. c. ^.
where we find that after their return from the captivity of Babylon,
when the Hebrew tongue was forgotten, and the Chalday, or Syriacke only
used, so as they understood not the law when it was read the in the Hebrew,
yeat they read it as it was, and that in public, interpretinge the same as
now the preacher does the Gospel to the people: which is insinuated also
in those words of the Gospel, Ioann. cap. 7.
Turba haec, quae non nouit legem. That is, this multitude which does not
know the law. Secondelye, by the example of the Apostles the^ selves, Romans
10. Coloss. 1. Mar. vlt. Irenae. lib. 5. cap. 3.
which allthoughe they preached the Gospel in all countries of the world,
and founded Churches in all nations, yea, and had the gift of tongues to
speak what language they vvoulde, yeat is there no one remnaunte of any
vvorcke, or writing of theyres, neither is there any testimony of any
aunciente writer, that specifieth any thing written by them but only in
Hebrew Greek, Damasc. in vita B. Petr A^drian. Finus. l. 6. Flageli co^tra
Iudaeos. c. 80. and lib. 8 c. 62. and Petr. Anton. Beuter. annot. 9.
or Latin. For Saint Marckes Gospel, the opinion of diverse is, that he first
vvrote it in Latin, and then in Greek: and so Saint Paul vvrote in Greek
to the Romans, and Saint John to the Parthians, whose natural language
was far differente. Thirdelie, by the use of the universal, or Catholic
Church; for as Saint Austen says, Augustine. Epist. 118. lib. 4. contr.
Donatist. cap. 24. S. Leo sermon. 2. de jejunto Pe^tecost.
to dispute against that which the whole Church of God uses is most
insolente madness* yea as the same Doctor, and Saint Leo affirms, that whose
beginning is not known, and is generally used in Gods Church, may justelie
be deemed to proceed of Apostolical tradition: now, that no aunciente writer
makes mention of any other translation (at least for the first four
hundred years) exceptinge in these three tongues which were sanctified upon
our Sauioures Cross, Joan. 19. and Hilar. praefat. in Psalm.
it is certain: and that this dured for many hundred years after, over all
provinces in the world, it is manifest even unto England it self, Beda
libr. 1. histor. cap. 1. Thom. walden. tom. 3. sacr. tit. 3. and 4.
as it is testified by our most learned, and authentical vvriters, and in
France, and all the vveste Church, the same testify other as aunciente
authors; or if this be not true, let our adversaries show us when this
custom was brought in, Albin. Alcuin. de divine. offic. Amalarius Trinire^sis.
and when it began, or where, in all Christendom.


M. Truly these arguments are passinge good; especially this last does
seem to me to demo^strate this matter; but yeat, have you no proof that is
grounded in reason it self upon which you may think this custom brought
in?


D. Yeas sir that there are, and those very pregnaunte: and first it was
necessary for the conservation of unity in Gods Church, that all the
Scriptures should be read in that tongue which was common in the whole
world, which was first the Greek. and after the Latin, when the Roman
Empire increased; and other wise no man vvoulde have list to here God served
but in his own country language, there could hardly be kept any general
cou^cells, in fine there could be little communicatio^ of true Christians of
diverse nations, one with an other. Seco^delie, if there were any reason why
it should be otherwise, it is that, of better understanding the Scriptures,
but experience does teach, that this is most false; saying the most learned
have much ado to understand them, Lib. 2. de Doct. Christian c. 6. and
sentent. 79. Prosperi.
and Saint Austen confesses them to be full of obscurity, and most deep
dificulties, howsoever they understand the letter, or language. And so Saint
Basile, and Saint Gregory Nazianzen are reported to have studied the
Scriptures thirteen, or fourteen years, before they durst to preach or
teach others: and how will you have a poor crafts man to understand them?
especially those places, which depe^de upon the propriety of the Hebrew,
Greek, or Latin phrase, Hilar. in extrem. libr. de. Cassian. Collat. 10. c.
2.3.4. and. 5. Aeneas Syluius de Origin. Boem^r.
which can not be understood but of those which possess the language: and of
the Scripture not well understood that all haeresies have begun, the holy
fathers do often advertise. David George for example had the Scriptures in his
mother tongue, and yeat he so little understood them, that he thought to prove
himself by them to be Gods son, Epist. 1. Basil.
and the true Messiah; to omit a thovvsande other sca^dalls that every day
in our country, and other places grow by this occasion. Tirdelie hence
vvoulde follovv, that every age all most, we must also change the
translation of the bible, no language allmoste, but once in an hundred years
sufferinge great mutation, and it is not without especial providence of God
that the Latin tongue has endured so many ages incorrupted. Greg. libr. 4.
Dialog c. 56. Chrysostom hom. 24. in Marth. Dionys c. 1. et vlt. Eccl. Hierarch.
Or ge. hom. 5. in Numer. Basil. de Spiritu Sa^cto cap. 17.
Fourthelie the gravity, and majesty of Religion, require the use of that
tongue which is most conueniente for sacred mysteries, which in good reason
cannot be the vulgar tongue; for as much as in the holy mysteries there are
many particulares which ought to be known to those only whom they do
concern according to our Sauioures saying, that pearls are not to be
thrown to swine, as diverse of the aunciente fathers also do teach us:
VVhervppon is that famous reprehension of Saint Hierome that all sorts of
people abuse the holy Scriptures, D. Hier. Epis. ad Paulinum Theodoret. l. 4
hist. c. 17.
and that other renowned answer of S. Basile to the Emperoures clercke of
the kitchen, which vvoulde needs argue with that learned Doctor, and great
master of the world, To thee quod S. Basile, It belongs to make good
potage for thy master, and not to make a hodgepodge of holy Scripture. Which
reprehension, how often it might be used now adays in those countries where
it is with vulgar translatio^s profaned, I need not here specify; the
poor ministers, and preachers being every day ouerborne, by tapsters, and
taylers, and other such illuminate elders of their congregation, the bible
hanginge al most at every aleknightes girdle, and no tavern so base wherein
Geneua Psalms do not rattle; the Prophet Ezechiel being in every vveauers
mouth, and the most profounde revelation of Saint John, is become every
cobblers Prophecy.


M. But what can you say to that objection of the adversaries. 1. Corint. 14.
Where Saint Paul seems to reprehende prayer in an unknown tongue, and
that of the Prophet; this people honors me with their lips but their
heart is far from me, and especially the end of divine offices being the
consolation, and aedification of the hearers.


D. Sir, this is not so: for the end of divine service in Gods Church is not
to instruct the people, for to that end are the sermons, and preachinges
appointed, by which means the people come to know all that has been read in
the Gospel, but the end of divine service is the exhibition of hi^ due
honor to God, which may be done asvvell in Latin as in English, for the
prayer of the Church is not made to the people, but to God for the people; so
that it i^ sufficient that God understand i^ thought the people do not: and
so we see the Church does p^^y for those also that are absente yea those
that often vvoulde not be prayed for as are diverse grievous sinners: and in the
oulde law Leuit. 16. God commanded that the priest entringe the sanctuary
should pray for him self, and the people which remained notwithstanding
without, and neither understood, nor yeat heard, nor savv what the priest
prayed for them as it is manifest in the first of Saint LuKe, of Zacharias:
and yeat who doubts but their prayer was profitable to the people? Origin.
hom. 20 in Ioann. Chryso^. hom. 3. de Lazaro D. Aug. l b. 3 de doct. Christ c.
9. and lib. 6. de bapt. c. 25.
Whereupon both Origin, and Saint Chrysostom, doubt not to say that al
best man do not understand that which is read, or heard in holy Scripture
the very hearing, or readinge of them, does breed sanctimonie, in our
souls, and Saint Aust^n says the same of every private man's prayer; no
otherwise then the Jews used many ceremonies in the oulde law, which they
never understood, no more then our poor country people do the Greek, and
Latin: who in all Catholic countries have books of private prayer in
their own language. Those places you alleged make not for the purpose, the
one, that is the Prophet speakinge against hyprocrites, the other being
understood, when the prayer, or Prophecy, vvherof is there speech, is in a
tongue that no body in the whole Church where they live, understands;
which can never fall out in the Latin, and yeat even the^ Saint Paul
confesses, that his thanckesgiuinge to God is good, and therefore not
without fruit, as Saint Chrysostom does there also expound it: and there
is no doubt, but that place is especially understood, of gifts
supernatural, and extraordinary which here is not called in question, and
this may suffice in my conceyte for this matter.


M. You have reason, and those which will see more heerof, and of other
controversies not examined in this instruction for brevity sake, and what else
belongs to the defense of Catholic Religion, lack not learned vvriters of
this time, which have abounda^telie heerin labored, and therefore I am
content also to conclude, and give over any father quaestioninge with you.


LAVS DEO.
THE CHAPters.
THE First Chapter of the sign of the Cross. Fol. 2 The second chapter of
the duties of a true Christian. Fol. 5 The third chapter, of the Creed. Fol.
6 The fourth chapter of the Pater noster. Fol. 41 The fifte chapter of the Aue
Marie. Fol. 46 The sixte chapter of the. 10. comm^undementes. Fol. 55 The
seventh chapter of the five commandments of the Church. Fol. 72 The eyghte
chapter, of the seven Sacraments. Fol. 88 The ninth chapter of the seven
Capital Sins. Fol. 123
A TABLE OF the chief points of doctrine, and controversies handled in this
instruction.
A
Aue Maria. Fol. 46
B
Baptism. Fol. 25 Beatitudes. Fol. 115
C
Christian. Fol. 2 Cross. Fol. 2 Christian duties. Fol. 5 Creed. Fol. 6
Church. Fol. 6 Church that is true. Fol. 20 Ceremonies of Baptism. Fol. 25
Communion of Saints. Fol. 28 Commandments. Fol. 55 The first commandment.
Fol. 56 The second. Fol. 59. Third. Fol. 61 Fourth. Fol. 62. Fyfte. Fol. 63
Sixte. Fol. 63. Seventh. Fol. 64. Eyghth. Fol. 64 Ninth, and tenth. Fol. 66
Christ is present in the B. Sacrament. Fol. 80 Ceremonies of Mass. Fol. 81
Confession Sacrament. Fol. 74 Confession Vocal. Fol. 74 Contrition. Fol. 74
Charity. Fol. 111 Capital sins seven. Fol. 123 Churches of Heretics Fol.
107
D
Duties of a Christian. Fol. 5 Descension of Christ into bell. Fol. ^5
E
Excommunication. Fol. 35. 75. Examininge of conscience. Fol. 71 Effects of
the Sacraments. Fol. 91
F
Figure of the Cross. Fol. 2 Forth. Fol. 6. 110 Free Will. Fol. 23 Fortitude.
Fol. 113 Fifteen mysteries of the Rosarie. Fol. 118
G
Good works. Fol. 24 Gifts of the holy ghoaste. Fol. 114 Their effects.
Fol. 114 Grace before, and after meat. Fol. 127
H
Heretic. Fol. 2 Holy days, and relics of Saints. Fol. 54 Heresy is
Idolatry. Fol. 58 Heretical Churches not to be gone unto. Fol. 107 Heretics
Christ's enemies. Fol. 108 Hope. Fol. 111 Holy water. Fol. 124 Hell. Fol. 13
I
Jesus name. Fol. 4 Incarnation. Fol. 10 Justification. Fol. 24 Invocation of
Saints. Fol. 46. 53 Images. Fol. 56 Justice. Fol. 213 Indulgences. Fol. 15
L
Limbus Patrum. Fol. 13 Life everlasting. Fol. 40 Last things. Fol. 117
M
Marie the B. Virgen without sin. Fol. 49 Mass. Fol. 78. 81 Meditation, or
mental prayer. Fol. 71 Mysteries of the Rosarie. Fol. 118 Marckes of the true
Church. Fol. 20
N
Notes of the true Church. Fol. 20 Noui^^ima. Fol. 117 Norimberga. Fol. 163
O
Our B Lady without sin. Fol. 49
P
Pope. Fol. 7 S. P^ter at Rome. Fol. 8 Purgatory. Fol. 14 Popes pardones. Fol.
1^ Predestination. Fol. 25 Pater noster. Fol. 41 Prayenge to Saints. Fol. 46.
53 Precepts of the Church. Fol. 72 The first precept. 73. The second. 73
Third, and fourth. 77. The fifte. Fol. 78 Prudence. Fol. 112 Powers of the
soul. Fol. 125
R
Religious vows. Fol. 22 Remission of sins. Fol. 36 Resurrection. Fol. 38
Relics of Saints. Fol. 5^ Rosarie. Fol. 128 Real presence. Fol. 82 106
Roman faith. Fol. 29
S
Signs of the true Church. 20. The first sign. 20 The second. 24 Third. 28.
Fourth. 29. Fifte. Fol. 29 Satisfaction. Fol. 74 Sacraments seven. Fol. 88
Their effects. Fol. 92 Sacrament of the Euchariste in the pix. Fol. 97 Seven
Capital sins. Fol. 123 Service in the vulgar tongues. Fol. 127
T
Theological virtues. Fol. 6. 110 Tradition. Fol. 7 The B. Trinitye. Fol. 9
Transubstantiation. Fol. 94 Temperance. Fol. 113 Three sacred tongues. Fol. 127
V
Vows Religious. Fol. 22 Virtues Theological. Fol. 110 Virtues Cardinal.
Fol. 11^ Vulgar tongues. Fol. 127
VV
Works meriterious. Fol. 24 Works of mercy. Fol. 109
A BRIEF manner of examination of Conscience for a General Confession.
BEFORE we begin the ^xamen it self, we must understand some fevv
things which may help us for the performi^ge well of so great a matter as
this is of making a good confession. And first of all, that we must take it in
hand as a matter of very great importance, and vvherof depends the peace,
tranquillity, and security of a good conscience for the space of all our life
after; and therefore it behooves us to examine our conscience with great care,
and exaction. Secondly he that makes his confession must necessarily have
contrition, or at the least attrition, that is sorrow and detestation of sin
committed, because it is an offense of God, vvho^ we love above all things;
or for that sin causes the enmity of God, and our eternal damnation; with
a firm purpose of changinge our life, and not offendinge God any more
hereafter mortally.

Thyrdly our confession must have these conditions: first it must be entire of
all the mortal sins, which a man has committed, and can call to
remembrance after examininge of him self: expressinge every one in particular
in kind, and number, and all such circumstances as do either change the kind,
or number of the sins; and if he does not distinctly remember the number, he
ought to tell it a little more or less, as he can remember, or at least how
long time he perseuered in that sin if h^ fell into it upon every occasion,
and how often, more, or less, the like occasions were offered.

The second condition is that the confession be faithful, that is true, and
sincere, not only not sparinge to tell any sin which a man has committed, but
also not accusinge himself of those which he has not committed, but telling
the doubtful things, as doubtful; and the certain, as certain. It must
also be plain, and simple, not artificially composed, without excuse, or
^^u^ringe, or diminishinge any thing at all making reckoninge that he
confesses his sins to God, who allreadie knovveth them, although his divine
will be that we confess them to the priest as his substitute, and our judge,
and receive the penance due thereunto, vvherof one part is the shame, and
confusion to acknovvledge ^ur faults, which notwithstanding is a thing so
founded in reason, and justice, as the very heathens of good understanding,
did perceive the conuenience, and necessity of that, which Christ our Savior
has instituted for the remission, and remedy of sin in this Sacrament: and
so one of them said. Innocentiae proxima est humilis confessio. That is: the
first degree is not to offend, but when offense is committed, the next thing
that is required is, that the offender do humbly acknovvledge and confess his
fault, and whosoever reflecteth upon him self being offended, will find
that by instincte of nature, and justice, he requires as the first
disposition for pardone, that the offender, though he be his own brother, or
child, acknovvledge that he has done amiss, and be sorry for it, and have
purpose not to do the like any more: which is in substance that which God
almyghtie, as a most careful father, requires of all Catholics as of his
chosen, and beloved children, minglinge justice and mercy in this Sacrament^,
as in all other his works, to facilitate our salvation.

The third condition is, that it be obediente, that is, that the penitent have
purpose of doing whatsoever shall be imposed him by his confessor, of
acceptinge the remedies for his sins, which shall be prescribed, and auoydinge
of all the occasions of sin, which he shall forbid him: lykvvyse of
making restitution, and satisfaction when there is obligacion justly to do
it, and finally of acceptinge the penance given him by his confessor.

By all which we see that it is necessary that we disclose faithfully our
sins in this Sacrament, which is a tribunal of justice, that God has left
in his Church for the remedy of sin, and comfort of sinners; where the judge
being man, cannot know the secret offenses, but by the declaration of the
offender himself, nor proportionate the sentente, and remedy, which
according to justice and prudence he is bound to give, but by way of the
penitentes confession, who (as experience teaches,) doing his duty,
finds so great comfort, and assurance (founded in Christ's word, Math. 18.
Ioann. 20.
and promise, which cannot fail) that his sins be forgyuen him as often as
he receaueth absolution from the priest lavvfullie authorized, that no comfort
in this world is comparable unto it. And herevppon comes that Catholic men,
the more learned, and wise they be, and the more care they have of their
eternal salvation, and to keep them selves in Gods grace, so much the more
often they frequent this holy Sacrament; some every month, some every week
yea, and some every day, for the admirable fruytes, benefits, and co^fortes
they find in it.

Lastly when we begin our confession, we must kneel down reuerentely
upon our knees, for humilities sake, as in the presence of God, at one side of
the priest, and make the sign of the Cross, and ask the Priest his
benediction: saying: Benedic pater: and afterward begin the general
Confession in this manner. in Latin.

COnsiteor Deo Omnipotenti, Beatae Mariae semper Virgini, Beato Michaeli
Archangelo, Beato Ioanni Baptistae, Sanctis Apostolis Petro, and Paulo, and
omnibus Sanctis, and tibi pater, quia peccaui nimis cogitatione, verbo, and
opere, mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa.

Ideo precor Beatam Mariam semper Virginem, Beatum Michaelem Archangelum,
Beatum Ioannem Baptistam, Sanctos Apostolos Petru^ and Paulum, and omnes
Sanctos, and te pater, orare pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum. which in English
is thus.

I confess to almighty God, to the blessed Virgen S. Marie, to the blessed
S. Michael the Archangell, to the blessed S John Baptist, to the holy Apostles
S. Peter, and S. Paul, to all the Saints, and to you my ghoastly father, that
I have grievously offended in thought, word, and deed, through my fault, my
fault, my most grievous fault.

Therefore I beseech the blessed Virgen S. Marie, the blessed S. Michaell the
Archangell, the blessed S. John Baptist, the holy Apostles S. Peter, and S
Paul, and all the Saints in heaven, and you my ghoastly father, to pray to
our lord God for me.

Where is to be noted, that some say all the Confiteor before their
confession, and others (perhaps better) do divide it into two parts, first
till you come to those words. My fault; etc. where Catholic people use to
strike their breast, in sign of repentance, and sorrovve, and then go
forwards with their confession; which being ended, they conclude with the
words follovvinge; therefore I beseech the blessed Virgen, etc.

THE EXAMEN upon the Ten Commandments.
Of the first Commandment: that is of honoring God above all things.
COncerning Faith: if he have believed whatsoever the holy Roman Church
believes: or rather has had some contrary opinion: or with words, and
exterior signs, has made any thevv of any infidelity or heresy.

If he have been ouer-curious, in desiring to search the matters of Faith: and
if he have doubted of any article of the same.

If he have kept books, either of Heretics, or for any other respect
forbidden by the Church.

If he have learned the prayers, and other necessary things, which every
Christian is bound to know: as are the commandments of God: and the
principal mysteries of the faith.

If he have given credit unto, or used any sorts of superstition,
enchauntments, deuinings, either by himself, or by means of others.

If he have procured by the way of lotis, to find out any theft, or to know
any secret thing

If he have carried about him superstitious vvritings, for the having his
health, or for any other end, or has induced others to do the like.

If he have given credit unto dreams, or soothsayenges, taking them as a
rule of his actions.

If for to much presumption of the mercy of God, he has committed any sin,
or has per^^uered in evil, and diferred his amendment.

If in adversities he has had more confidence in creatures, and in vvorldly
helps, then in God.

If for to much distrust of the mercy of God, he has despayred of amendment of
life, or of the remission of his sins.

If he have murmured against God, as though he were not just, or blaming his
providence.

If for fear, or other humane respect, he has had mind to offend God, or not
to do that which he was bound for his service.

If he have cursed, or blasphemed God, or his Saints, and other Creatures:
expressing all the manners and sorts of those blas^hemies which he has
spoken.

If he have exposed himself to any danger of mortal sin, or taken delight of
any sin which he has done in time before past.

If he have persecuted, or injured with words any devout persons: detracting
their good works, and being cause that they leave the^: and in particular,
if he have dissvvaded or hindered any from entering into religion.

Of the second Commandment, of taking the name of God in vain.
IF he have sworn that which was false, knovving it to be a lie, or
doubting of the same, although it were in jest, or of a matter of small
importance.

If he have sworn to promise any lavvfull thing, which afterward he has
not observed, or had not intention to perform it, at that time in which he
did swear.

If he have been cause that any did swear false, or not observe the lavvfull
oath which he made.

If he have sworn in manner of cursing: as men are wont to say, if I do not
such a thing, let such or such evil happen unto me.

If he has sworn to do any evil, or any thing which was a sin: or not to
do any thing which was good.

If in judgment he has sworn false, or being asked by order of law, he
has not ansvvered agreably to the intention of the Judge, or has counseled
others for to do the like. In which case not only he sins mortally, but if
thereof follovved any harm of his neighbor, he is bound to restitution.

If he have had a custom of swearing often, without consideration, or care, to
know if it were true, or false.

If he have made a vow of doing any good thing, and has not cared to
perform it: or has deferred overmuch the execution thereof.

If he have made any vow with a mind of not fulfilling it.

If he have made a vow of not doing any good thing: or of doing any evil
thing for an evil end.

Of the third commandment, of sanctifyeng the Holy Days.
IF he have not observed the holye-dayes, but either done him self, or
commanded others to do such works as are prohibited by the Church: or
consented unto those which do the like.

If he have omitted to hear a whole Mass upon the holye-dayes commanded,
without lavvfull cause, or has been cause that others did leave the same.

If being present at Mass upon any holy day commanded, he has been for any
notable time voluntarily distracted, by talking, laughing, or busyeng him self
in impertinent things.

If he have not procured that those which be under his charge do hear Mass
upon the holy days.

If he have not gone to Confession at the least once a year, or have not
procured that others of his charge have done the same.

If he have gone to Confession, without necessary examination of conscience,
or without purpose of leaving any sin, or of shamefastnes, or other humane
respect, has concealed any sir, which is amost grievous sacrilege.

If every year at Easter he has received: and that with conueniente
disposition.

If with a conscience, or doubt of mortal sin, he has received, or ministered
any Sacrament of the Church.

If he have fasted the Lent, Vigilles, and Ember days, being bound
thereunto, and if on such days he has eaten prohibited meats, or has been
cause of others doing the same.

If for gluttony he vvoulde not have regarded to do against any
commandment: or if he have eaten, or druncke over largely, with notable
detriment of his health: or if voluntarily he has been drunk.

If he have violated the Church with any carnal sin, or with sheding of
blood.

If he have incurred any excommunication: or whilst he was excommunicate,
have received any Sacrament, or been present at the holy offices of the Church:
or if he has conuersed with excommunicate persons, or such as were suspected
of Heresy.

If he have done any injury, or irreuerence unto Images, Relikes, or other
sacred things.

If being bound to say his office, he have omitted it, wholy, or any part
thereof: or in the saying of it been voluntarily distracted.

If for sloth, or negligence, he has left undone any good work unto which
he was bound.

Of the fourth Commandment, of honoring Parents.
IF he have borne little reverence to his Father, and Mother, despising them,
or offending them with deeds or injurious words.

If he have cursed his father, or mother, or detracted their good name, or
dishonored the^ in their absence.

If he have not obeyed his parents or superiors, in just matter, and such as
might result to notable detrimente of the family, or of their own soul.

If when his parents have been in necessity, he has not succored the^, if
it were in his power.

If deliberately he have desired their death, that he might have the
inheritance, etc.

If he have not fulfilled their Testame^ts and last wills after their death.

If he have loved his pare^tes in such sort that for their love, he has not
cared to offend God.

If he have not observed the just laws and decrees of his superiors.

If he have detracted, or spoken evil of Superiors, Ecclesiasti all, (...)
Secular, of Religious persons, Priests, Teachers, etc.

If he have not succored the poor, if he could especially in extreme, or
grievous necessity, or if he have been stern, or cruel unto the^, entreating
them sharply with words, or deeds

If those which be fathers, and Mothers have cursed, or wished evil unto
their children.

Also if they have brought them v^ as they should, teaching the^ their
prayers, and Christian doctrine, and reprehending them, and correcting them,
especially in matter of sin, and occupyeng them in some honest exercise to
the end they be not idle, and take some evil course.

That which is said of Children, is understood also of servants, and others
of the family, of whom care is to be had, that they know things which be
necessary, and observe the commandments of God, and of the Church.

Of the fifth Commandment: Thou shall not k^ll.
IF he have carried hatred toward any person, desiring to be reue^ged: and
how long he has stayed therein.

If he have desired any man's death or other great evil, and damage, as well
in his body, as in good name, honor temporal, and spiritual goods.

If he have been angry with any person, with mind to do him any harm, or
to be revenged of him.

If contending with others, or in other sort, he have stricken, vvou^ded, or
killed: or commanded, or consented unto others to do the same: or (being done
by others) approved it, or given aid, counsel, or favor thereunto.

If having offended others, he has refused to demand pardon, or
reconciliation: or have not sufficiently satisfied for the offense.

If he have refused to pardon, or to remitte injuries to those which have
offended him.

If for hatred he have omitted to speak unto, or to salute others, allthough
without hatred, yet with scandal of his neighbor.

If in adversities, and misfortunes, he have desired death: or with fury and
anger has stricken, and cursed him self, or mentioned the devil.

If he have cursed others, either alive, or dead: and with what intention.

If he have sowed discord, or caused enmity betvveene others: and what harm
has ensued thereof.

If for hatred or envy, he has been immoderately sorye for the good, and
prosperity of others, as well temporal, as spiritual; or has rejoiced at any
harm, or notable damage of others.

If for anger he has offended others with injurious, and contumelious words.

If he have flattered others, praising them of any sinful thing.

If with his evil example, or counsel, or with praising that which was
evil, or reprehe^ding that which was good, he has been cause that any man
left any good work which he had begun: or if he have induced hi^ to any
sin, or to perseverance therein.

If he have omitted to correct, and admonish any person of any sin when he
could, and probably hoped thereby the others amendment.

If he have given receipt unto outlavves, and murderers, or with his
counsel, and favor, or otherwise assisted them.

If he have spoken evil of his neighbor, manifesting any secret ^au^t of his
to discredit him, or cause him other harm.

If he have stricken injuriously any Ecclesiastical or Religious person,
wherein also there is Exco^municatio^.

Of the sixth, and ninth comaundeme^t Thou ^halt not commit adultery, Thou shall
not desire thy neighbors v^yfe.
IF he has given internal consent to any carnal temptation.

If he has taken delight deliberately in any filthy cogitation.

If he has been neglige^te in castinge away evil cogitations when he
feels him self in danger to give consent, or take delighte in them.

If he has spoken, or heard dishonest words.

If he has se^te lettres, messages, etc.

If he has used unchaste looks, behavior, gesture, or apparel ordayninge it
to any evil end.

If he has used unchaste touching, Kissinge, embracinge. etc.

If he has committed any carnal sin actually, vvherin he must explitate the
necessary circumstances as the persons, whether they were religious, or
secular; vowed to virginitye; married, or unmarried, which may aggrauate the
greatness of the sin.

If he has not avoided the occasions of this sin, nor armee him self
against temptations.

Of the seventh and tenth Commandment. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not
desire thy neighbors goods.
IF he have taken any thing which belonged unto others, by deceit, or
violence: expressing the quantity of the theft, and in particular, if he have
taken any sacred thing, or out of any sacred place.

If he hold any thing of an others, without the consent of the owner, and
does not restore it presently, if he be able.

If for not payeng of his debtes, (when he is able) his creditours have
sustained any damage.

If finding a^^^^ing, he has taken the same with mind to keep it for him
self: the like of those things which happen to come to his hands, which,
knovving that they belong to others he has not restored to whom he ought.

If in buyeng, or selling, he has used any deceit, either in the vvare, or in
the price, or in the measure, or in the vveyght.

If he have bought of those persons which could not sell, as of slaves, or
children under age

If he have bought things that he knevve or doubted to have bin stole^: or
vvittingly has eaten of any such things.

If only in respect of selling upon trust, he has sold for more then the
just price: or has bought for less the^ the price, in respect of payment made
before hand.

If he have had a determinate will to take or to retain any thing of oth^^
men's, (...) he could: or also, if he have had a deliberate mind to gain, or
increase his wealth (as men do use to say) by right or by vvro^g.

If he have committed any sort of vsurye, or made any vsurarious contract, or
entered into any unjust traffic, or partnershippe of mercha^dise.

If having wages, or pay for any work, or office, he has not done it
well, and faithfully.

If he have defrauded servants, or vvorke-folkes of their hire: or differred
their payment, to their hinderance.

If he have moved any suit in law against justice, or if in just suits he has
used any fraud, or deceit that he might prevail.

If he have played at prohibited games: or if in gaming he have used, and
vvonne by deceit, or has played with persons which can not alienate, as are
children under age, and such like.

If he have defrauded any just impost or tolles.

If he have committed any symonye in what sort soever.

If he have defrauded the Church of that which was due, as are Tithes, and
such like.

If by unlawful means, and evil information he have gotten any thing that
was not due unto him, or has unjustly hindered others from the obtaining any
benefit, or commodity.

If he have given any help, or counsel, or, in whatsoever other manner,
abetted such as have taken other men's goods: or (being able, and bound
thereunto) has not discovered, or hindered any theft.

Of the eight Commandment. Thou sha^lt not bear false witness.
IF he have borne any false witness in judgment or out of judgment or induced
others to do the like.

If he have spoken any untruth, with notable prejudice, or hurt of his
neighbor.

If he have detracted from the good name of others, imposing falsely upon them
any sin, or exaggerating their defectes.

If he have murmured in vvayghty matters, against an other man's life, and
conuesation, especially of qualified persons, as prelates, religious, and
women of good name.

If he have given ear willingly unto detractions, and murmuringes against
others.

If he have disclosed any grievous, and secret sin of others, vvhervppo^ has
insued infamy. Which although it were true, and not spoken with evil
intention, yet is the speaker bound to restore the good name.

If he have uttered any secret, which was committed unto him or which
secretly he came to see, or hear, in which case a man is bound to restore all
damages that afterward happen by such revealing.

If he have opened other men's letters vnlavvfully, or for any evil end.

If he have rashelye judged the deeds, or speeches of his neighbor, taking in
evil part that which might have been well interpreted, and conde^ning him
in his heart of mortal sin.

If he have promised any thing with intention to bind himself, and
afterward without lavvfull cause has omitted to observe his promise,
which is a mortal sin, when the thing which is promised is notable, or
when for want of performance of the promise, our neyhhbour has had any
notable loss, or damage.

Of the sin of pride.
IF that good which he has (whether it be of Mind, or of Body, or of
Fortune) he has not acknovvlegged as of God, but presumes to have it of him
self, by his proper industry or if he think to have it of God, yet presumes
to have it, by reason of his own merits, not gyuing to God the glory of all.

If he have reputed vaynely that he has any virtue which he has not, or to
be that which he is not or more then that which he is: despising others as
inferiors unto himself.

If he have gloried in any thing which is mortal sin: as, for to have taken
revenge, or to have committed any other sin.

If to the end that he might be esteemed and held for a person of value, he
has vaunted of any good, or evil, which he has done (whether truly, or
falsely,) with the injurye of God, or our neighbor.

If he have been ambitious, desiring inordinatly honors, and dignities, etc.
doing to that end that which he ought not.

If to the end that he may not be noted, and held of small account, or for
fear of the speeches of men he do that which he ought not, with scandal of
his neighbor: or neglect to do that which he ought: as to correct, and
reprehend others: to co^uerse with good persons: to go to Confession, and to
do other Christian works.

If he have stubbernly impugned the truth: or, because he vvoulde not submit
him self, or seem to be co^uinced, if he has obstinately defended his
manifest errors, against his conscience

If through arrogancye he has despised others, doing any thing for their
dishonor, and despite.

If for haughtiness, and pride, he has been at excessive charge, in Apparel,
Servants, Diet and other vanities nor convenient unto his estate.

Gathered out of F. Vincentius Bruno.


