A MODERATE DEFENSE OF THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE: Wherein the Author proves the
said Oath to be most lawful, notwithstanding the Popes Breues prohibiting the
same; and solueth the chiefest objections that are usually made against it;
persuading the Catholics not to resist sovereign Authority in refusing it.

Together with the Oration of Sixtus 5. in the Consistory at Rome, upon the
murder of Henry 3. the French King by a Friar.

Whereunto also is annexed strange Reports or news from Rome.

By WILLIAM WARMINGTON Catholic Priest, and Oblate of the holy congregation
of S. Ambrose.

IEREM. 4. Iurabis, Viuit Dominus, in veritate, in iudicio, and in iustitia.
Thou shall swear, Our Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in justice.

Permissu Superiorum. An. Dom. 1612.

An Admonition to the Reader.
THe purpose of the Author in this Treatise is to manifest unto such as embrace
the Roman faith, that they may take the Oath of allegiance unto his Majesty
without any prejudice unto the same. And therefore if in this his ensuing
discourse he has inserted any peculiar doctrines of the Church of Rome, those
that are of an adverse persuasion ought not to take offense, but rather make
true use thereof; and have just cause to acknowledge the clement and moderate
proceeding of the State herein.

THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
WHEN by the providence of Almighty God, (courteous Reader) who sweetly
disposes all things, I was by two Pursuiuants apprehended the 24. of March
1607. after our English account, and committed to the Clinke by the Lord Bishop
of London on the 26. of the same month, 1608; I entered somewhat more deeply
into the consideration of the controversy of the Oath of allegiance, then
before, whilst I was at liberty, I had done. And presently consulting with
some of my brethren whom I found there prisoners before my coming, I thought
it very expedient to inform the Popes Holiness of the lamentable estate of
our country, what miseries and imminent dangers such Catholics, as should
refuse the Oath of allegiance, were like to fall into by reason of his Breues
prohibiting them to take it; what division among Catholics, what perturbation
they were undoubtedly to breed in the Church of England, (our dread Sovereign
being thereby not without just cause exasperated) hoping by such means to
procure a remedy before the malady grew too desperate. But they more prudent,
and better experienced in such like Roman informations then my self, thought
it better in their judgments, and more expedient, with patience to expect
future events from Rome, and not so to proceed, as being to small or no purpose
at all.

Hereupon I rested satisfied, though sorry in mind to consider the manifold
evils that were like to ensue, as long as these two principal powers,
Ecclesiastical and civil, the Pope and our King, were at variance; and did
not intend to set pen to paper of this matter; for that I knew my self the
meanest among the rest of my brethren that had taken the Oath, and because I
had (as I thought) in discharge of my particular duty, made sufficient proof
of my loyalty toward his Majesty, by accepting the Oath when it was required
at my hands. In the end, advised by a friend one of my brethren, to premeditate
and provide reasons for our taking it, to be sent to Rome; for it was to him
more then probable he said, that in short space after we should receive a
commandment from his Holiness so to do: and desirous withal to yield some
satisfaction to the State, for the great scandal certain of our brethren had
given, by their perfidious inconstancy in taking the Oath, and anon after
(being freed from troubles) relented and impugned (as has been reported) that
which they seemed by their act to have judged lawful: I resolved upon mature
consideration, to reduce into some method for help of my memory, and
satisfaction of a friend, certain notes which in scattered papers I had
collected concerning this matter: not intending yet to publish them for fear
first of offending some Catholics, who pretending the Oath to be unlawful
(though they know not well wherein, are ready with rash censures to judge and
condemn, before sentence of condemnation from the chief Judge be given: but
especially I feared lest I should offend the Popes Holiness, who in his Breues
has either admonished or prohibited all Catholics to take it, or to teach the
lawfulness thereof. At length knowing my intention to be, not to offend any
one, nor to contemn his Holiness commandment; but to advance, what in me
lies, the glory of God, by setting down sincerely what in my judgment is
truth, and persuading every Catholic subject to render to Caesar those things
which are Caesar's, to perform his duty to his Majesty in taking the Oath of
allegiance, and to seek thereby to remove the imputation of treachery and
treason: I held it my duty both to God and man, to break silence, to cast
away this humane fear, and to put on the mantle of charity, quae for as mittit
timorem. 1. Ioh. 4
Howbeit (gentle reader) whilst I meditated to go forward in these my labors,
for the benefit of my brethren in Christ the Catholics of England, suddenly
that question of our B. Savior, as it were to deter me from the^, came into
my mind: Quis ex vobis volens turrim aedificare: Which of you minding to build
a tower, does not first sit down and reckon the charges that are necessary,
whether he have to finish it: lest, after he has laid the foundation, and is
not able to finish it, all that see it, begin to mock him, saying, That this
man began to build, and he could not finish it? I forthwith stayed, and cast my
accounts, that is, I weighed the small means I had to relieve me taking
pains, my infirm and feeble body, slender furniture of books, and many
interrupted distractions which my poverty in prison ministered unto me, and
considered whether I might be able to bring this short treatise to an end, and
so avoid that illusion: This man began to build, and he could not finish it.
Then though my means and ability every way I knew to be small, yet trusting
in the assistance of almighty God, whose glory hereby I principally seek,
and is the chiefest reason of this my process, I was by and by encouraged to
attempt the defending of this Oath, (which I judged far beyond my talent)
calling to remembrance that of the Prophet: In Deo meo transgrediar murum:
Psalm. 17.
In my God I will pass over a wall. Philip 4.
And the saying of S. Paul: Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat. I can do all
things in him (that is, through his help) that strengthens me: nothing
doubting also but, Phil. 2. v. 13.
Qui operatus est in me velle, operaretur and perficere pro bona voluntate. He
that wrought in me to will, would likewise work to accomplish according to his
good will. Upon this confidence then of Gods assistance, and for the
instruction of certain Catholics, who simply believe the inconsiderat
assertions of some of their teachers; that such as take the Oath, do, and must
renounce the Popes spiritual authority of excommunication; and abjure or
condemn for heresy a disputable position, to wit, that the Pope may depose
for heresy or apostacy; which is most untrue, as will easily appear to him
that without passion and with judgment shall read the Oath, or this my book.
These and such like I exhort not to be too credulous in a matter of so great
moment as this is, giving ear to every one that will say, it may not be taken,
and can show them no true reason why, nor in what point it is unlawful. If any
list wilfully to reject this my wholesome counsel, and will rather still give
ear to such as work their overthrow, what else can they in reason expect but
loss of lands and goods, perpetual imprisonment by the law, final
destruction to them and theirs, and happily get no merit to benefit their
souls, if his Majesty (in clemency excelling) be much exasperated? which
with careful regard ought to be looked unto, because, Qui nimium emungit,
elicet sanguinem: He that straineth too much, draws blood. And may not his
Princely Majesty be well said to excel in mercy and clemency, who first
with speed upon the discovery of the Gunpowder treason, set forth his
Proclamation worthy never to be forgotten, thereby to stay the fury of the
people, ready doubtless at that time to have murdered all that should bear
the name of Catholic, without respecting who were innocent or who were nocent?
and after, himself, Suetonius in Augusto.
as Augustus Caesar in person pleaded for the life of a soldier, by his pen
interpreting the Oath of allegia^ce, pleaded as it were (to give satisfaction
of his Royal meaning and intent of the law) for such as he needed not so far
to condescend unto? This rare and worthy example of our most learned and most
prudent Prince, I must needs say, was to me, (the least among many others) a
very urgent motive to adventure this spiritual combat of defending according
to my power the Oath of allegiance. Cic. lib. 1. Offic.
Studiose (says Cicero) plerique facta Principum imitantur. Many follow
diligently the facts (or examples) of Princes. And if you read the book of
the Judges, you shall see what encouragement the example of Gedeon then Judge of
the Israelites gave unto his small army consisting but of 300 soldiers,
against the Madianites their enemies in number almost infinite. Iudic. 7.
Quod me videritis facere (said this great Captain) hoc facite: ingrediar
partem castrorum, and quod fecero sectamini. What you shall see me do, do you
the same: I will enter into a part of the army, and what I shall do, that do
you follow: which they did, and obtained a happy victory. To whom can I better
liken our mighty Monarch king James then to that worthy Gedeon? To me he
seems likewise in effect to say unto his subjects, What you see me do, do ye
the same, as I have begun to write, so follow my example, endeavoring by pen to
defend my right, which is all I require by the Oath. Who admireth not the
profound wisdom and great piety of his Majesty, that he foreseeing the
fatal and wilful fall of diverse of his beloved subjects, by reason of the
Popes Breues prohibiting the Oath of allegiance, would be pleased for them and
their good, to retire himself from his princely recreations, to painful
labor both with mind and body, and to be the first that with his pen writ a
learned Apology for the Oath? Wherein for satisfaction of the perplexed
consciences of some of his subjects, his Highness imitating our Blessed
Savior, 1. Tim. 4.
qui vult omnes saluos fieri, and neminem vult perire, who is willing all
should be safe, and will have none to perish, interpreted his meaning to be,
not to derogate from the Popes spiritual authority, but to require his
subjects to perform their loyalty and natural obedience only in temporals,
which is due by the law of God and nature; thereby to draw all to his love and
their own safety. Vouchsafe then, beloved reader, to spend some idle and
vacant time to peruse this short Treatise, written by thy welwiller for thy
behoof, to confirm thee if thou take the Oath, or to persuade thee if thou
fear it to be unlawful; the time thou spendest herein may counteruaile thy
pains. Doubt nothing; if thou be Catholic, he is a Catholic priest that
writes, and teaches thee herein Catholic doctrine: if thou be none, yet give
this book the reading, assuring thy self this Author to be likewise a good
and loyal subject, and as such he purposes to live and die. Fear God, honor
the King, and in charity pray for me thy hearty welwiller.

Thine ever in Christ Jesus WILLIAM WARMINGTON Priest.

A Table of the principal points contained in this Treatise.
THe most barbarous conspiracy of certain Catholics, cause of the Oath of
Allegiance. Page 1. No wisdom to provoke a clement Prince to wrath. Page 2.
Many miseries fall, yea on innocent persons, when a Prince exasperated
punishes in ire. Page 3. Our King peerlesse for clemency in the Gunpowder
treason. Page 5. The end why the Oath was made. Page 7. Great reason for naming
the Pope in the Oath. Ibid. Samuel at Gods appointment anointed Saul King, but
did not, nor could depose him. Page 9. The objection of Ioiada the high priests
deposing Queen Athalia, answered. Page 13. Whether the Church or the Pope may
justly depose Kings. Ibid. and Page 87. Popes have their temporal states, not
by Christ, but by the grants of secular Princes. Page 15. The Canonists opinion
of the Popes deposing Princes. Page 17. The opinion of certain Divines
touching the same point. Page 18. To depose Princes, is no matter of faith.
Page 21. and 22. Not defined in the Council of Lateran, that the Pope has
power to depose Princes. Page 22. The decree of that Council. Page 24.
Cardinal Bellarmines assertion of this Councels definition refelled. Page 26.
Heretics are to be punished temporally by the civil magistrate, not by the
Ecclesiastical. Page 32. The Constitution of Frederick the Emperor. Page 34.
Frederickes law for the punishment of heretics, touches not Kings. Page 35.
The Chapter of the Council of Lateran, supposed a decree, yet is not de fide.
Page 36. How you may know a decree to be de fide. Ibid. The Breues of Pope Paul
5. are no definitions ex cathedra. Page 37. Whether the Pope alone may define
matters of faith. Page 38. No sin not to obey the Popes private assertion or
opinion in matters undetermined by the Church. Page 39. That the Pope not only
in matters of fact, but also in faith, he alone without a Council may err, as
some affirm. Page 42. Whether Priests or Laics are bound to obey the Popes
prohibition of this Oath of allegiance. Page 44. A boy under age hanged in
Rome. Page 46. A nephew of old Navarre the Canonist, by the Popes commandment
hanged in have. Ibid. Card. Mendoza deprived of his Deanery of Toledo by force.
Page 47. A Gentleman of Card. Farnesius put to death by Pope Clement Page 8.
48. The opinion of some overmuch devoted to the obedience of the Pope. Page 50.
Obedience due to all superiors, yet is their power contained within certain
limits. Page 51. Ecclesiastical and civil power both immediate from God, both
distinct and independent of each other. Page 53. A superior, yea the Pope in
diverse cases may be disobeyed without sin. Page 57. The Breues of Paulus 5.
prohibiting the Oath of allegiance, may be not obeyed without sin. Page 59.
Many evils ensue upon obeying the Pope in this case of the Oath. Page 60. A
commandment upon error of wrong information binds not. Page 62. The Popes
bare precept not always sufficient to cause men to hazard their temporal
states. Ibid. Cases not doubtful but manifest, as is this of the Oath, need no
solution from the Pope. Page 63. Subjects bound to obey all just laws of their
temporal Princes. Page 64. The law of the Oath of allegiance just. Page 65.
The Kings Majesty in setting forth this Oath, has not exceeded his limits.
Page 66. All lawful Kings, be they heathens or heretics, are to be obeyed by
their subjects in temporals. Page 68. That the Pope or Church do permit evil
Princes to reign, a strange phrase. Page 70. The place of S. Paul, Omnis
anima, to be understood principally of subjection to secular power. Page 72.
The material sword forbidden to be used by Ecclesiastical persons. Page 74 Not
without a mystery that Peter should strike none but Malchus. Page 78. The
Apostles and their successors subject to Emperors and Kings de iure. Page 79.
Gregory 7. ye first that challenged temporal power to depose Princes. Page 84
The doctrine and practice of deposing, when it began, according to Cardinal
Bellarmine. Page 85. Whether the Pope by his spiritual power, wherein he is
successor to Peter, may depose Princes. Page 87. and 91. Excommunication what
it is, the nature and effects thereof. Page 95. No denial of ye Popes power of
binding, to say that Princes, notwithstanding exco^municatio^, ought to be
obeyed of their subjects. Page 100. The Popes spiritual power of
excommunicating Kings not denied, as Cardinal Bellarmine in Tortus affirms.
Page 104. Whether I may renounce all pardons and dispensations which shall be
against this Oath of Alleg. without denying ye Popes power. Page 108. No
denial of the Popes power of absoluing, to say, that he cannot absolve me of
this Oath. Page 112. Whether the Pope may remit lawful oaths compelled by
fear. Page 114. How a matter only of opinion may be truly sworn. Page 116.
The doctrine that teaches, That Princes excommunicated by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their subjects, may be abiured as impious and
heretical. Page 119. To teach it lawful to murder, yea a tyrant, is
heretical. Page 123. The Oration of Sixtus 5. in the Consistory, of the
murder of the King of France. Page 128. The Pope as a temporal Prince may
wage war, but not invade any Kings dominions as he is Christ's Vicar. Page
149. Priests and reconciled persons, as such only, no traitors by the
intention of the Oath. Page 150. How an Oath is to be interpreted. Page 152. In
what sort a man is to swear before a lawful magistrate. Page 153. Not such as
take, but ye refusers of ye Oath give cause of sca^dal. Page 154. The Authors
exhortation to Catholics. Page 156. Strange Reports, or News from Rome. Page
159.
TO THE CATHOLICS OF ENGLAND.
Beloved brethren in Christ Jesus: Whereas the Kings most excellent Majesty,
being the true, lawful, and right inheritour to the Crown and Realm of
England, by the providence of almighty God entered and possessed the same with
tranquillity and peace, and the great applause of all his subjects, as well
Catholics as Protestants, or others of different sects and opinions: his
Highness, as it were to requite their dutiful affection, forthwith gave great
hope of a most happy and prosperous regiment; and out of his bounty and
clemency extended many his most royal favors indifferently upon all, till
such time as some of the one sort (to wit, a few giddie headed, desperate, and
disloyal Catholics associated with certain of the Society) provoked his
wrath and indignation against them, yea and all the professors of the same
religion for their fact. Who was not moved (as all men will confess) without
just cause, for that they (viz. Catholics) only either concealed, or most
barbarously attempted in that hellish-like manner of gunpowder fire (the
memory whereof must needs remain for ever most grievous to all true hearted
Catholic subjects) the cruel murder of so many worthy Commons, and Noble
personages, in Parliament assembled; yea of the most towardly and innocent young
Prince, the Queen, and King himself: and then soon after also had followed
undoubtedly the desolation, ruin, and destruction of the whole realm of
England.

Hereupon by the general consent of all three estates and the Kings Majesty,
it was thought necessary, an Oath of allegiance in such form should be framed
and enacted, as Catholics (for whom chiefly it was made) should have no cause
scrupulously to refuse to take the same; and the Kings Highness with his whole
estate might be better secured, and freed from all fears and dangers:
imitating herein other Kings and Princes as occasions shall be offered them.

If ever the Kings of France or Spain, or other Princes whatsoever had cause
to exact an Oath of fealty of their subjects for safety of their persons or
state; then certes no man that has but common sense will deny but our King
has more then just, upon so horrible and monstrous cause given, as the like
happily was never heard of from the beginning of the world.

Could any man have thought it strange, or held it cruelty, if, being in such
wise, and by such persons provoked, he had in his wrath and indignation
rigorously proceeded against all others of the Roman religion, as suspecting
them to bear no better mind toward him? though many thousands doubtless no
way consented, nor were ever privy to that horrible fact.

And if he had, what ruin of Catholic families, what havoc of Christian
blood, with the destruction of souls, and other infinite miseries should we
have seen? But the omnipotent God (whose name be blessed for ever) who has
the rule and government of the hearts of Kings, inclined his royal heart to
mercy and compassion of his subjects, knowing right well the faith and
loyalty of many of the same religion, as his Majesty most benignely expressed
in his Proclamation; and that he should have punished the innocent with the
nocent, as well his friends as his foes. Oh what folly were it for a man to
wake a sleeping Lion, or stir a nest of waspes or hornets, whereby he might
endanger himself to be bitten or stong most grievously? Then how much greater
is the folly of such, as fear not to irritate or incense a King, who
naturally desires nothing more then peace and quietness to himself and his
people? We learn in holy writ how dreadful is the terror of a King, in that
it is compared to the roaring of a Lion: Prou. 20.
Sicut rugitus Leonis, ita and terror Regis: qui prouocat eum, peccat in animam
suam. As the roaring of a Lion, so is the terror of a King: he that provoke
him offends against his own life.

Example we have of King David, who was stirred to wrath by Hanon King of
Ammonites upon ingratitude for his love and kindness. For, David hearing of
his fathers death, sent some of his servants to comfort him: Hanon following
evil counsel, forsooth, that David did not send to condole with him and
comfort him, but to epsy the City and overthrow it. Whereupon most
ungratefully he evil entreated the ambassadors, shauing half their beards,
and ignominiously cutting their garments unto the buttockes. King David
herewith moved to anger, provided an army to revenge this injury; overthrew
of the Syrians that assisted the Ammonites seven thousand chariots, and slew
forty thousand footmen, made hauock of the Ammonites blood, and wasted the
cities of King Hanon, destroying the people in most rufull manner: as you may
read in the second book of the Kings and Paralipomenon. 2. Reg. 10. 1.
Paralip. 19.20.
Consider the imprudence and wickedness of this king; imprudence, in not
foreseeing what dangers he might cast himself into, by making his friend his
foe, and stirring him to ire that sought to live in peace. Wickedness, in
rendering evil for good, and procuring wars (the event whereof is various)
which was cause that many innocent persons, who were not consenting to Hanons,
fact, nor ever happily wished David hurt, were in that fury slain.

We read likewise how this holy king David, 1. Reg. 25.
being in the desert persecuted by Saul, purposed and prepared to revenge
himself on malicious Nabal, for contemning him and his servants (whom in his
distress he had sent in peaceable and friendly sort for victuals and relief)
saying, Who is David? and what is the son of Isai? There are servants
multiplied now a days, which fly from their masters. Shall I then take my
breads, and my waters, and the flesh of my cattle which I have killed for my
shearers, and give it to men whom I know not whence they are? Hereupon David in
wrath set forward to be revenged, and purposed not to have left nor Nabal, nor
any belonging to him, to piss against a wall, had not his wife Abigail by her
wisdom prevented the shedding of innocent blood, meeting with David and
pacifying him with gifts, prudent speeches, and discreet behavior.

In the Ecclesiastical history is likewise noted, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 17.
how that renowned Emperor Theodosius upon rage caused many innocents in
Thessalonica to be put to death, for the murder of one Noble man of his court.
Many more examples both sacred and profane might be here alleged to this
purpose, but these may suffice to give us a taste of the miseries that fall on
many, yea on such as never offended, when a Prince is injured and provoked to
anger. Indignatio Regis, nuncij mortis: Prou. 16.
and vir sapiens placabit eam. The indignation of a king, is messengers of
death: and a wise man will appease it.

If king David or Theodosius might pretend just cause to revenge their wrongs
in such sort by severe punishment not only of the offenders, but also of the
guiltless: then surely none can deny but king James our dread Sovereign had
much more against the conspirators in the notorious gunpowder-treason, and many
others of the same religion, who^ he might well suspect to be of the same
confederation. In this, there was not a contempt only of his servants, nor a
shauing of beards, or paring their garments to the buttocks, nor yet the
murdering of one of his Nobles: but (out alas) here was intended a most
pitiful slaughter of the Kings own person, the Queen his wife, the young
Prince his son, the Nobility, and people in great numbers: and then
eftsoons had followed a final destruction of infinite souls and bodies, and
of this whole flourishing kingdom; as every one that is but meanly wise must
needs know. In that his Highness then proceeded no further in fury and
indignation against Catholics, (being by them so incensed) but stayed his
hands by the execution only of a few principals in that actio^, must needs be
imputed, first to the providence of Almighty God, (who guides the hearts of
kings) and next to his rare and singular clemency, See his Majesty's
proclamation.
who seemed ready to pardon, loath to punish by blood so many as in that
conspiracy offended, or to use such severity as the crime deserved. In
punishing some, he practiced justice; in pardoning others he extended his
mercy: which two virtues make a Prince renowned, and by which, especially
mercy or clemency, a king is most strongly fortified and preserved, according
to that of Solomon: Misericordia and veritas custodiunt regem, Prou. 20.
and roboratur clementia thronus eius. Mercy and Truth keep the king, and
with Clemency his throne is strengthened.

Greatly were it to be wished that this his mercy might not, but it is to be
feared, that through the default of some it may be turned into fury, as
sometime it happens when the clemency of a Prince is not regarded, or
abused: that no Nabal were to be found so presumptuous hardy as to contemn,
not the Kings servants, but himself, in withstanding his will by indiscreet,
if not obstinate, refusing to take the Oath of allegiance so just and
reasonable, made only for the safety of the King and kingdom, and exacted as
a note to distinguish friends from foes, good subjects from evil affected; and
to take from Catholics the heavy imputation of treason and treachery, which
has lien long on their necks. A child if he see his father in anger chastising
his brother, fears, though he offended him not: and so does the scholar in
the school dread the rod when the master in rage corrects one of his
fellows. The Lion roareth in the desert, and all fear that here the noise.
Leo rugiet, quis non timebit? How much more then is a king to be feared, Amos.
3.
who under God has power of life and death, as Pilate said to our Savior:
Nescis quia potestatem habeo crucifigere te, and potestatem habeo dimittere?
Do thou not know that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to let
thee go? Aug. Trac, 116. parum a medio Tom. 9.
Which power was given him from above, as is plain. Consider in what case rich
Nabal was, when he heard his wife Abigail recount unto him (who by her prudence
had appeased and pacified David coming in fury and rage to revenge) what David
had intended against him; he feared and trembled in such wise, as with the
news he became even senseless: Et emortuum est cor eius intrinsecus, 1. Reg.
25.
and factus est quasi lapis: that is, And his heart was dead inwardly, and he
became as a stone; and there upon within ten days after, stricken by God, gave
up the ghost. Had Nabal cause to fear David, not then accepted of the people
for king, Saul being yet alive: and have not we just cause to fear how we
offend and stir to ire our dread Sovereign, so mighty a Monarch? Was the
occasion that Nabal gave, in comparison of that of our Catholics alike?
Confer the crime of the one and the other, and you shall find great
inequality, as great, as between a word and a blow; yea such a blow, as
posterity will hardly believe could be offered, when they shall read it in
Chronicles. Mean while, we that by Gods goodness are yet living, and be eye
witnesses thereof, have cause to lament and testify with Habacuc the Prophet,
Quia opus factum est in diebus nostris, Habac. 1.
quod nemo credet cum narrabitur. That a work has been done in our days,
which no man will believe when it shall be told: and to wish that some
discreet Abigail may be found to step forth and meet with our liege Lord
coming in great ire to revenge, and with prudence to pacify and persuade him
to surcease, for the loialtie and true affection of many other his innocent
Catholic subjects, who lie prostate at his royal feet lamenting their
brethrens folly, and humbly beseeching pardon, with offer for, and in his
defense of both life and limme.

But (woe is me) whilst some endeavor to quench a flaming fire, by taking away
the wood, knowing that, Cum defecerint ligna, Prou. 26.
extinguetur ignis; When the wood fails, or is taken away, the fire will be
quenched: others put more wood to the fire, and so increase the flame. Whilst
his Majesty meditateth mercy, and requires that which justly he may, and we
in conscience are bound to perform; Nabal, yea many Nabals arise, and do add
matter to kindle his wrath, in resisting his will, and denying his just demand:
which is, only to discharge their duties, in rendering to Caesar that is
Caesar's, to swear fealty and true obedience unto him in temporals, according
to the tenure of the Oath, framed and enacted the third year of his reign,
without derogation to any spiritual authority of the Pope, or infringement of
any point of the Catholic faith. The cause then wherefore this Oath of
allegiance was made, no man can doubt but the most barbarous Gunpowder
conspiracy was the only urgent motive, it never being (in common knowledge) so
much as thought of before. The scope and end thereof was, that by taking or
refusing the same, the King and State might distinguish between true and
faithful, and hollow-hearted Catholic subjects: Regis Praemo, page 12.
and his Majesty might be more fully assured of their constancy and fidelity
in time of need, upon any cause to be offered whatsoever; or by Prince, people,
Pope, or whosoever.

And can any man marvel, that the Pope is therein named? Does this scandalize
any? Consider but what they were that inserted it; the time, and place, and
pretense of reason they had or might have to imagine (being so adverse or
opposite to him in religion, and the Treason so fresh in memory) that his
Holiness might give leave or encouragement, or at least be privy, and so to
wink at such an attempt; presuming that no Catholic durst enterprise such a
fact, without conniuence at least of supreme authority. And had they not cause
to fear or doubt him more then any other, none being therein culpable but only
Jesuits and Catholics; of whom, some happily think themselves bound to obey
him whatsoever he command, for that in their opinion he cannot err in
commanding? Howbeit we that are by Gods grace Catholics also, agreeing in all
points with Christ his Vicar the Pope of Rome, in unity of faith, do no way
suspect that ever he was consenting, much less gave way to authorize such
enormous and wicked designements: though withal we dissent from them that
think he cannot err, no not in a matter of fact. The State there assembled,
were not such babes, as that they needed be taught of the Pope his proceedings
with Princes about their deprivations or depositions for diverse crimes, when he
has hope to prevail, but especially for heresy or apostasy. They knew right
well likewise, that if his Highness should be by his Holiness denounced and
declared an heretic, what dangers might soon after ensue: therefore was it
thought wisdom to prevent a mischief ere it happen, in exacting an Oath of
allegiance at Catholics hands, in that manner and form as it is set down,
thereby more firmly to bind them to the performance of their duty, whereto
otherwise by the law of God and nature they rest obliged. For it is to be
presumed, that a Christian, an honest man, that has fear of Gods judgments,
will not become perfidious, nor rashly or unjustly break that oath, which
discreetly and justly he consented to take. Iurabit proximo suo, Psalm. 14.
and non decipiet: He will swear to his neighbor, and will not deceive him. By
this now I trust (dear Catholic brethren) you are satisfied, that an Oath of
allegiance may be justly exacted at our hands, and that we are bound to swear
fealty to our Prince, when it shall be required of us. But you make doubt,
lest more be contained in this Oath, then fealty or civil obedience to his
Majesty; viz. some points against the spiritual authority of the Pope, which
you being Catholics may not gainsay, but are bound in conscience to
maintain. If you could satisfy us (say you) that nothing is therein contained
against any article of faith; and that we may disobey his Holiness (who
prohibiteth the taking thereof) without danger of mortal sin, you shall do
us a singular pleasure: therefore I pray you resolve us herein that are much
perplexed about it, by reason of the great corporal troubles we are like to
fall into, if by disobeying the King we refuse it; or for the hazard of our
souls (as we think) if in disobeying the Pope, and scandalizing our brethren
the Catholics, we take it.

Beloved brethren, I trust you expect not at my hands that I should fully and
exactly discuss every point of the Oath, and answer every scrupulous
difficulty that some use to make (albeit it might be easy to effect:) for it
would require a better library then mine is at this present, more labor then
I can well afford, by reason of my feeble body, and a larger treatise then I
mean to make. Your desire is (as I presume) only to know whether the
principal points thereof, as deposing the Kings Majesty, discharging his
subjects of their obedience, dispensing and absoluing in this Oath, and such
like, be matter of faith, which bind every Christian man steadfastly to believe
the same, under pain of damnation; or else but matter of opinion. And
secondly, what you ought to do concerning the Popes Breues, whether you may
lawfully disobey them or no. These points indeed are the chiefest, whereon the
rest have their dependa^ce, which with Gods assistance I shall endeavor so to
handle, as you shall not need to doubt of the lawfulnes of the Oath, nor hazard
all your estates for refusing the same; yet so, as whatsoever shall be here in
this my treatise written, I humbly submit to the censure of the holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church. Errare quidem possum, homo enim sum, haereticus esse
nolo: Well I may err, for a man I am, but heretic will I never be.

In the days of Samuel the Prophet, after the people of Israel had been four
hundred years ruled and governed by certain rulers called Judges, upon
occasion of Samuels sons misdemeanour in their government, 1. Reg. 8.
all the elders of Israel came to Samuel in Ramatha, and they said unto him:
Behold thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways; appoint us a King,
like as all nations have. Whereupon, though this word highly displeased Samuel,
God commanded him to hear them; howbeit he should witness and foretell them
the authority or right of a King: which he did, saying, This will be the right
of a King that is to govern over you, etc. All which things in the text of
Scripture expressed by Samuel, Gloss. ordin. in hunc locu^.
are a Kings right (as faith the Gloss) in time of need, for the good of the
weal public; though it were to be wished that many of the^ were moderatly
used, Tho. 1. 2. q. 105. at. 1. ad 5
especially all those things which seem to make the people that is subject, to
be servile or slavish; and which respect not the common good, but rather the
will of the man exalted in the kingdom. These or such like did Samuel foretell
them, to withdraw them from asking a king, because it was not expedient for
them: and because, that government for the greatness or excellency of power,
is easily converted into tyranny.

After this, God sent Saul, and then revealed unto Samuel, that he was the king
that should govern his people-Israel, and commanded to anoint him. Which he
did, saying: Ecce vnxit te Dominus super haereditatem suam in Principem, 1.
Reg. 10.
and liberabis populum suum de manibus inimicoru^ eius qui in circuitu eius
sunt. Behold our Lord has anointed thee to be Prince over his inheritance,
and thou shall deliver his people from the hands of their enemies which are
round about them. Not long after, king Saul for disobeying the precept of God
given him by Samuel, was by God deprived of his kingdom, as the Scripture
says, and not by Samuel, as some would have it. 1. Reg. 15.
Quia proiecisti sermonem Domini, and proiecit te Dominus ne sis Rex super
Israel. Because thou have rejected the word of our Lord, our Lord also has
rejected thee, that thou may not be king over Israel.

By this example some gather (as they think) a strong argument, viz. a
fortiori, that the Church of God, and the Pope, Christ's vicar in earth, may
justly deprive or dispossess kings of their scepters and dominions upon cause
given, as for heresy or apostasy, etc. when as the Synagogue and Samuel had
this authority, who de facto deposed Saul for disobedience only.

If this were true, then indeed were the argument of some force; for it cannot
be denied, but that the spiritual power of the Church of Christ, is much
greater then was that of the Synagogue of the Jews, and the Pope has more
ample * ordinary authority then Samuel had: yet it follows not hereof, that
either the Pope, or Church, by any power received from Christ Jesus, can
deprive, depose, or disposses any lawful Prince or private man, that is not a
vassal, feudatarie or subject unto him, of his goods temporal, state, crown,
or dignity: because neither the Synagogue, nor Samuel were ever endued with
this power. It is not any where to be found in all the old Testament that the
Synagogue of the Jews (the figure of Christ's Church) or high Priest or Bishop
for the time being, could, or de facto ever did depose any lawful king of
Israel or Judah from their Empire, were he never so wicked, never so perverse or
cruel, and in his place did substitute an other. Whereby then is evident, that
no good argument can be gathered by this example, to prove such power to be in
the new law, and in the Church or governors thereof.

That Samuel deposed not king Saul by any authority in him existing, but
Almighty God himself, may easily be proved thus: for either he must depose
him by temporal authority as he was a Judge, which could not be, he being
deprived thereof when Saul was made king, and was no more a governor but a
subject; or else by some ordinary power of spiritual jurisdiction over him,
which he had not, for that he was nor Bishop nor Priest (though a great
Prophet) but only a Leuite, as Genebrard, Saint Hierome, Geneb. in Ps. 98.
Hierom. lib. 1. in louin Bellar. in Psalm. 98. Pintus in Ezech. c. 45. p. 549.
Cardinal Bellarmine, Hector Pintus and others affirm; to whom such
jurisdiction did no way appertain. Therefore Samuel deposed him not, but only
as an extraordinary Ambassador executed the will and judgment of God in his
deposition, who had given him a special warrant or commandment as touching
the same, which will appear manifestly to him that reads the Scripture: Sine
me, and indicabo tibi quae locutus est Dominus ad me nocte. 1. Reg. 15.
Suffer me (said Samuel to the king when he came to him) and I will declare
unto you what our Lord has spoken to me in the night. And then forthwith
delivered his message, that which God had revealed unto him, to wit, that our
Lord had so rejected him and his progeny, as (albeit he were in person to
enjoy the kingdom to his lives end, as he did forty years) that none of his
stock or seed should successively reign after him, and be of that line of
whom Christ the Messiah was to be incarnate.

If then neither the Synagogue nor Samuel did, or could by any ordinary power
depose Saul, elected by God, I do not see how by this example any good argument
can be drawn in consequence for the Churches, or the Popes ordinary power of
deposing Princes. Had such authority bin granted to the Synagogue or high
Priests in the old law, why I pray you had it not been practiced on the persons
of Achaz, Manasses, Amon, Ioachaz, and other kings of Judah, who were much more
wicked then Saul was? and on impious Jeroboam that led with him all Israel to
Idolatry? Achab, Ochozias, Ioachaz, and the rest of the kings of Israel, who
exceeded in all kind of impiety? in whose days flourished Ahias, Semeias,
Elias, Eliseus, Isaias, Jeremy, and other great Prophets, endued with
marvelous courage, zeal, authority, and sanctity of life; yet none went
about to depose or take the crown from the head of any Prince lawfully
invested, though he were never so wicked: knowing right well, that whatsoever
they wrought with Princes about the overthrow of some, or setting up of others,
or foretold what was to happen unto them; it was not by any ordinary power
that they had, but extraordinary, by special commandment and revelation from
Almighty God. Now by this fact of Samuel it may well be deduced, that
whenever the Pope, governor of Gods house, shall have special revelation
from above, as Samuel had, that such a particular king is to be deposed, and
another placed in his room; the^ it cannot be denied but he may do as Samuel
did, that is, as I have said, he may and ought to declare the will of God
revealed unto him without any concurrence to the execution thereof, only
denouncing Gods sentence of deiection or deposition of such a Prince, when he
knows certainly, that so is the will and pleasure of our Lord, whose will
none may contradict. Voluntati eius quis resistit? Who is able to resist his
will? nor is any to expostulate why he does so. And if such a thing should ever
happen, then were the argument good and sound, otherwise, weak, and of no
force.

If any man after this, object unto me, that Athalia was deposed, and slain by
the commandment of Ioiada the high Priest, when she had reigned seven years:
therefore it seems he had authority from God so to do; and if he had, why
should not the Pope have the like over exorbitant Princes?

For solution hereof, I refer him to the place of holy Scripture, where he
may see with half an eye, 4. Reg. 11.
that Athalia was no lawful Queen, but an usurping tyrant; who had murdered
all the kingly race, and so intruded her self most unjustly. Whereupon Ioiada,
high Priest, brought forth, and presented to the people Ioas, son to
Ochozias, who was strangely preserved, by means of his Aunt Iosaba, when he
was but an infant, from that tyrannous slaughter made by his Grandmother
Athalia; and together with their full consents, performing the duty of a good
subject, restored the true heir to the right of his kingdom; which could
hardly have been effected without the high Priests assistance, who was the
chiefest in matters of religion; and therefore much honored and respected of
the people. So this fact of Ioiada proves nothing, but that it is lawful for
a state or commonwealth to depose an usurper, and restore the true heir to his
right; and not that he had any authority to depose any lawful Prince, were he
otherwise never so exorbitant in life, manners and belief, or cruel in his
government.

Well Sir, though this be granted, that neither the Synagogue of the Jews, nor
Samuel the Prophet, nor Ioiada the high Priest, had authority to depose
Princes and dispose of their temporals; yet can we not be persuaded but that
the Church of Christ, and his Vicar in earth the Pope (whose power is not
limited to one sort of people, as it was in the old law, but is extended over
all Christians, as well Princes as people, throughout the world) may justly
depose kings and dispose of their kingdoms, when he shall judge it expedient
to the glory of God, and utility of the Church. And the rather because this
has been practiced by diverse precedent Popes upon certain Princes in these
latter ages, for crimes adjudged by them to deserve the same: which we suppose
they would never have enterprised, had they not sufficient warrant out of holy
Scriptures, or examples of the Apostles and ancient Bishops of Gods Church, or
else authority from the holy Ghost by a definitive sentence in some general
Council. We pray you touch this point so as you may resolve us thoroughly,
whether they have all, or some of these proofs for that authority: if they
have not, then is it clear in our opinions not to be de fide; and if it be not
a point of faith, binding all to believe that his Holiness has such authority,
we see no reason why (upon his bare commandment) we should so deeply plunge
our selves into a sea of calamities, as of necessity we must, by losing all
lands and goods whatsoever we have, to the utter undoing of our selves, wives
and children, and hazarding our lives by perpetual imprisonment, for refusing
to perform our duty to our Sovereign, by taking the Oath of allegiance,
wherein we swear fealty and civil obedience, which is due by the law of God
and nature. Reddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, and quae Dei Deo. Render (says
our Savior) to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods.
Besides, if we refuse it, we shall not take away, but greatly increase the
heavy imputation of treason and treachery, which our adversaries have this
long time laid on Catholics, and confirm them in this their wrong opinion,
that to be a true Catholic of the Roman Church, and a good subject, cannot
stand and agree together.

Beloved brethren, lest any man be scandalized at this my writing, judging it
not to savor of a true Catholic heart, nor of an obedient child of the
Apostolic Church, but rather to proceed from an evil affected mind fraught
with passion; accept for a premunition, and I wish I may not be mistaken; *
that sincerely and without spleen or passion, I intend, to set down nothing,
but what I shall think in my opinion to be truth; and that I honor and
reverence with heart and mind the holy Catholic Church of Rome, acknowledging
and steadfastly believing with the holy Fathers, that to be the mother of
Churches, the Sea of Peter, the rock against which hell gates shall not
prevail; the house of God, out of which who eats the Lamb, is profane, and
out of which no salvation is to be hoped for, as the great D. S. Augustine and
others do teach us; In sermon. super gestis Emer. Donat. and elsewhere. Hieron.
ep. ad Dam. Amb. 1. Tim. 3. Athan. ep. ad Felicem.
and that the Pope is the chief Bishop and Pastor thereof, Christ's Vicar in
earth, and successor to S. Peter prince of the Apostles, who by his spiritual
power given by Christ our Lord, has jurisdiction over all Christian Princes
and monarchs as well as poor men, so far as is requisite to the conversion
and feeding of souls.

But I cannot easily be induced to believe, that this power given him by Christ
in S. Peter, extends it self to the deprivation or deposition of secular
Princes of their dominions; or to the deposing of any lay-mans temporal goods
and patrimony, for any cause whatsoever, yea for heresy it self, who is not
temporally a vassal and subject to his Holiness. And if his spiritual
authority given him by our Savior, can work no such effect, much less his
temporal, which was never granted by Christ (by whom he ought to have
whatsoever he has for the good government of his Church) but by holy secular
Princes, whereof Cardinal Allen writes thus: The chief Bishops of Christ's
Church, In his answer to the Eng. just. page 144.
our supreme Pastors in earth, by Gods providence, and by the graunts of our
first most Christian Emperors and Kings, and by the humble and zealous
devotion of the faithful Princes and people afterward, have their temporal
states, dominions and patrimonies, whereby they most justly hold and possess
the same, and are thereby lawful Princes temporal, and may most rightfully by
their sovereignty make wars in their own and other men's just quarrel, as
occasion shall urge them thereunto. This he. The like in effect writes the
most excellent lawyer D. Barclai, Lib. de potestate Papae, ^ 15.
that the Pope himself is no otherwise excluded from temporal subjection to
secular Princes, then that by the benefit or liberality of Kings he was made
a King, forsooth a political Prince, acknowledging none for his superior in
temporals. And the same does the most earnest maintainer of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction confess, whom many think to be Cardinal Bellarmine, Sub nomine
Francisci Romuli page 114.
in his answer to the principal chapters of an Apology, etc. Generalis
(inquit) and verissima est illa sententia, debere omnes omnino superiori
potestati obtemperare. Sed quia, etc. It is a general and most true sentence,
that all ought to obey higher power: but because power is of two sorts,
spiritual and temporal, ecclesiastical and political, whereof the one
belongs to Bishops, the other to Kings; Bishops ought to be subject to Kings
in temporal things, and Kings unto Bishops in spirituals: as copiously do
dispute Gelasius the first, Gelasius. Nicolaus.
in his Epistle to Anastasius, and Nicolas the first, in his Epistle to
Michael. But because the Bishop of Rome is not only the chief Ecclesiastical
Prince, to whom all Christians by the law of God are subject, but is also in
his own Provinces a temporal Prince; neither does he acknowledge any
superior in temporals, as nor other absolute and sovereign Princes do in
their kingdoms and dominions, thence it proceeds that he has no power above
him in earth. Not then because he is chief Bishop, and spiritual father of
all Christians, therefore he is delivered from temporal subjection, but
because he enjoys a temporal principality subject to none. In those things
therefore which appertain to the good of the commonwealth, and civil
society, and are not repugnant to the divine ordinance, Clerks are no less
bound to obey the sovereign temporal Prince, then other citizens or subjects;
as Cardinal Bellarmine himself very notably shows: Quia clerici, In lib.
de Clericis, c. 28.
praeterqua^ quod clerici sunt, sunt etia^ ciues, and parts quaedam Reipub.
politicae. Non sunt exempti clerici vllo modo, inquit, ab obligatione legum
ciuilium, quae non repugnant sacris canonibus vel officio clericali: That
clergy men, besides that they are clergy men, are also citizens and certain
parts of the political commonwealth. Clerks (says he) are not exempted by
any means from the bond of the civil laws, which are not repugnant to the
sacred canons, or their clericall office. By this you may see, that the Pope
has his temporalities and temporal power, not from Christ, but from
Constantine and other Christian Princes and people, and was ever subject to
civil government of Emperors, till such time as by their graunts he was made
a King and temporal Prince, and so had no superior; and that Clerks (as parts
of the political commonwealth) are bound to obey al just laws of the same
commonwealth no less then the Laity: but more of this in another place, as
occasion shall serve. Now to come somewhat nearer the question that I promised,
and you desire to be resolved on, as touching the Popes authority to depose
Princes of their temporal dominions: First you are to note, that of this
matter there are two opinions much different the one from the other, one of the
Canonists, another of Divines. The Canonists hold it for true doctrine to be
maintained, Tho. Bozius. Carerius. D. Marta. and others.
that all power whatsoever is in this world, either temporal and civil, or
spiritual and ecclesiastical, was given directly by Christ to Peter and his
successors; and what power any Kings or Princes in the whole world, either
Christians or Infidels have, it all depends of the Pope, and is derived from
him to them, as touching the temporal execution: so that as Lord of the world,
he may depose Princes, take away their kingdoms and principalities, and give
or dispose them to whom he list, though no man know the cause why he does so;
if he shall judge there is sufficient cause to do it. If this were true
doctrine, then woe to all Princes that should at any time yea but break amity
and friendship with him that sits in Peter's seat: what security could they
have of their estates? Then might they expect, of Princes and rulers to be made
private men and subjects; then may it be granted that our Sovereign were not
unlike to be deprived of his temporals, his subjects to be discharged of their
obedience, and his territories given in prey to his enemies. But this opinion
is held to be most false by many Divines, because it cannot be proved either by
authority of Scripture, or by tradition of the Apostles, or practice of the
ancient Church, or by the doctrine and testimonies of the ancient Fathers.
Howbeit Bozius a late writer most stoutly defends the same, Lib. 2. cap. 11
and greatly blames many excellent Divines (among whom is renowned Cardinal
Bellarmine) and calls them new divines, saying moreover, that they teach most
manifestly false doctrine, Lib. 5. cap. vlt.
and repugnant to all truth, because they say that Christ as man, was never a
temporal king, nor had any temporal dominion on earth, nor did exercise or
practice any regal power, (for by these assertions, the principal foundations
of Bozius frivolous arguments are overthrown) which as most true they confirm
by the testimony of our Savior himself. Math. 8. Luc. 9.
Foxes (says he) have holes, and the fowls of the air nests, but the Son
of man has not where to put his head. If Christ Jesus as he was the son of man
had not so much in this world as a cottage to rest himself in: where I pray you
is his kingdom? where is his temporal dominion? who can conceive that one can
be king and Lord, who has no kingdom or Lordship in the universal world? We
know well that as he is the Son of God, he is the King of glory, King of
kings, Lord of heaven and earth, and of all things, Psalm. 23.
( Domini enim est terra and plenitudo eius) and reigns with the Father and
the holy Ghost for ever: but what is this to a temporal kingdom? what is this
to the imperial dignity of secular majesty? Therefore I mean not to stand
to confute this opinion of Canonists, which has been most learnedly confuted
by Cardinal Bellarmine, Lib. 5. de sum Pont. c. 2. and 3
but to let it pass as most absurd, that cannot be proved by any sound reason,
nor ancient authorities either of Scriptures, Fathers, or Councels; but
maintained by captious fallacies, unapt similitudes, and corrupt
interpretations.

An other opinion there is of Divines, who dislike, and with most strong
reasons do confute the Canonists positio^s, but yet so as they uphold and
labor to maintain the Popes temporal power, though in other sort then the
former, that is* De To. Pont. lib. 5. c. 6.
indirectly, or casually and by consequence. This then they write, and namely
Cardinal Bellarmine: Asserimus, Pontificem, vt Pontificem, et si non habeat
vllam mere temporalem potestatem, tamen habere in ordine ad bonum spirituale
summam potestatem disponendi de temporalibus rebus omnium Christianorum. We
affirm that the Pope, as Pope, although he has not any merely temporal power,
yet in order to the spiritual good, he has a supereminent power to dispose of
the te^potall goods of all Christians. And again in the same chapter: Quantum
ad personas, non potest Papa, vt Papa, ordinary temporales Principes deponere,
etiam iusta decausa, eo modo quo deponit Episcopos, id est, tanquam ordinarius
iudex, etc. As touching the persons, the Pope as Pope cannot ordinarily depose
temporal Princes, yea for a just cause, after that sort as he deposes
Bishops, that is, as an ordinary judge: yet he may change kingdoms, and take
from one, and give to an other as the chief spiritual Prince, if that be
necessary to the health or saving of souls. And in the same book the first
chapter, where he puts down the Catholic opinion (as he says) he
alters it somewhat in this manner. Pontificem vt Pontificem, etc. That the
Pope as Pope, Lib. 5. cap. 1.
has not directly and immediately any temporal power, but only spiritual; yet
by reason of the spiritual, he has at least indirectly a certain power, and
that chief or highest in te^porals.

You have here set down by Cardinal Bellarmine, the opinion of Divines, that
the Pope as Pope, or chief Bishop as chief Bishop, has not directly and
immediately any temporal power to depose Christian Princes, but that
indirectly, I wot not how, he may depose them, and dispose of their temporals:
and so in effect, and after a sort, agreeeth with the Canonists, that indeed
such power is rightly in him; only he differs about the manner, with a
restraint, from infidels to Christian Princes. But I trust, as he in improuing
the Canonists assertion of direct power over all the world, drives them to
Scriptures, or tradition of the Apostles; so likewise we may require that he
prove his indirect power by one of these two ways. If he cannot, as most
certainly he cannot, then why should men give more credit to him then to the
other, they being as Catholic, and happily no less learned then he? Why should
his opinion be thought more true then the former? To disprove the Canonists
thus he writes: Ex Scriptur is nihil habemus, Bellar de To. Pont l. 5. c. 3.
nisi datas Pontifici claues regni coelorum, declauibus regni terrarium nulla
mention fit. Traditionem Apostolicam nullam adversary proferunt. Out of
Scriptures we have nothing, but that the keys of the kingdom of heaven were
given to the Pope, of the keys of the kingdom of the earth no mention is made
at all. Apostolical tradition our adversaries produce none. Hereby it seems
the Cardinal goes about to prove against his adversaries, that because the
keys of the kingdom of the earth are no where mentioned in the Scripture to
be given to Peter and his sucsessors, therefore the Pope has not any direct
authority to depose the Princes of the world, nor dispose of their temporals:
insinuating that the keys of the kingdom of heaven promised and granted to
Peter (or to the Church in the person of Peter) can work no such effect, nor
were granted to deprive Christian Princes or others of their scepters and
regal dignities; but only by censures and spiritual authority to exclude
unworthy sinners from eternal felicity, and admit such as are truly penitent
to the kingdom of heaven. If this argument be good against the Canonists, then
why is it not also good against Cardinal Bellarmine himself, when as he can
no more produce Apostolical tradition to confirm his indirect authority,
then the other their direct? And of the keys of the kingdom of the earth,
required for deposing Princes and disposing of temporals, no mention is made in
all the Scriptures, no not for his indirect or casual authority.

Consider besides I pray you (for it is worth the noting) how obscurely and
ambiguously, he writes of the Popes power to depose, thereby happily intending
to seek some starting hole of equivocation if occasion serve; and mean while
leave his reader doubtful, and still to seek of his meaning, which in my
simple Judgment is such as the judicious wit can hardly conceive, nor tell
what he would say. As for example, that the chief Bishop as chief Bishop has
not any power merely temporal, etc. as is noted before lib. 5. cap. 6. and in
the same chapter: The Pope as Pope cannot ordinarily (note) depose, etc. no not
for a just cause: mary as he is the chief spiritual Prince he may depose and
dispose, etc. Help me good Reader to understand this riddle, how these two
differ in some essential point, Pope, and chief spiritual Prince. I must
confess that I understand not how he is the chief spiritual Prince, but as
he is Pope, that is, the Father of Fathers, or chief Pastor of souls in the
Church of God. It is well known that this title Pope, or Papa in Latin, has
been attributed to many ancient Patriarchs and Bishops, as well as to the
Bishop of Rome (though principally to him, and now is appropriated to him
alone) and for naught else, but for being Bishops and Ecclesiastical Princes
of the Church: and for that cause only, and not for being a temporal Prince,
Peter's successor, has his denomination. Which in effect D. Kellison affirms,
saying: D. Kellisons Reply to M. Sutel. ca. 1. f. 9. Bern. lib. 2. de consid.
I grant with S. Bernard, that the Pope as Pope has no temporal jurisdiction,
his power, as he is Pope, being only spiritual. If then it be so, that the
Pope as Pope has no temporal power over Princes, nor can depose them, etiam
iusta de causa, as the Cardinal says, surely I cannot with cristall
spectacles see how he can depose as a spiritual Prince, there being no
perceptible difference between them.

If I should stand to note unto you the rest of his obscurities and
ambiguities, I fear I should be too tedious, therefore I purpose to surceasse,
and leave them to your prudent consideration: as, The Pope has not any power
merely temporal; he cannot as Pope ordinarily depose temporal Princes, as an
ordinary judge; he has at least indirectly a certain power, and that
chiefest or highest in temporals: and such like, which seem no less fearfully
then obscurely written and taught.

This doubtful doctrine of most learned Cardinal Bellarmine, and the variety
or contrariety of opinions between him and other very learned Clerks in Gods
church about this matter of deposition, is to me a most strong argument, that
it is not de fide: for if it were, then would there be an uniform content and
perfect agreement among them, not only of the thing controuerted, but also of
the manner, and causes thereof, no less then is of Purgatory, prayer to
Saints, of the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the B. Sacrament,
of the virginity of our B. Lady, incarnation of Christ, seven Sacraments, and
so of all other points of faith. Then would a matter of such moment have been
found in the writings of some ancient Father, as well as other of less
importance; but for well near a thousand years continuance, till the time of
Gregory the 7. it was never challenged, mentioned or defended by any writer: or
else it would have been defined in some general Council, whose authority
binds all Christians to believe whatsoever is there decreed, to be de fide,
without controversy; which to this day never was, no not in the third Council
of Lateran under Innocentius 3. as some ignorantly think, and build them
strong castles in the air; and others inconsiderately auerre, howbeit not
simply and plainly, but somewhat timorously, which they need not do if it were
so, but should confidently avouch it so to be. Prou. 10.
Qui ambulat simplicitter, ambulat confidenter. He that goes simply and
plainly to work, goes confidently. A matter of faith is to be taught
sincerely and perspicuously, not doubtfully or guilefully, as it were to
deceive his readers, or thereby to hold them in suspense in such wise, as they
shall ever remain perplexed and to seek of the one meaning of what is written.

O sir, if you read that Council of Lateran, cap. 3. you shall find it
plainly decreed, that Princes which be negligent in purging out of their
territories the filth of heresy, are to be deposed.

This indeed were somewhat to the purpose, if it were true as you say; but if
you believe so, you are in an error: for who reads that chapter, shall well
perceive it was not there decreed or defined, but treated of the manner how
certain secular powers or temporal Lords (without specifying Kings) might be
proceeded withal; and nothing decreed de fide concerning deposition of
Princes: if it had been defined matter of faith, it must of necessity have
bound all Catholics, as well Princes as people, to believe it, and accept
thereof. Moreover, such a decree must always have continued immutable, and
could not be abrogated, as Cardinal Bellarmine writes: Decreta de fide
immutabilia sunt, Bellar. Lib. 2. Conc c. 17.
nec possunt vllo modo abrogari postquam semel statuta sunt. The decrees of
faith are immutable, neither can they be abrogated by any means after they are
once decreed. And if it be no decree of faith (as it is not) but only of
reformation, who I pray you will say it does bind, till it be accepted and
received? Famous Cardinal Tolet faith no; and for his assertion cites the
Canon law Can. In istis, did. 4. Tolet. de 7. pec. Mor. c. 18.
Vt lex vim habeat, debet esse recepta ab his quibus lex datur; si enim lex
promulgata est, sed non recepta, non obligat. For a law to be of force, it
ought to be received of those to whom the law is given; for if a law (to wit
Ecclesiasticke) be promulgated, but not received, it binds not. Do we not see
that the wholesome laws or decrees of the Council of Trent touching
reformation, bind not where they are not yet received, as in France and other
places? And is any man so unwise to think, that Princes will ever receive such
decrees as may bereave them of their scepters and temporal states, and turn
to their utter ruin? Never was it hitherto seen, nor ever will it be by all
likelihood in Great Britain, or any other kingdom.

Furthermore, in that chapter is no mention made of excommunicating Emperor or
Kings, nor deposing them, nor absoluing their subjects from their natural
obedience, but of excommunicating heresy, giving over such as are condemned
for that crimce, to the secular magistrate to be punished; and ordering
withal, that certain other secular powers or principal Lords inferior to
Kings, as may be Potestates, Consuls, Rectors, or such like (which by the
constitution of Frederick 2. page 66
Emperor is evident) should be compelled (if need were) to take an oath to do
their endeavor for the extirpation of heretics out of such places as should
be under their government; when of necessity both Emperor and kings ought to
have been specified, if the Council had meant to have included them in that
law. Sa Apho. v. lex. de elect. l. 6 ca 22. and de reg in edic. and in poenis,
sc. reg. 16. and 49. l. 6.
In poenalibus (says Samuel Sa) and restrictione vtendum, and pia
interpretatione. In penals we are to use both a restriction, and a pious
interpretation. Likewise, Poenae non extendendae vltra casus iure expressos:
Punishments are not to be extended beyond the cases expressed in the law. Then
why shall this be enlarged, and extended to kings, who are not expressed in the
decree of the Council? Therefore this chapter makes nothing for the Popes
authority to deprive kings of their crowns and dignities: and so consequently
is of no validity against the Oath of Allegiance made anno tertio Iacobi Regis
serenissimi.

But for better clearing this point, it shall not be amiss to set down the
decree of the Council as it is, leaving it to the considerations of the
learned, (...) judge whether it be of faith or no, which begins thus:

Excommunicamus and anathematizamus omnem haeresim, Conc. Later. 3 c. 3.
etc. We excommunicate and anathematize all heresy that exalts it self
against this holy, orthodoxe, Catholic faith, Note that the punishment of
heretics is to be commutted by sentence of this Council to secular powers.
which above we have declared, etc. And let such as are condemned, be left unto
secular powers if they be present, or unto their Bailiffes (or Presidents) to
be punished with due punishment, Clearkes being first degraded from their
orders. And such as shall be found noted with suspicion only, unless
according to the consideration of the suspicion and the quality of the person,
they show their own innocence by a meet purging, let them be excommunicated,
and the quality of the person, they show their own innocence by a meet
purging, let them be excommunicated, and avoided of all, till they have made
condign fatisfaction so that if for the space of a year they stand
excommunicate, from that time forward let them be condemned as heretics. All
which seems not to serve the Cardinals turn to prove the Pope to have power
to depose, and therefore in his answer to D. Barclai page 30. he omitted it
saving the first sentence Excommunicamus. It follows in the Council:

Moneantur autem and inducantur, etc. And let the secular powers, yea of what
office soever, be admonished and induced, and if need be, compelled; as they
desire to be reputed and accounted faithful, so for the defense of faith, let
them take publicly an Oath, that they will endeavor bona fide, to their power,
to root out of the lands subject to their jurisdiction all heretics marked
out by the Church, so that henceforward, whenever any shall be assumed into
either spiritual or temporal potestacie, he be bound to confirm this
chapter. This part also the Cardinal left our, as not being any thing for his
purpose, and takes hold of this clause ensuing.

Sivero Dominus temporalis. And if the temporal Lord being required and
admonished by the Church, shall neglect to purge his land from this heretical
filth, let him be excommunicated by the Metropolitan and comprouinciall
Bishops. And if he shall contemn to make satisfaction within a year, let this
be signified to the Pope, that he may from that time denounce his vassals
absolved from his fealty, and may expose his land to be occupied by
Catholics, who having rooted out the heretics, may possess it without any
contradiction, and conserve it in the purity of faith, the right of the
principal Lord referued, so that to this he be no hinderance, nor oppose any
impediment, the same law notwithstanding being kept about those who have not
principal Lords.

How greatly might it have been wished, that the most illustrous Cardinal
Bellarmine, either in Tortus, See Tortus p. 73. Colon.
or in his answer to D. Barclai, or in some other of his learned works, had so
clearly explicated this latter part of the Council, esteemed of him the
greatest and most famous (howbeit the Council of Chalcedon for number of
Bishops was much greater) that all might have rested satisfied of the
irrefragable decree of the Popes power to depose Princes? May it not be said
unto him; Quousque animam nostram tollis? if this be of faith, dic nobis palam.
But this, his Gr. (with his good leave be it spoken) has not yet performed, no
not in his last against Bellar. in Barc p. 31. Colon.
D. Barclai; howsoever he laboutech to beat down a simple reader with words
full of terror, to wit: That it is the voice of the Catholic Church, and he
that contemns to hear her as (he says) Barclai has done, is no way to be
accounted a Christian, but as a Heathen and Publican. And, if the Pope has not
power in earth, to dispose of temporals, even to the deposition of those
Princes, who are either themselves heretics, or in any sort do favor
heretics; why at the edition of this Canon, did none of so great a number,
reclame against it? Why durst not, no not one, among so many Ambassadors of
Emperors and kings, once mutter at it?

This lo, is all the Cardinal brings for proof of the supposed decree of
faith, in the third Council of Lateran, (which is little to the purpose, and
not so dreadful as the words import, if it be well considered) saying: It is
the voice of the Catholic Church. What? that it is a point of faith there
concluded, binding all Christians to believe, that the Pope has power to
depose kings, and dispose of temporals? Was there Anathema thundered against any
that should not believe it? Nothing less, as you may see if ye note the words.
And therefore Barclai has not conte^ned the Church (nor others that agree with
him in opinion) who did always highly reverence whatsoever she decreed, tanquam
de fide, in any general Council; whose soul I trust does rest in peace, and
whose defense I make no doubt but some will take in hand.

Then his Grace demands, why none reclamed against this Canon, nor any
Ambassador once muttered at it? This why, in my judgment, may be answered
with a, Wherefore have Metropolitans and Bishops all this time, being almost
400. years agone, bin so negligent in performing their duty, The 3 Council
of Lateran held an. ^alutis 1215.
by admonishing and excommunicating their Princes, if this decree did bind
them? And wherefore have not Bishops that were remiss and negligent in purging
heresy out of their Diocesses, been deposed according to the Councels order,
as appears in the end of this Canon? The words are, Volumus igitur and
mandamus, and in virtute obedientiae districte praecipimus, etc. We will
therefore and command, and in the virtue of obedience do straightly charge,
that for the effectual execution of these things, Bishops watch diligently
over they Diocesses, as they will avoid the Canonical revenge. For if any
Bishop shall be negligent or remiss in purging out of his diocese the leaven
of heretical deformity, when that shall appear by evident signs, let him be
deposed from Episcopal office, and into his room let another that is fit be
substituted, who will, and is able to confound heretical prauitie. This out of
the Council. Are these to be reputed as Heathens and publicans for not obeying
the voice of the Church in this point? I know the Cardinal will not be so
severe a judge, in such wise to censure them, albeit they obey not the straight
commandment of this great and famous Conc. Trid. Sess 25. c. 22. and de
reform. cap. 20.
Council, whose decrees of reformation, as also of all other general Councels,
they are more bound to accept and put in execution, then kings and secular
potentates.

And is it not more then probable that some there reclamed, some muttered,
though the Cardinal happily find it not registered, when according to the order
of the Council, and by virtue of this decree it was never executed? Then,
Nonne frustra est illa potentia quae nunquam redigitur in actum? Yes says
Cardinal Bellarmine, speaking in a like case, of Christ's regal power in earth,
upon those words of our Savior: Joan. 18.
Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo. Christ never exercised regal power in this
world: for he came to minister, not to be ministered unto. Therefore in vain
(says he) had he received regal authority; frustra est enim potentia quae,
nunquam redigitur in actum.

But supposing with the Cardinal there were not then any reclamation nor any
muttering against it, yet may such a constitution being never received,
Panormitan. 10. Andr.
or upon disuse of so long time, be justly said to be abrogated, as many Canons
and Decrees of this, and other Councels have been. And namely, that in this
Council which forbids new religions to arise, Can. 13. since which time,
notwithstanding, Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 16.
have risen the Minims of S. Francis de Paula, the religion of the Jesuits,
and others. That Metropolitans should celebrate provincial Councels every
year, was appointed ca. 6. which is not observed. Can. 3.
And in the Council of Lateran under Leo 10. was decreed, that Monasteries
after the deceasse of the Abbots should not be given away to any in commenda,
or commended to any who were not religious: but how this likewise is observed,
Constantino. Conc. can. 50 and 59.
the Monks and religious of Italy, France, and other countries can testify.
In the sixth general Council, clergy men were forbidden to play at dice; and
it was ordered that Baptism should be administered only in Churches: which are
not kept. Many mo instances out of other Councels might be to this purpose
produced, but to avoid tediousness these few may suffice.

Now for a further answer, I wish you to note, that this Council indeed (as by
the words in the chapter is clear) did first excommunicate all heresy that
lifted up it self against that faith which the Fathers had set down in the two
precedent chapters: and ordained that such as were therefore condemned, as also
all other heretics, should be left unto the secular powers to be condignly
punished. Secondly, this holy Synod decreed, that such as were only suspected
of heresy should clear themselves of that note within a year after
admonition; otherwise they were to be excommunicated and avoided till they had
made condign satiffaction. Which was but the right practice and true
proceeding of the Church, to inflict spiritual censures, that the souls of
the offenders might be saved in the day of our Lord, leaving them to the
secular Magistrates to be further punished temporally.

Thirdly, it was set down in this Synod, as meet and convenient, that
secular powers should be admonished, and if need were, compelled to take a
public oath for defense of faith, and to do their best endeavors to root out
of their territories, all such heretics as should be denounced by the Church:
and none to be assumed into office which should not by oath confirm this
chapter. By secular powers and such as shall be assumed into potestacie or
office, either spiritual or temporal, was not nor could be meant Emperor or
King, but rather Presidents or Gouerners of Provinces subject unto Kings, and
absolute Princes; who being Catholics, may by their excelling power assisting
the Church, compel them to confirm this chapter by taking such an Oath: but
themselves cannot be compelled by any, having no superior on earth in temporals
to force them thereunto. Neither may it be said properly, that a King, coming
to his crown by lawful succession and inheritance, or election, is assumed
into office by any, his subjects or others; for then it would follow, that he
were not supremus Dominus, a Sovereign, but in some sort inferior to those
that do assume him; because he that is assumed or taken into office, receives
authority from him that assumeth. As, the Pope creating a Cardinal, and
saying, Assumimus te insanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalem, We assume thee to
be a Cardinal of the holy Roman Church, gives him by his supreme authority
that spiritual office and dignity of assisting him in the government of the
Church, and his temporal state, and to have vocem actiuam and passiuam in the
election of the Pope, etc. But his Holiness, though elected by the Cardinals,
cannot properly be said to be assumed by them to the Popedom, because he
receives no power or authority from them, but immediately from God.

Finally, to the latter part, Si vero dominus temporalis: on which Cardinal
Bellarmine fortifieth his assertion of the Popes authority to depose Princes,
saying, It is the voice of the Church: it may be answered, that the Church here
defined it not, as he well knows; if she had, no doubt but his Grace would
have spoken it plainly, to put all out of doubt. By temporal Lords in this
place, ought not to be understood Kings, but rather such as are explicated in
the Emperors constitution, to wit, Potestates, Consuls, Rectors, is hereafter
follows page 34. or such feudatarie Princes as have principal Lords over
them, like to certain in Italy, where this Council was held: which is
manifest by this Canon, that reserueth the right of the principal Lord, Saluo
iure Domini principalis. But I know some will say, that Kings and absolute
Princes are to be also included, for that the words in the latter end seem to
import so much, The same law being kept about those who have not principal
Lords: which ought to be understood of absolute Princes. Lord, being a general
word, signifying sometime Kings. May it not be admired, that out of this
obscurity of the law, men will enforce Kings to be understood, and to be
subject to temporal punishments, who acknowledge no superior on earth to
punish them in temporals, especially when as no mention is made of them at all
in the law? In penals (as I have said before page 51.) a restriction is to be
used, not an ampliation; and Kings are no less to be named or specified by the
orderly proceeding of the Church, then Cardinals, Conc. Trid. sess. 24. de
reform. cap. 1.
who are always named in poenis, or else not included, though the Pope command
sub poena excommunicationis all Patriarchs, Archbishops or Bishops, of what
dignity soever. If yet any will enforce, that By those who have not principal
Lords, Kings are or may be understood, it helps them nothing at all, for that
such a law, first never received, and again per desuetudinem, being never by
the Church put in practice, is abrogated and of no validity.

Neither was it defined in this Council (as all men of mean judgment may
see) that the Pope has authority to absolve subjects from their loyalty or
natural obedience due to their Princes; but only signified, that he might
denounce the vassals of certain temporal Lords, absolved (as it were by
virtue of some former law, to wit, that of Gregory 7, Nos sanctorum, 15. q. 6.
ca: Nos sanctoru^
or some other) from their fealty, who being admonished and excommunicated by
the Metropolitan, shall contemn to make satisfaction within a year: which is
not to absolve them by any authority given by this Council, and so it makes
nothing against the Oath of allegiance: That the Pope cannot absolve me from
this Oath.

Then lastly it follows: And may expose his land to be occupied by
Catholics. Is not this (trow ye) the groundworke of the Cardinals bulwark
for the Apostolical authority of deposing Princes, and disposing of their
temporals? It seems yes, in his answer to D. Barclai; howbeit his Grace
brings nothing to prove such power to be in the Pope, Supra page 54
but only says that, you wot not what, is the voice of the Catholic
Church, and he that contemns to hear her, is no way to be accounted a
Christian, but as a heathen and Publican. What words here in the name of God
import a definition? The Council, as you may see, uses none of these words to
make a decree de fide, ordinamus, statuimus, definimus, we ordain, decree,
define the Pope to have authority to depose, nor anathema qui hoc non credit,
anathema to him that believes not this, nor yet, Haec est fides Catholica,
This is the Catholic faith: but only says, That if the temporal Lord
admonished by the Church, shall neglect to purge his country from heresy, he
is to be excommunicated by the Metropolitan; and if he contemn to make
satisfaction within a year, it is to be signified to the Pope, that he may
expose his land (which is not to depose authoritatiue) to be occupied by
Catholics, crucem praedicando, that is, to give indulgences or pardons to
such as shall voluntarily take arms, and adventure their lives to fight
against heretics; and as he is accustomed in like sort to grant to all
Christians that shall arm themselves and labor to expel the Turks or
Saracens out of the countries they usurp upon, or the holy land: as will
appear plainly to him that reads this Canon of the Council. For, it
follows immediately: Catholici vero, qui crucis assumpto charactere ad
haereticorum exterminium se accinxerint, illa gaudeant indulgentia, illoque
priuilegio sint muniti, quod accedentibus in terrae sanctae subsidium
conceditur. And let the Catholics, who having taken the sign of the cross,
shall address themselves to the rooting out of heretics, enjoy the same
indulgence, and be armed with the same privilege which is granted to such as
prepare themselves to the recovery of the holy land. Hereby every man may see,
that in this wise to expose a country by such privileges and pardons to Prince
or people, who either upon zeal of dying Martyrs, as they think, or rather
covetous desire to enlarge their dominions, and to enrich themselves with
others spoils, are ready to take such an occasion, and to run before they be
sent; is nothing to this purpose, for deposing a lawful Prince by any
authority given the Pope by our Savior Christ in S. Peter, or by the holy
Ghost in a general Council. You will say unto me, Are not heretics being
obstinate, upon contempt of the Churches sword of excommunication, to be
punished temporally by deprivation and confiscation of their goods, yea and by
death too? Yes. But by whom? Not by any decree of Pope or Council, but by the
wholesome laws of Emperors and Kings: for the Church, that is, the Pastors
thereof, after excommunication, Tho. 2.2. q. 11. ar. 3.
quia non habet vltra quod agat, because she can proceed no further, is
accustomed to deliver over obstinate heretics and such as she condemns, to
the secular magistrate to be punished temporally, whose right it is, Costerus
in fidei demonst propo. 3. c. 12. Con. Constan sess. 21
as Costerus writes; which is also manifest in the Council of Constance, in
the punishment of Hierome of Prage and John Husse, who being declared to be
heretics, excommunicated and condemned, were forthwith delivered over to the
secular power to be punished by death. Romanae Ecclesiae consuetudo (says
Costerus loco citato) in puniendis haereticis talis est, etc. The custom of
the Church of Rome in punishing heretics, is after this manner: After they
are apprehended by the civil or ecclesiastical magistrate, first they are
examined by learned and ecclesiastical men whether they be indeed heretics:
which being found, they are instructed in the right faith, etc. Then (says he)
if they remain obstinate, ab Ecclesiae gremio vt putrida me^bra
exco^municationis gladio resecantur: qui secundum legum Regumque decreta, prout
fas est, in eos animaduertant. Nulli enim competit Ecclesiastico, vel sanguinem
fundere, vel capitis quenquam condemnare. They are cut off with the sword of
excommunication as rotten members from the lap of the Church, and are delivered
to the civil magistrate to be punished, who according to the decrees of laws
and Kings may punish them, as reason is. For it is not meet for any
Ecclesiastical person either to shed blood, or to condemn any to death.

In the general Council of Constance was pronounced a definitive sentence
against John Husse, wherein for his pertinacie in heresy, as that Council
took it, Molanus de fide haeret. ser. l. 2. c. 2.
his degradation was committed to six Bishops, as writes Molanus out of
Cochlaeus, and his execution to the secular power. Haec sancta Synodus Ioannem
Husse, attento quod Ecclesia Dei non habeat vltra quod agere valeat, iudicio
saeculari relinquere, Can. corripiantur. 24. q. 3.
and ipsum curiae saeculari relinquendum fore decernit. This holy Synod
decrees, considering that the Church of God can proceed no further, (to wit,
then to excommunicate, and other spiritual punishments) to leave John Husse to
secular judgment, and that he ought to be left to the secular Court. Hence
(says Molanus) it is evident, with what small consideration some write, that
John Husse was burnt upon the sentence of the Council of Constance, when as it
was left to secular judgment. Taken out of Cochlaeus lib. 2. ex Hussita. Now
let it be demanded why heretics, noble or ignoble, have not been, and yet are
to be deprived of their temporals, and punished by death, by virtue of that
decree of Pope Innocentitus in the Council of Lateran, but rather by the
decree of Frederick the second, Emperor, which he made (being solicited
thereto by the Pope) anon after that Council at Padua 22. Februarij, indict.
12. against certain heretics called Patareni, if that of the Pope or Council
were to bind and be of force? If the first were obligatorie, what needed the
second of like form to be made? The Emperor might well have spared his labor,
if that former had been deemed sufficient. And this is certain, and a
sufficient proof of the insufficiency thereof, that the subsequent Popes,
Direct. inquisit. lit. Apost. p. 13. 17. 51.
Innocentius 4. Alexander 4. and Clements 4. would have their Judges to punish
and proceed against heretics, by virtue of that constitution of Frederick,
and not by the chapter of Lateran: which they would never have done by Caesar's
law, and not their own, had they not known that Caesar's law in that behalf
was of greater force, and much more moment then their own.

And lest you should, having perchance never seen this imperial Decree, doubt
thereof, I have thought good to set it down at large, which is this. Statuimus
etiam hoc edicto in perpetuum valituro, Constit. Fred. Imper. cont. Patarenos.
vt Potestates and Consules, seu Rectores, quibuscunque fungantur officijs,
defensione fidei praestent publicu^ iuramentum quod de terris suae ditioni
subiectis vniuersos haereticos ab Ecclesia denotatos bona fide pro viribus
exterminare studebunt, ita quod amodo quandocunque quis fuerit in perpetuam
potestatem, vel temporalem assumptus, hoc teneatur capitulum iuramento firmare,
alioquin neque pro Potestatibus, neque pro Consulibus, seu consimilibus
habeantur: eorumque sententias ex tunc decernimus inutiles and inanes. Si vero
Dominus te^poralis requisitus and monitus ab Ecclesia terram suam purgare
neglexerit ab haeretica prauitate, post annum a tempore monitionis elapsum,
terrans ipsius exponimus Catholicis occupandum: qui eam exterminatis haereticis
abque vlla contradictione possideant, and in fidei puritate conseruent: saluo
iure Domini temporalis: dummodo super hoc nullum praestet obstaculum, nec
aliquod impedimentum apponat: eade^ nihilominus lege seruata contra eos qui non
habent Dominos temporales etc. Datum Paduae. 22. Februarij, indictione 12.

In English thus: We decree also by this edict, for ever to be of force, that
Potestates, and Consuls, or Rectors, what offices soever they bear, for
defense of faith, take a public oath, that they shall seriously endeavor what
in them lies, to root out all heretics noted by the Church, out of the
countries subject to their government, so that from henceforth, whenever any
shall be assumpted to a Potestacie for ever, or for a time, let him be bound to
confirm this chapter by oath, otherwise let them not be esteemed for
Potestates, or for Consuls, or such like: and their sentences we decree
forthwith to be unprofitable and of no force. And if the temporal Lord,
required and admonished by the Church, shall neglect to purge his country from
heretical prauitie, after a year expired from the time of the admonition, we
expose his country to be occupied by Catholics: who, when the heretics are
rooted out, may possess it without any contradiction, and maintain it in the
purity of faith: the right of the principal Lord being reserved: so that upon
this he bring no obstacle, nor procure any impediment: the same law
notwithstanding being observed against them that have not principal Lords,
etc. Given at Padua 22. of February, indiction 12.

Now can any man perceive by this imperial law (procured, and used by the
Church in the punishment of heretics) that kings are bound to take the oath
therein specified? or that it is meant, their countries should be given from
them, if after the Churches admonition they yet remain negligent in
extirpating heretics? Nothing less. First, because kings are not named or
mentioned, which is requisite; but Potestates (as are in Italy) Consuls, and
Rectors, or Governors of provinces, such as are inferiors, or subject to the
Emperor or kings; therefore they are not comprised in the law. Nor secondly,
can they be comprised therein (though perchance you will say, that by the
latter clause, it is meant also by kings, and all other absolute Princes, who
have no dependence of the Emperor) for that they are not bound to the keeping
of the law being penal. L. Princeps D de legibus.
Princeps enim solutus est legibus. For the Prince is freed from laws. That
is, as the Grecians understand, from the penalty of laws.

Thirdly, the Emperor being no superior to absolute kings, cannot constrain
them by any law civil, nor punish them. L. non magistratus D. de recep. Qui
arbi.
For, Par in parem non habet imperium, multo minus inferior in superiorem. A
peer or equal has not dominion over his equal, much less an inferior over
his superior; as subjects over their lawful Prince. Now if the Emperor, or
any other Peer, may by virtue of that law, deprive an absolute king of his
kingdom, and confiscate whatsoever he has (which are grievous punishments)
then is he subject to penal laws, and to be corrected not only by his peers
but also by inferiors, and his own subjects: which is absurd, Tert. ad
Scapula^ Praesid. Carthag. Amb. in li. Qui inscrib. Apol. David.
and against the authorities abouesaid, and judgment of ancient Fathers,
Tertullian, Ambrose, Gregorius Turonensis, and others; who write, that a king
is inferior but to God alone, that is, in temporals: that they are not to be
punished by penal laws, being defended with the power of their empire: and,
Greg. l. 5 hist. c 7.
if thou (speaking of a king) do offend, who shall correct thee, who shall
co^demn thee, but he that has pronounced himself to be Justice? This being
so, then cannot that law of the Emperor take hold on kings, nor punish the^
temporally.

But supposing that chapter of the Council, whereof we spoke before, or rather
of Innocentius in the Council, were a decree, what then? does it follow
infallibly that it is. de fide? No. The most reverend Cardinal Bellarmine will
tell you, Bella l. 2. Concap. 12.
that in Councels the greatest part of the acts appertain not to faith, as
disputations, reasons, explications, etc. Sed tantum ipsa nuda decreta, and ea
non omnia, sed tantum quae proponuntur tanquam de fide. That is, But only the
very bare decrees, and not all those neither, but only such as are proposed
as of faith. For sometime (says he) Councels do define somewhat, not as
certain, but as probable, as the Council of Vienna, which decreed to be
holden as the more probable, that grace and virtues are infused to infants in
Baptism, as is, Clement. vnica de summa Trinit. and fide Cath.

Why then Sir, how shall I know when a decree is of faith, and when it is not?
Cardinal Bellarmine in the place above noted will put you out of doubt
thereof. Quando autem decretum proponatur tanquam de side, facile cognoscitur
ex verbis Concilij; semper enim dicere solent, se explicare fidem Catholicam
vel haereticos habendos qui contrariu^ sentiunt, etc. When a decree is proposed
as of faith, it is easily known by the words of the Council; for they are
always accustomed to say, that they explicate the Catholic faith, or, they are
to be held for heretics that think the contrary; or which is most usual,
they say Anathema, and exclude out of the Church, those that are of contrary
opinion. And when they have none of these, it is not certain that the matter
is of faith. This he. By which you learn, and may secure your conscience, that
the doctrine of depositio^ of Princes, either directly or indirectly,
ordinarily, or extraordinarily, casually or by consequence, was never in such
sort decreed in the Council of Lateran, or any other Council to this day: nor
ever defined by any Pope ex cathedra (as some take it) in Consistory tanquam
res fidei formaliter, as a matter of faith formally.

If yet further you desire to know what Authors write, that the Popes
authority in things temporal (as deposing Princes, and disposing kingdoms
you take to be) was never defined; you may read Cardinal Allen against the
English Justice, c. 4. f. 326. who says, Alanus.
that it is a mere matter of Divinity disputable in school, and no
certainty as yet defined by the Church, touching the Popes authority in
things temporal. The same affirm Couarruuias, Couarruuias. Nauarrus.
Bensfildius.
p. 2. page 504. Nauarrus, as is there noted by Couar. and in cap. Nouit de
iudicio notab. Bensfildius de iure and damno dato, c. 7. and others.

Here it may be you will object unto me, and say, that Paulus 5. in prohibiting
by his Breues the Oath of allegiance, seems there to define ex cathedra the
Popes authority in temporals, as some of our Pastors since this controversy
teach us; I pray you let me know your opinion, whether they be definitive
sentences or no.

Beloved brethren, assure your selves they deceive you, that so ignorantly
instruct you; and while they lead you into an error, they hazard your
overthrow. Those Breues are no definitions, but rather admonitions or
aduertisements, as the first, dated 10. Kalendas Octobris, 1606. which has:
Propterea admonemus vos, vt ab hoc at que similibus iuramentis praestandis
omnino caueatis, etc. Therefore we admonish you to beware of taking this and
the like Oaths; affirming it withal to be unlawful. Or else precepts, (though
not obligatorie ad mortale peccatum) as the second seemed to be, dated 10.
Kalend. Septembris, 1607. prohibiting the taking thereof. All which make not a
definition ex cathedra; and it may well be presumed, that his Holiness never
had any such intention to set forth such a decree. To know when a decree is de
fide, you may learn by that I told you a little before out of Cardinal
Bellarmine, whose rule is well to be considered. If these Breues were
definitions de fide ex cathedra (as some most fondly and ignorantly stick not
to avouch) some of those clauses and interminations mentioned by Cardinal
Bellarmine had been inserted; they must have been general, and ought to bind
all Christian people as well as English Catholics: for what is faith in one
country, ought to be such through the world, and to be agreed upon among
learned men without controversy. But these, being directed to one particular
nation, and for this one particular cause of the Oath of allegiance, can be no
decree ex cathedra, but rather private exhortatory letters, no precepts, as a
late writer affirms them to be: Andraeas Eudaemon societatis Ies. in praefat.
ad Tortur Torti.
Priuatis literis Catholicos monuit Pontifex (says Eudaemon) iuramentum id
suscipi per diuinam legem non licere, proinde quiduis potius paterentur. The
Pope admonished Catholics in his private letters (says Eudaemon a Jesuit)
that it was not lawful by the law of God to take that Oath, therefore they
should rather suffer any thing. Which may be of little force, and not bind,
specially if they were procured by sinister means, as by surreption, wrong
information, and so forth, as with great reason it may be presumed these were,
by a person more turbulent then was fitting for one of his function and
vocation, whose merit happily might have been greater by devout saying one pair
of beads, then was by his labors and travails with his Holiness to kindle
quenched coals, as most probably he did in playing the soliciter, and
procuring those Breues; whereby he has brought all in brandlement, set no
small contention and division among brethren and friends, and raised a
tempestuous sea of calamities and troubles, where a happy calm of peace and
quietness was not unlike to be: for which God pardon his soul.

Moreover, some good Authors not only doubt whether the Pope alone may
determine or define matters of faith, but plainly seem to say, such a
determination does not bind; and so he cannot without a general Council.
Determinatio solius Papae (says Gerson) in his quae sunt fidei, Io. Gerson.
tract. de ex. aminatione doctrinarum, consid. 2.
non obligat, vt praecise est talis ad credendum. The determination of the Pope
alone, in matters of faith, as it is precisely such, binds not to believe.
And Petrus de Alliaco sometime Cardinal of Cambray, in his treatise of the
reformation of the Church of Rome, offered to the Council of Constance begun
an. 1414. writes in this sort, as appears in M. Blackwels large examination.
Petrus de Alliaco.
In hoc non debet Papa aut eius Curia, etc. Herein (as touching the reformation
of the body of the whole Church of Rome) the Pope or his Consistory ought not
to reject the deliberation of a general Council, because, as the Gloss, 19.
did. super cap. Anastasius, 19. did. super cap. Anastas.
says, The Pope is bound to require a Council of Bishops, when any point of
faith is to be handled: which I do not understand of the articles of faith, but
of difficult matters, that touch the universal state of the faithful Church:
which Archidiaconus notes, 15. did. c Sicur
where approving the said Gloss, he adds, That it were too dangerous a
matter to commit our faith to the arbitrament of one man, and that therefore
the Pope in new and hard cases, was accustomed to have recourse to the
deliberation of a Council. Now let your learned instructors peruse and
consider well the foresaid Authors (Catholic) and the Gloss, with the
approbation thereof, also Catholic; and then I persuade my self, they will
with more aduisement give you better instructions, and confess that those
Breues are far from definitive sentences; if not, I wish for your good, you
may light on better, and better experienced, lest the blind leading the blind,
both fall into the pit: Si enim coecus coecum ducit, ambo in foueam cadent.

Well, grant they are no definitions, yet it cannot be denied, but that therein
his Holiness has declared, many things to be contained in the Oath against
faith, and the health of souls, and thereupon prohibited all Catholics to
take the same; whose commandment (if any other) is to be obeyed, by S. Paul's
doctrine: Obedite Praepositis vestris, and subiacete eis: Heb. 13.
ipsi enim peruigilant quasi rationem pro animabus vestris redd^^uri. Obey your
Prelates, and be subject unto them; for they watch, as to render account for
your souls. How can this be answered? or how can they free themselves from
mortal sin, that by taking the Oath, seem to contemn sovereign
authority? Very well. If indeed there were contempt as some either carried
away with passion, or through ignorance and small consideration bear you in
hand) then a heinous sin would it be to transgress the precept of the
supreme Prelate Christ's Vicar; for, contempt of any superior, though in re
leuissima, is always a mortal sin. But it is not so in this our case, it is
not all one we know, nolle obedire, and non obedire: conscience settled on good
grounds, is the only motive to such as take it, not to obey, believing it to
be most lawful.

That his Holiness has affirmed in genere, as his opinion, many things to be
contained in the Oath repugnant to faith and health of souls, is manifest in
the Breues; yet because he has not Specified any one particular clause (which
was much desired) nor Father Parsons in his Catholic letter, nor Cardinal
Bellarmine in Tortus, or other book of his, have explicated or cleared the
Popes meaning, what they be, nor any other writers that have handled this
matter, and written in defense of them (as doubtless they would have done, if
they could tell which were against faith) his Holiness (in my judgment)
cannot justly condemn such of a contempt, as with reason and upon good grounds
hold the contrary: who are not bound to alter their opinions upon any such
assertion of any private Doctor, unless their understanding be first
convinced, either by good reason, or authorities of Scriptures, Fathers, or
some general Council. If any man be scandalized, and please to carpe hereat
as at strange doctrine, let him read the famous and learned S. Tho. More in
his Epistle to D. Wilson, Tho. More in his epist. to D. Wills. p. 1445.
where he shall see the very same taught in this manner. Many things (every
man learned woteth well) there are, in which every man is at liberty, without
peril of damnation, to think which way he list, till the one part be
determined for necessary to be believed by a general Council. And in another
place of his works, In epist. ad filiam, pa. 1439.
thus he writes: If it so hap, that in any particular part of Christendom,
there be a law made, that be such, as for some part thereof some men think
that the law of God cannot bear it, and some other think yes; the thing being
in such manner in question, that through diverse parts of Christendom, some
that are good men and cunning, both of our own days and before our days,
think some one way; and some other of like learning and goodness, think the
contrary. In this case he that thinks against the law, neither may swear
that law lawfully was made, standing his own conscience to the contrary; nor is
bound upon Gods displcasure to change his own conscience therein, for any
particular law made any where, other then by the general Council, and by a
general faith grown by the working of God universally through all Christian
nations: nor other authority then one of these twain (except special
revelation, and express commandment of God:) since the contrary opinions of
good men and well learned, as I put you the case, made the understanding of the
Scriptures doubtful, I can see none that lawfully may command and compel any
man to change his own opinion, and translate his own conscience from the one
side to the other. This he. And in another Epistle to his daughter Margaret,
page 1440 If it be not so fully plain and evident (as appearing by the common
faith of Christendom) yet if he see but himself with far the fewer part
think the one way, against far the more part of as learned and as good as
those are that affirm the thing that he thinks, thinking and affirming the
contrary, and that of such folk as he has no reasonable cause, wherefore he
should not in that matter suppose, that those which say they think against his
mind, affirm the thing that they say, for none other cause, but for that they
so think indeed: this is of very truth, a very good occasion to move him, and
yet not to compel him to conform his mind and conscience unto theirs. By this
doctrine of Sir Thomas More it is clear, that the Popes opinion of the Oath,
though it may seem to some, to be a very good occasion to move men not to
take it, yet it is not sufficient to compel them to conform their mind and
conscience unto his; when as they that have taken it, and also many others both
virtuous and learned, are of contrary opinion, nothing to be contained in that
Oath against or repugnant to faith; nor never has this point in controversy
been yet defined.

Will you say then that the Pope has erred in setting forth this his opinion
and prohibition? No, I dare not presume to affirm that therein he has erred,
for the reverence and honor I bear to the Sea Apostolic, nor take upon me to
be judge over him, Qui parem super terram non habet, to use Saint Bernards
words; L. 2. de consid c. 2. Romans 14.
lest I be thought to neglect the doctrine of the holy Ghost taught by S. Paul:
Tu quis es qui iudicas alienum seruum? and, Tu autem quid iudicas fratrem tuum?
aut tu quare speruis fratrem tuum? Who art thou that iudgest another servant?
and why do thou judge thy brother? If I be taught and forbidden tp judge or
despise my brother, my equal; then much more ought I not to judge or contemn
him, qui a nemine iudicatur, that is not to be judged by any man: absit hoc a
me, let such temeritie be far from me, the least in Gods house. But when in
matters of fact, he proceeds by information of others, (as in this our case
of the Oath he has) I trust it is no temeritie, or any sin at all, to say that
he may err; yea and sometimes by false suggestions or wrong informations, he
has erred in Rome it self. And which is more, Councels also in facts, or
particular judgments may err, as Cardinal Bellarmine notes. In Scriptura
(says he) nullus potest esse error, Li. 2. Council. cap. 12.
sieve agatur de fide, sieve de moribus, etc. At Concilia in iudicijs
particularibus errare possent. Nec non in praeceptis morum, quae non toti
Ecclesiae, sed vni tantum aut alteri populo proponuntur. In the Scripture can
be no error, whether it treat of faith, or of manners, etc. but Councels in
particular judgments may err. And also in precepts of manners, which are not
proposed to the whole Church, but to one or other people only.

It seems also not to be any heretical doctrine to hold, that not only in
matters of fact, but likewise in faith the Pope alone without a Council may
err, for that he is no God, but a man subject to errors; to whom as he is
Peter's successor, Christ never so promised the assistance of the holy Ghost,
that he in person should not err, but to Peter together with the Apostles,
assembled at his sermon before his passion, who represented the whole body of
the Church, as appears by the words of our Savior in Saint John's Gospel:
Paraclitus autem Spiritus sanctus, John. 14. c.
quem mittet Pater in nomine meo, ille vos docebit omnia, and suggeret vobis
omnia, quaecunque dixero vobis. You may note how the holy Ghost then promised,
and afterward sent on the day of Pentecost, was promised to all, and sent unto
all, not to Peter alone. And in the same chapter, that this holy Ghost was to
remain with them, and be in them. Apud vos manebit, and in vobis erit. And in
another place. Cu^ autem venerit ille Spiritus veritatis, Ioh. 16.
docebit vos omnem veritatem. And when he shall come, the Spirit of truth, he
will teach you all truth. In all these places is manifest that Christ spoke
always in the plural number, that the holy Ghost the Comforter, should remain
and be in his Church, and should teach his Church all truth, and not any one of
his Apostles successors in particular. This special privilege of not erring in
matters of faith, was reserved for his dear spouse the Catholic Church alone,
as appears evident likewise in Saint Matthewes Gospel: Tu es Petrus, Math.
16.
and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portaeinferi non
praeualebunt aduersus eam. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. That is, the
Church (as Iansenius and others understand it) represented in a general
Council, which Church is called by Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 3.
Columna and firmamentum veritatis: The pillar and groundworke of truth. Not
any one man in the house of God was ever such. And Alphonsus de Castro, a great
learned man, and an earnest defender of this Church against heresies and
heretics, blusheth not to write plainly that, Omnis homo errare potest in
fide, Contr. haeres. l. 1. c. 4.
etsi Papa sit: Every man may err in faith, yea the Pope himself, without
exception. Yet I never heard that he was condemned of heresy, or sin, for
saying so. This then being so, no man of up right judgment, can with reason
censure him of heresy, that shall affirm, The Pope may err in his opinion of
the Oath; for, Haeresis est circa eaqnae sunt fidei, 2.2. q. 11. ar. 2
sicut circa propriam materiam: 2.2. 11. ar. 2.
as S. Thomas says. Nor of mortal sin, if he refuse to obey his prohibition
for taking thereof, the taker not intending to contemn his commandment, Tho.
22. q. 104.2.2. ad 1.
(ad inobedientiam enim requiritur quod actualiter contemnat praeceptum) nor to
transgress against the law of God; but only to render to Caesar that which is
Caesar's, that is, civil obedience, due unto him both by the law of God and
nature; without denying or derogating any authority spiritual of the Sea
Apostolic, according to his Majesty's declaration and interpretation of his
own meaning, set down at large in his Apology and Praemonition. The
intention then being good, the end good and just, the act of such as take it
cannot be but good and lawful, and no sin at all. For secundum finem morales
actus species sortiuntur. Tho. 2.2. q. 89 ar. 5. ad 1. and q. 105 2.1.
And as true it is, that, Actus agentium non operantur vlira ipsorum voluntatem
seu intentionem. And this much as touching the Popes opinion or assertion in
his Breues. Now it remains to resolve the difficulty of his precept, or
prohibition of the Oath; whether Priests and Catholics in England be bound
under pain of deadly sin to obey it, and so to disobey the Kings Highness,
who for his more security, upon so just a cause, requires the same.

The cause why the Pope prohibited Catholics to take the Oath of allegiance
as it lies, may seem to have been, for that in his opinion he was persuaded
many things to be contained therein repugnant to faith. Which opinion supposed
true, no man indeed can take it without peril of damnation; because every
Christian is bound vsque ad effusionem sanguinis inclusiue, to profess and
maintain all points of faith, when occasion of persecution shall be offered,
against heretics, Jews, Turks, or what infidels soever, according to the
doctrine of our Savior: Math. 10. Luke 9.
Qui autem negauerit me coram hominibus, negabo and ego eum coram Patre meo:
And he that shall deny me before men, I will also deny him before my Father.
Likewise in another place; Qui non renunciat omnibus quae possidet, Luke 14.
non potest meus esse discipulus. And then were it malum, non quia prohibitum,
verum ex se, to take such an oath. But till it appear more clear, and be more
substantially proved then hitherto has been by any, that some point therein
contained, is manifestly against faith, and what that point is; I cannot see
why any man should forthwith upon a bare commandment, though of the supreme
Pastor, hazard his life in perpetual bonds, with loss of all that he has,
and utter ruin of his dearest wife and children. For his private will, subject
to error, can be no infallible rule of man's actions, but the will of God, which
is always right: and hereupon a man may in case be disobeied, be he Prince or
Prelate, but the most righteous God never. For that the commandment of God is
always just, wherein can be no error, Genesis 22.
no not in willing Abraham to kill his son Isaac: Exodus 12. Ose. 1.
nor in commanding the Jews to spoil the Egyptians of their goods: nor also
in bidding the Prophet Osea to commit fornication. The reason hereof you may
read in S. Thomas. But an earthly King, Prince or Prelate, See S. Tho. 22 q.
104. ar. 4.
yea the Prince of Prelates may, and do sometimes command iniust things, or
may usurp dominion iniustly: in which cases, subjects are not bound to obey
them, 22. q. 104. ar. 6.
nisi forte per accidens (as S. Thomas notes) propter vitandum scandalum vel
periculum: unless happily accidentally, for avoiding scandal or danger. That
some Kings and secular Princes have usurped domination, and commanded iniustly,
no man I think will doubt, and our domesticke adversaries will easily grant:
but to say that the Prince of Prelates, the Pope, Peter's successor should err
in commanding, or command that which is iniust ( guarda la gamba, take heed)
some nicely precise, pure and rigid, if not simple and foolish people, audito
verbo hoc scandalizabuntur, no less then the Pharisees were scandalized at the
doctrine of our blessed Savior, as we read in S. Mathewes Gospel: Math. 15.
for that they think of like, the Pope so to be confirmed in grace, that he
cannot once commit a mortal sin. If they will so easily be scandalized for
speaking the truth, I trust I may be bold, Greg. hom. 7. in Ezech. Haimo in
Math. c. 18.
without sin, to say with S. Gregory: Si de veritate scandalum sumitur,
vtilius nasci permittitur scandalum, quam quod veritas relinquatur. If scandal
be taken for speaking truth, it is better a scandal should be permitted to
arise, then truth left untold. I will relate therefore certain true facts, but
not censure them, which without this, or such like occasion offered, I ever
purposed to have concealed; and refer to the readers judgments whether they
were errors in government, and sins, or no.

When Sixtus Quintus, otherwise a prudent Prince and learned Pastor, commanded
a boy of fourteen years of age to be hanged in Rome, for a fault which in
many men's judgments deserved not death, but rather whipping, or some such
punishment; and being in all humility told by the Judge, that by the civil
laws he was not to be executed till he came to the age of 16: he answered,
Then I will give him two of my years. Whereupon the poor lad, contrary to
law, ended his life in port have in a halter. Whether this were a just sentence
or iniust, I will not say; it seemed at his departure out of this life, to be
scored among his misdeeds: for being in extremis, one like in habit to S.
Francis appeared to him, who had appeared long before, and foretold al his
fortunate risings to honor, and now warned him to prepare to die, for his time
was come. Hereat Sixtus appalled, said: Did thou not promise me that I
should reign one luster and half? (a luster is the space of five years.)
Yes; and now it is in manner expired (he had then reigned five years, four
months, and three days); for if you remember, you gave a boy two years, to
hang him. This I heard constantly reported by many in Rome presently upon his
death. But who this was that appeared, S. Francis, or some other transfigured
in his habit, it was not known, and I leave to the consideration of men to
think what they list.

Likewise it happened, that in his time a Clergy man, nephew unto old Martinus
Nauarrus the great Canonist, coming into S. Peter's Church (doubtless with
intent to pray) found standing against a pillar by our Ladies altar a pilgrims
staff, wherewith he struck the Judge of the Suitzers, being on his knees at
his prayers before the crucifixe altar, and brake his head so, as the blood ran
about his ears, and fell on the pauement; whereby the Church being profaned,
forthwith all Masses and other divine service ceased for a time, (I speak
what I know, being then oculatus testis:) incontinently the party fled toward
the new Church, but pursued by certain Suitzers attending on the said Judge,
was apprehended; and the Pope then sitting in Consistory, advertised of the
fact, who commanded a ghostly father to be provided for him, (religiously and
well done for safety of his soul) and that he should not hope for life, but
prepare to die out of hand, (summum ius) for he would not dine till the
offender were hanged. A hard sentence of the supreme Pastor. Haste here made
waste of blood. Would God he had well considered S. Ambrose his penance
enjoined Theodosius the Emperor, and his humble acceptance thereof, viz. not
to punish any malefactor to death for a months space after the crime
committed; then happily his wrath and indignation might have been pacified, and
the offenders life saved. Incontinently a gallows was set up before the
Suitzers gate, and the Spanish gentleman brought to execution within three
hours after the blow given, the Pope standing in a gallerie of his palace
(Consistory being ended) to see him coming, as was most certainly reported
unto me then lying in the palace, by such as had reason to know it: and would
not be pacified or entreated for his life, neither by the Spanish Ambassador,
who posted to the Court to that end, though in vain, for audience would not be
granted, nor by any other; howbeit his servant the Suitzer, in short space
after recovered, and lived diverse years after that to my knowledge. How (...)
these commandments were, I refer to the readers judgment; and whether they
sauoured not more of a passionate secular Prince, then of a mild spiritual
Pastor.

Moreover, the said Pope having created Cardinal the Deane of Toledo, Mendoza
by name, a very noble and worthy gentleman, a comely and courteous Prelate,
and well beloved of many; dealt often with the said Cardinal to resign his
Deanrie into his hands, by reason of the indignity he should be driven into,
if at any time after, he were to reside in his Deanrie according to order, by
taking inferior place in the Church to the Bishop of the Diocese, being no
Cardinal; which was a thing he would not consent unto, saying, they were
incompatibilia, Deane and Cardinal in one person. The Cardinal unwilling to
lose so great revenues by making such a resignation, thought it no sin
therein not to yield to his Holiness. Pope Sixtus notwithstanding out of his
absolute authority volens nolens deprived him of his Deanery, and bestowed it
on another Spaniard, who after Sixtus death, played least in sight, for fear
what might befall him by some of the Cardinal his friends for accepting or
seeking it. And the Pope to make his donatio^ valid, sent Monsignore Burghesius
Auditor di camera, (who sits now in Peter's chair) with straight
commandment unto Cardinal Mendoza, either forthwith to send the writings of
his Deanrie, or else to go immediately with the said Prelate to the Castle. The
Cardinal hereat sore perplexed and straightned on every side, making choice
of the less evil, chose rather quietly, though much against his liking, to
send his writings, and be deprived of his Ecclesiastical living, then bereaved
of his temporal life in the castle of S. Angelo; whence is hard getting forth
for any that shall enter therein. Many hereat muttered and murmured, judging
the commandment to savor of great injustice.

After this, Pope Clement in the beginning of his reign, with more haste the^
good speed, resembling likewise rather a passionate Prince then a meek Pastor,
gave order or commandment that a certain gentleman of Cardinal Farnesius
apprehended on Saturday before Palmsunday, should be executed the wednesday
following, being the feast of the Annunciation of the blessed virgin Marie,
and in the holy week, against all clement Christian customs and good order,
which spare to execute any malefactor on such times: and would not hearken to
any other information then that of the Governor, the gentleman's known
adversary, no not of the Cardinal, who hearing thereof, with all speed posted
from Grotta ferrata toward his Holiness at Rome, for his servants life: albeit
in vain, for he was inexorable, and audience would not be granted him, till
the poor gentleman had lost his head; whereupon the Cardinal being offended,
departed, and refused to come to the Court for the space of a month after. Was
this apprehension and execution for any heinous crime trow ye? Thus stood the
case. Certain Sbirri or Sergeants, were sent from the Governor to the palace
of Cardinal Farnesius (he being absent twelve miles off, at Grotta ferrata) to
apprehend some other of his family of baser condition, who finding the party
in the open Court together with one of his fellows, they laid hands on him:
the party and his fellow, and the two Sbirri striving and struggling each with
other, an English mastife dog, whereof the Cardinal made great reckoning,
fell on the Catchpols of himself, and the mean while they gat out of their
hands. The said gentleman seeing this stir, came to them, and demanded how they
durst be so bold to make such an attempt in that place, and whether they knew
where they were, and in whose house, which (being privileged as a sanctuary)
ought better to be respected of such as they were, and such like words. The
Sbirri departed with complaint to the Governor, who hasteneth to the Pope, and
informs him in such sort, as the gentleman by his commandment was presently
taken, and executed as is above said: and so should the dog been hanged too if
he could have been found, but he was secretly conveyed away. And this lo was
the crime for which he lost his life, as was bruited and known through all the
city, and was besides told me by such of the family as had reason not to be
ignorant of the business: at which fact many grudging said, The Pope might
more fitly have bin called Leo then Clement.

Well, if for relating these truths any man be offended, let him blame certain
silie souls whose fond importunity has urged me thereto, for that they
think, and will sometime say, that the Pope his actions are irreprehensible,
he cannot commit a mortal sin, nor command unjustly; as if he were more then
a mortal man, half a God, or so confirmed in grace that he could no way err,
as was the Mother of God. But the more prudent sort will easily grant that he
is a man, subject to humane infirmities, and not so confirmed in grace as that
he cannot err in his moral actions; that is a privilege they know rather
proper to the Mother of God, then common to Christ's Vicars, which (if I be not
deceived) was never yet granted to any of them. Marie some of these, prudentes
apud semetipsos, dare boldly avouch, that if Peter's successor shall at any
time excommunicate a Prince fallen into schism, heresy or apostacy, or other
crime adjudged by him to deserve so to be censured, and thereupon depriueth him
of his Regal scepter, deposes him of all temporal dominion, and disposes of
his territories to some other whom he shall judge better to deserve the same;
or authoriseth subjects to raise tumults and take arms against such a one, and
absolueth them of their fidelity and natural allegiance, or inciteth other
neighbor Kings and Princes by mighty power, to invade his dominions, or
finally whatsoever he command in this or the like sort, they are bound
forthwith to obey him and his sentence, what peril soever may fall unto them
for it; though by so doing they are to lose their lives who (as they
imprudently think) has in such a case so supreme authority over him as
exceeds all limits, and is so directed by the holy Ghost that he cannot
command iniustly: so omne nimium vertitur in vitium, this lo is the prudence
of some imprudent Catholics, who headlonglie without due consideration run
on themselves, and animate others to run through over blind obedience to their
utter destruction; but this point of obedience rests now to be more largely
discussed.

It cannot be denied but that obedience is a moral virtue (whereas it is a
part of justice, whose office is to render to every one that which is his:) the
special object of which is the secret or express precept of the superior, to
whom every inferior, both by the law and ordinance of God and nature, ought in
all things lawful, not to be refractarie, but subject and obedient. Yet it may
so happen again, that for two respects a subject or inferior may not be bound
always to obey his superior: the one is by reason of the precept of a higher
power commanding contrary, as upon that of S. Paul, Qui potestati resistunt,
ipsi sibi damnationem acquirunt: Romans 13.
They that resist power, the same get to themselves damnation. The Gloss
says, Si quid iusserit Curator, etc. Ang. in ser. 6. de verbis Domini, to. 10.
If the Curator, or governor, command and thing against the Proconsul, art
thou to do it? Again if the Proconsul command thee one thing, and the Emperor
an other thing, is it to be doubted that contemning the one, thou art to serve
and obey the other? Then if the Emperor one thing, and God command an other,
thou art bound to obey God and not the Emperor. So semblably if the Pope
command one thing, and the holy Ghost in Scriptures an other, who doubts
which is to be obeyed or disobeyed? The other is, when the superior commands
any thing wherein the inferior is not subject unto him, exceeding the limits
of his power: all power whatsoever under the cope of heaven being contained
within certain limits, which no powerable person is to exceed.

Here if any object S. Paul, teaching children and servants to obey their
parents and masters in all they command: Coloss. 3.
Filij obedite parentibus per omnia: and, Serui obedite per omnia dominis
carnalibus: children, obey your parents in all things; and, servants, obey in
all things your carnal masters: therefore the Pope is to be obeyed in all
things. I answer them, that it is to be understood, in all things that
appertain to the right of parents and masters, and as far as they have
power to command; as masters their servants in servile things, Tho. 2.2. q.
104. c. 5.
and parents their children in domestical affairs belonging to their
paternall care: for neither can they command such as are under them to keep
virginity, or to marry, or to enter into religion, to go in pilgrimage, or
such like; if they should, the inferior is not bound to obey. No more can the
Pope, albeit he has plenit udinem potestatis in Ecclesia, justly command any
thing wherein he has no power, nor any persons which are not subject unto him:
for that none is to be reputed a superior, Tho. 2.2. q. 67. ar. 1.
but in respect of them, over whom as over subjects he receives power, whether
he has it ordinary, or by commission. Neither are Religious men, who vow
obedience to their superious, bound of necessity to obey them in all whatsoever
lawful things they command, (albeit in way of perfection they may) but only
in such as appertain to their regular conversation, or according to their rule
which they profess. Tolet de 7. pec. mort. c. 16. n. 3. Tho. 2.2 q. 104. a. 5.
ad 3. Innocen. in c. no Dei. 43. de Simon. Martin. de Carazijs in tract. de
principibus q. 48. Felin. in cap. Accepimus de fide instrum.
And if their superiors should by indiscretion or otherwise command any thing
against the law of God, (yea were he the Pope himself) or against the
profession of their rule, such obedience, I deem, nor they nor any will doubt
to be unlawful; and they were not bound to obey, as Innocentius and others
affirm. So then we may distinguish obedience to be of three sorts: one
sufficient to salvation, which obeys in all matters wherein he is bound:
another perfect, which obeys in all things lawful: and the third indiscreet,
which is ready to render obedience yea in unlawful or iniust things.

And this is the obedience wherewith may (alas) in these our angerous days
seem so deeply possessed, (dangerous I say) for that within such obedience
(latet anguis in herba) lies hidden a mystery of mischief, and which is so
highly by diverse recommended to their auditors who stick not boldly to say,
that by obeying Pastors and Praelats, and the supreme Pastor among the rest, he
cannot sin, but by refusing to obey, he may sin; therefore it is best and
securest always to obey whatsoever is by them commanded, alleging S. Paul:
Hebr. vlt.
Obedite Praepositis vestris: Obey your Prelates, without distinction: not
attending that the same holy Ghost who taught us this doctrine by the vessel
of election, has likewise taught us by the mouth of the Prince of Apostles,
and cannot be contrary to himself, that we are no less bound to obey and be
subject to kings and their officers, to wit: 1. Pet. ^.
Subiecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Deum: sieve Regi quasi
praecellenti: sieve ducibus tanquam ab eo missis, ad vindictam malefactorum,
etc. Be ye subject to every humane creature for God: whether to the King as to
the precellent, or to his Captains as sent from him, for the punishment of
malefactors, etc. For that the political or civil power, yea of heathen or
persecuting Neros (as in the Apostles times were no other) is no less from
God, and immediate from him, then is the Ecclesiastical or spiritual. Non est
enim potestas nisi a Deo: Romans 13
for there is no power but of God. When he says, No power, is there any
excepted? Is it not meant as well of the temporal, as of the spiritual?
Chrysostom upon this place has these words: Deus it a exigit, vt creatus ab
eo Princeps vires suas habeat; God so requires, that a Prince created have his
power from him; then not from the people. If you read Solomon in the book of
Wisdom, you shall find it most clear, that the power of Kings and Rulers is
immediate, not from men, but from God. Praebete aures vos, Sap. 6.
qui continetis multitudines, etc: quoniam data est a Domino potestas vobis,
and virtus ab Altissimo, etc. Give care you, that contain multitudes: (who are
they but temporal Princes?) because power is given to you from our Lord, and
virtue from the Highest, without any distinction of mediate, etc. It follows
a little after who are meant: ver. 10.
Ad vos ergo Reges sunt hi sermones mei, vt discatis sapiontiam, etc. To you
therefore o kings are these my words, that you may learn wisdom, etc. These
two powers then, Ecelesiasticall and civil, as they are both from God, so are
they both distinct and separate from other, and independent of each other, as
after shall be proved.

And even as God has ordained and concluded the waters and maine sea within
certain limits, which the may not pass, but must break their raging waves
where they are appointed, as is in holy Writ: Legem ponebat aquis, Prou. 8.
ne transirent fines suos. He made a law for waters, that they should not pass
their bounds: and in Job: Et Dixi, Job. 38.
vsque huc venies, and non procedes amplius, and hic confringes tumentes
fluctus tuos. And I said (says God) hitherto thou shall come, and thou shall
proceed no further, and here thou shall break thy swelling sources. So
likewise his omnipotent wisdom, happily to avoid all confusion and other
mischiefs, which might arise by intermedling with each others power, has
appointed the^ their several and distinct ends, their limits and bounds, which
they may not pass, not invade each others empire: Lib. 1. de consid. cap. 5.
as mellifluous S. Bernard writing to Pope Eugenius 3. does more then
insinuate. Habent haec insima and terrena Iudices suos, Reges and Principes
terrae. Quid fines alienos inuaditis? quid falcem vestram in alienam messem
extenditis? These base and terrene things have their Judges, Kings and Princes
of the earth. Why do you invade other men's bounds? why do you thrust your sithe
into others harvest? By which is evident that Popes may, and do sometimes
exceed their limits, to wit, spiritual authority, when by usurpation they
intermeddle in terrene things or temporal authority, being the proper bounds
of Kings and secular Princes, which ought not to be invaded by Ecclesiastical
persons. And to this effect writes most excellently amongst latter Divines
Ioannes Driedo, affirming this distinction to be de iure diuino. Lib. 2. de
liber. Eccle. c. 2.
Christus (says he) vtriusque potestatis officia discreuit, vt vna diuinis and
spiritualibus rebus atque porsonis, altera profanis ac mundanis praesideret.
Christ has so parted the offices of both powers, as the one might govern over
divine and spiritual things and persons, the other over profane and mundane.
And a little after: The distinction therefore of Ecclesiastical Papal power
from the secular and Imperial power is made by the law of God. And in the same
chapter; Whereupon the Pope and the Emperor are in the Church not as two
chief governors divided among themselves, (neither of which do acknowledge or
honor the other as superior) because a kingdom divided against it self will
be desolate. Neither are they as two Judges subordinate, so as the one
receives his jurisdiction from the other: but they are as two governors,
which are the Ministers of one God, deputed to diverse offices, in such wise as
the Emperor is to rule over secular causes and persons, for the peaceable
living together in this world: and the Pope may rule over spirituals to the
gain of Christian faith and charity. This Driedo. That these two dignities
are distinct, having no dependence of each other, Cardinal Bellarmine himself
proves, co^paring them to the two great lights or planets, the Sun and
Moon. Nota (says he) quemadmodum non est idem sydus Sol and luna, and sicut
luna^ non instituit Sol, sed Deus: Bellar. l. 5. de To. Pont. c. 3.
it a quoque non esse idem Pontificatum and Imperium, nec vnum ab alio absolute
pendere. Note that even as the Sun and Moon are not one and the same planet,
and as the Sun did not institute or appoint the Moon, but God: so likewise
the Papacy and Impery are not one and the same, nor the one do absolutely
depend of the other. By these two great lights Sun and Moon, Cap. Solitae de
maiorit. and obedien.
Pope Inocentius interprets to be meant two dignities, which are Pontifical
authority, and Regal power.

Moreover this distinction of these two great powers, that ancient and renowned
Hosius Bishop of Corduba writing to Constantius the Arrian Emperor most
manifestly shows: L. 2. de liber Christ c. 2.
whose sentence is related in an Epistle of holy Athanasius in this manner:
Tibi Deus imperium commisit, Atha. ep. ad solit. vitam agentes.
nobis quae sunt Ecclesiae concredidit: and quemadmodu^, etc. To you God has
committed the Empire, to us he has delivered those things which belong to the
Church: and even as he that with malignant eyes carpeth your Empire,
contradicts the ordinance of God, so do you also beware, lest, if you draw to
you such things as belong to the Church, you be made guilty of a great crime.
Give, it is written, Math. 22. Mar. 12.
to Caesar those things which are Caesar's, and to God those which belong to
God. Therefore neither is it lawful for us in earth to hold the Empire; nor
you o Emperor, have power over incense and sacred things. Thus this learned
Bishop, and renowned in the first Council of Nice. In cap. Inquisitioni de
sen. excom.
Hereupon Innocentius the third, and Panormitan conclude, that laickes are not
bound to obey the Pope in those things that are not spiritual, or which
concern not the soul, as they speak: but only in those places which are
subject to his temporal jurisdiction. That these two powers are independent of
each other, and the temporal not subordinate to the spiritual, but, since the
coming of Christ, separate, and so distinguished by their proper acts, offices
and dignities, that the one may not usurp the right and power of the other
without injury to each other, Pope Nicolas the first, plainly witnesses in
his Epistle to Michael the Emperor; as appears also in the Canon law; Can
cum ad verum. ventu^ est, did. 96. Barcl. de potest. Pap. c. 13. L. 5. de Romans
Pont. c. 3.
which you may read in D. Barclai of worthy memory, in case you can get it.
Which place I may not pretermit to note unto you as it is set down in
Cardinal Bellarmine: Idem mediator Dei and hominum, homo Christus Jesus, sic
actibus proprijs, and dignitatibus distinctis officia potestatis vtriusque
discreuit, etc. The same Mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus, has so
severed the offices of both powers, by proper acts and distinct dignities, that
both Christan Emperors for eternal life, should have need of the chief
Bishops, and the chief Bishops for the course of temporal things only,
should use Imperial laws. Here (says the Cardinal) the Pope speaks not of
the only execution, but of power and dignity, etc. For whatsoever Emperors
have, Pope Nicholas says, they have it from Kings and Emperors this
execution, as being himself chief King and Emperor, or else he cannot? If he
can, then is he greater then Christ: if he cannot, then has he not in deed
Regal power. This he: Who in the same chapter brings Pope Gelasius to this
purpose. Duo sunt (inquit) Imperator Auguste, Gelas. ep. ad Anast. Imp. Decret.
did. 96. Can. Duo sunt.
quibus principaliter mundus hicregitur, Authoritas sacra Pontificum, and
Regalis potestas, etc. There are two things O noble Emperor, whereby
principally this world is governed, the sacred authority of Bishops, and
Regal power, etc. Where it is to be noted (says Bellarmine) that Gelasius
speaks not only of the excution, but of the very power and authority, lest
our adversaries say (as they are accustomed) that the Pope has indeed both
powers, but commits the execution to others. That the ends likewise of these
two powers are different, the Cardinal confesses, saying, that the political
has for her end temporal peace, and the Ecclesiastical eternal salvation.
And hereto agreeeth Navarre in Relect. cap. Nouit do iudic. nu. 90. Nauar.
By this now is apparent that these two powers, their ends, offices, and
dignities are distinct and separate from each other.

If then the one command any thing which appertains not to his power, or
wherein he is not superior, it is a general rule (as Cardinal Tolet notes)
that such a one is not of duty to be obeyed: Tolet. de 7. peccatis mort. c. 15.
Vnicuique superiori (says he) obediendum est ex obligatione, in his tantum in
quibus est superior. And the inferior discharges well his duty, if he
promptly obey in those things wherein he is inferior; as a servant in
seruilibus, such as appertain to a servant: and for this cites Pope
Innocentius cap. Inquisitioni de sent. excom. Whereupon, if the Pope should (in
virtute obedientiae) command any man to give away his vineyard or house, or
sell his patrimony (as Bellocchio cupbearer to Sixtus 5. would have had the
Pope by his Breue to command a subject of his to do, because the poor man's
land lay commodiously for him, and pleased him ( Naboths case:) which his
Holiness refused to do, answering, he could not, he might do no man wrong,) or
a clergy man to resign his benefice with cure to some unworthy person, which
is against a divine precept, he is not to be obeyed, as the same author
affirms in the chapter aforesaid. And alleges Panorm. in cap. Inquisitioni
de sent. excom. and Io. Andr. c. Cum a Deo de rescript. Much less is any n="a"
Cap. litteras de rest. spoliat
superior, yea the Pope himself to be obeyed (according to n="b" Cap.
Inquisit. etc.
Panormitan) commanding any sin, though but n="c" 11. q. 3. can. Quid ergo.
venial. And n="d" Verbo obedientia, nu. 5.
Syluester: Intellige etiam si Papa credit ma^datum iustum, and tamen subdito
constat illud in se continere peccatum: Understand, although the Pope believes
his mandateto be just, but yet the subject knows it contains a sin. de
restit. spol. lit. Here may be noted, that the Pope may hold one opinion, and
an inferior may hold the contrary, and more true, without sin. Yea and a
Bishop, in case the Pope should command him to be absent from his residence
without some necessity, he is not bound to obey; because (says Tolet) cum
absque causa rationabili aliquid praecipitur, Instruct. sacer l. 5. c. 4. nu. 3.
non debemus audire. When any thing is commanded without reasonable cause, we
ought not to obey, for it were more then is due. And the same Cardinal in
another place faith thus: Li. de 7. pec. mort. c 15.
Nullus obligatur obedire suo superiori in actibus interioribus puris, puta
intellectus and voluntatis. No man is bound to obey his superior in pure
interior acts, to wit, of the understanding and will. Who explicateth himself;
If a superior say unto his inferior, Love thine enemy, See. S. Tho. More
epist. ad filiam.
or this man in particular; or else, believe this or that opinion, the inferior
is not bound to believe it, nor to obey: because (says he) the soul is
subject only to God. And for proof alleges Saint Thomas, whose words are: In
his quae pertinent ad interiorem motum voluntatis, 2.2. q. 104 art. 5.
homo non tenetur homini obedire, sed solum Deo. In such things as appertain
to the inward motion of the will, a man is not bound to obey another man, but
only God. And this he affirms to be the common doctrine. Out of these cases
you may gather, and secure your conscience, that a superior, yea Christ's Vicar
the Popes Holiness, may be disobeyed without scruple of sin, (modo absit
contemptus) notwithstanding his commandment prohibiting the Oath of
allegiance: because no man can force any to believe that which is matter only
of opinion, not of faith formally, unless his understanding be first
convinced, that it is an infallible truth which is commanded. And this of the
Oath being an inward act of the understanding, is not subject in that case to
the commandment of any man, according to the doctrine of the Authors
aforesaid. And furthermore, by obeying his Holinesses Breues, and disobeying
his Highness law in a matter as yet undetermined; great damage to many is more
then likely to ensue, and infinite scandals, to the loss of souls, to arise
in the Church; which every Christian man and good subject is bound to avoid.
Qui amat periculum, peribit in illo. He that loves danger shall perish in it.
And, Qui causam damus dat, damnum dedisse viderur. It seems he does the hurt,
that gives cause thereof. If this satisfy you not, lend me a patient and
diligent ear, and you shall hear more.

If I show you by the authority of the Sea Apostolic, that his Holiness, who
sits now at the stern, Paulus Quintus, forbidding all Catholics to take
the Oath of allegiance, is not therein to be obeyed, I trust you will require
no other testimony; but believe it to be lawful, and resolve not to hazard
your estates for refusing it hereafter. Mark then what a learned Cardinal
writes of Innocentius 3. Pope: Eleganter dicit Innocentius de sent. excom.
cap. Inquisitioni, Franciscus de Zabarel. de schismat.
quod Papae non est obediendum quando vehementer praesumitur statum Ecclesiae
perturbari, vel alia mala ventura. Et peccaret obediendo, cum deberet futura
mala praecauere. Elegantly says Innocentius, that we are not to obey the Pope
when there is vehement presumption that the state of the Church is to be
perturbed, or other evils are like to ensue. And in obeying, a man should sin,
when as he ought to prevent future evils.

Now tell me, I pray you, or let our domesticke adversaries, or such as are
inwardly persuaded, that the Pope cannot, by any authority derived from
Christ, dethrone Kings directly or indirectly (howbeit forsooth in policy
refuse to take the Oath, and discharge their duty to Caesar, for fear of
losing friends and commodities) nor dispossess any private man of his
temporals, who is not his subject (of which sort there are many:) let them I
say, or any one of them tell me, whether by disobeying the Kings highness, and
obeying the Pope in this case of the Oath, the Catholic Church in England is
not like to be greatly afflicted, the memory of the Gunpowder treason
revived, the Catholics miseries aggrauated, the heat of persecution
continued and increased, whole families utterly ruined, propagation of faith
hindered, many souls lost, and a thousand evils like to follow, with many
scandals to the State and all the Realm, by reason of obeying his Holiness
Breues, if our most clement Prince with rigor upon this their indiscreete
obedience, prosecute his law, made for the security of him and his posterity?
The authority aforesaid being of a Pope (as that Author affirms) censureth
such a one to offend (note well) in obeying; whom? the Pope: when as he is
bound to beware before hand, or prevent such future evils or dangers. Then
ought not all Catholics and good subjects do what in them lies to prevent
the manifold evils that hang over their heads, by satisfying the Magistrate,
and refusing to obey such a precept as is the only cause thereof, (for had no
prohibion come from Rome, few or none had stood against the Oath) especially
when as nothing has been yet proved by any that have written of this subject,
since the coming of the Breues four yea five years agone and more, to be
contained in the Oath against faith?

Syluester likewise alleging Panormitane, agreeable to the former authoritic,
Syluest. v^rb. obedieti^. ^u. ^.
says, that the Pope is not to be obeyed, not only when his precept is iniust
or sauoureth sin, but also when by such obedience it may be presumed, that the
state of the Church is like to be greatly disturbed, or some other detriment or
scandal is to ensue, yea although he should command under pain of
excommunication latae sententiae. Nec est (says he) ei obediendum, si ex
obedientia praesumeretur status Ecclesiae perturbandus vehementer, vel aliud
malum aut scandalum fut urum, etiam si praeciperetur sub poena
excommunicationis latae sent entiae. Vt notat idem in cap. Si quando. and in
cap. Panormit. See ^elin. in cap. Si qua^do. nu. 4. and in c. Accepimus.
Cum a Deo de rescrip. And goes forward, Ex quo ipse in dicto, cap. Si quando
infert, Quod si, etc. Whereupon he infers, that if he (the Pope) command any
thing under pain of excommunication ipso facto, by execution whereof it is
presumed there will be a scandal in the city of souls or bodies, he is not
to be obeyed, etc. It follows: Imo ex cap. Officij de poenis and remis.
habetur, etc. Yea it is evident, that the positive law interprets, that
restitution, which is de iure diuino, sometime is not to be made, by reason of
danger, when it may happen to souls or bodies. then it may be well inferred,
that obedience in like case may be pernicious, and so ought not to berendered.
Tolet. de 7. Pec. mort. cap 15.
The same writes Cardinal Tolet, citing these authors: Nulli superiori
praecipienti aliquid, etc. No superior commanding any thing whereby scandal
or any notable detriment of others do follow, is to be obeyed in such a
precept. So say Panorm. and Syluester ver. obed.. 5. where they say, that in
this case we are not to obey, although the superior command under pain of
excommunication: for it binds not quando male imponitur, when it is iniustly
imposed. Emmanuel Sa likewise: Obediendum non est cum creditur inde malum
oriturum: Aphoris. Sa ver. obedien.
When it is thought evil may come by obeying, we are not to obey. Again, He
is not bound to obey, that thinks the superior commands upon error (as
being misinformed,) and that if he knew the truth, he would not command: and
also, that superiors by their general edicts intend not to bind with great
detriment. This Sa. And had not Catholics I pray you, before the Popes second
Brief, just cause to be persuaded, that the Breues were procuted by sinister
suggestions and wrong informations of some ouer-hastie and busy person? and
that if his Holiness had had true and particular notice by some other true
hearted subject, how things stand with them have in England, what perturbations
they might breed in the Church, and what loss and detriment was undoubtedly to
fall on such as should obey them, and thereby refuse the Oath, that he would
never have granted forth the said Breues in manner and form as he did; nor when
he had granted them, intended to bind Catholics to obey to their so great
detriment and damage? For that were addere afflictionem afflictis; which kind
of cruelty is not to be thought can proceed from that holy Sea. And this may
suffice for answer to the point, so much stood upon by many inconsideratly
precise, of obeying or disobeying the Popes Breues prohibiting the just Oath of
allegiance. Howbeit a word or two more may not be omitted, vt obstruatur os
loquentiu^ iniqua, to flop the mouth of standerous tongues; and to answer a
fond, or rather strong argument, as some think and say, that in dubijs (as is
the Popes power of deposing Princes, in their opinions) we are to have recourse
to the Sea of. Peter for solution, and there to learn what is truth to be
embraced, what is error to be avoided. Yea, what is there decided, the Church
is bound to believe, though it be that virtue is evil, and vice good; as
Cardinal Bellarmine formerly has taught (strange doctrine; Lib. 4. de sum.
Pont. cap. 5.. Vltimo.
) but now in his late Recognition retracted, saying, that he spoke of doubtful
acts of virtues or vices. For if in the old law, the decision of difficult and
doubtful questions and ambiguities inter sanguinem and sanguinem, causam and
causam, Deuteronomy. 17.
lepram and lepram, were granted to the Priests of the Leuiticall stock, and
to the Judge that should be for the time: much more to the Priests of the new
law, and to Christ's Vicar, the chief Judge and interpreter in all
Ecclesiastical controversies. Therefore in this case of the Oath now
controuerted, Catholics are to require no more but his bare precept; and
whosoever disobeyeth it, taking the oath, sins deadly. This, some wise in
their own conceits, and learned in the estimation of others, have said and
taught, howsoever otherwise very inconstant in their opinions and judgments;
but how prudently, charitably, or learnedly, let the discreet reader judge.
These have forgotten who it is that says, Nolite iudicare, and non
iudicabimini: Luc. 6.
nolite condemnare, and non condemnabimini. And what S. Thomas teaches:
Ecclesia non debet praesumere de alique peccatum, Supplem q. 47. ar. 3.
quousque probetur: The Church ought not to judge any of sin, till it be
proved. Indeed if the Popes precept were such as S. John Evangelist
recommended, and often inculcated to his Disciples at his departure out of this
world, Hieron. lib. descrip. Eccles.
which was, as S. Hierome writes: Filioli diligite alterutrum, Little children
love ye one another; then (as he said) upon their tediousness of hearing it so
often repeated, Praeceptu^ Domini est, and si solum fiat, sufficit: It is our
Lords precept, and if it only be done, it suffices; then I say, we should not
need to diue farther in seeking reasons, but simply to obey, quia praeceptum
Papae est, because it is the precept of the Pope: but by reason of the infinite
difference between the commanders and the commandments, we must crave pardon
if we say, Et si solum fiat, non sufficit: if in this case of the Oath, there
be but his bare precept, it is not sufficient.

Touching the other point, I must needs confess that in obscurities, and
doubtful questions, and difficulties in the Law of Christ, all Christians are
to repair to him that sits in Peter's chair for the light of interpretation
and true solution thereof: as S. Hierome did to Pope Damasus, Hieron. ep. ad
Damasum.
desiring, if he had erred in his writings, to be corrected by him. Also
Athanasius in his distresses appealed to Foelix and Julius Popes of Rome. S.
John Chrysostom to Innocentius, Cost rus in Enchir. de sum. Pont.
Calendion of Antioch to Pope Foelix: and other ancient Fathers in their
distresses and difficult causes were wont always to seek for succor and
redress of the Pope of Rome then being: but in cases perspicuous, wherein are
no ambiguities or doubts to be made, against which nothing was ever formally
decreed in any general Counsel, nor by any ancient Father taught, but is most
plain and evident in holy Scriptures, and as clear as the Sun in the
firmament: that needs not. And such is the duty of inferiors to superiors,
of subjects to their lawful Princes, of children to parents, of rendering to
Caesar that is Caesar's, and so forth: for which there is an express
commandment from the Highest, wherein no power created can dispense or justly
command the contrary. Which if any should attempt to do (as his Holiness
seems to have done in prohibiting the Oath of allegiance) it may well be by a
Catholic English subject in all humility and reverence to the Sea Apostolic,
yet with Christian courage answered: Non obedio praecepto Regis, sed praecepto
legis. 2. Macch. 7.
I obey not the precept of the King (that is, the Pope) but the precept of the
law. And, Obedire opertet Deo magis quam hominibus. Act. 5.
We must obey God rather then men. To conclude, in such a case not to do as the
Pope commands in this Breues, so there be no co^te^pt (as I have said) of his
precept, is no mortal sin: ex fine enine morales actus speciem habent. See
Caiet. 5. Precepti transgressio. Tho. 2.2. q. 105. ^. 1. ad. 1.
For moral acts have their formality of the end: and such disobedience being
materialis tantum, makes not a deadly sin, and cose quently no sin at al.
And this much as touching obedience to the Popes H. Breues. It follows now
that we treat briefly of a subjects duty in this point toward his liege Lord
and secular Prince.

If it must be granted that Christians by the law of God are strictly bound to
obey all just determinatiue sentences and decrees that proceed from the Sea
Apostolic, being the highest spiritual tribunal in Gods Church; why must it
not likewise be granted that subjects, as well Clercks as laics, are by the
same law no less bound in foro co^scientiae to be obedient to the King and his
just laws, the chiefest tribunal in the common wealth? This (I think) no
Christian will deny, as being most clear and evident in holy Scriptures,
taught, and practiced by all ancient Fathers and holy Saints.

I confess (you will say) that humane just laws have their efficacy of
binding all subjects to obey in the Court of conscience, Tho. 1.2. q. 96. ar. 4.
from the eternal law of God, of which they are derived, according to that of
Solomon: Per me Reges regnant, Prou. 8
and legum conditores iusta decernunt. By me (says God) Kings do reign, and
Lawmakers decree just things. But whether this law of the Oath (which you aim
at) be such, some make doubt; for that Cardinal Bellarmine in Tortus, and
father Parsons in his Catholic letter affirm, many things to be contained
therein against the spiritual primacie of the chief Pastor, and his
authority of binding and loosing: and concerning the limitation (to use father
Parsons own words) of his Holiness authority, to wit, what he cannot do
toward his Majesty, or his successors in any case whatsoever. Moreover,
besides promise of civil and temporal obedience in the Oath, other things are
interlaced and mixed therewith, which do detract from the spiritual authority
of the highest Pastor, at least wise indierectly, says he. Therefore this law
is iniust, as being prejudicial to the law of God and holy Church.

Some I know will be carping at me for affirming father Parsons to be the
author of that Catholic letter; who being ashamed (as may be thought) of the
slender and insufficient clearing the important matter of the Oath, by four
several and distinct ways according to his promise, deny that ever he wrote
the same. But will they nill they, it is so well known to be his, and was to
the Inquisition in Rome (if I have not been misinformed, and by a very
credible person, that heard it from a gentleman, present in the city in his
life time, and at his death) that he could not deny it; and upon the
acknowledgement thereof (whether with sorrow and grief for some points
unadvisedly or erroneously written, and brought in question in his old age; or
somewhat else in some other book of his against Doctor Morton, touching the
lawfulness of the Oath of Supremacy in some case, I cannot say) soon after
fell sick, and died within eight days. But to return to our matter. Then
laws are said to be just, Tho. 1.2. q. 96.24.
first when they are made for the common good: secondly when they exceed not
his power that makes them: and thirdly when they have their due form, to wit,
when the burdens (or penalties) are imposed on the subjects with a certain
equality of proportion, in order to the common good or utility of the weal
public, as S. Thomas notes.

Such is this law of the Oath of allegiance, made by full authority in
Parliament, for the conservation of his Majesty and whole commonwealth in
tranquillity and peace, Tho. 22. q. 67.2.4. Innoc. 3. cap. Per venerabilem:
Extra. Qui filij sint legitimi.
which is both private and common good. When I say full authority, I mean, in
temporals; for so the Prince has, and only in temporals in the common wealth:
no less the^ the Pope in spirituals in the patrimony of the Church. Which law
was generaly enacted for all English subjects, though principally intended as a
distinctiue sign to detect, not Catholics from Protestants, nor such as
deny the Kings spiritual supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, from the Popes
spiritual primacy, as Cardinal Bellarmine in Tortus affirms; but turbulent
spirited Catholics (and these to repress) from mild and dutifully affected
subjects of the same religion: such as disliking happily in words that most
horrible conspiracy of Gunpowder King-slaying, would in heart have applauded
the event, from those who in affliction for their conscience, with patient
perseverance to the end, how long soever God permit it to continue for our
sins, will in word and deed love their enemies, bear wrongs without
murmuring, and sincerely pray for the conversion of their persecutors, if they
have any, following the example and doctrine of our blessed Savior and his
holy Apostles.

That our dread Sovereign in setting forth this Oath by Act of Parliament,
has not exceeded the limits of his power, is manifest, in that it was framed
only for this end, that his Majesty's subjects should thereby make clear
profession of their resolution, Praefat monit. Apolog. Reg.
(to use his Majesty's own words) faithfully to persist in his Majesty's
obedience according to their natural allegiance. And so far was his intent
by the same Oath to detract from the Primacy or spiritual authority of the
Pope, of binding or loosing by Ecclesiastical censures or sacraments (as the
Cardinal and father Parsons affirm,) that his Majesty as it were by a most
prudent prevention, Praefat. monit.
to take away all scruples that might arise in Catholic subjects consciences,
took special care that that clause inserted by the lower House into the Oath,
which detracted from the Popes spiritual authority of excommunicating his
Majesty, should be forthwith put out. And withal declared, that the virtue or
force of this Oath was no other, then that the Popes excommunication might not
minister a just and lawful cause unto his subjects to attempt any thing by
open or privy conspiracies against his Majesty or state. What more I pray you
could he have done for clearing this controversy, and satisfying his subjects?

If then it be so that nothing is contained in this Oath, but what appertains
to natural allegiance, nor more by his Majesty required then profession of
civil and temporal obedience, which nature prescribes to all borne subjects
(as his Majesty the interpreter of his own law has most sufficiently in his
Premonition and Apology made known to all by his pen) nor that he intended by
interlacing or mingling any thing, to detract from the spiritual authority of
the Pope, no not indirectly, nor against the law of God, as is likewise
manifest, none can justly say he has exceeded his limits, or that the law is
unjust.

And whereas the Catholic letter has: That there are some things (but
specifying none of those some) concerning the limitation of his Holiness
authority (if he mean spiritual, it is untrue) to wit, what he cannot do
toward his Majesty or his successors in any case whatsoever* That is a
gloss of his own invention beside the text, a notorious untruth; for there
are no such words to be found in the Oath, as, In any case whatsoever. Neither
is the Popes spiritual authority limited or once touched therein, as by his
Majesty's intention sufficiently made known unto us, does manifestly appear.
And Caietan teaches that in such like case, if the intention of the man that
commands may be known, Caietan ver. praecepti trangressio.
it is enough; because the force of the precept depends of the intention of
him that commands. Now to end this matter, I wish you to note the fraud of
that Catholic letter writer: for, to have set down in plain terms, that
his Holiness may depose his Majesty, dispose his kingdoms to whom he list,
license subjects to raise tumults, take arms against him, or murder him, and
such like, he knew would sound to good subjects most odious: therefore he
thought it to be a point of policy not to deal plainly, but leave the Reader
perplexed with this obscurity: What his Holiness cannot do toward his
Majesty, in any case whatsoever. Whose bare assertion without proof, or
truth, can in reason convince none but such as want their common sense.

Now that it has been proved, nothing to be contained in the Oath against the
law of God, nor decrees of any general Council; and that his Majesty in
making this law, and requiting of his subjects the performance thereof
according to his intention (which is but just and good) has not gone beyond
his bounds: will any yet be so wilfully blind as not to see, that by the
immaculate law of God he is bound in conscience to render to Caesar that is
Caesar's? to be obedient to higher powers, as well the civil in temporals, as
the Ecclesiastical power in spirituals? Saint Peter prince of the Apostles
taught this doctrine to the Christians of the primitive Church, that they
should submit themselves and be obedient to secular Princes and Magistrates,
though they were heathens. 1. Pet. 2.
Subiecti igitur estote omni humanae creaturae propter Deum: sieve Regiquasi
praecellenti, sieve Ducibus tamquam ab eo missis, etc. Be subject therefore to
every humane creature, for God: whether it be to the King, as excelling, or to
rulers as sent by him to the revenge of malefactors, but to the praise of the
good; for so is the will of God, that doing well you may make the ignorance of
unwise men to be dum. And a little after, exhorting the^ to fear God, his next
lesson is, to honor the King: Deum timete: Regem honorificate. How I pray you
is a King honored, when his just precept is neglected or contemned? Some happily
without consideration, both ignorantly and unwisely will grant that Catholic
kings are to be honored and obeyed, but doubt may be made of such as by the
Church are reputed, or rather condemned heretics, and adversaries to the
Catholic faith.

I ask these (if there be any so simple) whether Emperors, Kings, and
Princes, to whom the Apostles preached this subjection and obedience, were not
adversaries, yea and persecutors of the Catholic faith, and continued such
the space of more then three hundred years? howbeit the Christians of those
days, instructed both by the doctrine and example of the Apostles, in all
dutiful humility, did not give freely, but rendered to Caesar his due, how
perverse soever their Governors were. Which lesson Saint Peter their chief
Pastor, immediately after in the same chapter had taught them: Serui subditi
estote in omni timore dominis, non tantum bonis and modestis, sedetiam
dyscolis. Servants be subject in all fear to your masters, not only to the
good and modest, but also to the wayward. Ephesians. 6. Colos. 3.
This dutiful subjection likewise teaches Saint Paul: Serui obedite Dominis
carnalibus cum timore and tremore, in simplicitate cordis vestri, sicut
Christo. Servants, be obedient to your Lords according to the flesh, with fear
and trembling, in the simplicity of your heart, as to Christ, not serving to
the eye, as it were pleasing men, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will
of God from the heart, with a good will serving as to our Lord, and not to men.

If servants then commanded by the Apostle, were bound to serve and obey their
temporal Lords and masters with such care and diligence, were they never so
froward and wicked Pagans (for such no doubt many Christians did serve) who by
their examples, threats, or enticements might hazard to withdraw them from the
true worship of God: are not subjects now by the same law as well bound to be
obedient to lawful Kings and Princes, be they never so wicked in manners, or
opposite to faith and Christian religion, as heretics and apostates are? Were
they not Pagan Princes and Potestates whom Saint Paul willed Titus to admonish
Christians to obey at a word? Admone illos (says he) Principibus and
Potestatibus subditos esse, dicto obedire. Admonish them to be subject to
Princes and Potestates, to obey at a word. S. Ambrose.
Upon which place Saint Ambrose: Admonish; as if he should say, Although thou
have spiritual government over spiritual matters, yet admonish them to whom
thou preachest, to be subject to Kings and Princes, because Christian religion
depriueth none of his right. The same holy Father and also Saint Augustine
write of the prompt obedience of Christians to Julian the Apostata (which may
be a very good example for Catholics of these latter times to show like
obedience if they light on like Princes) saying: Iulianus extitit infidelis
Imperator, Aug. in Psalm. 124. Super illud, Non relinquet Domi nus virgam.
Habetur 11. q. 3. c. Julian.
nonne extitit Apostata, iniquus, idololatra, etc. Julian was an infidel
Emperor, was he not an Apostata, wicked, an idolater? Christian soldiers
served an infidel Emperor. When they came to the cause of Christ, they
acknowledged not but him that was in heaven. When he willed them to worship
Idols, to sacrifise, they preferred God before him. But when he said, Bring
forth your army, go against that people, they obeyed incontinently. The
distinguished the eternal Lord from a temporal Lord: and yet for the eternal
Lord, they were subject also to the temporal Lord. Hereby is evident that
Julian had right to command Christian soldiers in temporals, and they showed
all prompt obedience, knowing that their religion taught no injustice; that
notwithstanding his Apostacy, he being lawfully called to the Empire, they
were not, nor could be absolved of their loyalty and civil obedience toward
him.

Was so notorious an Apostata to be of duty obeyed, and not a king, who cannot
be judged an heretic, because he does not pertinaciter defend any opinion
against the Church of Christ, but royally promises to forsake the religion he
professes, if any point or head thereof belonging to faith can be proved not
to be ancient, catholic, and Apostolic?

Here Cardinal Bellarmine will answer, That the Church in her nouitie or
beginning, wanted forces (forsooth after three, yea four hundred years from
her beginning) to depose Julian, Constantius, Valens, and other heretical
Princes, and therefore permitted Christians to obey them in temporals.

Saint Cyprian says, that in his time the number of Christians were very
great. Cypr. in Demetrianum. Tertul. in Apologet.
And Tertullian writes thus: Were we disposed, not to practice secret revenge,
but to profess open hostility, should we want number of men, or force of
arms? Are the Moors or the Parthians, or any one nation whatsoever, more in
number then we, that are spread over all the world? We are not of you, and yet
we have filled all the places and rooms which you have. Your Cities, Islands,
Castles, Towns, Assemblies, your Tents, Tribes, and Wards; yea the Imperial
Palace, Senate, and seat of judgment, Eusebius. l. 3. de rita Constan. Niceph.
l. 5. c. 25.
etc. Eusebius likewise, and Nicephorus report, That the whole world, as it
were, under Constantius was Christian, and the greater part Catholic. How
then is it true that the Church in her nouitie wanted forces?

And therefore she permitted Christians to obey their Princes in temporals,
says the Cardinal. Even so permitted, as father Parsons in his letter to the
Catholics of England against the Oath of allegiance affirms, that Pope
Clement by a Breue had permitted civil obedience to our King; and recommended
to all Catholics soon after his Highness entrance unto the Crown. As if
civil obedience had not been otherwise due but by his Holiness permission.
Who would have thought such an imprudent and strange kind of phrase could have
so escaped his pen? But it seems he had learned the same out of Cardinal
Bellarmines writings, and so presumed it would pass as current without
controlement. And may not the world marvel (be it spoken with due reverence to
his great dignity, which I have ever, and in heart still do honor) that a man
so excellently learned will teach, that Christian subjects, unless they be
permitted by the Church, are not bound to render obedience to their lawful
Kings and Princes, if they become heretics, or adversaries to true religion,
and persecutors? Princes infidels lose no right, but are the true and supreme
Princes of their kingdoms, as he himself teaches: Lib. 5. de To. Pont. c. 2.
for dominion is not founded either in grace or in faith; so as the Pope has
no authority to meddle with them. Marry if these become Christians, and after
fall to heresy, what then? In that case, says he, Potest regna mutare, and
vni auferre, Cap. 6.
and alteri confer: He may change kingdoms, and take from one, and give to
another, says he. Then is their condition worse as touching temporal
possessions, then it was when they were infidels, and worse then the condition
of the basest of their subjects. But Christian religion depriueth no man of his
right: who had right in infidelity, cannot lose the same by receiving the
grace and faith of Christ; which is agreeable to the doctrine of the Cardinal,
howsoever he seems sometime to teach contrary to himself. Bellar. lib. 5. de
To. Pont. c. 3.
Christ did not (says he) nor does take kingdoms from them to whom they
belong: for Christ came not to destroy those things which were well settled, but
to establish them. And therefore when a King becomes a Christian, he does not
lose his earthly kingdom which by right he held, but purchases a new interest
to an everlasting kingdom: otherwise the benefits received by Christ, should
be hurtful to Kings, and grace should destroy nature. If Christian Kings
lawfully attaining to their dominions, by right of nature enjoy the same, as
cannot be denied, and so are to be obeyed; why not also if they happen to fall
back into heresy or infidelity, their right not being founded in grace or in
faith? To say that such Princes or magistrates are not to be obeyed, comes
near the heresy charged upon Wickliffe, and condemned in the Council of
Constance, and is repugnant to the doctrine of the holy Ghost in sacred
Scriptures, and practice of all blessed Saints and Martyrs; who most promptly
without any permission of the Pope or Church, obeyed Pagan Princes, under whom
they were subject in all civil causes; and only in defense of faith and Gods
truth, made choice rather to shed their blood, then by obeying Caesar to
disobey God. And where such a permission was ever granted (as to obey Julian or
other heretical Emperor) cannot be found in any general Council, or ancient
Fathers writings before the days of S. Thomas of Aquine, 2.2. q. 12.2.2.
of whom the Cardinal learned his doctrine of permission, to obey till such
time as they had forces to deprive them of their Empire.

Consider I pray you, that S. Paul having received his doctrine immediately from
heaven, writing to the Christians in Rome, permitted not for a time, but
strictly commanded them ever to obey higher powers: Romans 13. Sap. 6.
Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit: Let every soul be subject
to higher powers. Was this meant, trow ye, for only higher powers Christians,
or heathen only for a time? No; but for all sorts of rulers, and as long as
there be superiors and inferiors. The holy Apostle in this and other his
Epistles, often inculcateth this necessary virtue of obedience, diligently
exhorting and commanding as well subjects to be obedient to their Princes, as
servants to their masters, and all inferiors to their superiors. And were not
these masters and higher powers for the most part Pagans? Were they not
enemies to Christian religion, whom they were taught to obey? Was any sort of
inferiors exempted from obeying? S. John Chrysostom will put you out of doubt,
that such subjection is commanded to all sorts, Priests, Monks, Chrysostom. in
cap. 13. Romans hom. 23. August. in lib. expositionis quorundam propos. ex epist.
ad Romans
and secular men, as the Apostle himself declares in the very beginning:
Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit, etiam si Apostolus sis, si
Euangelista, si Propheta, sieve quisquis tandem fueris: neque enim pietatem
subuertit ista subiectio. Let every soul be subject to higher powers, yea if
thou art an Apostle, if an Evangelist, if a Prophet, or finally whosoever thou
art. Mark well. For this subjection subuerteth not piety, or religion. And he
specially notes, that S. Paul says not simply Obediat, but subdita sit. And
why? because power is of God; Non est enim potestas nisi a Deo: For there is no
power but of God. Quid dicis? says this holy Father to S. Paul: Omnis ergo
Princeps a Deo constitutus est? Istud, inquit, non dico. Neque enim de quouis
Principum sermo mihi nunc est, sed de ipsa re. What say thou, O Paul: is then
every Prince constituted of God? This (says he) I say not. For neither of
every Prince do I now speak, but of the thing it self: that is, of power. And
the Apostle says further, Quae autem sunt, a Deo ordinatae sunt: And those
that are, of God are ordained. Therefore he that resists the power, resists
the ordinance of God: adding, Tho. 2.2. q. 105. ar. 1.
contrary to the love of God, in not obeying his commandment: and contrary
to the love of his neighbor, withdrawing from his superior obedience due unto
him. And they that do resist, what get they? They purchase to themselves
damnation: having committed a deadly sin in resisting. Which kind of
purchase, I wish many in this our country to note diligently, and in time to
take heed of.

But I know some will infer that this place of S. Paul may well and ought to
be understood of Prelates, and the chief Prelate Christ's Vicar, who are also
higher powers: and therefore touches such as by obeying the King in the Oath
of allegiance, disobey their spiritual Pastor the Pope. These deceive
themselves, not considering the drift of the Apostle: for if they mark well,
they will easily see that S. Paul in this chapter understands not the
spiritual directly, but the secular power, as must needs appear manifestly to
him that reads the text. Nam Principes (says he) non sunt timor^ boni
operis, sed mali, etc. For Princes are no fear to the good work, but to the
evil. But will thou not fear the power? do good, and thou shall have praise
of the same: for he is Gods minister unto thee for good. But if thou do evil,
fear; for he bears not the sword without cause: for he is Gods minister: a
revenger unto wrath to him that does evil. By whom can all this be meant, but
by the secular power? To whom is tribute due to be rendered, not given gratis,
because it is an act or work of justice, but to the secular power? Who carries
such a sword to punish corporally to death, and by the ordinance of God, but
Kings and secular Princes, who are Gods ministers and vicegerents in earth for
this purpose? This sword never belonged to Peter nor his successors by Christ's
institution, as D. Kellison confesses against M. Sutcliffe; D. Kellison in his
Reply to M. Sutcliffe, cap. 1. fo. 13.
his words are these: If beside this spiritual power which he has over the
whole Church, Sutcliffe suppose, that either we give him, or that he
challenges to himself any temporal power over Christian Kings and kingdoms,
he is foully deceived; for we confess, and so does he, that Christ gave him no
such sword nor sovereignty, etc. We acknowledge indeed two swords in the
Church of Christ, the one spiritual, the other temporal, but we give them not
both to the Pope. For the supreme spiritual power is the only sword which he
handles; the supreme temporal power out of Italy pertains to the Emperor,
Kings and Princes.

For as there are in the Church of God two bodies, Idem. fo. 14.
the one political and civil, the other Ecclesiastical or mystical; the one
called the commonwealth, the other the Church: so are there two powers to
direct and govern these bodies, and the one is called civil or temporal, the
other Ecclesiastical: and that rules the bodies, this the souls; that the
kingdom, this the Church; that makes temporal, this spiritual laws; that
decideth civil causes, this determines and composeth controversies in
religion; that punishes bodies by the temporal sword, this chastises souls
with the spiritual glaiues and bonds of excommunication, suspension,
interdicts and such like: and the end of that, is temporal peace, the scope
and butte of this, eternal felicity; and so that being inferior, this
superior, that must yield to this, when there is any opposition. And so we
give to the Pope one sword only over the Church, and not swords, as Sutcliffe
says. They are secular Princes likewise who may exact customs, and to whom
tribute ought of duty to be paid by all subjects, thereby to sustain and
maintain their dignity, govern their kingdom in peace and justice, and
protect them from all enemies: such excepted as by their privileges for the
honor of Christ are exempted. Tributum Caesaris est, Ex. de trad. Basil. and
ep. ad Valentin*
non negetur. says S. Ambrose. This was never due to the Apostles the
spiritual Princes of the Church, nor consequently to Bishops wno, as they are
bishops only: either did they exercise such a sword, or ever acknowledge to be
permitted the^ by the institution of our B. Savior, of who^ they received
their co^missio^ and al power they could practice for government of his Church
till the worlds end. Cost. c. 14.
Costerus a reverend and learned Jesuit in fidei Demonst. page 95. commends
Erasmus for writing thus: Erasm. ep. ad Vulturium Neocomum.
Nihil vi gerebant (Apostoli scil.) tantum vtebantur gladio Spiritus, neminem
agebant in exilium, nullius inuadeba^t facultates, etc. Haec Erasmus non minus
diserte quam vere. They (that is the Apostles) did nothing by violence, they
used only the sword of the Spirit, they drove none into exile, they invaded no
man's possessions, etc. This Erasmus, (says Costerus) no less wisely then
truly. And a little before in the same book cap. 12. he teaches, Cost. propos.
3. cap. 12.
that the material sword belongs not to any Ecclesiastical person: Nulli
enim competit Ecclesiastico vel sanguinem fundere, vel capitis quenquam
condemnare. For it appertains not to any Ecclesiastical person either to
shed blood, or to condemn any man to death. Then not to the Pope as he is an
Ecclesiastical person, and successor to Peter, does it belong to use such a
sword. Hereto agrees Sir Thomas More in his treatise upon the passion: Morus
in pas. Dom. page 139^. Bern de consid. li. 4. c. 3.4. See Gratian. 23. q. 8.
in princ.
Mitte gladium in locum suum, etc. Put up (says Christ to Peter) thy sword
into his place, as though he would say: I will not be defended with sword. And
such a state have I chosen thee unto, that I will not have thee fight with this
kind of sword, but with the sword of Gods word. Let this material sword
therefore be put up into his place, that is to wit, into the hands of temporal
Princes, as into his scabberd again, to punish malefactors withal. Adding,
that the Apostles have to fight with a sword much more terrible then this, that
is, the spiritual sword of excommunication, the use whereof pertains to
Ecclesiastical persons alone: as the other to secular Justices. This he, most
learned in his time, and no less zealous in Catholic religion. Morus in
passione Domi.
He goes on page 1393. saying, that Christ after this told Peter, that he had
done very evil, to strike with the sword: and that he declared also by the
example of the civil laws, Matthew. 26.
who says: Omnes qui acceperint gladium, gladio peribunt, etc. For by the
civil laws of the Romans, under which the Jews at the same time lived,
whosoever without sufficient authority were spied so much as to have a sword
about him to murder any man with, was in a manner in as evil a case, as he
that had murdered one indeed. If Peter, exercising a material sword in
defense of Christ, and at such time as the use thereof might seem to him very
necessary, was sharply reprehended, for that he had no lawful authority in
such wise to fight for him: is it not a sufficient document for his successors
not to use violence on secular Princes by exercising the material sword, no
not in ordine ad spiritualia, in defense of Christ's spouse the Church, for that
she has no warrant so to do? Our Savior a little before his passion, seeing
his Apostles to contend about superiority, teaching them their duties, and in
them all their successors, and the different government between them and
secular Princes said: Luc. 22.
Reges gentium domina^tur eorum; and qui potestatem habent super eos, benefici
vocantur, vos autem non sic, etc. The Kings of the Gentiles ouerrule them: and
they that have power upon them, are called beneficials. But you not so: but he
that is the greater among you, let him become as the younger etc. Upon which
place Origin, S. Hierome, Chrysostom and Basil with one assent understand,
that secular Princes are not content only to have subjects, but also by
ouerruling they use the^: but you not so, to wit, you my Apostles and
successors after me: for it is your part to serve, to minister, and to feed
by word and example, etc. And in Saint Matthewes Gospel, Math. 20.
our Savior said unto two of his disciples James and John: You know that the
Princes of the Gentiles ouerrule them: and they that are the greater, exercise
power against them. It shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be the
greater among you, let him be your minister, etc.

Is it not plain tnat our Lord Jesus, though he teach not paritie with
Puritans, nor forbids superiority among Christians neither Ecclesiastical
nor temporal, yet he will not that his Apostles nor their successors, Bishops
and Priests (being called to the state of a celestial kingdom, that differs
from the condition of a temporal kingdom) should rule like unto Kings and
secular Princes, who carry a material sword ad vindictam malefactorum, for
revenge of malefactors? and some now and then imperiously govern their
subjects with pride, tyranny, contempt of inferiors, and for their own lucre
more then the vtility of their subjects. Which kind of government is forbidden
both by the doctrine and example of our Savior, 1. Pet. 5. Presbyteros
Compresbyter. so reads and expounds. S. Hierome ep. 85. So translate
Erasmus and Beza.
and humility commended to all the Clergy, yea to Peter himself; who
co^formably to this, likewise instructed such as at any time to the worlds end
should bear rule in Gods Church (saying; Seniores igitur qui sunt inter vos
obsecro, ego consenior. etc. The seniors therefore that are among you, I
beseech, my self a consenior with them: etc, (or Priests; my self a fellow
Priests) feed the flock of God which is among you, providing not by
co^straint, but willingly according to God: neither for filthy lucre sake, but
voluntarily: neque vt domina^tes: neither as ouerruling the Clergy, but made
examples of the flock from the heart. Whereby appears that all violence,
coaction, and compulsion by exercising the temporal sword (which is the sword
of Kings) is wholly forbidden all Ecclesiastical persons.

To me it seems not without a mystery, that only Peter among the rest of
the Apostles should not strike any in all that hellish troop, coming in fury
to lay violent hands on their Lord, no not the traitor Judas that with a kiss
betrayed him, the ringleader of the rest, and so better deserved to have had
his head cut off: but only him whose name is so precisely recorded by the
Evangelist to be Malchus: and that he should be checked and reproved by our
Savior, Johan. c. 18.
of whom happily he expected to be commended for his zeal. But though Peter
might pretend just cause to be moved to strike as he did, yet was his fact
reprehensible in two respects. First, for that asking Christ the question
whether he and his fellow (for no more of the eleven had swords about them)
should strike or no, stroke without his grant, yea against his will. Secondly,
because his fact had rather a show of revenge then of defense. For what might
he think to do with 2. swords against so many, what possibility to prevail?
And as may appear likewise by Christ's words unto him: Math. 26.
Return thy sword into his place; for all that take the sword shall perish
with the sword. And in S. John's Gospel: Johan. 18.
Put up thy sword into the scabbard: the chalice which my Father has given me,
shall not I drink it? By all which is clear that Peter was justly reprehended
for striking without commission the high Priests servant Malchus, which name in
Hebrew, or Malcuth, signifies Rex or Regnum: doubtless in my judgment not
without a great mystery, and the admirable providence of God, thereby happily
instructing posterity, that no less reprehensible is it in Peter's successors,
as they are Peter's successors, to dethrone Kings and deprive them of their
kingdoms, (which cannot be done without drawing forth and striking with the
material sword) then it was in Peter himself for cutting off Malchus ear.
And that they ought not to use such kind of violence on the persons of Kings,
no nor inferiors to Kings, having no commission from Christ to punish
corporally, no more then Peter had against Malchus, but only spiritually.

Now to return to the authority or power meant by S. Paul Romans 13. Omnis
anima. It is most plain that the Apostle in that chapter recommended to
Christians their dutiful obedience to secular Potestates: because having
preached obedience to spiritual Pastors, some newly converted thought
themselves, being Christians, See S. Chrysostom. in c. 13. ho. 23. To.
to be freed by Christ from al former subjection, and now not bound to obey
either Emperor, King, or any temporal Lord, for that they were heathens and
persecutors of the Apostles and Christ's religion. For which cause, and for that
the Apostles generally were slandered, and said to be seditious, and untruly
charged of their adversaries, that they withdrew men from order, and obedience
to civil laws and officers: Saint Paul here (as S. Peter does in his first
Epistles) to stop the mouth of such flanderous tongues, clears himself, and
expressly charge every man and woman to be subject to their temporal Princes
and superiors: howbeit in such matters as they may lawfully command, and in
things wherein they are superiors.

Conformable to his doctrine was likewise his example, and of the rest of the
Apostles, who in all matters not repugnant to faith and religion, were most
obedient to their temporal Governors, though Pagans and cruel persecutors:
yea and their successors many hundred years after to their lawful Princes,
were they never so wicked heathens or heretics. When Saint Paul being accused
of many crimes by the Jews, appealed to Caesar, saying: Act. 25.
Ad tribunal Caesaris sto, ibi me oportet iudicari: At Caesar's judgment seat
do I stand, there I ought to be judged: (because this is the place of
judgment, says Gloss. interlin;) is it to be thought that he would have said,
he ought there to be judged, if de iure he had not been subject to that
tribunal? or that he did it for fear of death, who was ready before, not only
to be bound and suffer imprisonment, but also to die in Jerusalem for the name
of Jesus?

And who will judge this holy Apostle to be so ready to commit such a crime
for saving his life, as by his doctrine and example to teach and do that which
was unlawful to be taught or practiced; to subject against equity, all
Priesthood to the jurisdiction of a secular Prince? specially because he was
not compelled to go to Jerusalem, to make a lie so prejudicial to all the
Clergy ever after. But well he knew that he was then, de iure, subject to
Caesar's tribunal, being therein become an imitator of our Savior Christ; who
in judgment submitted himself to Pilate, Caesar's Lieutenant; and said, that
his power to judge him was not only permitted, Joan. 19.
but given from above. And our B. Savior (whose actions are our instructions)
in paying tribute for himself and Peter as due to the Emperor, whose subject
he acknowledged to be as he was a mortal man, Math. 17.
taught us by his example that the adopted sons of God, ( Peter not excepted)
are not by the divine law freed from subjection to secular authority in
tributes, customs, and such like, when himself the natural Son of his
heavenly Father, King of kings, by yielding it, showed it to be Caesar's due,
and that it ought to be paid by all that after should believe in him: (such
excepted as by good Princes grants and privileges should be exempted) howbeit
himself was not otherwise bound thereto then for avoiding scandal, for that
he was the natural Son and only begotten of the King of heaven (which they
knew not who exacted tribute) and therefore free.

To which purpose Saint Augustine writes thus: Quod dixit, Ergo liberi sunt
filij, etc. That he said, Therefore the children are free, is to be understood,
that the children of a kingdom are in every kingdom free, Aug. l. 1. qu.
Euan. q. 23.
that is, are not tributaries. Which S. Augustine must needs mean of a kings
natural children; and not of the sons and children of God by adoption: for so
all virtuous and good Christians should be freed from paying tribute; which is
absurd, and contrary to the doctrine of Saint Paul, Omnis anima, etc. every
soul. To this agrees Saint Thomas: Tho. 2.2 q. 104. a. 6. ad 1.
That such as are made the sons of God by grace, are free from the spiritual
servitude of sin; but not from corporal servitude, by which they remain
bound to their temporal Lords. And such subjection Saint Gregory the Great
acknowledged, both by his example and doctrine, to be due to the Emperor, as
to his superior in temporals; following therein no doubt the steps of all his
predecessors before him. Ego autem (says he in an Epistle to Mauritius and
Augusta) indignus pietatis vestrae famulus: Greg. l. 2. ep. 61.
And I an unworthy servant of your piety. And a little after: For to this end
power was given from above to the piety of my Lords over all men. If over all
men, then over himself, though Pope, and the adopted son of God by grace.
But some will say, that Saint Gregory submitted himself of humility, not of
duty. Which is a great injury and derogation to this great Doctor and blessed
Saint, who was vir simplex, and rectus, ac timens Deum, Job. 1.
Real and simple without any duplicitie, fearing more God then the Emperor,
without all fiction or lying; knowing well what a sin it would be to him, by
such a pernicious fiction to prejudice greatly all Pontifical dignity ever
after. Old Eleazarus in the Macchabees, he knew, 2. Macch. ^.
had taught him not so by faining to leave an evil example to posterity, but
rather to suffer martyrdom as he did. And Saint Augustine says: Aug. ser. 29.
de ver. Apost.
That when a man makes a lie for humility sake, if he were not a sinner
before, by lying he is made a sinner. Albeit Saint Gregory were an Italian and
a most noble Roman, yet are we not to imagine that his Worthiness would once
use to any, much less to the Emperor, such ceremonial complements of
courtesy, as many in those parts now adays do, and not of the menest sort: to
wit, Ton seruitore, anzisono schiano divostra signoria. I am your servant, yea,
I am a base servant or slave of your Maistership or Worship, and other such
like; when they mean nothing less: or do an unlawful act, for fear of the
Emperor? displeasure. Saint Gregory undoubtedly ex animo obeyed the Emperor
commanding him to send a law which he had made, into diverse parts of the world
to be promulgated: which he refused not to do, albeit the law in Saint
Gregory's judgment contained many things against the Ecclesiastical liberty.
In fine epist. 61. l. 2.
Ego quidem iussioni subiectus, eandem legem per diuersas terrarum parts
transmitti f^ci, etc. I being subject to your commandment, have caused the law
to be sent through diverse parts of the world. In the end: Vtrobique ergo quae
debui exolui, qui and Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro Deo, quod sensi
minime tacui. On both sides therefore have I performed my duty, (or done what
I ought, which is to be noted) who have both obeyed the Emperor, and also for
God have not been silent what I thought. This obedience Cardinal Bellarmine
against Barclai says was coacted, and de facto, but not de iure. By which
answer, who sees not what an imputatio^ of frailty and weakness is laid on
him that ought to be and was murus aeneus, and petrafortitudinis, against any
power whatsoever that commands unjustly? A weak defense for so strong a
rock; who both in doctrine and example left a perfect pattern of a most
humble Pastor, and glorious Saint burning with the fire of charity, ready, no
doubt, to have exposed himself to martyrdom, rather then for saving his life
to consent to a venial sin. A mirror may he be to his successors and all
Bishops; would God he had many followers in his profound humility, which is
the virtue that most exalts Prelate, Prince, or people to glory. And this
much of subjects duties to their Princes in temporals, wherein they ought by
the law and ordinance of God to be no less obedient, then to their Pastors and
Prelates in spirituals.

It follows now to know what authority it is the Pope pretends to have,
whether Ecclesiastical or civil, to depose lawful Kings, and dispose of
their temporals, and absolve subjects of their bounden duty and natural
allegiance. Which question, who so desires to see it more at large, he may
read D. Barclai de potestate Papae, and M. Widdrington de iure Principum,
where it is most sufficiently and learnedly handled; and before in this my
treatise page 17 I have briefly touched it, whereto I add in this place a word
or two more for your better satisfaction.

Among such Catholics as refuse to take the Oath of allegiance, are many who
think indeed the Pope to have no power to depose Kings or dispose of their
kingdoms, howbeit either upon pretended scruple of conscience, or other humane
respects, are against the taking and takers of the Oath, as if they were little
better then Heathens or Publicans. And some so simple and ignorant, as believe
that no Pope ever challenged or attempted such authority on any Kings or
Emperors; and that no Jesuit or other learned man allowed or ever taught such
doctrine; so odious it seems unto them. But the wiser sort and more learned
know how it has been challenged and practiced by Popes on the persons of
Henry, Otho, Frederick, Emperors, John King of Navarre, for neither heresy
or apostasy; and since on Henry 8. and Queen Elizabeth, as by censures do
appear. And that it is the modern doctrine of many both Canonists and Divines
in these latter ages, which at the first teaching thereof (being so far
dissonant from the writings and practice of all antiquity) was generally
adjudged to be noua haeresis, as Sigebert reports. S. John Chrysostom that
great Doctor, upon that place of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 1. Non dominamur fidei
vestrae: We ouerrule not your faith; Sigebertus in Chro. ad an. 1088. Chrysostom.
lib. 2 de dig. sacerd. c. 3.
attributes such power as forcibly restraines offenders from their wickedness
of life, unto secular Judges under whose dominion they are, not unto the
Church: because (says he) neither is such power given unto us by the laws,
with authority to restrain men from offenses; nor if such power were given
us, could we have wherewith we might exercise such power, etc. So in his time,
and long after, such power of compelling offenders by temporal punishments to
convert to better life, was unheard of to be in Bishops of the Church.

Cardinal Bellarmine in the catalogue of his ancient writers, which he
produces against Barclai for the Popes temporal authority over Princes,
begins with one who was judge in his own cause, Gregory the seventh, that
began his reign in the year of our Lord 1073. not able of like to prove it
out of any more ancient Father or general Council. That this Pope was the
first that challenged or attempted to practice such authority, Otho in chro.
l. 6. c. 35.
witnesses Otho Frisengen. a most learned and holy Bishop, and highly
commended by the Cardinal himself, lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 13. Lego (says
he) and relego Romanorum Regum and Imperatorum gesta, and nusquam inuenio
quenquam eorum ante hunc a Romans Pontifice excommunicatum, vel regno priuatum,
etc. I read and read over again the acts of the Kings and Emperors of Rome,
and in no place can I find any of them before this (to wit, Henry the fourth)
to be excommunicated or deprived of his kingdom by the Bishop of Rome; unless
happily any take this for excommunication, that Philip the first Christian
Emperor (who succeeded Gordianus) for a short space, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 6.
c. 25.
was by the Bishop of Rome (or as Eusebius reports, of the Bishop of that
place where he then resided) placed among public penitents: and Theodosius
sequestered by S. Ambrose from entrance into the Church, for cruel murder.
Whereby we may note, that this learned man could not find no not one example in
all precedent ages of depriving kings of their regal scepters; though of
excommunication he proposes only these two, which may have some show of truth
for mere excommunication, howbeit more probable it is they were not
excommunicated at all maiore excommunicatione. Then this Author in the next
chapter following, Otho ibid. c. ^6.
describes the intestine wars, destruction of souls and bodies, setting up
of Pope against Pope, schisms, and other manifold lamentable miseries that
ensued upon that fact of Pope Gregory against Henry the 4* who commanded the
Bishops of Ments and Colen to constitute Rodolph Duke of Burgundy Emperor,
Spec. hist l. 27.
and to put down Henry: whereupon followed a most grievous war, wherein
Rodolphus was overcome; who dying repentant said: The Apostolical
commandment, and the entreaty of Princes have made me a trangressor of my
oath; behold therefore my hand cut off (or wounded) wherewith I swear to my
Lord Henry, not trecherously to practice any thing against his life, nor his
glory. Who being overcome, the Bishop of Ments by the Popes commandment, and
with help of Saxons, raised an other adversary against the Emperor, one
Hermannus Knoflock: whereupon followed likewise bloody wars. After this,
Henry gathering his army together, drives the Pope into France, and sets
up the Bishop of Rauenna against him, whom he named Clement, and so caused a
schism. This sparsim out of the history. Such like calamities are more then
probable to fall on people and the Church, when Emperors or Kings are so
violently proceeded withal; assured destruction of many, and no hope of the
correction of any by such means, is like to ensue. Was such power, trow ye,
given by Christ to his Apostles tending to destruction, not to edification? No,
all to edification, according to S. Paul, 2. Cor. 10.
none to destruction.

Otho Frisengensis in another place of his works, Li. 1. de gestis Frederici,
c. 1.
writing of the Popes excommunicating the Emperor, shows that Henry 4.
thought it to be such a nouitie, as he had never known the like sentence to be
denounced against any Roman Emperor before. He lived an. 1150.

And Sigebert in Chronico 1088. affirms the doctrine of Priests, By evil
kings he means such as are deposed. Cont. Barcl. cap. 5.
teaching that no subjection is to be yielded to evil Kings, and though they
swear fidelity, are not bound to perform it, to be noua haeresis, a new
heresy sprung up. Howbeit Cardinal Bellarmine will tell you, that such
doctrine and practice began about the year of our Lord 700: for before that
time there wanted (as he affirms) either necessity or opportunity to teach,
or use such power. By reason, of like, there were no heretical Princes
impugners of the true faith before that time; or that the paucitie of Christian
Kings to assist the weak forces of the Church against her persecutors was
such, as there could be no hope to prevail. As if true faith and religion
(which is now, beside the Indies, restrained into a corner of Europe only) did
not replenish before that time Europe, Afric and Asia. No, there wanted not
necessity to practice such authority on Constantius, Julian, Valens,
Valentinian, and other like professed adversaries of Christ and his Church: nor
opportunity, Christians being so many, so potent, replete with marvelous zeal
and constant courage in defense of Gods truth, to the loss of lands and life,
if they had known such power of deposing to have been in the Church and chief
Pastors thereof; and the Pastors knew well what their duty was in that behalf.

But where (I pray you) lay this power hidden for the space of 700 hundred
years after Christ by the Cardinals confession (suppose I should grant so much
unto him) of disposing of temporals in ordine ad finem spiritualem, no
Scripture, no tradition, no ancient Father or general Council in all that
time teaching it? If he say, there was; where or how does it appear? His Grace
has not yet neither in Tortus, nor against our Kings Apology, nor in his last
against Barclai, produced any such clear testimony as may convince. Our
Savior Christ himself refused to intermeddle in dividing a temporal
inheritance between two, saying: Quis me constituit iudice^ aut diuisore^
super vos? Luc. 12.
Who has constituted me a judge or a diuider over you? disdaining as it were
(as Iansenius notes) that he should be troubled or drawn from the celestial
business, Iansen. conc.
for which only he was sent by his Father, to have care of carnal and base
things; thereby also to teach such as are his, that they ought not to entangle
themselves in profane business that govern the Apostolic office. According
to this is that of S. Paul: Nemo militans Deo, 2. Tim. 2.
implicat se negotijs secularibus: No man that is a soldier to God, entangleth
himself with secular business. What more intangling, what more secular, then
to intermeddle in dividing and disposing of temporals? Non est discipulus super
magistrum: The disciple is not above his master. Therefore his Vicar ought not
in such wise to be judge over Kings in things terrene, when they are taught by
our Saviors example not to be hindered from celestial affairs, which only
do concern them: whose power is over sins of men, not over their
possessions, In criminibus, non in possessionibus potestas vestra. Bern. lib.
1. de consid. cap. 2.


Again, S. Peter prince of the Apostles, having received of Christ all power
necessary for the government of his Church, which was to be derived to his
successors, had not that power which is temporal, but only spiritual; for in
the Apostles times the Ecclesiastical and civil were distinct and separate,
as the Cardinal confesses, lib. 5. de sum. Pont. cap. 6. Which could not be,
but were conjoined, if they had any such power, yea indirectly. If then Peter
had no temporal power directly or indirectly given him by Christ's institution,
who doubtless foresaw that it was necessary to be in him and his successors
for the correction and direction of souls to their spiritual end; it were
absurd to say, that succeeding Popes as they are Peter's successors, should have
more ample power then he, or any of the Apostles had. De To. Pont. li. 5. c 4.
And the Cardinals argument which he makes against the Canonists, helps for
confirmation of this matter in hand, to wit: Christ (says he) as he was man,
while he lived on earth, received not, nor would have any temporal dominion:
but the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and represents Christ unto us, such as he was
while he lived here among men; Therefore the Pope as Christ's Vicar, and so as
Pope has not any temporal dominion.

How then comes it that Popes in these latter ages practice on exorbitant
Princes deposition, and disposing of temporals, when they shall judge it
necessary, or expedient to a spiritual end, having no commission, no warrant
of our Savior so to do? Is it by temporal only, or spiritual only, or by
both? By their temporal power, which reaches no further the^ the patrimony of
the Church, it is evident they cannot; for so they are but equals, not
superiors to absolute Princes: and Par in parem non habet imperium, No neither
have they, which is more, being no Monarchs, authority from Christ to put any
man to death, to banish, or to deprive any private man of his goods, Cost. in
Osiand propos. 7.
as Costeru^ a learned Jesuit, and other good Authors do hold.

Nemo Pontifex sanguinis leges tulit, hoc munu^ Imperatorum est, qui varia^
poenas de haereticis scripserunt; quos bonorum spoliatione, infamia, exilio,
morte, imoigne puniri iusserunt, etc. No Pope has made laws of life and
death: this is the office of Emperors, who have written down diverse
puniments for heretics; whom they have commanded to be punished with loss of
goods, infamy, exile, death, yea with fire, etc. He goes on, The Pope at Rome
puts no man to death; he has his secular Judges, who minister justice by
the laws of Caesar. To this agrees Iacobus Almain: De ratione potestatis
laicae est poena^ ciuilem posse infligere, Almain. de dom. not. and civilly. in
vlt. edit. Gersonis.
vt sunt mors, exilium, bonorum priuatio, etc. It belongs to the secular
power to inflict a civil punishment, as are death, banishment, depriving of
temporal goods. But the Ecclesiastical power cannot by the institution of God
inflict any such pain: no not imprison any, as many Doctors hold; but it
reaches only to spiritual punishment, that is, to excommunication: and the
other punishments which he uses, ex iure pure positiuo sunt, are only by a
positive law. Who in another place has thus: Alm. de pot. Eccles. and laic. c.
13. and q. 1. c. 9.
Christus secundum humanitatem, etc. Christ according to his humanity had
greater power then the Pope has, as to institute the Evangelical law: neither
had he his power limited to sacraments, for he could pardon without application
of sacraments: and his Vicar has not such, but only that which is declared in
his Vicarship; for he gave him power to remit sins, to preach, to give
indulgences, etc: but it is no where found that he gave him power to institute
and depose Kings: therefore by any power given him from Christ (note well) he
has not sovereign power of jurisdiction in temporals. This he. With these may
be ranked Ioannes Mayor: Mayor in 4. did. 24. q. 3.
Maximus Pontifex no^ habet dominium temporale super Reges, etc. The chief
Bishop has not temporal dominion over Kings. For the contrary being granted,
(says he) it follows that Kings are his vassals, and that he may expel them
de facto out of their kingdom, etc. but this is not to be granted. And in the
same question: Si aliqui Reges, etc. If some Kings with the people have
delivered over themselves to the Popes of Rome, as it is said of Englishmen, it
is nothing to us. Yet do I not think that Englishmen by any means would
permit the Pope to depose their King, and set up another: for they never yet
suffered any of the Bishops of Rome to do it.

But lest any man here take hold and say, that King John was brought to yield
his crown to the Popes Legate, and for redeeming it, granted an annual
tribute to the Sea Apostolic; let him read S. Thomas More for his better
satisfaction herein, who plainly denies it thus: More supplic. of souls page
296.
If he (the Author of the Supplication of beggars) say, as indeed some writers
say, ( Platina and others) that King John made England and Ireland tributarie
to the Pope and the Sea Apostolic, by the grant of a thousand marks: we dare
surely say again, that it is untrue; and that all Rome neither can show such a
grant, nor never could: and if they could, it were nothing worth; for never
could any King of England give away to the Pope, or make the land tributarie
though he would.

To conclude this point of deposing Princes, I will note unto you only one
place more to this purpose out of the Decrees of the Church of France collected
by Bochellus a late writer. Bochel. ex Cod. libert. Eccles. Gallie. li. 2. tit.
16. c. 1.
Regnum Franciae eiusque pertinentias dare in praedam Papa non potest etc. The
Pope cannot give away for a prey the kingdom of France and the appertenances
thereof, or dispose thereof in any other sort whatsoever. And notwithstanding
whatsoever admonitions, excommunications, or interdicts, the subjects are bound
to perform due obedience to their King in temporals; neither can they be
dispensed or absolved from the same by the Pope. The reason hereof is, that
such obedience is due by the law of God and nature, against which no man may
dispense, according to S. Thomas: In his quae sunt de lege naturae, etc. In
such things as are of the law of nature, and in divine precepts, Tho 2.2. q. 88
ar. 10.
no man can disp ence. O that Frenchmen (if that their doctrine be current in
France) would vouchsafe to teach their doctrine here in great Britain. In
them it seems tolerable, and would be doubtless unpunishable. But certain
English priests, no less Catholic then well affected subjects, for teaching
the like in defense of their King and country, must be subject to the loss of
faculties (the only means that many have of their relief) calumniation and
obloquie of tongues, reputed as schismatikes, little better then heretics; and
esteemed of some unworthy of food to maintain life; diverse having been
forbidden to visit such in prison or relieve them. This is too true: would God
it were not so. O tempora, O mores. Well may we cry out with S. Paul,
Miserabiliores sumus omnibus hominibus: 1. Cor 15. Psalm. 13.
we are more miserable then all men. But though the throat of some be an open
sepulcher, and with their tongues they deal subtly, and the poison of aspes
be under their lips: yet we need not one eye look to his merciful and most
wonderful care of Daniel, feeding him imprisoned in the midst of Lions: and
with the other behold his daily relieuing the beasts of the field, and fowls
of the air, all made for man, as man for God. Then confortamini in Domino, and
nolite tim^re, multis passeribus pluris estis vos. Comfort your selves in our
Lord, and fear ye not, you are much more worth then many sparrowes: you I
mean that intend not to derogate from the spiritual authority of Christ's
Vicar, but to render no less unto him his due, then to Caesar his. But to
return whence we have digressed, if it be true that a Council may not judge,
punish, or depose the Pope, though he endeavor to destroy the Church of God, Li.
2* de Romans Pont. c. 29.
as Cardinal Bellarmine writes: which belongs to none but to a superior; a
Council not being above the Pope, as many hold: why are we not to believe the
same of Kings, though they persecute the Church, Li. 3. c 19. Tert. ad Scapulam
praesid. Carthag.
when as (witness the same Author) they acknowledge no superior, no judge on
earth in temporals?

Well, let such Doctors as teach deposition in schools, withdraw themselves
from speculation to practice, from scholasticall distinctions and disputations
to Magistrates examinations, such as have potestatem crucifigendi vel
dimittendi; happily they may change their subtle shifts into a simple
proposition, that it is small wisdom to band with the supreme Magistrate in a
matter so important as is Caesar's right, never any thing being yet determined
by the Church of God to warrant them so to do.

And it may be in my judgment admired, that catholic Princes permit such
dangerous positions, not only to be disputed, but also taught for truth within
their dominions, and to pass without controlement, knowing that a sparkle of
fire lying smothering in combustible matter, if it be neglected and left
unquenched, may cause in short space an unquenchable flame: so such a
speculatiue doctrine little regarded, is not unlike in time to breed a woeful
practical ruin of kingdoms and nations. And this of the Popes temporal
power.

Is it then by spiritual authority alone, or by both, that Princes maybe
deposed? for it seems by later Divines, that Popes may depose them directly
or indirectly. The mirror of this age for divine literature, Cardinal
Bellarmine, in his late book against Barclai, cap. 5. and elsewhere, writes
not so plainly as were to be wished, nor so, as he satisfies his reader,
whether it be spiritual only, or temporal only, but seems to incline more
to the spiritual power, yet mixed with temporal. Iam dixi (inquit) potestatem
de qua loquimur, etc. I have already said, In Barcl. c. 5.
that the power whereof we speak, is to be found expressly in the Scriptures,
but generally, not in particular; to wit, in the 16. of Saint Matthew: Tibi
dabo claues regni coelorum. And John 21. Pasce oues meas: and by these same
divine testimonies may be gathered, that accession and conjunction of power to
dispose of temporals, in ordine ad spiritualia, as more then once is declared.
And may it not I pray you be as well said (with due respect to his dignity)
that by those divine testimonies no such gloss of accession or conjunction of
power may be gathered: because those places were ever understood by all ancient
Fathers of the sole spiritual authority of the Pope without accession or
conjunction of temporal power, yea in ordine ad spiritualia?

By the keys of the kingdom of heaven promised to Peter, (yet not for Peter
alone, but for the n="*" O igen. In hunc loc. ho. 1 Aug tract vlt. in Joan. and
l. 1. d^ doct. Chr. c. 18. Coster. in O. siand. c. 4.
Church) signifying power to be given to bind and loose, to admit the worthy to
the kingdom of heaven, and to exclude the unworthy; can any other power be
understood then merely spiritual? most certainly there cannot. For ask when
this promise of our Savior was performed? No man I think will deny, but then
Christ gave these keys, when after his resurrection he used this ceremony of
breathing on his eleven Apostles, giving them all like power to forgive or
retain sins, by these words: Quorum remiseritis peccata, etc. Whose sins
you shall forgive, Joan. 20.
they are forgiven them: and whose you shall retain, they are retained. By
which words the Fathers often say, that the keys were given to all the
Apostles. If any man so build on that which Christ said to Peter: Quodcunque
ligaueris super terram, etc. Whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, Math. 16.
it shall be bound also in the heavens: and whatsoever thou shall loose in
earth, it shall be loosed also in the heavens: that Peter and his successors
have power to set up and pluck down Kings; then must it of necessity follow,
See Iansenius Concor. c. 72.
that the rest of the Apostles had the same, because he used the like phrase to
them also; Quaecunque alligaueritis, etc. Whatsoever ye shall bind upon earth,
shall be bound in heaven, etc. And so consequently all Bishops (who are
appointed governors likewise of the Church of God, Act. 20.
as Saint Paul says, Attendite, etc. Take heed to your selves, and to the
whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to rule the Church
of God, which he has purchased with his own blood) may dethrone Kings if they
judge it expedient; which is not to be granted.

This former interpretation of ancient divines seems more agreeable to Christ's
words as Iansenius notes, to understand by these keys power to bind and loose
(because with these two powers as with two keys, the kingdom of heaven is
opened to the truly penitent; and with the other it is shut against the
unworthy and impenite^t sinner) then is the interpretation of later Divines,
who say that Christ meant of the keys of knowledge of discerning inter lepra^
and lepram, who is worthy to be absolved, who unworthy; and of power to bind
and loose. Howsoever they are to be understood, yet thereby cannot be gathered
power to depose or dispose of temporals. Theophylact upon this place, has
thus: Claues aute^ intelligas, quaeligant and soluunt, hoc est, delictoru^ vel
indulgentias vel poenas, Theoph. in 16. Math.
etc. And understand keys, which bind and loose, that is, either pardons or
punishments of sins. For they have power to remit and to bind, who have
attained to the grace of Episcopacie as Peter has. Which power he affirms
was granted to all the Apostles. Quamuis autem soli Petro dictum sit, Dabo
tibi, etc. And although (says he) it be spoken to Peter alone, I will give
thee; yet the keys are granted to all the Apostles. When? When he said, Cap.
firmiter de summa Trinit. and fide Cath. and c* loquitur. 24. q. 1 Vict. de
clauibus. nu. 4. Rabanus.
Whose sins ye remit they are remitted. For when he said dabo, he signified a
time to come, to wit, after his resurrection. So Theophylact. If they were
given to Peter, does it not follow that the Apostles received them of Peter?
But Victoria teaches that they received them of Christ, not of Peter. Rabanus
likewise: Albeit this power of binding and loosing seem to be given only to
Peter, yet it is also given to the rest of the Apostles, and is now likewise to
all the Church in Bishops and Priests. But therefore Peter specially received
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the principality of iudiciarie power,
that all believers through the world may understand, that whosoever do separate
themselves in any sort from the unity of his faith and society, that such can
neither be absolved from the bonds of sins, nor enter into the gate of the
kingdom of heaven. This he.

But let it be granted, according to the sentence of many ancient Fathers, that
Christ speaking specially to Peter, gave him more ample power then he gave to
the rest of the Apostles, yet all was but spiritual, as the words import, and
to a spiritual end; in aedificationem, non in destructionem, to edification
not to destruction: not tending to deposition or deprivation of the temporal
goods of any within his government: but to excommunication, or separation of
certain obstinate offenders from the common goods of the Church militant, and
so consequently from the joys of the Church triumphant. And let it be, that
Peter received the keys of our Savior when he said unto him, Pasce oues meas,
Feed my sheep; all was but spiritual: Joan. 21.
for the same power is required to feed the flock of Christ, that is to open
or shut the kingdom of heaven. Vict* de clau. nu. 4.
And then was he instituted the Vicar of Christ on earth: by whose institution,
and as he is Bishop or Pastor of the whole Church, Card. Bellar. de To. Pont.
l. 5. c. 10.
the most illustrous Card. confesses that he received not power to ouerrule
(dommari) but pascere, to feed. Which kind of secular domination was forbidden
the Apostles, and ministration commanded, as Saint Bernard says. Bern. de
consid. l. 2 c. 5. L. 4. c. 4. de consid.
Who in an other place explicateth what it is, to feed: Euangelizare, pascere
est. Opus fac euangelistae, and pastorum opus implesti. To euangelize, is to
feed. Do the work of an Evangelist, and thou have fulfilled the work of
Pastors. But some are forced to say, that excommunication of the Pope
necessarily works this temporal effect of deposition, for that they know not
otherwise how his Holiness can attain to such power. If this were so, then
what Bishop soever do excommunicate any within his diocese, does also depose
and deprive them of their temporals: for what the Pope is in the universal
Church, such is a Bishop in the particular, L. 5. de sum. Pont. c. 3.
as Cardinal Bellarmine once held, though lately in his Recognitions he
retracteth it after this manner: Whereas I said, that a Bishop was the same in
a particular Church, as the Pope is in the universal, it is thus to be taken;
that as the Pope is the true Pastor and Prince of the Church universal, so is
a Bishop a true Pastor and Prince of a particular Church, not a Vicar or
administrator for a certain time, etc. Which yet serves well for our purpose
in hand: for if a Bishop a spiritual Prince of a particular church, cannot by
virtue of excommunication depose his subjects, neither can the Pope as
spiritual Prince over all.

And Victora plainly says thus, That a Bishop de iure diuino has power to
excommunicate his subjects ex officio, Victor. de excom. nu. 1^.
and by ordinary and proper power. And what the Pope can do throughout all the
world, a Bishop may also do in his Bishopric, a few things excepted, as to
create a Bishop. Who disagreeth not with the Cardinal in this, that a Bishop
is a true Pastor in his particular Church, as the Pope is in the Catholic and
universal: that he may as well excommunicate the subjects committed to his
charge, as the Pope may all Princes and people that are sheep of Christ's fold,
by the authority given to Peter in those word, Pasce oues meat. By which
Christ indeed constituted him Pastor over his flock, marry a spiritual
Pastor, not a temporal, giving him all authority necessary for that office,
which was only spiritual, without conjunction of any other. By virtue then of
this spiritual authority (the principal part for government in foro
exteriori, is excommunication, being grauissima poenarum, then which none is
more grievous) no Bishop can deprive any private man whatsoever within his
Diocese of the least parcel of his lands or goods: (that being the office of
the civil power) how then can the chief Bishop deprive Kings and Princes of
their crowns and dignities, the nature of this censure being all one in both?

Excommunication is defined to be separatio a commumone Ecclesiae, quoad
fructum and suffragia generalia, Tho. in suppl. q. 21. ar. 1. and in 4. did.
18. q. 2.
etc. Excommunication is a separation from the communion of the Church, as
touching the fruit and general suffrages. The fruit of the Church, cannot be
understood of the fruit of temporal goods, because these are not taken away
from excommunicate persons. This S. Thomas: plainly showing, that it is beyond
the nature of this censure to work any such effect, as to take away temporal
goods. And in the same qu. ar. 3. Sed quia excommunicatio est grauissma
poenarum, etc. But becausce excommunication is the greatest of all punishments,
therefore excommunication ought not to be inflicted, no not for a mortal sin,
unless the offender be obstinate. Tunc enim postquam monitus fuerit, etc. For
then after he shall be admonished, if he contemptuously disobey, he is reputed
stubburne, and ought to be excommunicated by the Judge, now not having any more
to do against him. And the same Doctor disputing whether heretics are to be
tolerated, says, That after the first and second admonition, if yet he be
found obstinate, Tho. 2.2. q. 11 ar. 3.
the Church not hoping of his conversion (meaning no doubt such a one as having
professed the Catholic faith, has made shipwreck thereof, and fallen to
heresy) provides for the health of others, separating him from the Church by
the sentence of excommunication; and further leaves him to secular judgment
to be put to death. Whereby you see that in case yea of heresy, the Church can
proceed no further then to excommunication after she has declared and
condemned him for his crime. Can. corripiantur. 24. q. 3.


To this agrees Molanus, writing of the condemnation of John Husse and Hierome
of Prage by the general Council of Constance, Mola. de fide haer. ser. l. 2.
c. 2 and l. 3. c. 4.
who (as he says) having excommunicated, anathematized and condemned them for
heretics, and having no more to do with them, delivered them over to
Imperial power, by which they were burnt. So that temporal punishment of
heretics, whether it be by confiscation of goods and patrimony, or death,
belongs and is proper to the secular power, as the spiritual do to
Ecclesiastical persons. Which we see manifest by practice of all Christian
countries, yea and out own, that no man is to be put to death, nor lose his
goods upon excommunication, but only by execution of the Princes law. And
Cardinal Bellarmine himself will confess, Bellarm. in Barcl. c. 23.
that extra casum haeresit, out of the case of heresy, by virtue of the
sentence of excommunication there follows not deprivation of temporal
dominion, or of particular goods, or kingdoms and princedomes: though (says
he by and by) Kings and Princes may be for just causes deprived by the Pope of
their kingdom or princedome. Variously and ambiguously insinuating, that there
are other just causes besides heresy, but lists not, or rather (as may be
supposed) cannot set down what they are: for as yet never were any
determinately made known, more then such as shall be deemed worthy of
deprivation, ad arbitrium Pontificis.

But as far as I can see, his Grace must maintain other causes as well as
heresy; otherwise how can the deposition of Henry, Frederick, Otho, and other
Princes, be defended to have been lawful, who were never condemned by the
Church for heresy? And if there be other causes current to deprive Princes of
temporals then there is for private men, surely the Christian princely state
must needs be far worse then the plebeian, or then if they were Heathens or
Publicans: which were absurd; when as God the giver of all power, for
correction of men, is not acceptor personarum, but ministers justice equally
or indifferently to all; all, both Princes and people being populus eius, and
oues pascuae eius, his people, and the sheep of his pasture. If there be any,
as me thinks I hear one say, that he is not yet satisfied as touching this
point, but desires to know the final cause, nature and effects of
excommunication; let him note well what the most learned and grave Cardinal
Tolet of famous memory, and others write thereof.

Est autem excommunicatio Ecclesiastica censura, Tolet. Lib. 1. instruc.
sacerd. c. 4. nu. 1.
qua homo Christianus bonis fidelium communibus priuatur. Excommunication is an
Ecclesiastical censure, whereby a Christian man is deprived of the common
goods of the faithful. Which goods, he faith arc three: 1. external
conversation, consisting in mutual talk and society. 2. participation of
sacraments: 3. prayers and suffrages of the Church. And these in his opinion,
are not so much the effects, as the very nature and substance of
excommunication. The end whereof, Lib. 1. c. 11. n. 1 Li. 1 c. 10. n. 14.
without controversy, is the good and vtility of man, that he may repent, and
convert himself to good, as he says; Cap. Medicinalis de sent. excom. in 6.
Decret. 2. par. 24. q. 3. cap. 36
when as excommunication is medicinal, not mortal; instructing, not plucking
up by the root. Which agrees with the Epistle of Pope Vban, set down in the
Canon law: Liquido apparet aliud esse excommunicationem, aliud eradicatiouem,
etc. It evidently appears, that excommunication is one thing, eradication
another. For he that is excommunicated (as the Apostle says) to this end is
excommunicated, that his spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord. 1. Cor. 5.
Disciplina est enim excommunicatio, non eradicatio. Now what can here be
gathered by the definition, end, effects or substance of this spiritual
censure, for deposing Kings, and disposing of temporals? Marry sir, that
subjects are bound, obeying the chief Pastors censure, to shun their Prince
excommunicated, performing no duty unto him, nor in any sort to communicate
with him; for an excommunicate person by name, ought of all to be avoided, to
whom os, orare, vale, communio, mensa negatur. And then when all forsake him,
is he not in effect deposed? Yes truly, when all his subjects do forsake him,
and he left alone. Sed quando haec eru^^? Is a King more like to be forsaken
then a paterfamilias, a private man? Almaine says indeed, Alm. de pot. Eccl.
and laic^, q. 1. cap. 9.
that the Pope may forbid the subjects of a Prince, under pain of
excommunication, to perform any duty unto him; whereby in effect he loses
his kingdom, when no man does regard him: yet cannot depose him, though he
abuse his authority to the destruction of the Christian faith. But if a
general defection of subjects follow not, if according to their duty they
adhere faithfully unto him; without regard to his censure, how then? What his
Holiness may do in this case of excommunication with absolute Princes, being
sheep of Christ's fold, to be directed and corrected with that spiritual rod,
when there is hope of amendment, as well as private men, I will not dispute;
but experience of former ages teaches it is not expedient, See S. Aug. lib 3.
c. 2. cont. ep. Parm. etc. 26.
and that such practice breeds often schisms, reuolts, troubles, and tends
rather to destruction of many, then to edification of any: when as S. Paul
professes power to be given to the Church to edify, not to destroy. And when
this power is exercised in destructionem, it is not that power which comes
from God, but impotencie and defect. This we may be said to do, that we may
lawfully do.

Which power Doctor Sanders calls the sword of the Church, and shows how it
should be used: Sand. de clau. David, c. 9.
Gladius Ecclesiae in aedificationem datus est, etc. The sword of the Church is
given to edification, not to destruction; to confer life, not to infer
death: for defense of the flock, not for hurt of the sheep: to drive away the
Wolf, not to devour the lamb. This sword being spiritual, and is to work
upon souls, not bodies or goods of any, may be drawn forth I must confess
by the supreme Pastor against exorbitant Princes (whose superior he ought to be
acknowledged but only in spirituals) when there is hope to save, not to
destroy: to do good, no harm: and rather to make a wolf a lamb, then cause a
lamb to become a wolf ready to devour the flock, as sometimes such censures
have done, which lamentable experience on the persons of many Princes can
testify: whereupon they proceeded further happily in rigor with their subjects
then otherwise they would have done: and not so much for excommunication only,
as for the clauses of deprivation, deposition, and absolution of subjects from
their dutiful obedience; which are far from the nature and substance of a
spiritual censure, and exceeds the limited of that power, as very learned
Catholic Authors go about to prove. Excommunicatio (says Ludouicus Richeom)
non nisi excommunicatum facere potest, Richeom. in apolog.
eaque fulminatur in Principes, etc. Excommunication cannot cause one to be but
excommunicated, and it is thundered out against Princes, not that they may
become tyrants, nor removed from their possessions, nor to slacken the raines
unto subjects, or that they may be freed from their sworn fidelity. To this
agrees Medina. Excommunicato non est priuatio alicuius boni proprij, Medina.
in 1.2. q. 96. ar 4. citans Sotum.
quod transgressor legis prius possederat: sed est priuatio bonorum communium,
etc. Excommunication is not a taking away of any proper good, which the
transgressor of the law before had possessed: but it is a depriving of the
common goods which he was to receive of the Church, as spiritual communion,
and receiving sacraments. By which doctrine is plain that none, poor or rich,
subject or Prince, may by virtue of excommunication merely, be dispossessed of
any temporal goods whatsoever. If they could, then woe to all Christians in
this respect, that live in such times as Bishops and Popes are not saints. Any
man excommunicated, upon repentance may return to grace, be received of the
Church, and may recover those spiritual goods he had lost, as prayers,
suffrages, and sacraments of the Church, etc. But if temporals, especially
kingdoms, be once lost and confiscate; what hope of recovery? Will it not be
too late to cry, Peccaui? So then, that punishment which God has ordained for
the good of souls, would be most like to turn to the destruction of bodies,
souls, and goods for ever, if excommunication could work such effect, and
were not (as it ought to be) medicinalis, but exitialis: which is not to be
granted.

Moreover if ye look back to ancient Canons of general Councels, yea to the
Canons of the Apostles, you shall see for the same, or like crimes, punishments
to be inflicted on offenders; but deposition inflicted on Clercks, and on
Laics excommunication, or depriving only of sacraments and communion; making
this distinction, Si Clericus sit, deponitor; si Laicus, a communione eijcitor.
Insinuating thereby (as may seem) that the Church has superiority directly
over Clerks to deposition or degradation of persons, not so over the persons of
Laics further then to the censure of excommunication: and therefore not over
kingdoms and Kings, who acknowledge no superior on earth in temporals.

But I pray you, if the Popes Holiness upon cause of heresy do excommunicate a
Prince, or private man, and all that shall communicate with him or obey him, is
he not then to be avoided and forsaken of his subjects and inferiors, or
others whosoever? He that denies this seems to deny the Popes spiritual
authority of binding; and that of S. Paul: Haereticum hominem post primam and
secundam correptionem denita. Tit. 3.
A man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition avoid.

What is this to our Oath? Is there any such clause, for heresy, in it? Are we
to add unto it by our idle inventions? or are we urged to take it otherwise
then the words import simply as they lie, framed by act of Parliament? But
these and such like fond verbal objections, are the cauilling shifts of such
as know not how to give better answers to the substantial points of the Oath;
and persuade some to the loss of their lives, and others of their lands and
goods to their utter ruin, (if justice without mercy be executed) that it
cannot be taken without denial of their faith: never showing them any
particular point, which it is; for to say truth they cannot. So then their bare
word must be believed as an oracle; or else in fine with a bat they will beat
men down, The Popes commandment; not having ought else to say, which may
convince. It may be admired they make no more conscience in such an important
business as this is, not having the Churches definition, nor ancient Fathers
approbations for their assertions. After all, some burst forth in most
uncharitable railing and slanderous backbitings against such priests as in
conscience have performed their duty in taking it, and persist in teaching the
lawfulness thereof; withdrawing friends, and charitable alms from them,
counselling some, and commanding others, not to resort unto them; as I have
been credibly told by some that have themselves been forbidden, and much more
such like dealings which shall not be here rehearsed.

Ignosce illis Deus, quia nesciunt quid faciunt. These ought not to be the
proceedings neither of good subjects, nor of discreet guides of men's souls,
or true disciples of Christ, who are made known to all by a notorious
cognizance, commonly called love or charity, given by our Savior Christ. In
hoc cognoscent omnes quia discipuli mei estis, Joan. 13.
si dilectione^ habueritis Adinuicem. In this all men shall know that you are my
disciples, if you have love one to another. Which badge were to be wished more
visible then it is, in some that pretend to be true followers of Christ.

Now to the authority of S. Paul may be answered, that an heretic so taken,
condemned, and denounced by the Church, is to be avoided in his heresy, to be
taken heed of that he be not seduced by him; haeresis enim serpit vt cancer,
for heresy creeps as a canker: and in humane conversation also, when there
is hope to reduce him thereby to a better mind: Vt spiritus saluus sit. But as
no Catholic is by the laws of this realm to be accounted a Recusant till he
be convicted: so is none by the laws of the Church to be reputed an heretic
to be avoided, till he be by her admonished, condemned and denounced for such;
which is never without pertinacie in heresy. And what makes this for them
that say we deny the Popes authority? God forbid that I (by his grace) a
Catholic priest, should ever deny the Popes spiritual power to
excommunicate any, Prince or people, that were once incorporated into the body
mystical of Christ by Baptism: but as I have denied excommunication of her
own nature to extend to deposition and taking away of temporals; so I may not
grant that every excommunicate person is to be abandoned of all, and debarred
of all humane society and conversation. Though humane communication, esteemed
one of the common goods, is found also among the faithful, as to eat
together, to salute, to talk? negotiate, and such like; yet this sort of
communication belongs not to them properly as they are Christians and members
of the Church, but as they are citizens and parts of the body politic. And as
they are such, they are bound to adhere unto the head of this body their
Prince, not to forsake, but obey him in all just civil causes, notwithstanding
any sentence of excommunication, as has been proved before out of Syluester,
Panormitan, and others; which is not to deny the Popes power.

No? if you read Tortus and believe him, I know you will change your opinion;
for upon those words: That the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority
of the Church or Sea of Rome, has any power or authority to depose the king,
etc. or to discharge any of his subjects of their allegiance and obedience to
his Majesty, etc. He writes thus. Tor^us par. 3.
Here it is manifestly seen, that this Oath does not contain only civil
obedience in things merely temporal, as the Author of the Apology (our
Sovereign) so often has repeated; but it contains also a denial of the Popes
power, which is not a thing merely temporal, but a holy thing and given from
above, which no mortal man can take away or diminish.

It is strange that his Majesty's often repetition of a truth, nothing to be
contained in the Oath, or required, but civil obedience, seems irksome to
the Cardinal, it being very necessary when men will not understand, but his
Grace goes not about to disprove it. And who I pray you is a better
interpreter of a law when doubts or difficulties arise, then he that made the
law? If it contains a denial of the Popes power, his Grace should have done
well to have proved it, and showed wherein. Though the Cardinal for many
respects ought of me (sometime not unknown unto him) highly to be reverenced,
and his writings credited; yet in this matter to me most clear, I must crave
pardon if I differ from him in opinion, and write otherwise: not being able,
after study and diligent search of this matter, to see it so manifest as his
Grace would make his reader believe. It is most manifest the ancient Fathers
never taught so, viz. to be in the Popes power to depose Kings, nor discharge
subjects of their loyalty and dutiful obedience; the Church never yet defined
it so: can I then be so credulous to believe his bare word without better
proof? His ipse dixit in this will not be sufficient. The other flourish to
lead away a simple and inconsiderate reader; forsooth, that the Popes power is
spiritual, a holy thing, from heaven, etc. is somewhat vainly and to no
purpose inserted: for no Catholic denies it, and we that have taken the Oath
of allegiance are ready with Gods grace if need were, to shed our blood in
defense thereof and every point of Catholic faith, albeit we suffer
disgraces, and never received temporal benefit, nor ever took oath, vsque ad
effusionem sanguinis inclusiue, so to do, as the most illustrous and most
reverend purple Fathers are accustomed to take, when in public consistory
they receive their hats.

The Cardinal in Tortus goes on further, to prove by subsequent words in the
Oath, that the Popes spiritual power is denied; Parag. 4.
which were enough to terrify Christian subjects, if it were true. The words
are these: Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any
declaration, or sentence of excommunication or deprivation made or granted, or
to be made or granted by the Pope, or his successors, or by any authority
derived or pretended to be derived from him, or his Sea against the said King,
his heirs or successors, or any absolution of the said subjects from their
obedience; I will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his heirs
and successors.

Here says the Card. is openly denied that the Pope has power to
excommunicate Kings, though they be heretics. Note his proof. For how (says
he) can a Catholic lawfully and justly swear, that he will not obey the Pope
exco^municating an heretical king, unless he believe that an heretical king
cannot be excommunicated by the Pope? Nay here in our Oath (with due respect to
his Grace be it said) is neither openly, no nor covertly denied that the Pope
has power to exo^mmunicate Kings, though they be heretics, as the Cardinal
bears his reader in hand: I marvel he would in such wise add unto, and
thrust into the text of the Oath that which no man, no nor himself can find
therein. For let it be well viewed and considered, it will presently appear
that there is no mention at al of the Popes exco^municating Kings, though they
be heretics, or heretical Kings; but only, if he should excommunicate our
King, and absolve his subjects from their obedience, yet I will bear true
faith and allegiance to his Majesty. What sincere dealing is this? Such
glosses or wilful additions are but manifest corruptions of the text, which
ought not to be used by any that profess sincerity and truth. So this makes
nothing against us, but rather against himself. Then he comes with his needles
minor, which no Catholic denies: But power to excommunicate is intrinsecall
to the Apostolic primacie, and inseperable from it, when as our Lord said to
Peter as to the first spiritual Primate: Math. 16.
Whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven. What is
this to the purpose? What Catholic that has taken the Oath will deny it? It
is not unlike to one that frames an adversary in the air to fight withal.

If French Catholics be demanded, what they will do in this case, if the Pope
should excommunicate their King, and discharge his subjects of their obedience?
they will forthwith answer, that notwithstanding any monitions,
exco^munications, or interdicts, they will not forsake, but obey their King in
temporals, from which obedience they cannot be absolved or dispensed withal by
the Pope; as is in decretis Ecclesiae Gallicanae, lib. 2. cap. 1. Nay they will
bring certain privileges for them and their King against the Popes censure of
excommunication: yet these like good Catholics will believe that he has
power to excommunicate an heretical King.

So in our case a man of any judgment may clearly see, it is neither openly
nor covertly, explicit nor implicit denied, but plainly granted of such as
take the Oath, that the Pope may excommunicate, albeit upon just cause adhering
to his Prince he obey not the sentence. I ask, if his Holiness in Rome should
determine to create some Priest or Prelate, Cardinal or Bishop; and he of
humility or for some other cause best known to himself, notwithstanding the
Popes determination, refuse to accept of the dignity, ( Quis est hic, and
laudabimus eum? Who is he, and we will commend him?) does it follow that
therefore he denies the Pope to have power to confer those dignities on
them? Or if a King be pleased to extend his mercy toward an offender condemned
to die, granting him a pardon; can it be said, though he list not to accept
thereof, notwithstanding the Kings grant, for that he has a shrewd wife that
makes him weary of his life, or for some other cause, that he denies the
King to have power to pardon his offense? It may be admired that one so
excellently learned will argue so weakly. None would have thought but the
book bearing the name of Mattheus Tortus, had been in deed his Chaplains, not
the Cardinals, had not his Grace discovered himself in his answer to our Kings
Apology. Whosoever says or swears, that notwithstanding any sentence of
excommunication, yet he will bear true faith and allegiance to his Prince, no
way denies it, but supposes such a sentence to be, or to have bin. When the
Pope in his writings puts this clause: Non obstantibus constitutionibus
Apostolicis contrarijs quibuscunque. Notwithstanding any contrary Apostolical
constitutions whatsoever, etc. as in the Brief of Paulus the fifth to master
George Birket, dated 1. Febr. 1608. or in others, Non obstantibus priuilegijs
quibuscunque, etc. Notwithstanding whatsoever privileges: Is it not manifest
that such privileges, or Apostolical Constitutions are supposed to be, or
might have been before granted? So in our case none denies the Popes
excommunication, but chooses upon just cause to adhere to his Prince,
notwithstanding the sentence of excommunication against him, which he
presupposes to be, or else may be granted. If any will say, There can be no
just cause to adhere and obey his Prince if he be excommunicated, it were
ridiculous, and false, as all writers affirm, some cases being excepted,
whether he be excommunicated a iure vel ab homine. Vict. de excom. nu. 10.
Cum omnibus excommunicatis (says Victoria among the rest) quocunque modo sint
excommunicati, etc. With all excommunicate persons, in what sort soever they
are excommunicated, it is lawful to participate in these things which are
contained in this verse: Vtile, lex, humile, res ignorata, Tolet. l. 1. inst.
sacer. c. 11. n. 7 Nauar. Ench. c. 27. n. 26. Tho. 4. did. 18. ar. 4.
necesse. Navarre likewise: Regulariter participans, etc. Ordinarily he that
communicates with one that is excommunicated with the greater excommunication,
incurreth the lesser: yet it fails in these, Vtile, lex, etc. The declaration
of which words he that understands Latin may see in the same place of
Navarre, in Caietans Sum, Emanuel Sa, and other Authors.

Now who is so simple as to think that a wife is bound to abandon her husband,
and not to participate with him; children to forsake their fathers, servants
their masters, and not communicate with them in domestical affairs, if they
should be excommunicated?

If it be lawful for such, (as it is by lex and humile) why not also for
subjects to communicate in all civil causes with their Prince, there being
absolute necessity, besides vtile and humile to warrant them so to do,
according to the rule as it is in Navarre, Quod non est licitum in lege,
necessitas facit licitum? What is not lawful in the law, Nau. Ench. c. 27. nu.
35.
necessity makes lawful.

It is not unknown that Henry the fourth, the late French King, obtaining the
Crown of France when he was yet an heretic, relapsed, and de facto
excommunicated by the Pope, required an Oath of fealty of the Clergy of
Paris, for the better security in his dominions, as by their records do
appear: whereupon the chief of all the learned Doctors and faculties, both of
the secular and religious Clergy of that city, willingly without delay
performed their duty, taking a corporal oath of fealty and true allegiance
to his Highness notwithstanding the Popes excommunication, with promise to
assist him to their power against all leaguers whatsoever (among which his
Holiness at that time was one) that should machinate or attempt any thing
against his person, hinder his peace and quietness, or raise arms to the
disturbance of him or his people, etc. This they so virtuous and learned did
with their Prince without resistance, as knowing it to be their duty so to do;
and his case to be far different from that of our Sovereign (who was never
excommunicated, nor relapsed, or indeed heretic, as I have already said,
and could more largely prove if need were;) yet they did not then, nor ever
will deny the Popes spiritual power to excommunicate. And may not the King of
great Britain require the like of his subjects, both Clergy and people, and
they perform the same as well as the French, without preiudicating the
Apostolical power? When Monsignore Fontana Bishop of Ferrara, knowing well the
now Duke of Modina (then usurping the title and dominion of Ferrara) to be
excommunicated by name in most parts of Italy, did notwithstanding of
necessity communicate with him, as a subject with his Prince, and did refuse
to publish it in his own Church without the Dukes consent, notwithstanding the
Popes order and commandment unto him. Will any man say, that this good Bishop
denied the Popes spiritual power to excommunicate? That were ridiculous: or
offended in disobedience? No; necessity (if naught else) excused. So enough of
this matter.

There is another knot to be untied, which seems insoluble, to wit, that I do
believe, that neither the Pope nor any person whatsoever, has power to absolve
me of this Oath, or any part thereof, etc. And that I do renounce all pardons
and dispensations to the contrary. Is not this a plain denying of the Popes
spiritual authority? Cardinal Bellarmine in Tortus plainly teaches me,
Tortus. 5.
that he who a little before by swearing denies the Popes power to bind, the
same does now deny his power to loose. For of those words of our Lord,
Quodcunque solueris super terram, erit solutum and in coelis, all Catholic
men gather, that power belongs to the chief Bishop to absolve, not only
from sins, but also from punishments, censures, laws, vows and oaths, when
it may be expedient to the glory of God, and health of souls.

This knot to him that vieweth it well, will not be found to have more
difficulty to unknit, then the former of binding. For as it is an undoubted
verity, that no Bishop, no nor the Pope can by virtue of excommunication
(less by any temporal power out of his own territories) thrust any private
Christian man out of his possessions, who before had right thereto, and bereave
him thereof, as has been proved: so it is as certain, that they can no more
absolve a subject of his duty and natural allegiance to his Prince, and of
his oath of fealty made unto him, discharging him of all subjection and
obedience, then they can a wife of her duty to her husband, of childrens
honoring their parents, or servants their masters, being warranted for the
performance thereof by the law of God, Honor thy father and thy mother, etc.
against which no power in earth can dispense nor absolve them, that is, release
them of such duty.

At this word Absolve, some silly souls, yea and others that would be
accounted wise, are as it were scandalized, believing that taking the Oath,
they shall deny the Popes spiritual power of absoluing a sinner of his sins
in foro conscientiae, which every Priest having jurisdiction may do: little
considering that they are not like to confess their sins to him this year,
or ever in their life; and out of confession, his authority stretches not to
remit or absolve one from deadly sin. These in a sort resemble some good
creatures that I have noted in Italy, when they hear the Preacher in his
sermon utter this word Confiteor, will by and by knock their breasts, thinking
he is talking of confession; when as the word signifies sometime to give
thanks. And like people of small understanding, believe, that by renouncing
all pardons and dispensations to the contrary, they must deny the Popes power
of granting indulgences or pardons (as the practice is) to beads, grains,
crosses, etc. and of dispensing in any case whatsoever, it being spiritual, as
cannot be denied.

Here I stand ambiguous, Prou. 26.
whether I should follow Salomons counsel or no, Responde stulto iuxta
stultitiam suam, ne sibi sapiens esse videatur: Answer a fool according to his
folly, lest he think himself wise. It shall not be happily amiss for their
more satisfaction to condescend somewhat unto such, letting them to understand,
that to men of any judgment, it must needs be ridiculous, who know it cannot,
nor ought so to be understood, but only of pardoning and dispencing, or
releasing subjects of a lawful Oath of fealty and dutiful obedience to their
Sovereign. This is not spiritual power which belongs to the Church; and
therefore when such pardons and dispensations shall be offered by his Holiness,
(as is never like to be) every good subject is bound to renounce them, as being
contrary to the ordinance of almighty God. I ask these what they think,
whether the Pope or any power in earth can command, absolve in this sense as we
take it, or dispense against the law of God and nature? They must needs say as
truth is, he cannot: and according to S. Thomas doctrine: In his quaesunt de
lege naturae, 2.2. q. 88. ar. 10.
and in praeceptis diuinis, non potest per hominem dispensari. In such things
as are of the law of nature, and in divine precepts, it cannot be dispensed
withal by man. Then I infer, and it is Barclaies argument, not solued by
Cardinal Bellarmine: But subjection and obedience due to Princes and
superiors, is de iure naturali and diuino: this cannot be denied, being evident
in Scriptures. Therefore neither the Pope, nor any power in earth can command
any thing, absolve, or dispense against it; and consequently cannot command
subjects not to perform obedience to their Prince or superior, in that wherein
he is superior: if he should, it is lawful for them not to obey him, not to
accept of such a dispensation.

We grant with the Cardinal, that it appertains to the Popes spiritual
power to absoblue from sins, also from pains and censures; laws, vows and
oaths; verumt amen non quidquid libet licet, it is not meant in all laws, all
vows, nor all oaths. No man I think will say, that he can absolve from the
just civil laws of secular Princes; for that were in alienam messem falcem
mittere, and to be a monarchical superior in temporals, which is not to be
admitted: but only in his own laws, and the Canons, Decrees, or positive
laws of the Church, wherein I confess he has plenitudinem potestatis: as
likewise Princes have in the commonwealth (and thereby may dispense in their
own laws) as S. Thomas teaches 2.2. q. 6.7. ar. 4. Princeps habet plenariam
potestatem in republica. 1.2. q. 96. a. 5. ad 3.
Who (according to the same in another place) is said to be freed from the law,
as touching the compulsiue force of the law, because no man may give judgment
of condemnation against him if he do against the law:(if none, then not the
people, nobles or commons assembled) whereupon on that of the Psalm, Psalm. 50.
Tibisolipeccaui, To thee only (O God) I have sinned, the Gloss says, Quod
Rex non habet hominem, qui sua facta dijudicet, That a King has not any man
that may determine his facts. But as touching the directive power of the law,
the Prince is subject to the law by his own will: as it is said Extra. de
constitut. cap. Cum omnes. Quod quisque iuris, etc. What law any do decree for
another, he ought to use the same law himself. According to that: Patere legem
quam ipse tuleris. What if a Prince will not do what he ought to do, what then?
who may compel him? None but God, to whom only he is inferior, Tert. Ad
Scapulam, and in Apologet. Greg. Nazian. orat. in Julian. Amb. orat. ad pop.
inter ep. 32.33.
Tertullian and other Fathers affirm, who rules the hearts of Kings at his
pleasure, being his Vicegerents in earth: and other remedy then prayers, tears
and patience subjects have none at all.

I will not deny the Popes Holiness to have power to dispense in vows, yet if
I should affirm that in solemn vows of religion he cannot, I should not
disagree from S. Thomas and other Divines. Papa non potest facere, etc. 2.2. q.
88. a. 11.
The Pope cannot make one that is professed in religion to be no religious man:
that is, release or free him of the bonds of chastity, poverty and obedience
vowed. Abdicatio proprietatis, etc. The renouncing of propriety, as also the
keeping of chastity, is so essentially annexed to the monastical rule (or the
state of a Moncke) that against it the Pope himself cannot dispense. This is
the opinion of S. Thomas, as Caieta^ affirms, as much as it depends of the
Decretall, Extra. de statu Monach. in fine illius cum ad monasterium. And he
concludes; And therefore in a solemn vow of religion it cannot be dispensed
withal by the Church. Who will say that this holy Doctor denies the Popes
spiritual power, though he differ from Cardinal Bellarmine? Were he not a
great Doctor and blessed Saint that writes in this wise, I know some of our
tender consciences would be much scandalized: for they cannot endure to hear
any man talk a word of the limitation of the Popes power, what he cannot do
forsooth, as if he were omnipotent. But these are for the most part the
ignorant sort, that believing him to be Christ's Vicar, believe also that he is
endued with Christ's power of excellency, and can do all that he could do as
man, when he was here on earth. Let these learn that his Holiness neither
challenges Christ's power of excellency, as to institute sacraments, to remit
sins without out the ministry of a sacrament, to make an article of faith,
and such like; but only that which it pleased our Lord to communicate unto
him: nor the most learned Divines yield him all authority without limitation.
For beside that which S. Thomas writes of dispensation in vows, Victoria de
sacram. ord.
Franciscus a Victoria, disputing whether the Pope may delegate power unto a
Priest who is not a Bishop, to give orders? concludes that S. Thomas,
Paludanus, and all say, he cannot. And against his dispencing in matrimony
before consummatio^: Idem tract. De matrim. cland. nu. 282.
Teneamus cum tota caterua Theologorum, quod Papa non potest dispensare in
matrimonio rato. Let us hold with the whole troop of Divines, thant the Pope
cannot dispense in matrimony called ratum, that is, before it be consummate.
And Cardinal Bellarmine admits a limitation: Dicimus Papam habere, etc.
Bellarm. lib. 5. de To. Pont. cap. 4.
We say that the Pope has that office which Christ had when he lived here on
earth: but we cannot give him those offices which Christ had as he was God, or
as a man immortal and glorious, but only those which he had as a mortal man.
Whereby you see that the Popes power is not without some limitation; howbeit he
exceeds in yielding him all that Christ had as he was a mortal man, as is
said before. Now remains to be discussed, whether his Holiness may absolve
from all oaths, and so from this Oath of allegiance. Which question serves
most for our purpose in hand.

It is to be noted that every oath is either assertory, that is, of things
present or past; or else promissorie, of things to come: and either of good and
lawful matters, or of evil and unlawful. An unlawful thing, and that which
cannot be performed without sin, is not matter of an oath, and therefore
requires no dispensation or absolution from it, as is manifest: for whosoever
should swear to commit adultery, which is promissorie, or never to pray, never
to fast, and such like, will any man say that he must seek to be absolved from
that oath; and not rather that he is bound ex naturarei not to perform it,
2.2. q. 89. ar. 9. ad 3.
being evil in it self? S. Thomas says: Sometime it happens that that
which falls under a promissorie Oath, is repugnant to justice; either
becausce it is a sin, and so is bound not to keep it; or else for that it is
a hinderer of a greater good (as not to live a virgin, not to enter into
religion) and such an Oath needs no dispensation, but is lawful for him that
swears to keep it, or not to keep it. And sometime (he says somewhat is
promised, of which there is doubt whether it be lawful or unlawful,
profitable or hurtful, absolutely or in some case: and in this every Bishop
may dispense. But in an assertorie Oath Syluester verbo Iuramentum 5. n 2. S.
Thomas in the place above said ad 1. and all Dolors, hold there can no
dispensation or absolution be granted by any Bishop or Pope. The reasons such
as understand may see in S. Thomas.

When in an Oath is any thing sworn or promised to Prince or private man,
which is manifestly just, according to the law of God, and accompanied with
these three associates, Verity, Judgment and Justice, that ought duly to be
performed of him that so swears: Exodus 20. Matthew. 5.
Reddes Domino iuramenta tua; and cannot be dispensed withal, when as the
observation of an Oath falls under a divine precept, which is indispensable,
as S. Thomas writes in the place above noted ad primum. And in every such
Oath, yea though it be coacted, rises an obligation, whereby a man rests
bound to God, which is not taken away in foro conscientiae, as he affirms. To
which purpose S. Bernard writes thus: Bern. lib. de praecepto. and disp. c. 5.
Illud quod non ab homine traditum, etc. That which is not delivered us by man,
but is proclaimed from God, admits no humane dispensation at all, neither is
it lawful for any man in any sort to absolve from these; that is, Joan. De
Turrecre^. in can. Lector, did 34.
divine precepts.

Such I take our Oath of allegiance to be, published and proclaimed by God,
commanding subjects and all inferiors to render unto Caesar and all superiors
their due: against which no dispensation, no absolution can be of force. And
herein I say not, that his Holiness cannot dispense or absolve from any Oath,
but from this particular Oath, wherein is nothing promised which is not
manifestly law full, and profitable and due to him to whom it is made: and in
such an Oath, S. Thomas says, 2.2. q. 89. ar. 9. ad 3.
dispensation seems to have no place; because besides the obligation to
Almighty God, there rises a new to his Majesty, which cannot be released by
Pope, subjects, or any other then by himself to whom it is made. Neither does
the Popes power extend to the taking away of the right of a third person in
matters which are not Ecclesiastical, as Caietan affirms. And therefore
cannot absolve a subject from an Oath of allegiance to his Prince, for that it
would be prejudicial unto him. Caiet. In 2 2. q. 89. ar. 9.
Praelatus Ecclesiasticus, etiam Papa, etc. An Ecclesiastical Prelate, (says
he) yea the Pope, has not in such manner power over Oaths as over vows.
Because it is not in the Popes power to take away the right of a third man in
matters not Ecclesiastical, as it is in his power to change (to wit vows)
into something more acceptable to God; for that he is Gods Vicar, and is not
the Vicar of that man: neither is he so over him as he may deprive him of his
goods at his pleasure. Tolet. instr, sacer. li. 4. c. 23. nu. 3.
Whereto agrees Card. Tolet: Quando iuramentum, etc. When an Oath is to the
utility of some third person, it cannot be dispensed withal, no not by the
Pope, without the consent of the third person; as also the Pope cannot take
away an other man's goods. Whereto tends our Oath, but to the utility or good
of his Majesty; and to his great prejudice would it not be, if his subjects
should accept of any absolution from the same? Speculator likewise denies that
the Pope may absolve any man from a lawful Oath, Tit. de legato. nunc
ostendendum, n. 24.
because the bond of keeping an Oath and performing it to God, is of the law of
nature and divine. By this appears that just and lawful Oaths, being such
as may be prejudicial to a third person, cannot be dispensed withal.

But the Church uses to remit an Oath extorted by force or fear. It may be
answered, that if such an Oath extorted be manifestly unjust, and would be
against the law of God to be taken without force or fear; no violence or fear
of losing goods or life can make it lawful. Which doctrine is taught in the
Canon Law, lib. 1. Decretal. de his quae vi metusue cap. 2. in glossa. and 15.
c.q. 6. in glossa. and Extra. de iureiurando; that for no fear it is lawful
to incurr e a mortal sin, C. super co de vsuris.
Which in another place is taught also of a venial sin. Therefore an Oath
extorted of a thing unlawful, the Church uses not to remit or release, when
as no man will think that unlawful Oaths are to be kept, as has been said
before. What say you then to lawful Oaths, yet compelled by fear of losing
goods, liberty, etc?

If it be just and lawful which thou art required to do, why do thou refuse
to do it? and why expectest thou compulsion to make thee to perform that which
in duty thou art bound? I know thou will grant that a father may shake his
rod, threaten to correct his child, and beat him, if of stubburnnesse will not
ask blessing, or will not do his duty by obeying him. So may the Magistrate,
who carries the sword ad vindictam malefactorum, not only threaten, but
really punish and force thee to performance of that which is lawful and thou
ought otherwise to do. And God himself the pattern of good government
threatens hell fire, and punishes severely the transgressors of his law with
many corporal afflictions, and thereby forces many to observe and keep his
commandments, which of love, without any such compulsion, they ought in duty
to do. Will any hereof infer, that the Pope or any power on earth can absolve
these from performing their duty to God or man, for that it is extorted by
fear? Then I conclude, that lawful Oaths, such as are made by subjects to
Princes of their fidelity, bind in conscience, although they be forced on them
by fear of punishments, and cannot be dispensed withal. To this purpose
Caietan says; that Oaths of him that promises, whether they be coacted or
voluntary, Caiet. in 2.2
si habent materiam bonam moraliter, do bind in the court of conscience.

Whereas some will say, that Popes have practiced this authorie of absoluing
subjects from lawful Oaths: it may be answered with Joan. de Turrecrecremata,
Syluester, Soto and others, That the facts of Popes make not an article of
faith. And it is one thing to do somewhat de facto, and another to determine
that so it ought to be done de iure. Turrecremata speaking of unlawful
dispensations, says: And if it were so done at any time, by some Pope, either
ignorant in divine learning, or blinded with covetousness of money, which for
such exorbitant dispensatio^s is accustomed to be offered, or else to please
men: it follows not that he could do it justly: (that was, Clement 3.
dispencing with Constantia a professed Nun, to marry with Henry 6. Emperor,
son to Frederick 2.) The Church is governed, or ought to be governed, by
rights and laws, not by such facts or examples. Thus you see that it is no
denying his Holiness spiritual power to say, that he cannot dispense in all
laws, all vows, or all oaths, nor consequently absolve me of this Oath of
allegiance.

How I pray you can I swear truly (as I must if I do well) that which never
was determined or defined by the Church, but is matter of opinion, diversely
held of diverse learned men?

Very well, and without sin. And you may observe what is commanded in holy
Scripture to such as shall take an Oath; Ierem. 4.
Iurabis Domino in veritate, in iudicio, and in iustitia. For then is a man
said to swear truly, that his doctrine of opinion, v. g. that the Pope cannot
by any authority depose Princes, or such a thing is true; not only when he
certainly knows it to be so, but also when he is persuaded in his conscience
upon probable reason, Tolet. instru. sacer. l. 4. c. 21 nu. 4. Syl. verb.
periurium and 22. q. 2. homines.
and in heart thinks it to be so as he speaks. This Cardinal Tolet
teaches to be that sufficient truth which is required in every Oath. And
which is more, both he, Syluester, and other hold, that to swear a thing to be
true in his opinion, which indeed is false, is no sin at all, if he did his
best endeavor and used due diligence to know the truth. As, if one say as he
thinks, that Peter is dead, Greg. de Val. disp. 6. q. 7. de iuramento.
and should swear it: he neither speaks, nor swears untruly, because his
words are conformable to his interior mind. Which is sufficient according to
Saint Thomas also, as Syluester notes, to be accounted truth, the principal
point of an oath. The second is judgment. For it is required that he who
swears, swear not lightly or vainly, but discreetly, upon consideration of
some necessary or profitable cause. The third is Justice, to wit, that it be
not unjust or unlawful which is sworn. Which being so, how can any man be
worthily reproved of sin that takes the Oath of allegiance, upon a most
necessary and profitable cause as all know, of removing thereby an imputation
of treachery and treason, and pacifying what in him lies his Majesty's heavy
displeasure, worthily conceived for the most detestable Gunpowder practice: and
further is persuaded, after great diligence used, to be both true, at least in
his judgment, and also very lawful, as is a subjects loyalty to his Prince?
Hereupon I see no reason why this Oath may not be taken of all Catholics
without danger of sin, and ought of every good subject being required thereto:
in the wilful refusers whereof his Majesty has just cause to suspect a
hidden mischief to lie, if ever oportunite should serve. By this is clear,
that what a man ex animo thinks to be true, he may truly say, yea and swear
too; it being a most certain principle, well in reason as in divinity, and
noted by father Parsons in his Catholic letter, that what a man may truly
say, he may also truly swear: but he may truly say, that a probable opinion
held and maintained by sundry learned men Catholics, is true, and
contradicts not another probable opinion taught by others as learned and as
good. For example, That our blessed Lady the mother of God was free from being
conceived in original sin: which opinion was defined in the Council of Basil
Sess. 36. and stiffly maintained by the Fransciscan family. The contrary was as
earnestly defended by the Domihicans, following the doctrine of Saint Bernard,
and Saint Thomas. This controversy grew to be so great, that they calumniated
each other of motall sin, yea of heresy, Extrau. Com. l. 3. dereliq. and
vener. Sanct. c. 2.
till such time as Sixtus the fourth put them to silence, as appears in the
Canon law. Excommunicantur illi qui affirmant, etc. They are excommunicated
that affirm them to sin deadly, or to be heretics, who defend the blessed
mother of God to be conceived without original sin. In like manner they are
excommunicated, that affirm them to sin deadly, or to be heretics, Cost. In
Osia^d propofit. 2. page 103. Tolet instr. sac. l. 3. c. 36. nu. 12. Antuor.
1603.
who hold the contrary. The Pope knew (says Costerus) that this question never
appertained to the doctrine of faith. And Cardinal Tolet writes thus: Neither
part has been defined; De fide both may be holden without mortal sin,
although it be much more certain and truer, that she was conceived without any
spot, and ita nos credimus, and so we believe. Might not (trow ye) each of
these without sin swear their opinion was true? Yes undoubtedly.

The like may be, that the Pope is above a general Council, as was defined in
the Council of Lateran under Leo the tenth, taught and believed by the greater
part of Divines at this day. Which definition of the Council, Costerus makes
doubt, whether it were de fide, inclining to the negative part, Cost. in Osia^d
pioposit; page 282.
saying, Sed an vt negotium fidei, non parum dubitatur. Yet notwithstanding
this definition and opinion of many learned men besides, such others as believe
and teach a general Council to be above the Pope, are not to be reputed
heretics, nor to sin mortally. For then are the general Councels of
Constance and Basil to be condemned, who defined it so; wherein were assembled
many very learned Bishops and other great Dolors: and likewise the most learned
and renowned Faculty of Paris, who art ever ready earnestly to defend it
without heresy or sin. Excusantur ah haeresi qui aliter sentiunt, Coster. loeo
citato.
vt schola Parisiensis. They are excused from heresy (says Costerus) that
think otherwise, (to wit, then the Council of Lateran) as the school of
Paris. And dare not these swear (trow ye) if need were, their opinion to be
true? Tho. More.
Sir Thomas More likewise in his letter to Cromwell, says: Never thought I the
Pope above the general Council. No doubt but this holy and leaned man would
have sworn, if occasion had been offered, that his opinion was true, because
it was such as he thought. So may any in this our case of the Oath of
allegiance, swear no less truly then they, having good Authors, and all
antiquity for their opinion. Many like instances might be here produced of the
diversity of doctrine between S. Thomas and Scotus, and their scholars, who
peremptorily will defend their doctrine against each others, yet all agreeing
in vnitate fidei: but these shall suffice.

After all this follows another point, no less difficult then any of the
rest of the Oath, that is: And I do further swear, that I do from my heart
abhor, detest and abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine
and pofition, that Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may
be deposed or murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever.

Some peradventure not duly considering what they hear or read concerning
this point of the Oath, finding the words (Pope) and (excommunicated,) persuade
themselves assuredly, that to take this clause, is absolutely to renounce the
Pope, and deny his power to excommunicate. Others of better understanding
conceive rightly, that such authority is rather presupposed and granted to be
in him, then denied: but to abjure (which in this place signifies to deny
with an oath) a doctrine as heretical, that is, to swear it is heresy, which
has not been determined or defined by the Church, seems very hard and
unlawful to be sworn. For answer, you shall first understand, that a man may
abhor, or detest a doctrine, as he would detest yea heresy it self, yet not
affirm the doctrine which he so detesteth to be heresy. V.g. If any should
detest the doctrine of S. Thomas and of the Dominicans, Tho. 3. p.q. 27. ar. 2.
which deny the conception of our B. Lady to be free from original sin; or
that of the Sorbons in Paris, holding peremptorily(as I have said) a Council
to be above the Pope; will any man of judgment say, that the position is her
esie, and they heretics? Costerus and other learned men do clear them from
such a note, and they are still ready to defend themselves against any that
shall accuse them thereof. Likewise if any abhor drunkenness, detraction,
sowing discord between brethren and friends, as he abhors heresy; can it
be said that drunkenness, detraction, or sowing discord (though they be great
sins, and abound in too too many) is heresy? it were too fond and childish.
This As, signifies here a similitude, not an equality. and all know, that
nullum simile est idem; which may serve for one answer.

And for a second, let it be granted, that such as swear, think it indeed to
be heretical doctrine (albeit the Church has not defined it so,) that Princes
which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by
their subjects, etc. what absurdity is like to follow? I have already (as I
trust) sufficiently proved, that neither Bishops nor the Pope, by their
spiritual censure, have authority to dispossess any private man or Prince,
be he never so perverse an heretic, of his lands, goods, or temporal
dominions; for that it is against the essence or nature of excommunication to
work such an effect. It is likewise proved to be against the law of God, for
children, servants and subjects to disobey their parents, masters and Princes,
commanding justly: notwithstanding any excommunication denounced against them,
which is the Churches period, beyond which she may not go; it being only a
depriving of the common goods of the Church appertaining to Christians. Now
what doctrine soever is repugnant to Scripture, every word thereof being de
fide. may well be accounted heresy, and as such abhorred and abiured: for
haeresis est circa ea quae sunt fidei, Tho. 2.2. q. 11. ar.2.
heresy is about those things which belong unto, or are of faith. Such is the
duty of subjects to their lawful Prince, and of all inferiors to their
superiors. Then is it heresy directly to say, that it is lawful for subjects,
or any other whatsoever, who is not his Judge and superior in that kind, to
murder him; it being expressly against a divine precept, Non occides, and this
saying of our Savior, Matthew. 26.
Omnes qui acceperint gladium, gladio peribunt: All that take the sword, shall
perish with the sword. By which are understood all such as assume to themselves
authority to use the material for revenge, Iansen. in ^unc locum.
before it be granted them by the Prince, who only has his authority by the
divine ordinance, which ought not to be resisted by subjects or others. For, as
Cunerus writes: Cun. de offic. Princip. l. 4. c. 12.
Nulla pacta vel contractu^ No covenants or contracts may preiudicate the
divine ordinance, whereby a King has his power, that the people at any time
may take arms against their King.

And in my judgment it may be admited, that any Catholic will stick at this
point, here being no mention of the Popes deposing (that which many stand
upon,) but of subjects, or any other whatsoever; unless they will rank him
among these, whatsoever, which ought not so to be understood. But if they will
under this general word understand also the Pope, yet may it be said, it is
heresy, to wit, May be murdered; which cannot be understood but of killing
unjustly, and without authority. If you say, that the other part, May be
deposed, was never declared, nor adjudged heresy, and therefore the Oath
cannot be taken, because bonum is ex integra causa, and malum ex singulis
defectibus: then one part not being heretical. how can this clause be lawfully
sworn, that Princes which be excommunicated, may be deposed, to be damnable
and heretical doctrine?

This indeed is such an objection, as in the judgment of diverse cannot be
answered, and whereupon many pretend to have great reason to stand: but let all
passion be laid aside, lending me an indifferent care, and with Gods assistance
such a solution may be framed, as shall satisfy I trust and solue the
difficulty.

In our Oath, no man swears, nor is urged to swear, nor by the law ought to
swear further then the express words of the Oath, which are after this sort;
as is also noted before, page 119.

And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure as
impious and heretical, What? Note well, this damnable doctrine and position,
What position? Forsooth, that Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by
the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their subjects, etc. This position is
sworn, not per parts, by peecemeale, but coniunctiuely and wholly as it
lies: and so, it cannot be denied but it is impious and heretical doctrine;
heresy here being affirmed, not on the parts of the position separated, but on
the (...) hole together.

For in a sentence affirmative, disjunctive proposition, or book, if any part
be defectuous, false, or heretical, albeit some part thereof be true, and
sound doctrine; it may well be said, that the whole sentence, proposition or
book is defectuous; false, Gress. l. 1. consider. Page 47.
or heretical, as Gretserus writes. Then that, May be deposed; closed in one
proposition with the other part; or murdered, which is heretical; the whole
position as it lies must needs ber said, and may be sworn to be heretical.
For example, The Inquisition uses to condemn as a scandalous or heretical
book, if there be but one only Chapter or sentence of scandalous or
heretical doctrine contained therein, though all the rest be found and
Catholic. And may not any man lawfully swear, that book so condemned, to be
scandalous or heretical, albeit all the whole is not such? or that man to be
an heretic, which erreth against one only article of the Catholic faith?

But if the two parts of the proposition you think are sworn diuisim and by
parts, not coniunctim or totally together; then let impious go with the first
part may be deposed; and heretical with the latter or murdered; and I cannot
see how you can deny, but so it may besworne.

If any will yet stand upon the word abjure; as I hear many do, saying, It
signifies not only simply to deny a thing with an oath, as al Dictionaries
understand the word, but by oath to deny that which once he held before: then,
he that never held the doctrine and position above named, cannot take this
Oath, because he may not abjure that opinion which he never held.

But this will manifestly appear, to him that has any experience in the
practice of the Church, to be false. For, let any be conuented into the
Inquisition for any one heresy whatsoever, as Anabaptisme; Brownisme, etc, if
afterward he repent and convert to the Catholic faith, he shall be required;
and must of necessity abjure, not only that impious opinion or heresy of
Anabaptisme or Brownisme, which he held before, but also all other heresies, as
Pelagianisme, Arianisme, Nestorianisme, etc. which happily he had always before
detested. This therefore is but a vain verbal shift of some who not knowing
what to say against the maine points of the Oath, are driven out of the
profundity of their wits to seek a knot in a rush, to invent a difficulty
where none is, thereby to entrap the souls of scrupulous consciences, and
deter them from performing their duty to their Prince, making no conscience
to overthrow them also in their temporals.

If any insift saying, that they think indeed the doctrine, which teaches it
to be no sin to depose or murder a good and lawful King, such a one as
governs for the good of the common*wealth, to be heretical: but if he become
a tyrant, such a one as has more care of his own utility then of the weal
public, and seeks to subvert the State, persecuteth the professors of the
true religion, and sets up idolatry in steed of Christian faith in the
judgment of the people; it is not heresy to teach, that he may be deposed by
the State assembled, or lawfully murdered by any man whatsoever.

And is not this pernicious doctrine of many sectaries of this age heresy? It
being directly repugnant to the doctrine and example of our Savior Christ and
his Apostles, against the law given to Moses, Thou shall not kill; as also
against that saying of our Lord, Qui acceperit gladium, gladio peribit:
Whosoever shall take the sword (to strike withal without authority) shall
perish with the sword. This was that dangerous positio^ worthily condemned as
heretical in the Council of Constance: Quilibet tyrannus potest, and debet
licite and meritorie occidi, etc. Conc. Constant. sell. 15. an. 1415.
Every tyrant may, and ought lawfully and meritoriously to be murdered, by any
his vassal or subject wharsoeuer, either by close treachery, or by smooth
practices and insinuations, notwithstanding any Oath taken or promise of
allegiance made unto him; nay not so much as expecting the sentence or warrant
of any Judge whatsoever.

Against which error this holy Synod endeavoring to arise, and utterly to
extinguish the same, after mature deliberation does declare, and define, that
this doctrine erroneous in faith and manners, and does reject and condemn it*
as heretical and scandalous, opening a gap to fraud deceit, dissimulation,
treason and perjury. It does moreover declare, and define, that they who shall
obstinatly maintain this pernicious doctrine, are heretics, and as such to be
punished, according to the canonical decrees. And that this is the intent and
purpose of the Synod, Molanus de fide haeret. ser lib. 5. c. 6.
Molanus shows thus: Patres indistincte de quolibet tyranno loquuntur: and
doctrina illa de vtriusque ge^er is tyranno: est in fide and moribus erronea.
The Fathers speak indistinctly of every sort of tyrant: and that doctrine
of.(killing) a tyrant of either sort, is in faith and manners erroneous, land
it gives way to frauds; deceipts, lyings, treasons, periuries; for those
things which concern the commonwealth are not to be handled or accomplished of
private persons: among which is the occision of an inuader. Thus far he. This
doctrine or position was also long since, two years before the Council,
condemned as impious, heretical and damnable by 141. Divines of the Faculty or
school of Paris, anno 1413. December 13. and now lately again by the same
faculty, anno 1610. since the bloody parricide of the French king Henry the
fourth. The decree is this, The decree of the Doctors of Sorb.
as it is set down in Antimariana: Censet seditiosum, impium and haer eticum
esse. The sacred Faculty judges or decrees, that it is seditious, impious;
and heretical for any subject, vassal or stranger, upon what occasion,
pretense, or divised color soever, sacris Regumpersonis vina infer, to do
any violence (note well) against the sacred persons of Kings. Whereunto
accords S. Thomas, that yea a tyrant may not be slain by his subjects,
otherwise he should be contrary to himself, for thus he writes. Tho. de
regim. prin. lib. 1. c. 6.
Essetmultitudini periculosum and eius rectoribus. It were dangerous to the
people and their governors, that any should attempt to take away the life of
Princes, though they were tyrants: for commonly not the well disposed, but the
ill affected men do thrust themselves into that danger. And the government of
good Kings is as odious to bad men, as the rule of tyrants to good people.
Wherefore the kingdom by this presumption would be rather in danger to forgo a
good Prince, then a wicked tyrant. So S. Thomas. By this Catholic censure of
that famous Vniuerfitie, and by the definitive sentence of the general
Council, and the doctrine of S. Thomas, you see it to be condemned as
heretical and damnable doctrine, that Princes (as in our Oath) which be
excommunicated, (or tyrants by the Council) may be deposed (which cannot be
effected without violence to their persons, and slaughter of many men) by their
subjects (Nobles or commons) or any other whatsoever. Whereby you may secure
your conscience, this part of the Oath to be lawful, and may be taken without
fear or preiudicating the Popes spiritual authority.

Sir, what say you then to the Friars killing his liege Lord Henry the third
of France, the mod Christian King, supposed to be a tyrant in government, and
a favorer of heretics; applauded or allowed of (as seems to some) by Pope
Sixtus 5. in his oration made in a secret Consistory before the Cardinals,
anon after the certain news of the act, and the Kings death?

My opinion is, that as the doctrine teaching to be no sin to kill a tyrant,
is worthily condemned as impious and heretical: (which you have heard
sufficiently proved in the precedent pages,) so such a fact, of such a one, in
such sort, must needs be most impious and damnable: yea supposing we should
grant, that King to have been such a one as is above said; albeit the French
know right well he was their true and rightful King, and besides lived and died
a member of the Catholic Roman Church. And whosoever will go about to excuse
this inexcusable fact, and to say, that he did it, either out of a great zeal
to deliver the commonwealth from such a supposed wicked and tyrannical King: or
else that he did it by divine inspiratio^, being ordained and appointed by God
so to do; Saint Paul teaches otherwise, to wit, Non faciamus mala, vt veniant
bone. Let us not do evil, that there may come good. And David, a man according
to Gods own heart elected to be King of the Jews, both by his example
proceeded, and in his doctrine taught otherwise. For when David, persecuted by
Saul, yea who at that time sought his life, came even to Saul's Tent whilst he
was sleeping, and was counseled by his Chiefetaine Abisai to kill him: saying,
Conclusit Deus inimicum tuum hodie in manus tuas: nunc ergo perf^diam eum
lancea in terra, semel, and secundo opus non erit. God has this day delivered
thine enemy into thine hands; I will now therefore pierce him with a Iance in
the earth, once, and the second time it shall not need. David made him answer
in this sort, charging him not to lay hands on the King to hurt him: Ne
interficias eum: quis enim extendet manum suam in christum Domini, and innocens
erit? Kill him not: for who, or what is he that shall reach out his hand
against the annotated of our Lord, and shall be innocent? It follows a little
after: Our Lord be merciful unto me (says David) that I may not stretch out
my hand against the anointed of our Lord. In saying, who, or what is he; and
teaching that himself, who best might, could not without offense lay violent
hands on King Saul, gave us instruction that it could not be lawful for Friar
Clement to extend his bloody hands as he did, against his true and lawful
Prince the anointed of our Lord: and Christ himself after commanding, Nolite
tangere christos meos.
not to touch his anointed. Such kind then of furious zeal of taking the
sword, is to be detested in any, and to be repressed with great severity; lest
way be given to evil disposed persons to perturbe, yea ruin whole kingdoms
and commonwealthes, whilst under a preposterous zeal they embolden themselves
to perpetrate any villainy.

And no less dangerous and impious it is to say, that he did that horrible
murder by divine inspiration; for then should be justified a most wicked
Parricide, and likewise a gap opened to all miscreants to commit any outrageous
cruelty, against any superior, Prince or King whatsoever. And so whilst they
machinate their mischief, if this be granted, they may cloak it with the
mantle of divine inspiration, thinking thereby to pass blameless before God
and men. But who can enter into the secret judgments of almighty God to know
this? according to the holy Scripture, Quis cognouit sensum Domint, aut quis
consiliarius eius fuit? Who has known the judgment of our Lord, or who has
been his counselor? This assertion of this truly ignominious and wretched
Friars being inspired from God to do so sinful, and execrable an outrage, is no
less to be rejected then the former. For the righteous God of heaven, neither
appointed, nor excited, but only permitted him to put in practice his
devilish inward suggestions, against the sacred person of his dread
Sovereign, for causes to man unknown, as he permitted Adam to fall, Judas to
betray his Lord and master.

Now touching the Popes oration, some make a doubt whether ever any such,
specially of approving the Friars act, were pronounced by his Holiness, and in
Consistory, as has been reported, and is extant in Anti-Sixtus, or no* and
the rather for that Cardinal Bellarmine in his answer to our clement and most
gracious Kings learned Apology writes, Tortus. p. 54. edit. Colon.
that no such oration is extant but only among the enemies of the Church, who
set forth Anti-Sixtus, and therefore is of no credit. Neither (says he) did
any take this oration made in private Consistory; nor was published by the Pope
himself, or by his order and appointment, by any other.

Whether the enemies of the Church have set forth the oration made by Pope
Sixtus in the Consistory I know not; but this I know, that I have lately seen
such a one both in Latin and in French, printed according to a copy set forth
at Paris 1589. the year of the Kings death, by Nicholas Niuelle, and Rollin
Tierry; Sur la Copy imprimee a Paris chez Nicholas Niuelle and Rollin Tierry
soy disans Impromeur and Libraire de la saint Union, auee Printlege de la dite
Vmen and apbrobation de la faculte de Theologis de Paris. And set forth with
approbation of three Doctors of the faculty of Paris, as follows.

Nous soubsignez Doctors e^ Theology de la facultede Paris, certifions auoir
confere Harangue pronontee par sa saintctete auec l'exemplaire Latin enuoye de
Rome, and auoir trouue conform l'vn a l'autre.

BOVCHER. DECREIL. ANCELIN.

Which oration who so is desirous to see, may here read it according to the
Latin copy printed as above: it follows thus:

Sixti Quinti Pont. Max. de Henrici Tertij Morte, Sermo.
Romae in Consistorio Patrum habitus, 11. Septembris, 1589.
A Nime meo saepe, ac serio reuoluens, mentisque aciem intendens in ea, quae
nuper Dei voluntate acciderunt, videor mihi vere posse illud Prophetae Abacuch
vsurpare: Abac. 1.
Quia opus factum est in diebus vestris, quod nemo credet, cum narrabitur.
Mortuus est Rex Franc^rum per manus Monachi. Nam ad istud potest recte
applicari: licet de alia re, nempe de incarnatione Domini, quae omnia mira, ac
mirabilia superat; Propheta proprie locutus sit; sicut and Apostolus Paulus
eadem verba Actorum 13. ad Christi resurrectionem verissime resert. Quando
Prophetae nominat opus, non vult innuere aliquid vulgar, vel ordinarium, sed
rarum, insigne, ac memorabile facinus; quomodo de creatione mundi, Opera manuum
tuarum sunt coeli. Item, Requieuit die septimo ab omni opere quod patrarat. Cum
bero factum ait, eo verbo tale aliquid in Scripturis exprimi, quod non temere,
casu, fortuua aut per accideus euenire dicitur; sed quod expressa Dei
voluntate, pronidentia, dispositione, ac or dina^io^e obuenis. Vt cum dicit
Saluator, Opera quae ego facio, vos facietis, and maiora horum facietis: and
similia in sacris litteris plurima. Quod autem loquatur in praeterito factum
esse, id more aliorum Prophetarum facit, qui propter certitudinem euentus
sosent saepe de futuris, ac si iam facta essent, praedicere. Dicunt enim
Philosophi, res praeteritas esse de necessitate, praesentes de inesse, futuras
de possibili tantum: ita illi loquuntur. Propter quam certitudinem Isaias
propheta long ante vaticinatus de morte Christi, sic dixit, sicut in Act.
Apostolorum cap. 8. etiam recitatur, Tanquam ouis ad accisionem ductus est, and
sicut agnus coram tondente se non aperuit os suum etc. Atque hoc, de quo nunc
verbafacimus, and quod his diebus nostris euenit, vere insigne, menorabile, and
pene incredibile opus est, nec sine Dei opt. Max. particulari prouidentia, and
dispositione perpetratum. Occidit Monachus Regem, non pictum aut fictumin
charta, aut pariete; sed Regem, Francorum in medio exercitus sui, milite and
cuslodia vndique septum, quod re vera tale est, and co modo effectum, vt nemo
nunc credat, cum narrabitur, and fortasse apud posteritatem pro fabula
reputabitur.

Quod Rex sit mortuus, vel etiam peremptus, facile creditur, sed eum sic
sublatum, vix est credibile: sicut Christum natum ex foemina statim assentimur:
sed si addas porro ex foemina Virgin ortum esse, tunc secundum hominem non
assentior: ita etia^ quod mortuus sit Christus facile credimus, sed quod
mortuus iam rasurrexerit ad vitam, quia ex priuatione ad habitum non fit
regressio, redditur secundum intellectum humanum impossible, and propterea
incredibile: quod homo ex somno, ex morbo, etiam ex syncope, vel extasi
resuscitatur, quia id saepe secundum nature am fit, humanitus credimus; sed
resurrexisse a mortuis, ita secundum carnem videbatur incredibile, Vt Paulo
apud philosophos Athenienses de hac resurrectione disserenti, improperarent,
quod esset nouorum daemoniorum annunciator: and alij, sicut D. Lucas narrat,
irridebant, alij dicebant, Audiemus te de hoc iterum. De talibus igitur, quae
secundum naturae leges, and ordinarium cursum fieri non solent, dicit Propheta:
quod nemo credet, cum narrabitur; sed huiusmodi tantum fidem adhibemus ex
consideratione omnipotentiae diuinae, and per subiectionem intellectus nostri
in obedientiam fidei, and obsequium Christi. Nam hoc modo quod erat incredibile
naturaliter, fit credibile. Igitur qui secundum hominem non credo Christum de
virgin natum, tamen quando additur hoc factum esse supra naturae terminos per
operationem Spiritus sancti, tunc vere assentior, and credo. Ita quando dicitur
Christum ex mortuis resurrexisse, humanitus non credo; sed cum id factum esse
per diuinam (quae in ipso erat) naturam affirmatur, tunc omnino credo. Eodem
modo licet tantum Regem in medio exercitus, tot stipatum militibus, ab vno
simplici, and imbelli Religioso occisum esse, secundum prudentiam carnis, and
intellectum humanum sit incredibile, vel omnino improbabile; tamen considerando
ex altera part grauissima Regis peccata, and specialem Dei omnipotentis in hac
re prouidentiam, and quam inusitato, and mirabili modo iustissimam voluntatem
suam erga ipsum impleuerit, omnino, and firmiter credo. Rem etenim tam istam
grandem, and inusitatam alio refer, quam ad particularem Dei prouidentiam
(sicut quosdam ad alias caussas ordinarias, veletiam ad fortunam, and casum,
aut similes accidentarios euentus perperam refer intelligimus) prorsus non
licet; sicut ij, qui totius facti seriem pressius obseruant, facile videre
possunt, vbi plurima interuenerunt, quae ab homine, nisi Dei speciali
concurrente auxilio, expediri non quiuerant. Et sane Regum, ac Regnorum
rations, caeteraque tam rara, tantique momenti negotia a Deo temere
administrari non est existimandum. Sunt in sacra historia nonnulla huius
generis, nec eorum quidquam potest alio, quam ad Deum authorem referri: tamen
nihil est, vbi magis claret superna operatio, quam in isto, de quo nunc agimus.
Lib. Maccha. 1. cap. 6. legimus, Eleazarum, vt Regem populi Dei persecutorem,
ac hostem tolleret, seipsum certae morti obtulisse. Nam in conflictu
conspiciens Elephantem caeteris eminentiorem, in quo videbatur Rex esse,
concito cursu in media^ hostium turmam se conijciens, hinc inde viam vi
sternens, ad belluam venit, atque sub eam intrauit, subiectoque gladio peremit,
quae cadens oppressit Eleazarum and extinxit. Hic quoad zelum, and animi robur,
reique tentatae exitum, aliquid huius nostri simile cernimus, tamen in reliquis
nihil est comparabile. Eleazarus erat miles, armis and pugna exercitatus, in
ipso praelio constitutus, ardoreque animi, and furore (vi fit) accensus: iste
Monachus praelijs ac pugnis non erat assuefactus, and a sanguine, vitae suae
instituto ita abhorrens, vt nec ex venae incisione fusum cruorem forsan far
potuerit. Ille nouerat genus mortis, simulque locum sepulturae suae, nempe quod
ruina belluae inclusus magis, quam oppressus, suo sepeliretur triumpho: iste
mortem, ac tormenta crudeliora, and incognita expectabat, sepulchroque se
cariturum non dubitabat. Sed and alia multa dissimilia sunt. Nota quoque est
insignis illa historia sanctae mulieris Judith, quae and ipsa, vt obsessam
ciuitatem suam, ac populum Dei liberaret, cepit consilium, Deo sine
controuersia suggestore, de interimendo Holopherne hostilis exercitus principe;
quod and perfecit. In quo opere licet plurima, and apertissima supernae
directionis indicia appareant, tamen long maiora diuinae prouidentiae
argumenta, in istius Regis occisione, ac ciuitatis Parisiensis liberatione
conspicere licebit, sicut certe quoad hominem, hoc suit illo magis difficile,
vel impossible. Nam illa sancta foemina intentionem suam aliquibus vrbis
presbyteris aperuit, portamque ciuitatis, and custodiam pertransiit illis
praesentibus, ac approbantibus, vt proinde scrutationi, vel explorationi, quae
obsidionts tempore solet esse tam exacta, vt ne musca fere sine examine egredi
queat, non potuerit esse subiecta. Apud hosts vero, per quorum castra, and
varias excubias transeundum erat, saepius explorata, and examinata cum foemina
esset, nec quidquam haberet vel litterarum, vel armorum, vnde suspicio oriri
potuit, deque aduentu in castra, and a suis, fugae probabiles reddens rations,
facile dimittebatur. Sicut tam propter easdem caussas, quam propter sexum, and
formae excellentiam ad Principem impudicum introduci, and in temulentum,
facile, quod designauit, perficere valuit. Ita illa. Hic vero Religiosus
aggressus est, and co^fecit rem long maiorem, pluribusque impedimentis, ac
tantis difficultatibus, periculisque obsitam, vt nulla prudentia, aut astutia
humana, nec alio modo, nisi aperta Dei ordinatione, ac succursu confici
potuerit. Debebant obtineri litterae commendatitiae ab ijs, qui erant
contrariae factionis, transeundum erat per eam vrbis portam qua itur ad castra
hostium, quae ita sine dubio in illis obsidionis angustiis custodiebatur, vt
cuncta haberentur suspecta, nec cuiquam sine curiosissima exploratione de
litteris, nunciis, negotiis, armis pateret exitus. Sed iste (res mira) vigiles
pertransiit sine examine etiam cum litteris credentiae ad hoste^, quae si
fuissent interceptae a ciuibus, sine mora, ac sine vlteriori iudicio de vita
fuisset actum* atque apertum hoc diuinae prouidentiae argumentum: sed maius
miraculum est illud, quod idem mox sine omni exploratione transierit quoque
castra hostium, varias militum excubias, ipsamque corporis Regis custodiam, ac
totum denique exercitum, qui fere erat conflatus ex haereticis, ipse Religiosus
existens, and in habitu Ordinis sui, qui ita erat exosus talibus hominibus, vt
in illis locis, quae paulo ante prope Parisios vi ceperant, Monachos quosque
vel occiderint, vel pessime tractauerint. Judith erat foemina, minimeque
odiosa; tamen examinata saepe, illa nihil secum tulit, vnde sibi oriretur
periculum: iste Monachus, and propterea odiosus, ac suspectissimus, etiam cum
cultello ad hoc propositum preaparato, non in vagina condito (vnde poterat esse
probabilis excusatio) sed nudo, ac in manica abscondito, quem si inuenissent,
mox fuisset in crucem actus. Ista omnia clariora sunt particularis prouidentiae
diuinae argumenta, quam vt negari queat: nec aliter fieri potuit, quam vt a Deo
occaecarentur oculi inimicorum ne agnoscerent illum. Nam, vt antea diximus,
licet quidam ista absurd tribuant fortunae, aut casui, tamen nos hoc totum non
alio referendum censemus, quam in diuinam voluntatem. Nec profecto aliter
factum crederem, nisi captiuarem intellectum in obsequium Christi, qui hoc modo
admirabili, and liberare ciuitatem Parisiensem (quam variis viis intelleximus
fuisse in summo discrimine, maximisque angustiis constitutam) (and istius Regis
grauissima peccata punire, eumque tam infausta, and infami morte e medio
tollere statuit. Atque nos, dolentes sane, aliquoties praediximus fore, vt
quemadmodum erat familiae suae vltimus, ita aliquem insuetum, and dedecorosum
vitae exitum esset habiturus. Quod me dixisse non solum Cardinales Ioiosa,
Lenocortius, and Parisiensis, sed etiam, qui tunc apud nos residebat Orator,
testes esse possunt. Neque enim hic mortuos, sed viuentes in testimonium
huiusmodi verborum nostrorum adhibemus, quorum isti omnes probe meminisse
possunt. Quidquid tamen in hunc infoelicem Regem hoc tempore dicere cogimur,
nullo modo volumus, vt pertineat ad nobilissimum illud Galliae Regnum, quod nos
imposteru^, sicut hactenus, semper omni paterno amore, ac honor prosequemur.
De persona ergo Regis tantum ista cum dolor diximus, cuius infaustus finis
eximit quoque ipsum ab ijs officijs, quae solet haec sancta seeds (quae est pia
Matter omnium fidelium, and maxim Christianorum principum) Imperatoribus and
Regibus post mortem exhibere: quae pro isto libenter quoque fecissemus, nisi id
fieri in hoc casu sacrae Scripturae vet arent. Est, inquit S. Ioannes, peccatum
ad mortem, non pro illo dico vt roget quis: quod vel intelligi potest de
peccato ipso, ac si diceret, pro illo peccato, vel pro remissione illius
peccati nolo vt quisquam roget, quoniam non est remissibile: vel, quod in
eundem sensum redit, pro illo homine, qui peccat peccatum ad mortem, non dico
vt roget quis. De quo genere etiam Saluator apud Matthew. quod illi, qui peccat
in Spiritum sanctum, non remittetur, neque in hoc saeculo, neque in futuro. Vbi
facit tria genera peccatorum, nimirum in Patrem, in Filium, and in Spiritum
sanctu^; atque priora duo esse minus grauia, and remissibilia, tertium vero
irremissibile. quae tota differentia, sicut ex scripturis scholae tradunt,
oritur ex distinctionne attributorum, quae singula singulis Personis
sanctissimae Trinitatis appropriantur. Licet enim, sicut eadem est essentia,
sic eadem quoque est potentia, sapientia, and bonitas omniu^ personarum (sicut
ex Symbolo S. Athanasii didicimus, cum ait, Omnipotens Pater, omnipotent
Filius, omnipotens Spiritus sanctus;) tamen per attributionem, Patri applicatur
Potentia, Filio Sapientia, Spiritui sancto Amor. quorum singula eo modo, quo
attributa dicuntur, ita sunt propria cuiusque personae, vt in aliam referri non
queant. Ex quorum attributorum contrariis, and distinctionem, and grauitatem
peccatorum dignoscimus. Contrarium Potentiae, quae attribuitur Patri, est
infirmitas, vt proinde id quod ex infirmitate, seu naturae nostrae
imbecillitate committimus, dicatur committi in Patrem. Oppositum Sapientiae est
ignorantia, ex qua cum quis peccat, dicitur peccare in Filium, ita vt ea, qua
vel ex humana infirmitate, vel ignoratione peccamus, facileus nobis condonari
soleant. Tertium autem attributu^ quod est Spiritus sanctus, nempe Amor, habet
pro contrario ingratitudinem, vitium maxim odibile. Vnde venit, vt homo non
agnoscat Dei erga ipsum dilectionem, aut beneficia, sed obliuiscatur,
contemnat, ac odio etiam habeat. Ex quo tandem fit, vt obstinatus reddatur,
atque impoenitens. Atque his modis multo grauius and periculosius peccatur in
Deu^, quam ex ignorantia, aut imbecillitate; proinde huiusmodi vocantur peccata
in Spiritum sanctum: and quia rarius, ac difficilius, and non nisi abandantiori
gratia condonantur, dicuntur irremissibilia quodammodo, cum tamen sola
impoenitentia sit omnino, and simplicititer irremissibilis. Quidquid enim in
vita committitur, licet contra Spiritu^ sanctum, potest per poenitentiam deleri
ante mortem: sed qui perseuerat vsque ad mortem, nullum locum relinquit gratiae
ac misericordiae Atque pro tali peccato, seu pro homine sic peccante, noluit
Apostolus vt post mortem oraremus. Iam ergo quia magno nostro dolor
intelligimus, praedictum Regem ex hac vita sine poenitentia, seu impoenitentem
excessisse, nimirum in consortio haereticorum; ex talibus enim hominibus
confecerat exercitum suum: and quod co^mendauerat moriens regnum in successione
Nauarrae declarato haeretico, and excommunicato; necnon in extremis, ac in
vltimo fere vitae spiritu ab eodem, and similibus circumstantibus petierit, vt
vindictam sumerent de ijs, quos ipse iudicabat fuisse caussas mortis suae.
Propter haec, and similia manifesta impoenitentiae indicia, decreuimus pro ipso
non esse celebrandas exequias. non quod praesumamus quidquam ex hoc de occultis
erga ipsum Dei iudiciis, aut misericordiis, qui poterat secundum beneplacitum
suum in ipso exitu animae suae conuertere cor eius, and misericorditer cum illo
agree; sed ista locuti sumus secundum ea, quae nobis exterius patent. Faxit
benignissimus Saluator noster, vt reliqui hoc horrendo iustitiae supernae
exemplo admoniti, in viam salutis redeant, and quod misericorditer hoc modo
coepit, benign prosequatur, ac perficiat, sicut eum facturum speramus: vt de
erepta Ecclesia de tantis malis, and periculis, perennes illi gratias agamus.

In quam sententiam cum dixisset Pontifex, dimisit Consistorium cum
benedictione.

LAVS DEO.
An Oration of Pope Sixtus the fifth upon the death of King Henry the third, in
Rome, in the full assembly of the Cardinals.
Considering oftentimes with my self, and applying my whole understanding unto
these things, which now of late by a just judgment of God, are come to pass:
I think I may with right use the words of the Prophet Abacuck, saying; I have
wrought a work in your days, which no man will believe when it shall be told
him. The French King is slain by the hands of a Friar, for unto this it may
fitly be compared, although the Prophet spoke of another thing, namely of the
incarnation of our Lord, which exceeds and surmounteth all other wonders and
miracles whatsoever: as also the Apostle S. Paul refers the same words unto
the resurrection of Christ. When the Prophet said a work, his mind was not to
signify by it some common or ordinary thing, but a rare and notable matter,
and a deed worthy to be remembered, as that of the creation of the world, The
heavens are the works of thine hands: And again, He rested the seventh day,
of all the works which he had made. When he says, I have wrought, with these
words the holy Scripture is wont to express things not come to pass by
casualtie, fortune, or accident, but things befallen by the determined
providence, will, and ordinance of God, as our Savior said:The works which I
do, ye shall do also, and yet greater; and many more such like wherewith the
holy Scriptures are replenished. And that he says that it is done in times
past, herein he follows the use and order of the other Prophets, who for the
certainty of the event are wont to prophecy of things to come as if they were
past already. For the Philosophers say, that things past are of necessity;
things present, of being: and things to come only of possibility. For which
certainty the Prophet Isay long before prophesying of the death of Christ,
has thus spoken: He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a dumb
lamb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth, etc. And this whereof we
speak at this present, and which is come to pass in these our days, is a
famous, notable, and an incredible thing, not done or achieved without the
particular providence and disposition of the Almighty. A Friar has killed a
King, not a painted one, or drawn upon a piece of paper, or pictured upon a
wall, but the King of France, in the midst of his army, compassed and
environed round about with his Guard and Soldiers: which truly is such an
act, and done in such a manner, that none will believe it, when it shall be
told them, and perhaps our posterity and the age to come will account and
esteem it but a fable.

That the king is dead or else slain, it is easily to be believed; but that he
is killed and taken away in this sort, is hardly to be credited: even as we
presently agree unto this, that Christ is borne of a woman; but if we add unto
it of a woman virgin, then following natural reason we can no in wise assent
unto it. Even so we lightly believe that Christ died; but that he is risen up
again from death to life, it falls hard unto man's understanding, and
therefore not lightly digested. That one is wakened again out of a sleep,
ecstasy, or a sound, because it is not against nature, we naturally believe it;
but to be risen again from death, it seems so incredible unto the flesh,
that S. Paul disputing in Athens of this point, was misliked greatly, and
accused to be a setter forth of new Gods, so that many (as S. Luke witnesses)
did mock him, and many for the strangeness of the doctrine said, We will hear
thee again of this thing. Of such things therefore which befall not according
to the laws of nature, and the ordinary coursse thereof, speaks the
Prophet, That none shall believe it when it shall be told them. But we give
credit unto it by consideration of the omnipotency of God, and by submission
of our understanding under the obedience of faith, and service which we owe
unto our Savior Christ. And by these means this that was incredible by
nature, becomes credible by faith: therefore we that believe not after the
flesh that Christ is borne of a virgin, yet when there is added unto it, that
this was done supernaturally by operation of the holy Ghost; then truly we
agree unto it, and faithfully believe it. So likewise when it is said that
Christ is rise^ again from the dead, as we are flesh only we believe it not;
but when it is affirmed that this was done by the power of the divine nature
which in him was, then without any doubting we believe it. In the same manner
when it shall be told us, that such a mighty King was killed by a poor, simple,
and a weak Friar, even in the midst of his army, and environed with his Guard
and Soldiers; to our natural reason and fleshly capacity it will seem
incredible; yet considering on the other side the great and grievous sins of
this King, and the special providence of the Almighty herein, and by what
accustomed and wonderful means he has accomplished his most just will and
judgment against him, then most firmly we will believe it. Therefore this great
and miraculous work I may but only ascribe it unto the particular providence
of God, not as those that refer all things amiss unto some ordinary causes,
or unto fortune, or such like accidentarie events: but as those who (more near
observing and looking in the course of the whole matter) easily see that here
in this befell many things, which could in no wise have been brought to pass
and dispatched without the special help of God. And truly the state of Kings
and kingdoms, and all other such rare and weighty affairs should not be
thought to be governed of God rashly and unadvisedly. In the holy Scripture
some are of this kind, and none of them can be referred unto any other thing,
but unto God the only author thereof: yet there are none wherein the celestial
operation more appears then in this whereof we speak at this present. We
read in the first book of the Macchab. chap. 6. how Eleazar offered himself
unto a certain death, to kill the king that was an enemy and persecutor of
the people and children of God. For in the battle espying an Elephant more
excellent then any of the other beasts, whereupon it was like that the king
was, with a swift course casting himself in the midst of the troops of his
enemies, here and there making a way perforce, came to the beast at last, and
went under her, and thrust his sword in her belly and slew her, who falling,
with the great weight of her body pressed him to death, and killed him out of hand.
Here in this we see some things not unlike unto ours, as much as touches the
zeal, valiantness of mind, and the issue of the enterprise, yet in the rest
there is no comparison to be made. Eleazarus was a Soldier, exercised in
weapons, and trained up in wars, set in battle, emboldened with courage, and
inflamed with rage and anger: this a Friar not inured to the fight, and so
abhorring of blood by the order of his profession, that perhaps he could not
abide the cutting of a vein. He knew the kind of his death, as also the place
of his burial, namely that he should be intombed under the fall of the beast,
and so buried in the midst of his triumph and victory. This man did look
for death only, and expected nothing but unknown and most cruel torments,
and did not doubt before, but that he should lack a grave to rest within. But
in this are yet many other things that can suffer no comparison. The famous
history of the holy woman Judith is sufficiently known, who took counsel
with her self, that she might deliver her City and the people of God (no
doubt by the inspiration of the holy Ghost) to murder Holophernes chief
Captain and Prince of the enemies forces, which she also most valiantly
accomplished. Wherein although appear many and most manifest tokens of
heavenly direction, yet far greater arguments of Gods providence, are to
beseene in the killing of this King, and the delivering of the city of Paris,
far more difficult and harder to be brought to pass, then was the enterprise
of Judith. For this holy woman disclosed part of her intention before unto the
Governors of the City, and went not without great commendation of young and
old, through the gates of Bethulia, and by the watch, in sight and presence of
the Elders and Princes of that place: and by that means was not subject unto
their examination and searching, which is always used so stricty in time of
siege and war, that a fly can hardly without examining get by. She being
come to the enemy, through whose camp and watches she was to go, and now
oftentimes examined and searched, being a woman, carrying no letters nor
weapons about her, from whence any suspicion might grow, and yielding probable
reasons of her coming there, and abandoning of her country, was easily
discharged. As also for the same causes, and for her sex and exquisite beauty
being brought before this lewd Prince, whom lust, wine, and good cheer had
rockt asleep, might lightly perform that which she had determined before. But
this religious man had undertaken a matter of greater weight, and also
performed it, which was compassed with so many impediments, difficulties, and
dangers, that it by no earthly means could have been brought to pass without
the manifest ordinance, and special aid of the Almighty. First letters of
commendation were to be procured from the enemy; then was he constrained to go
through that gate of the city, which directly went to the enemies camp, the
which without doubt was so narrowly kept and watched in the extremity of that
siege, that every trifle bred suspicion, and none were suffered to go forth
without curious searching before, touching their letters, business, and
affairs they had. But he (a wonderful thing) went by the watch unexamined,
yea with letters of commendatio^ unto the enemy, which if they had bin
intercepted by the citizens, without delay and further sentence he should have
been executed presently; and therefore this is a manifest argument of Gods
providence. But this is a far greater miracle, that he without searching went
also through the enemies camp, by diverse watches and sentinels, and, which
more is, through the Guard of the Kings body, and finally, through the whole
army, which was compacted almost of none but Hugonots and Heretics, he being
a religious man, and apparelled after the order of his profession, which was so
odious unto them, that they killed, or at least greatly misused all those
Friars, whom they found in those places, which not long before they had taken
perforce about Paris. Judith was a woman, and nothing odious, yet examined
oftentimes, she carried nothing about her that might have turned to her danger
and destruction. This man, a Friar, and therefore hated, and most suspected,
having also a knife prepared for that purpose, not put up in a sheath, (which
might have made his excusation probable) but bare and hidden in his sleeue,
which if it had been found about him, presently without any further judgment he
should have bin hanged. All these are such clear arguments of the particular
providence of God, that they cannot be denied or disprooued: and it could not
be otherwise, but that God blinded the eyes of the enemies, so that they could
not see nor know him. For as we have said before, although some absurdly
ascribe this unto fortune, or unto some other such like accident, yet we think
good to refer all this to none else, but unto the holy will and ordinance of
God. And truly I could not believe this to have been done otherwise, unless I
should captive and submit my understanding under the obedience of Christ his
doctrine, who had determined by these miraculous means to unset and deliver
the city of Paris, (which as we have heard has been in great danger and
extremity) and justly punish the heinous and notorious sins of that King,
and take him away out of this world by such an unhappy and infamous death. And
we truly (not without great inward grief) have oftentimes foretold, that as he
was the last of his name and family, so was he like to have, and make some
strange and shameful end of his life. Which, that I have oftentimes said it,
not only the Cardinals Ioiosa, Lenocurtius, and he of Paris, but also the
Orator at that time here resident, can sufficiently witness and testify. We
will not seem to call here to affirm our words, for those that are already
deceassed, but the living, and some of them at this time present do yet well
remember the^: yet notwithstanding we will not unrip all that we are able and
forced to speak against this unfortunate king, for the most noble realm of
France it sake, which we shall prosecute and foster hereafter, as we have done
always before with all fatherly love, honor and affection. This therefore which
we with grief have spoken, touches only the kings person, whose unhappy and
unlucky end depriueth and exempteth him also of those duties and honors, which
this holy sea (the tender and gentle mother of all faithful, but chiefly of
christian Princes) is wont to offer unto all Kings and Emperors, which we most
willingly would likewise have bestowed upon him, if the holy Scriptures in this
case had not altogether forbidden it. There is, says S. John, a sin unto
death; I say not that any should pray for it: which may be understood, both of
the sin it self, as if he should say, for that sin, or for the remission or
forgiveness thereof, I will that none should pray, because it is not
pardonable. Or else in the same sense, for that man who commits such a sin
unto death, I say not that any should pray for. Whereof our Savior himself
has spoken in S. Matthew, saying, that he that sins against the holy Ghost,
shall not be pardoned, neither in this world nor in the world to come. Where he
sets down three sorts or kinds of sin, to wit, against the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost; and that the two first are less heinous, and
pardonable, but that the third is altogether unpardonable, and not to be
remitted. All which difference proceeds from the distinction of the
attributes, as the Divines teach us, which severally are appropriated unto
every several person of the holy Trinity. And although as the essence of all
the three persons is but one, so also is their power, wisdom, and goodness,
as we have learned in the symbol of Athanasius, where he says, almighty is
the Father, almighty is the Son, and almighty is the holy Ghost: yet by
attribution, power is ascribed unto the Father, wisdom unto the Son, and
love unto the holy Ghost; whereof every several as they are termed
attributes, so are they so proper unto every several person, that they can not
be attributed and referred unto any other. By the contraries of which
attributes, we come to discern the distinction and greatness of sin. The
contrary to power, which is only attributed unto the Father, is weakness, and
therefore that which we do amiss through infirmity of nature, is said to be
committed against the Father. The opposite unto wisdom, is ignorance and
blindness, through which when any man sins, he is said to sin against the
Son: therefore that which we commit through natural infirmity, and
ignorance, is more easier forgiven us. The third attribute, which is the holy
Ghostes, is love, and has for his contrary ingratitude and unthankfulness, a
vice most detestable and odious, which causes men not to acknowledge the love
of God, and his benefits bestowed upon them, but to forget, despise, yea and
to hate them. Whereout briefly, and finally proceeds, that they become
altogether obstinate and impenitent. And this way sin is committed against
God with greater danger and peril, then if it were done through ignorance and
weakness of the flesh, and therefore it is termed a sin against the holy
Ghost. And because such sins are seldom and difficultly pardoned, and not
without great abundance of grace, in some sort they are said to be
unpardonable: whereas altogether through unrepentance only, they become simply
unpardonable. For whatsoever is done amiss in this life: although it be
against the holy Ghost, by repentance it may be wipt out and defaced before
death; but they that persevere therein till death, are excluded from all grace
and mercy hereafter. And therefore for such sinners and sins the Apostle has
forbidden to pray after their deceasse. Now therefore because we understand, not
without our great grief, that the said king is departed out of this world,
without repentance and impenitent, in the company, to wit, of heretics, (for
all his army was made almost of none other but of such men) and that by his
last will he has commended and committed his crown and kingdom to the
succession of Navarre, long since declared an heretic, and excommunicated; as
also in his extremity, and now ready to yield up his ghost, desired of him,
and such like as he was there standing by, that they would revenge his death
upon those whom he judged to be the cause thereof. For these and such like most
manifest tokens of unrepentance, we have decreed not to solemnize his death
with funerals: not that we would seem to conjecture by these any thing
concerning the secret judgments of God against him, or his mercies, who could
according unto his good pleasure in the departing of his soul from the body
convert and turn his heart, and deal with him mercifully: but this we have
spoken, being thereunto moved by these exteraall signs and tokens. God grant
therefore that all, being admonished and warned by this fearful example of
heavenly justice, may repent and amend, and that it may further please him to
continue and accomplish that which he has mercifully begun in us, as we do put
our trust in him, to the end we may give everlasting thanks to him, to have
delivered his Church from such great and imminent dangers.

Whereof when his Holiness had spoken, he brake up the Consistory, and having
given his blessing, let them al depart.

Whether that the Pope in this his Oration applauded or approved the Friars
murtnering his Prince, I would rather the learned reader should be judge
thereof then my self: his wisdom doubtless was too great to approve by any
clear and direct sentence, so vile and detestable a fact. Howbeit this I can
witness, that it was commonly spoken by many in Rome, that had the Friar been
a Franciscan, as he was a Dominican, he might happily have been then declared a
Saint. And this is most certain, which my self living in the court of Rome
saw, that as it were to retain a pious memory of such a deed, the Friars
picture was drawn on paper together with the Kings, in one square or quadro in
Italian, and publicly sold without controlement (to my knowledge,) which many
admired to see.

Besides, this likewise is true, that M. William Reynolds then being in the Low
countries (to who^ as to my special friend I sent a copy of the Oration)
esteemed it (so did many others) as an approving of the Friars act. For,
returning me an answer to my letter, he gave me hearty thanks for it, saying,
that I could not have gratified him with any thing more, then by sending him
the approbation of the Sea Apostolic, which came in very good season, he
being at that time writing his Rossaeus Peregrinus, a book of such a like
subject.

If any desire to know how I should light on a copy thereof, when as it is
most true, that neither the Cardinal, whose office it was to have noted the
Popes oration, was not provided of paper nor ink, as he should have been, had
any such occasion of using it been thought of before; and therefore was not
taken by any, as Cardinal Bellarmine says well: let him understand, that the
Oration and Consistory being ended, and the Pope departed toward his chamber,
certain Cardinals, among which (if my memory fail me not) were Cardinal
Gallo* and my most honorable patron Cardinal Borromeo Archbishop of Millan,
who are yet living, with a greedy desire flocked about Cardinal Alan there in
the chamber, entreating him that he would call to remembrance, and write what
they had heard there spoken, to the end they might after at more leisure read
and consider it better, and that so worthy a speech of his Holiness might not
perish. Cardinal Alan craving pardon, besought them not to impose on him a
matter of such difficulty, for that he acknowledged himself unable to effect
it; yet at last won by their importunity (they being his friends) promised
to do the best he could, hoping they would when they saw it, with their
memories help to supply his defects. The same afternoon he began to set down
in writing the Popes speech in his own phrase and style, as near as he could
remember: and when he had done, he commanded me, being one of his Chaplains,
and two other of his gentlemen, to write out copies thereof; which he after
presented to the Cardinals his friends, who had importuned him to that labor.
Afterward they gave him thanks, saying, that it was the very Oration which
Sixtus had uttered in Consistory: and as I was informed, the Pope himself
liking his doing therein, said, it was his speech indeed.

By this means the Oration was set forth, and published among diverse
particular friends, and so I reserved to my self a copy, which I sent (as I
have said) soon after to my beloved friend M. William Reynolds. And as far as
my memory serves me, this here printed according to the Parisian copy, does
well agree with the originals first written in Rome: for I do yet perfectly
remember the beginning out of Abacucke to be the same, likewise the facts of
Eleazar and of Judith, with the circumstances to have been in that Oration; as
also the circumstances of the Friars going to certain adversaries of the
league for letters of credence to the King, Brisac then prisoner in the Bastile.
his going forth of the gate so dangerously, and his passage through the
heretics camp to his Majesty, with other like circumstances there
specified. But whether the Pope in this his Oration approves or allows of
the Friars fact killing his King, for that he had caused the Cardinal of Guise
Archbishop of Rhemes to be put to death, and was esteemed of some a tyrant, and
favorer of heretics; or only admired the providence of almighty God, as
Cardinal Bellarmine in Tortus affirms, I do not presume to define, but leave
it to the consideration of each prudent reader.

What if the Pope upon wrongs done to himself, as a temporal Prince in Italy,
should authorize some of his vassals or feudatary Princes to wage war against
our King, and invade his dominions, is not this lawful for him by the law of
nations? How then does the Oath say, that the Pope neither of himself, nor by
any authority of the Church or sea of Rome, or by any other means with any
other, has any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of
his Majesty's kingdoms or dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to
invade or annoy him or his countries? That his Holiness as he is a temporal
Prince in Italy, may upon just cause revenge injuries offered, by attempting
the various events of war, and thereby seek to annoy his Majesty or his
countries, no man I think will doubt: but can any man hereby infer, that so
doing he has more authority to depose our King, or dispose any of his
Majesty's kingdoms, or invade his dominions, then has the Emperor, French
King, King of Spain, or any other secular Prince? And in case he should
attempt in hostile manner (not as he is a spiritual Pastor, but a secular
Prince) by himself, or by the help of any foreign Prince, to invade or annoy
his Majesty or his countries; every good subject may lawfully, and in duty is
bound to take arms in defense of his King and country against him, no less
then he ought to do against any other secular Potentate whatsoever. But our
Oath speaks not of the secular power of the Bishop of Rome, which he has
only by the bounty and liberality of temporal Princes, or by prescription
in the temporal dominions he possesses: but of any authority whatsoever
received from Christ or his Apostles, as he is Christ's Vicar, and Peter's
successor; as the words of the Oath seem to import, viz. That the Pope,
neither of himself, that is, as he is Pope, nor by any authority of the
Church or sea of Rome. For thus his authority is only and merely spiritual,
which was never ordained by God to produce such effects, as waging of war,
invasion of kingdoms, deposing and dethroning of Princes, as has been said
before; but only to practice spiritual censures, to wit, excommunication,
suspension, interdiction, and such like, which makes nothing for such as
refuse the taking of the Oath.

Another objection some use to make for their justification against the Oath,
viz: That he who swears, must do his best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto his Majesty, his heirs and successors, all treasons and
traitorous conspiracies, which he shall know or hear of to be against him, or
any of them. But to be a Priest, to reconcile, or to be reconciled to the
Church of Rome, is treason by the statutes of this kingdom. Anno 23.27. Elizab.
Therefore he is bound by this Oath to reveal Priests, and all reconciled
persons; which no man can do without committing a most grievous and heinous
crime.

Are not these men narrowly driven to their shifts trow ye, when after
laboring their wits to defend their refusal of the Oath, they can find no
better arguments? The words of the Oath import, that such as take it must make
known all treasons, and traitorous conspiracies, which he shall know to be
against him. How I pray you can this be understood of any who is not disposed
to cavil, to be meant of Priesthood, and confession of sins, or reconcilement
to the favor of God, or unity of his Church; and not rather of such like
treasons and traitorous conspiracies as were invented, and should have been
practiced by those late wicked sulphurean traitors? These indeed, and others of
like nature and quality are directly against his Majesty, his hieres and
successors; and for repressing and detecting such, this Oath was invented, and
the Act framed; not for disclosing Priests or reconciled persons, who
acccording to the intention of the Act, are no such traitors, as long as they
enter not into any treasonable practice against his Majesty and the State:
whereof God forbid all Priests should be guilty.

And I trust, both his Majesty most learned and wise, together with his grave
and prudent Council, in their wisdoms know, that besides some few, who have
already given good proof of their loialtie and dutiful affection (though to
their great temporal detriment for the same) there are many more, who bear
likewise a true English heart to their King and country, and would be ready to
make also proof thereof if occasion were offered.

Wherefore supposing it were true, that by the letter of the law, all Priests,
Jesuits, etc. mentioned in the statute, are to be reputed traitors, and all
reconciling treason; yet I dare avouch it was never his Majesty's, nor the
lawmakers intent, to bind any called to the Oath to reveal such kind of
traitors or treasons: which is made further manifest, for that no Magistrate
ministering the Oath does ever interpret the law in that sense, or give charge
to any for detecting such. So that these are but ridiculous, and the cauelling
shifts of some, to withdraw men from performing their duty to his Majesty:
whereby they cause a confusion and perturbation in the whole realm, bring many
families to ruin, hinder the conversion of many souls, and minister just
occasion unto the State to suspect little fidelity in their hearts, what fair
show soever they make in words.

Here, by reason of such an interpretation made of revealing and detecting
Priests and reconciled persons, it shall not be amiss to know how an Oath is
to be interpreted: and in what sort every one is to swear that takes an oath
before a Magistrate. Molanns writes, that an oath stretches not to things
unlawful: Mola. de fide haer. ser. lib. 2. c. 7.
Omne iuramentum iuris interpretatione ad licitatantum, non vero ad mala se
extendit. Every oath by the interpretation of the law extends to lawful
things only, and not to such as are evil. The case is most perspicuous and
plain, that in the Oath of allegiance it cannot be drawn to be meant of
revealing Priests as Priests, not otherwise traitors; because it should be
extended to that which is to be reputed evil according to the known
Catholic Roman faith, which his Majesty in his learned Apology professes
no way to prejudice by taking this Oath. Marc. 6.
When Herod Tetrarch of Galilee swear to give Herodias daughter what she would
ask, though half his kingdom: who will say that it extended to the cutting
off S. John Baptists head, it being manifestly evil in it self? Yea, but in
this matter of our Oath, what if the case be doubtful? Emanuel Sa a Jesuit
teaches you, Sa. Apho. verb Interpretatio.
that in poenis, in punishments a mild interpretation is to be made, and being
doubtful, it is to be interpreted to the better part, and more benign, and
more probable. Then what reason have these that will make the case doubtful, to
interpret this clause of the Oath not to the better, but to the worse, and
more improbable? Now a word or two how an oath is to to be taken before a
lawful magistrate.

Whosoever swears to an officer being required, eithere swears guilefully,
or without guile, which is not to be denied: Then, says S. Thomas, He who
swears sincerely without guile, Tho. 2.2. q. 89. ar. 7. ad. 4. Syluest. verb.
Iuramentu^. 3.
is bound according to the intention of him that swears: he that swears
with guile, ought to swear according to the sound understanding of him to whom
the oath is made. And to this purpose says Innocentius in Cap. Innocentius.
Veniens de iureiurando, That an oath given generally of performing obedience
to commandments, is so interpreted as it may not be extended but to these
things which were thought of, or indeed ought to be thought of. Which is to be
meant of things lawful. Then it follows a little after: And if he that
requires (the oath) be a Judge in bona fide, requiring it in a lawful case,
according to the order of law; then that takes place 22. q. 5. to wit, Isido
li. 2. de sum. bo. c. 31.
Quacunque art verborum quis iuret, Deus tamen qui conscientiae testis est, it
a hoc accipit, sicut ille cui iuratur intelligit. With what cunning sort of
words soever any swear, yet God who is witness of the conscience, so
accepts it, as he before whom the oath is made understands: and he that
wittingly swears not according to the intention of him that requires it,
sins deadly, and is perjured: and is bound to perform it as he understood
it. This is meant, as S. Thomas says, of a guilefull oath; and such a one is
made guilty in two sorts, for that first he takes the name of God in vain,
and with subtlety deceives his neighbor. Hereupon I infer, that to swear
to reveal all treasons and traitorous conspiracies, cannot be extended to be
meant of Priests, Priesthood, or reconciling, because it was never thought of,
nor ought to be thought of in the Oath. Neither is it his Majesty's or his
officers intent, as I assure my self, to draw any thereby further, then to
make profession of their allegiance; and not to entangle any man's conscience in
matters of faith and religion: which is sufficient for justification of his
Majesty in requiring it, and for satisfaction of Catholics lawfully to take
it.

After all this that has been said, there remains yet one stumbling stone
more to be removed, and so I will end, which is commonly called Scandal. For
that some there be that use to say, being pressed with stronger arguments then
they can well answer, they could be content to take the Oath, (as either
holding it lawful, or else not able by any important reasons to disprove it,
unless they borrow some one, or all four of the Catholic letter deemed to
be father Parsons, to little purpose) were it nor for offending many
Chatholicks, who are much scandalized at the taking and takers thereof.

And is it not strange for Christian men professing charity, to take scandal
where none is given? Are not also many other Catholics no less, but rather
more justly scandalized at such as refuse it? yea and the whole state beside,
both Nobles and commons together with his Majesty, cannot but rest much
scandalized, not only at such persons, but also at their religion for their
sakes.

If they will say unto such as take the Oath, as Achab King of Samaria said
unto Elias the Prophet: Tune es ille, qui conturbas Israel: 3. Reg. 18.
Art not thou he that troublest Israel? For so some, Quorum os maledictione and
amaritudine plenum est: whose mouth is full of malediction and bitterness have
said in effect, Psalm. 13.
That such Priests as have performed their duty in taking the Oath of
allegiance, and sought thereby to pacify the Kings wrath worthily conceived
against Catholics for the demerite of a few, have caused a trouble and great
perturbation in the Church; which undoubtedly would never have been (say they)
had all Catholics and Priests stood constantly against the Oath. But such
loyal subjects, Priests or Laickes, may well retort upon them, as Elias did
upon King Achab: Non ego tur baui Israel sed tu, and domus patris tui. It is
not I that have troubled Israel, but thou and the house of thy father, who have
forsaken the commandments of our Lord. It is not such as have taken the Oath,
that cause trouble in the Church, nor forsake the commandments of our Lord;
but such Priests and people as wilfully refuse it, and persuade others against
it, to the hazard yea loss of some of their lives, and of the lands and goods
of others: and also of the souls of such as loving more the glory of men then
the glory of God, obstinately refuse to perform their duty in obeying that
precept of our Savior: Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's: and that of
S. Peter, Regem honorificate: and also the commandment given to Moses: Honor
thy father and thy mother. These, assure you, are they who give cause of
scandal indeed, whereby their persecution (if so they please to call it) is
continued, the Church perturbed, Catholic religion little regarded, and many
a soul lost. But Vaeilli, per quem scandalum venit. Woe to him, by whom
scandal comes. Time will make trial who it is, whether they or we.

In the mean while we say, that the proper and true definition of scandal, as
it is defined by S. Thomas and others, most aptly agrees with the doctrine and
example, or words and deeds, of such English subjects as withdraw men from
performing their duty to their dread Sovereign: not on such as persuade it,
and yet remain no less Catholic, then they do pretend in every point of
faith. Scandal is a word or deed not right, Definition of scandal. Tho. 2.2.
q. 43. ar. 1. and Ieron. in comment. super Math. c. 15.
giving occasion of ruin; that is, of spiritual ruin or sin. Now what
evil or show of evil or sin is there in those, who by their deeds and words,
example and doctrine, teach and labor to induce all to do that which is right
and due by the law of God? What scandal or offense, or occasion of sin do
they give, who persuade nothing against any one article or point of faith, but
mere allegiance to their Prince? Does this offend or scandalize any? If they
will be scandalized for well doing, and take offense where none is given, do
they not show how imperfect they are in the love of God? Pax multa diligentibus
legem tuam; and non est illis scandalum. Psalm. 118.
To such as love thy law (o God) there is great peace: and to them there is no
scandal. May not these be well likened to the Pharisees, that of envy and
malice were offended or scandalized at the sayings and doings of our Blessed
Savior? who, being told by his disciples of their scandal taken, answered:
Omnis plantatio quam non plantauit Pater meus coelestis, eradicabitur. Math. 15.
All planting which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up.
Let them alone; blind they are, guides of the blind. And if the blind be guide
to the blind, both fall into the ditch. Such are to be pitied and prayed for,
not envied; whom we may answer in the same sort, and with Haimo: Haimo in Math
c. 18. Greg ho. 7. in
Sipro veritate scandalum oriatur, magis veritas eligenda est, quam scandalum
vitandum. If for truth scandal do arise (as it does in this our case) rather
truth is to be chosen, then scandal sought to be avoided. The same affirms
S. Gregory the Great, Ezech. page 2.
as before, page 45. And S. Thomas disputing whether spiritual goods are to be
pretermitted for passive scandal, Tho. 2.2. q. 43. ar. 7.
says: That such goods as are de necessitate salutis, ought not to be omitted
for avoiding scandal: because they cannot be pretermitted without mortal
sin: (as in our judgments we take allegiance in the Oath to be;) but it is
manifest (says he) that none ought to sin mortally, to save an other from
sin: because according to the order of charity, a man ought to love more his
own spiritual health then another man's. The same likewise has Ioannes de
Burgo: Pupil. oculi.
Opera necessaria ad salutem non sunt omittenda ad vitandum scandalum proximi,
ex quacunqueradice procedat. Works necessary to salvation are not to be
omitted for avoiding the scandal of our neighbor, out of whatsoever root it
proceeds. Herby, dear brethren in our Lord Jesus, I trust you rest
satisfied, that such as have taken the Oath of allegiance, wherein nothing has
been hitherto proved by any learned man to be contained against any one point
of faith, have not given cause of scandal (as they have bin slandered to have
done) but by that their fact, performing their bounden duty to their dread
Sovereign according to the law of God, have sought to take away that horrible
scandal given indeed, by a few ungracious Catholics in the gunpowder treason;
and which others daily give to his Majesty and the State in resisting the law
made upon so great reason, and for the common good of the realm. Besides, I
trust your wisdoms will consider, that to take the Oath being bonum
spirituale, wherein no evil thing against religion is contained, they are not
to pretermit it for the imperfections of some, who are ready to suffer or take
scandal where none is given.

Wherefore I exhort you all most dearly beloved Catholics in the bowels of
our Savior Jesus Christ, (as the very Reverend and learned master George
Blackwell sometime our Archpriest, did in his letter to his Assistants, and you
all both Clergy and Laity) for abolishing and ending this controversy which
has scandalized the whole State, you would desist to impugn supreme authority
in this case of the Oath most lawful and just, as has been proved: and cease
any longer to provoke to wrath his Majesty our most clement Prince: clement I
say, for I dare boldly avouch, that neither the Pope, nor any King or Prince in
Christendom, had he had the like cause offered by any his subjects, especially
of a contrary religion, and finding others of the same religion to refuse to
make profession of their loyalty by an Oath required at their hands, would show
such mercy and clemency as his Majesty has done, and does. Confer the fact
or enterprise of the Moors in Spain now two years agone, who went about (as
report goes) treacherously, to bring in Turks and forreiners to invade the
country, with this Catesbeyan and Percian most barbarous treason: and I doubt
not but you will judge them both worthy condign punishment. Compare again the
two Princes, who by Gods ordinance carry the sword ad vindictam malefactorum,
to take revenge on malefactors; you shall find them both justly provoked to
indignation against the delinquents: yet the one, viz. King Philip, with great
severity chastises the innocent with the nocent, old and young, men, women and
children, expelling all alike out of his dominions, to the number of nine
hundred thousand, as appears by his edict, within the space of xxx. days, to
the loss of all their immoueables. Whereas the other, our dread Sovereign, of
his pitiful inclination, did not punish in such sort the guiltles, nor all the
offenders according to their deserts, but repressed by his edict the fury of
his people, ready to have taken revenge yea on many innocent persons, for
their sakes that had offended. Embrace then, dear brethren, the mercy and
long sufferance of this our mild and clement Prince whilst time is granted
you, lest through your default it be turned into surie; for often times patientia
laesa, specially of a King, vertiturin furore^. And resist no longer* but
conform your selves to his Majesty's just demand in this case of the Oath,
that wherein they (that is) such as are of a different religion, misreport of
you as of malefactors, by the good works considering you, 1. Pet. 2.
they may glorify God in the day of visitation. Also with this blessed Apostle
S. Peter I wish you to be subject to every humane creature of God, whether it
be to the King, as excelling: or to rulers as sent by him to the revenge of
malefactors, but to the praise of the good: for so (note well) is the will of
God, that doing well you may make the ignorance of unwise men dumb. I desire
likewise with S. Paul, that obsecrations, prayers, ^1. Tim. 2.
postulations, thanksgiving be made for all men; for Kings, and all that are
in preeminence: that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all piety and
chastity. If Tertullian were living and those ancient Fathers of the primitive
Church, Tertul. Apologet. c. 50. See master Blackwels letter.
they would questionless, following the doctrine and example of the Apostles,
exhort you likewise to pray for the long life of our Sovereign, no less then
they did the Christians of those days for their Emperors or Kings, howsoever
they differed in religion.

Finally as Baruch the Prophet wished such Jews as were left in Jerusalem
after the captivity, Baruch 1.
to pray for the life of Nabuchodonozor King of Babylon, and for the life of
Balthazar his son, that their days might be as the days of heaven upon the
earth: so do I desire all Catholics professing with me the Roman faith,
heartily to pray for the long life and prosperous reign of King James of great
Britain, together with his dear Spouse our most gracious Queen Anne, and
the hopeful young Prince Henry his son, with the rest of his most royal
issue, that in this world they may long continue to the glory of the eternal
God; and afer this mortality ever to enjoy that felicity which never shall
have end.

Vui Trinoque Deo omnis honor and gloria.
STRANGE REPORTS OR NEWS FROM ROME.
THis my discourse of the Oath of Allegiance being fully complete and ended,
written specially for satisfying and persuading such Catholics of our
country as think it not lawful to be taken, at least by reason of the Popes
Breues prohibiting the same; behold, certain strange news diversely spread
aboade, from diverse parts and persons, have ministered me occasion to continue
on my labor by adding this brief Treatise following, for and in defense of my
self and some others my brethren Priests, who for no crime committed in our
judgments, but only for performing our duties to God and man, have been and
are calumniated to be deprived of all faculties granted by any authority from
the Sea of Rome; whereby we are utterly disabled to live, for not being any
longer regarded; but forsaken and in affection abandoned by such as formerly
used of charity to relieve us.

Audite ergo coeli quae loquor: audiat terra verba oris mei. Hear therefore o
ye heavens what I speak: let the earth hearken to the words of my mouth. For I
am to utter that which to Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and to the blessed
Apostles, and to all glorious Saints, will seem strange and wondrous tidings,
and whereat all good Christians on earth that shall enter into consideration of
the case, may stand amazed, and posterity will scarce believe when it shall be
told them.

Talking not long since with a friend that came newly from beyond the seas, I
asked him what news in those parts, and what was said of us that had taken the
Oath of allegiance: he told me* the report was there, that we had lost our
faculties, but could not tell by what means or by who^. And here at home in
our country the same is bruted abroad by many, and in many places, but in
sundry manner, the reporters disagreeing so much in their tales, as no
certain truth can be gathered by the^. For some say, that five Priests only
of the Clinke were by name deprived of their faculties, (one of which is lately
deceassed) and master Blackewell was not mentioned, because he was thought to
be dead.

Others have reported that he alone was named, but all other Priests likewise
had lost them that did concur with him.

Others again, that such were deprived of their faculties (that is, unabled to
exercise certain privileges granted Priests at their mission into England) as
having taken the Oath, do constantly persist or persevere in teaching or
allowing the lawfulness thereof. Now which of these reports so much differing,
is true (for all cannot be true) I greatly desire to know, but cannot learn
any certainty.

Then as touching the manner, how, and by what means they be taken away,
little agreement do I find, but such variety in relation thereof, as wise men
may well admire to see such proceedings in a matter so important as this is:
and, that some of our own profession and religion, should receive satisfaction
and contentment in beholding our miseries, by being in such wise punished; who
have (as it may seem) long expected, and Tantalus like hungered and thirsted
after the same.

First, some say that we have lost them, and had long since by virtue of the
Archpriests Admonition directed, To all the secular Priests of England; which
anon shall be set down verbatim, that all discreet persons may judge thereof.

Another report is, that the Cardinals of the Inquisition have given their
judgment, and censured our faculties to have dene lost by the Archpriests
Admonition at the first.

A third report is, that the Cardinals of that congregation have themselves
taken them from all such Priests as either have taken, or shall hereafter take
our Oath of allegiance.

From these, the fourth sort disagree, saying, That the Viceprotector of his
own authority that he has over our nation, in his private letters writing to
the Archpriest, signified his depriving such of their privileges, as had taken
the said Oath, and do persist in defending it.

Fifthly, that indeed he did it, but by order from the Popes Holiness.

And lastly, that the Pope himself has sent to the Archpriest a Breue,
wherein he commands him in virtute obedientiae, to deprive all those Priests
of their faculties which do concur with master Blackwell, or else have
taken, or shall teach it lawful to take the Oath of allegiance. Yea and in
such severe sort, as the like was never seen ab initio nascentis Ecclesiae;
viz. Omniexcusatione posthabita: etiam ipsis delinquentibus non admonitis: and
nullo iuris or dine seruato. That is, all excuse set aside: yea the delinquents
not admonished; and no order of law observed in proceeding with us. That this
is true, by mine own knowledge I can testify, and prove if need were.

Which of all these reports deserve most credit and is truest, were greatly
wished might be made known to the parties whom it concerns; otherwise how
can they tell what to do in this important business, and what is required at
their hands, to retain still, or recover their faculties being once lost? How
shall they obey, if they know not what is commanded them? 1. Cor. 14.
Etenim si incertam vocem det tuba, (says Saint Paul) quis parabit se ad
bellum? For if the trumpet give an uncertain voice, who shall prepare himself
to battle?

Therefore it is most requisite, that such as have bin in possession of their
faculties, granted the^ by authority of the Sea of Rome, some 20. some 30.
years agone, and some more, should know how, and by whom they are taken from
them, and for what cause; which ought to be for so the great fault, because the
pain is most grievous: and should see moreover not only an authentical copy
of the original letters, but also the originals themselves, if the Churches
orderly proceedings be observed; otherwise all may be thought idle reports not
to be believed. Tho. 3. p. q. 19. ar. 6.
For Saint Thomas says, That when the Church depriueth heretics and
schismatickes, and other such like, withdrawing subjects from them, either
simpliciter, or quantum ad aliquid, simply, or touching some particular thing:
they cannot put in practice or have use of the keys, touching that which they
are deprived of. Then I say, it is very necessary that Priests, not
heretics, nor schismatickes, or such like, but most constant in every least
article of the Roman faith, should know whether they be forbidden simply all,
or else but some particular faculties received at their mission: whereby they
may in all humility show themselves obedient to his Holiness, in surceasing
from exercising what they shall perceive to be by him forbidden them.

Now whereas the first report of the manner of taking away faculties, is, That
Priests constantly persisting in teaching the lawfulness of the Oath, had lost
their faculties and were disabled to absolve their penitents from deadly sin,
by virtue of the Archpriests admonition: I wish the discreet reader not to give
credit thereto, because doubt may well be made thereof, seeing diverse learned
Priests, yea such as have not taken the Oath, have judged otherwise, viz: That
they were not lost; and amongst the rest, an Assistant esteemed of many to be
one of the grauest and best judgment in such cases. Which will also most
perspicuously appear to him that shall with judgment read the Admonition,
and duly consider the Archpriests act and proceeding therein, whether it be (as
it ought to be) in every respect conformable to that of the Popes Breues
authorizing him, which was as follows: Ex Breui sum Pont.
Tibique iniungimus and mandamus, ac specialem facultatem ad hoc tribuimus, vt
authoritate nostr a omnes and singulos Sacerdotes Anglos, qui quoddam iur
amentum (in quo multa continentur quae fidei atque saluti animarum aperte
aduersantur) praestiterunt: vel ad loca ad quae haeretici ad eorum
superstitiosa ministeria peragenda conuenire solent, consulto accesserunt, aut
qui talia licite fieri posse docuerunt, and docent, admonere cures, vt ab
huiusmodi erroribus resipiscant and abstineant: quod si intra tempus
(extraiudicialiter tamen) arbitrio tuo illis praefigendum hoc facere
distulerint, seu aliquis illorum distulerit, illos seu illum facult atibus and
priuilegys omnihus ab Apostolica sede, seu illius authoritate a quocunque ^lio
illis vel cuiuis illorum concessis, eadem authoritate priues, ac priuatos esse
declares, etc. Datum Romae apud S. Petrum sub annulo piscatoris die 1.
February* 1608. Pontificatus nostri anno 3. And we enjoin and command you, and
for this we give you special faculty, that by our authority you take care to
admonish all and singular English Priests, who have taken a certain Oath
(wherein many things are contained which are manifestly against faith and the
health of souls, etc.) or have taught and do teach such things may lawfully be
done, that they may repent and abstain from such errors: and if within the
time ( extraiudicialiter notwithstanding) by you to be prefixed unto them, they
shall defer to do this, or any one shall defer, that you by the same
authority deptiue, and declare them or him to be deprived of all faculties and
privileges granted them, or any of them, from the Sea Apostolic, or by her
authority from any other whatsoever. Dated at Rome the first of Frebruary, 1608.

This much out of the Popes Breue to the reverend Archpriest M. Birket,
touching his faculty or commission given him, first to admonish, then after
the time prefixed was expired, no satisfaction being given of repenting or
abstaining, to deprive such, and declare them deprived of their faculties.
Whereupon the Archpriest indeed sent a letter of admonition to the Priests then
of and in the Clinke, endorced, To all the reverend Secular Priests of England.
Which was as follows:

Most dearly beloved brethren, The Archpriests letter to the Priests of the
Clinke.
whereas I have always desired to live without molesting or offending others,
it cannot be but a wonderful corsiue, sorrow and grief unto me, that against
mine own inclination I am forced (as you have seen by the Breue it self) to
prescribe a certain time for such as do find themselves to have been contrary
to the points which are touched in the said Breue, concerning the Oath and
going to Church; that they may thereby return and conform themselves to the
doctrine declared by his Holiness, both in this and the other former Breues.
And therefore now by this present do give notice unto you all, that the time
which I prefixe and prescribe for that purpose, is the space of two months
next ensuing after the knowledge of this my admonition. Within which time, such
as shall forbear to take, or allow any more the Oath, or going to Church, I
shall most willingly accept their doing therein; yet signifying unto you
withal, that such as do not within this time prescribed give this
satisfaction, I must (though much against my will for fulfilling his Holiness
commandment) deprive them, and denounce them to be deprived of all their
faculties and privileges granted by the Sea Apostolic, or by any other, by
authority thereof unto them, or to any of them, and so by this present do
denounce; hoping that there is no man will be so wilful or disobedient to his
Holiness order, but will conform himself as becomes an obedient child of
the Catholic Church. And so most heartily wishing this conformity in us all,
and that we may live and labor together vnanimes in domo Domini, I pray God
guie us the grace to effect that in our actions, whereunto we are by our order
and profession obliged. This 2. of May, 1608.

Your servant in Christ George Birket Archpriest of England, and Protonotarie
Apostolical.


After which admonition, the Archpriest proceeded no further, nor ever
afterward did deprive, nor declare any one to be deprived of his faculties, as
he should have done strictly, according to the order and commission granted him
by his Holiness that now is Paulus 5: and not to denounce them lost during the
time of the admonition, exceeding his bounds, as he did, saying, And by this
present do denounce. Therefore most certain it is, that the Priests to whom
knowledge of the admonition came, did not then lose their faculties by virtue
thereof. Neither is it to be credited, that the Cardinals of the Inquisition,
who are both wise and learned, can judge them lost by that act, as the second
report affirms, if they were truly informed, and as well experienced in the
case, as some here, their inferiors in every respect are. If they have been of
that opinion, and judged so, yet is the contrary opinion of other learned men
rather to be believed and followed, being much more probable then theirs. But
suppose we should grant, which is not to be granted, that those Priests who
received and took notice of the admonition, were justly deprived, and had lost
their faculties; at least some others who have taken the Oath since that
general letter, being never admonished, nor ever seeing that, or any other
letter from the Archpriest to any such end, are free and have not lost them:
the Archpriest being bound by his faculty admonere singulos, to admonish each
one in particular, at least to give him knowledge thereof, that shall take the
Oath, or teach it lawful; or to go to the Protestants Churches to their
Service. Besides, why I pray you, should not that Priest be exempted from
losing his faculties, albeit he saw and read the admonition, who wrote, and
endeavored what he could possibly to send to the Archpriest (as in his letter
he required) to give him such satisfaction, as might have caused his Reverence
to stay from censuring him when the time prefixed should have been expired, but
could not find any means to convey letters unto him, which some (if need were)
can testify? This all know, quod ad impossible nemo tenetur, that none is
bound to a thing impossible to be effected. So then consequently, neither did
that Priest lose his faculties by the admonition. Howbeit all without
exception, and without any excuse (for no excuse must be admitted) are
deprived, all abandoned of Catholics, and as if they were the greatest
offenders that ever were in Gods Church, adjudged unworthy of the charitable
alms and poor means which they had to sustain their painful and tedious
life.

And if the most illustrious and most reverend Cardinals of the congregation of
the holy Office, have taken them away, (as it is in the third report) then is
it requisite that the Priests whom this matter touches, should see and know
with what authority they do it, whether by faculty from his Holiness, or of
themselves by their own power; and also the form of their sentence: all which
lies hidden in the clouds, and cannot be seen.

Whereas the fourth report has, that the Viceprotector of his own authority
by his letters written to the Archpriest, deprived such Priests as are above
mentioned, of their faculties, is most vain, and worthy to be exploded as a
forged fable. For it is not to be credited, that a sage Prince and pillar of
the Church will ever attempt to do that which is not in his power, unless it be
given by him whom we acknowledge to have plenitudinem potestatis in
spiritualibus, specially in such a case as ours is.

What if his Grace has done it by order from his Holiness, as the fifth report
says, is not his sentence then to be accepted and obeyed? Yes, I acknowledge
as a child of the Church ought, that a sentence or censure proceeding mediate
or immediately from the chief Pastor, is to be respected and feared, as S.
Gregory teaches me. Yet I think none will deny but it ought orderly to be
made known to the parties whom it concerns; and that until it come by
orderly means to their knowledge, it binds not: nor then neither, if the
censure be manifestly unjust, as procured by obreption, false information, or
any sinister means which may vitiate the process. Whereto agrees Petrus
Gregorius in his books de Repub. Pet Greg de repub. l. 26. c. 5
saying, Sed neque rescripta omnia, aut impetrata, seu extorta a summo
Pontifice per suggestionem falsam, vel obreptionem, aut in praeiudicium
alterius, devent effectum vel consequentiam habere, quia haec Sedem Romanam
(quae iustitiae cultrix est) redderent ignominiosam, saepe praet^r intentionem
Pontificum; quorum rescriptis perpetuo duae clausulae adijciuntur, vel omissae
adiectae censentur: Si preces veritate nitantur, and sine praeiudicio tertij
inauditi. L. 1.. Si quid a principe nequid in loco publico p.
But neither all rescripts, or matters obtained, or rather wrested from the
Pope by false suggestion or obreption, or to the prejudice of another, ought to
have any consequence or take effect, because such like proceedings would make
the Sea of Rome (which is a lover of justice) ignominious, oftentimes be side
the intention of Popes, to whose writings always two clauses are added, or
being omitted, are adjudged to be added, (to wit) If the petitions are grounded
on truth, and without prejudice of a third person that is unheard.

Now that this censure of suspension from faculties (if there be any such
extant) has been obtained, or wrested out by some sinister means, to wit, by
false suggestion or wrong information of one or other ouerhastie solicitor,
that is greedy to see what will be the event and final issue of this our
controversy, is very probable. The cause that makes me suspect false
information in this our case, is, that to my knowledge a certain prime Priest
in a letter to his friend affirmed, he had sent information to Rome of as much
as any of us that have taken the Oath, can say in defense thereof, yea and
more. Which doubtless is a most faise suggestion, if he has so informed, and
far beyond his talent to perform. What else (I pray you) is this, but by
obreption to procure or extort that from either the Cardinal Viceprotector, or
from the Pope, which would never have been granted (as may be presumed) against
reverend Priests, neneuer heard what they can say for themselves, and to their
great prejudice? Therefore if the soliciter and informer have so egregiously
erred in deceiving his Holiness, the censure or sentence so procured is of no
validity at all.

The sixth and last report is, that the Pope in a Breue to the Archpriest
commanded him to deprive all those Priests of their faculties, which do or
shall concur with master Blackwell, without giving any admonition, admitting
any excuse, or observing any order of law. So that the Archpriest may sit
quietly in his chamber, and but say the word, that the Priests of the Clinke or
else where, that shall concur with master Blackwell (they know not wherein)
are deprived of their faculties, and so forthwith they are, and must be
deprived. This report seems to me more improbable then any of the rest;
because it raises an imputation and slander against the chief Pastor of the
Sea of Rome, to wit, that he should give ear only to one adverse part, and
not be content to lend also another ear, to hear what the other part accused
can say in defense of their actions: to condemn them before they come to their
answer, and before any crime to their knowledge be proved against them, which
would be an act of injustice, and contrary to the laudable custom of the
ancient Romans, yea heathens, as is in the Acts of the Apostles: Non est
Romany consuetudo damnare aliquem hominem, Act. 25.
prius quam is, qui accusatur, praesentes habeat accusatores, locumque
defendendi accipiat ad abluenda crimina. It is not the Roman custom (said
Festus President of Jury, to king Agrippa) to yield up (or condemn) any man,
before that he which is accused have his accusers present, and take place to
make his answer for to clear himself of the crimes. Is it not strange that
any should be so presump tuously bold, as to impute unto his Holiness, that
he, who should be a lover of justice, and loving father of all his children,
should inflict so grievous a punishment on Priests, as to bereave them of their
life? their life I say, for that to take faculties from them, is to take all
relief from some of them, and to take relief, is to drive them into extreme
misery, sickness, famine, and death: yea and such Priests who for no hope of
temporal emoluments, or spiritual benefices, but only, as we are persuaded,
for gaining souls unto Christ their Redeemer; and after have labored some 20.
some 25. some 30. yea and more years to that end; during which time, without
expectation of preferment in this world, they have suffered many sharp showers
of tribulation, some by imprisonment, in sundry prisons many years, and some
many years banishment from their parents and friends and and native country
too. That these should be thus censured and deprived by the common Father and
chief Pastor of the Church, as if they had committed a crime so heinous and so
notorious, in taking the Oath, as needed no admonition, might admit no excuse,
nor deserved any orderly proceeding in law, I cannot be persuaded, nor will
believe it is so, till I see more cuident signs thereof then hitherto I have
seen.

The material cause of suspension (says Cardinal Tolet) is sin, for which
it is inflicted: Materialis causa proxima. Tolet. instr. sacerd. l. 1. c. 44.
Caietan. verb. sulpensio. Nauar. in sum. c. 27. nu. 159.
for none may be suspended without sin. His words are: Non enim absque
peccato quis suspendi potest. Cap. Satis peruersum. d. 58. And this sin (says
he) most commonly is mortal. Potest autem pro veniali aliqua suspensio imponi,
vt dicit Caietanus. Dummodo tamen sit lenis suspensio, sicut and culpa. Yet for
a venial sin some suspension may be imposed, so for all that the suspension
be light, as the fault is light. Argum. text* in l. respiciendum. in prim. ff.
de poen.

If none ought to be suspended grievously but for some grievous sin, then I
trust it is untruly given forth, that his Holiness has inflicted so severe a
punishment on such Priests as have taken the Oath, because it has not yet been
proved by any to have been a deadly, yea or venial sin in them. And then
Ecclesia non debet praesumere de aliquo peccatum donee probetur: as Saint
Thomas says. Neither can they after due search and examination of their own
consciences, accuse themselves to have committed any sin at all in so doing,
but rather discharged their duties, as good subjects and good Catholics
ought: and have not denied by taking it any one point or Iota of faith at all:
nor disobeyed his Holiness Breues of contempt, which makes a sin; but upon
well grounded reasons, and authorities of good writers, have refused (as
lawfully they might) to obey them.

Beside, When as the end for which the pain of suspension or loss of faculties
is inflicted, is the utility of souls, as Cardinal Tolet affirms: Finis
suspensionis est idem, Tolet. instr. sac. l. 1. c. 44. in fine.
qui and excommunicationis; Ecclesia enim animarum vtilitatem intendit, quando
corrigit and castigat. The end of suspension (says he) is the same as is of
excommunication; for the Church intends the utility of souls, when she
corrects and chastises: I cannot be induced to believe that his Sanctity,
(who in all weighty affairs, as this is, uses the assent of his Senate of
Cardinals) will so rigorously proceed with Priests, that have always lived,
and do desire nothing more in this world, then to continue and end their days
in that faith they have hitherto professed, and in the fear of God. Who
knows not that often times necessity drives men to do that which they never
thought? Durum telum necessitas. And now lately some Priests, upon these
reports given forth of having no faculties, have in such sort felt the
alienation of Catholics, and the withdrawing their charity from them, (for
on the eight of this month, for an addition to our afflictions, it was written
unto us by him that has had the distribution of the common alms many years,
that from henceforth you may seek to be relieved elsewhere, for, for my part
I find I shall not be able to help you any more hereafter) as if necessity
could have shaken them, they might have, Psa. 72.
not only said with David, Pene moti sunt pedes mei, My feet were almost
moved, but had been moved indeed.

Great reason we might think there was for us to expect that his Holiness
would, considering this poverty of Catholics of England to relieve, and the
multitude of prisoners to be relieved, knowing we are such Priests as were made
ex indulto Apostolico, without title of benefice, or patrimony, rather have
taken some order according to the Council of Trent, to have been succored and
relieved in prisons, then to expose such to famine, by taking from the^ the
only means some of them had to uphold and maintain their unpleasant life. Yet
if it be true that is reported, and that it is the Popes pleasure we must
suffer more, and sharper showers of calamities, and that orderly courses are
not in this our case to be kept with us, let us with patience comfort our
selves in our Lord, and say with Saint Paul: Benedictus Deus and Pater Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, Deus totius co^solationis, qui consolatur nos in omni
tribulatione nostra. God be blessed and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;
who comfort us in all our tribulation. And do wish that these our
afflictions may be cautions to all our countrymen to consider well the sequel
of things and times, before they make themselves Priests beyond the seas, lest
the like fall to them as to us.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Preface A 2. line 8 read overmuch. page 24. line 4. read, Emanuel. p. 30.
1.12. read pa. 24. Pa. 34. l. 5. pro defensione. Ibidem l. 15. occupandam. p.
42. l. 26. possunt. p. 56. l. 11. read can not get it. p. 70. l. 10. wants
in the margent. Praefat. mon. Regis seren. p. 62. Lat. p. 71. l. 27. says he,
is superfluous. p. 73. l. 26. adding, read, doing. p. 81. l. 35. son
seruitore. ibid, schiauo. p. 86. l. 13. hundred, is superfluous. p. 65. l. 26.
put out, only in temporals. Ibidem. l. 27. read, in spirituals in the Church,
and in the patrimony of the Church only in tempotals. p. 116. l. 22. of, read
or opinion. p. 125. l. 14. or, read of preiudicating. p. 126. l. 25. and
Christ himself, read, and the same Prophet prefiguring Christ himself, after
commanded. p. 136. l. 27. read, a work has been wrought. p. 137. l. 12. of,
read from all. Ibid. has been wrought. Ibid. l. 17. read, as when our. p.
138. l. 31. shall, read, will p. 168. l. 11. Roman, read, Romans.


