Domus ordinata.

A FUNERAL SERMON, Preached in the City of Bristoll, the five and twentieth
day of June, 1618. at the burial of his kinswoman, Mistress Needs, wife to
Mr. Arthur Needs, and sister to Mr. Robert Rogers of Bristoll.

By John Warren, Minister of Gods word at Much-Clacton in Essex.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's device of Nicholas Oaks

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by John Harison,
dwelling in Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Unicorn. 1618.

To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord, Richard, Lord Dacres of the South:
grace and peace.
RIght Honorable, That which unwilling I was to offer unto the view of the
world, until it was wrested from me, by the earnest desires of my good
friends, am I now willing to send forth as a remembrance of my dutiful
affection to you. Thus I satisfy their desires in publishing this Sermon: and
mine own, in dedicating the same unto your Lordship. For howsoever distance of
place is large between us, yet neither is my affection to your Lordship, so
long since begun, now diminished: neither have I found your Lordship
unmindful of me, whom you have prosecuted with good favors. It may be I
shall be condemned for sending to one in the prime of his age, a discourse of
death. But this well perused will make you die not the sooner, but the happier.
Old age is already come to death: this Sermon teaches how to meet with death
before it comes. The same spirit of God which said, Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: does know that it is fit in
young years also to remember our end. Oh that they were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29
then they would understand this, they would consider their latter end: was the
wish of God for the Israelites. It is the way to be wise, to number our days.
Psalm. 90.12
Amongst the Nobles of Egypt whiles they banquited, was carried the picture of
death, and these words spoken: Look upon this, Herodot. in Enterpe.
and so eat and rejoice, as that you remember your self shall once be such.
The train of birds guides their flight: and the remembrance of our ends may
direct our life. Even in young years then, let this book be as Philip of
Macedon his boy, saying, Memento Philippe, quod homo es, Remember, you are
mortal. And my earnest prayer is, that as it may be accepted as a token of my
dutiful respect to your Lordship, and to your honorable Lady, so it may be
some little furtherance, that you both may still and still live honorably, and
in a good age die Christianly: All which your good beginnings do largely
promise. Much-Clacton. July the 26. 1618.

Your Lordships in all duty to be commanded, John Warren.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is not for any exellencie, which I esteeeme to be in this my work, that I
thus publishit. Such has been the respect which I have always borne unto my
loving and kind Uncle Mr. Matthew Warren, at this time one of the Sheriffs of
Bristoll: and such have the courtesies been which I found at his hands, at the
hands of my cosen Mr. Robert Rogers, brother to this disceased Gentlewoman, at
the hands of both their wives, and also of many citizens in that famous City:
that I cannot to satisfy them in divulging this, which by no small number of
them, with more then ordinary importunity has been requested. They earnestly
protested to have received much fruit at the hearing. That it may now bring
forth fruit in thee (Reader,) let it be in thy hands, as a Deaths head, to
remember thy end: take it as the clock strikes, as thou think upon thy
worldly store, and as thou remembrest thy conscience; apply it line by line:
and then as David stood triumphing with the head of dead Goliath in his hand: so
when the time of thy dissolution comes, (although others at the like time,
are either senseless, or else yell and houle; thou shall dye as joyfully, as
if death had no venom; crying out triumphantly in the midst of the pangs of
death, 1. Cor. 15
O death where is thy sting? When the servants in the city of Tire, had slain
their Lords and Masters, they agreed to choose him amongst them to be king, who
should first espy the Sun rising the next morning: Justin. lib. 18.
when they were all assembled to this purpose, whiles all the rest stood with
their faces looking into the East, only Strato looked upon the high mountains
westward: for doing whereof although he were at the first derided, yet when by
this means he first destroyed the reflection of the Sunbeams, then was this
face of his judged, not to be Seruilis ingenij ratio, from a speculation of a
servile brain, but of some more noble spirit. Malac. 4.
So whiles some look for Christ the Sun of righteousness, in the
wilderness, some in the markets, some in other places, if you look
religiously to the Sunsetting of your life, toward your death, it may be a
means for you with great joy, first, to discern the Sun of righteousness
favorably shining upon you. These things, if thou have any furtherance to
obtain by this samll work; thou will first thank God for his gifts, next
those citizens of Bristoll, who were the means that it came to thy view: and
lastly, thou will pray for me, that the dew of heaven may descend upon my
labors to thy further good, and in this hope I commend thee to God, and this
small work to thy good usage.

Thine in Christ: John Warren.

The Preface before the reading of the Text.
THat the name of the just might be had in remembrance, it is the laudable
custom of our Church, at funeral meetings to recite the virtues of the
deceased, as the widows showed the coats and garments which Dorcas made
whiles she was with them: Act. 9.89.
yet are there two things which will make me very sparing at this time, in the
performance of this duty: first, least our consanguinity, and nearenesse in
blood and kindred should make any think I speak more out of partiality, then
out of judgment. Secondly, because how near soever I was unto her in blood,
yet in respect of conversation, I was a stranger. Yet thus much may I truly
say, that she is generally reported to have been toward her neighbors full
of courtesy, toward her husband full of such love as himself witnessed to me,
that although they lived together many years, she never sought for any thing
toward him, but love and peace toward God, religious: insomuch, that I
visiting her but the day before her death, when she could scarsely speak to
man, she was very desirous to speak unto God by prayer: and comforted
herself, saying, I know that he who was the God of Daniel, is my God: not
doubting but the same God will deliver her from all pains and sorrows: which
we all with joy remembering, leave her in the hands of God, and that we may
thither also come at the last, let us hear what the spirit says for us.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
ESA. 38.1. Put thy house in order, for thou shall die and not live.
Sickness (a Sergeant belonging to the Mayrolty of death,) had seized upon the
body of King Hezechiah, to urge him to pay Nature her debt. And whiles he was
under this arrest, the Prophet Esaias was sent unto him from God, to preach that
in his ears, that sickness preached in every part of his body, to wit, that
he should now presently die: and withal to give him this admonition to
prepare himself for death, Put thy house in order, for thou shall die and not
live.

In which words there are these two parts to be observed: first, an
exhortation, Put thy house in order: secondly, a commination or menacing, for
thou shall die and not live. But because the force of the exhortation depends
upon the commination, and as the manners of men are now a days, few prepare
themselves for death, until they begin to have some feeling of it: therefore
in the handling of these parts, the first shall be last, and the last shall be
first, and I will first speak of the commination, and secondly of the
exhortation.

1. Thou shall die, and not live.
Breui moriturus es, and non viues, says Tremelius, Thou shall speedily die,
and not live long; not denying but he should live in the next world, but
doubling the sense in variety of words, to express the certainty of his
message, Thou shall speedily die, and not live here any longer time.

In this commination, I observe three things for our admonition, first,
something common to Hezekiah with us; secondly, there are here somethings
peculiar to Hezekiah, not common to us; thirdly, we must consider the event of
this prediction.

First, Hezekiah and to all flesh, and is therefore called the way of all flesh
or of all the world. Ioshu. 23.14. that is, death. For what man lives, and
shall not see death? Psalm. 89.48. statutum est hominibus, etc. It is appointed
to men, that they shall once die: Heb. 9.27. there is a statute law enacted in
heaven for it, which cannot be disanulled. We read in the fifth of Genesis, of
many men that lived many hundreds of years, yet none of them but dyed at the
last. At the command of Joshua, the Sun stood still for a while in Gibea and
the Moon in the valley of Aialon, yet not for ever, but they found their going
down: so may some man's life stand for a while, longer then others, but yet at
the last death catches them. To Princes and Magistrates God speaks, I said
ye are Gods, but ye shall die like men: Psalm. 82. The life of man being
preserved by a calidum humidum, never yet could the searchers of nature find
means to preserve it always. When any malefactor is condemned to death and
speedy execution, the Magistrate may pardon him, and give him his life to
warrant him against the executioner, but not against death: yea when death
comes to the Magistrate himself, he cannot repriue himself, dye he must.
Glass is brittle and cannot last long, it is subject to so many knockes: yet
if it be set in some safe place from knockes, it may endure many ages. It is
not so with man, who though he escape all outward violence, yet is borne with
sin and consequently with corruption to breed his death, one Henoch, one
Helias, might be translated, that they should not see death, so to confirm
our hope of the resurrection by the mighty power of God: but never any more.
Death is gone over all men. Romans 5. I need not longer to amplify this point:
ye are not now as Adam and Abel once were, whiles they never saw a man to
die; every Churchyard, every age, every sickness, preaches this mortallity:
and ye will also say this thing we all acknowledge. But yet I wish we did so
acknowledge it, as that we would lay it to our hearts. We scarcely live as if
we should die, no not when we follow others to the grave. In a good pasture
where many fat oxen are, the Butcher enters and fetches away one and kills
it: next day he fetches another, and still those which he leaves behind,
feed and fat themselves until they are fetched to the slaughter: not
considering either what is become of their fellows, or shall be of
themselves. So when death comes amongst a multitude of us, here taking one,
and there another, being presently ready to fetch us we pamper up our selves
without ceasing till death take us. Did we consider our own ends, we would
alter this course, the hand writing upon the wall made Baltasar tremble in
every joint, Daniel the fifth. Oh let the handwriting of God whereby the number
of our days is determined make us so to live, as that we remember we shall
not always live here, for this sentence is passed on us, ye shall die, and
not live.

Secondly, Hezekiah, that there are three things peculier to Hezekiah: whereof
we are destitute. 1. That herein he was foretold of the time of his death, for
so the words import: thou shall presently die. But to you I can say, you shall
die, but when I cannot say, no not when Physicians have given you over unto
death. Man knows not his time, Eccles. 9. we know the Sun shall set in the
evening, and we perceive how, and when: we can say, now the Sun is four
hours high, or two hours, or one hour high: we cannot say so of our life:
but when we think it is many hours, it may presently cease; when we think
the Sun of our life is ready to set, it may have far to run. To him that
dreamed of many years, it was said, Thou fool, this night shall they fetch
away thy soul, Luke 12. It is not for you to know the times and seasons,
which the Father has kept in his own power (said our Savior to his
Disciples, in the first of the Acts.) It is not for you; and for our good: If
he that has now lived threescore years, should from his infancy be assured
that he should have lived so long, Oh how secure would he have been in his
sins, whom yet this uncertainty of the time of his death could not awake?
Vtiliter voluit Deus latere illum diem, vt semper paratum sit cer, ad
expectandum quod esse venturu^ sit et quando venturu^ sit nescit, said S.
Austen of the day of judgment. So I, of the day of death: It was for our
profit, that God would not have us to know that day, to the intent, that every
day we should prepare for that which may come upon us any day, and we are sure
shall come upon us one day, which we know not. Oh be careful this day, which
may be thy last, thrice happy is that servant, whom his Master when he comes
shall find well doing. Let your loins be girded about, and your selves like
unto men that wait for their Master, when he shall return from the wedding,
Luke 12.35. All we can say unto you is, your Master will come, but when, we
know not. When ye shall die, whether to day, or to morrow, whether this month
or next, whether this year or next, we cannot tell; but this we are sure of,
die ye shall, and not live.

2. In these words it was foretold to Hezekiah, in what place he should die:
for, so much they intend, thou shall presently in this place, without time to
change often thy place, in this place thou shall die. As for us, we know where
we were borne, but in what place we shall die, until we die we know not:
whether in the shop, or in the chamber, or in the field, or in the Church, or
in a journey; no place so good, as death will not enter, none so vile a place,
as will disdain. Moses had appointed some cities of refuge, and we have had
sanctuaries and privileged places for men oppressed: were there any place in
this world a sanctuary where death might not enter, I doubt not but it would be
thronged unto: but there is no place freed here from death, pallida mors aequo
pulsat pede pauperu^ tabernas, regumque turres, country cottages and Kings
courts feel death alike. The Sun is introduced in the Poets speaking thus of it
self, Omnia qui video, per quem videt omnia mundus: I see all places and
things, and by me are all things and places seen, the Wiseman says, The sun
that shines looks upon all things, Eccleasticus 42.16. yet are there some
places from whence the light of the sun may be kept; so is there not any place
from whence death may be kept. look for it in every place: In omni loco te
mors expectat, tu illam omni loco expecta: it may be, it runs by thy horse
side as thou ridest, to take thee down, it may be it walks into the fields,
to make thee for ever seeing thy home again. In any case take heed of going
into any places of sin and wickedness; it may be death stands there, even
there to take thee to thy eternal shame. For as for the place of thy death we
cannot tell thee: all I can say, is only this, thou shall die and not live.

3. Herein is another thing wherein we differ from Hezekiah, he is foretold
the disease he shall die of: for so the words importe, thou shall not recover
of this sickness: as for us we know not the disease shall work our death,
until our end: no not when we are subject to some grievous disease, for some
other means may prevent it. Vnus nascendi modus, moriendi mill; there is but
one way for us all to be born into the world, but a thousand several ways to
die, as a broken ship receives in water at a thousand places, so we leake,
and take in death in every part of our body. Mary Magdalen had seven devils,
one man had one, and another had a legion: one man has one disease, another
has seven, another has a whole legion of diseases to bring him to his end.
Him that escapes from the sword of Hazael, shall Iehuslay, and him that
escapes from the sword of Iehu, shall Elishah slay, 1. King. 19. so him that
escapes one means of death, another will slay. Pharaoh escapes the fire, and
perishes in the Sea, Sodom is free from the Sea, and is consumed with fire,
Corah auoideth the fire, and the earth deuoureth him, Herod is free from all
these, and the worms eat him, Ioh his children eschew all these, and die by
the fall of a house, the houses of the Samaritans stand, and they perish with
famine, the Shunamites child is free from these, and he cries out, Oh my
head, my head, Antiochus his head is well, and he complayneth, Oh my bowels,
my bowels, Asa his bowels are well, and he exclaimeth, Oh my feet, my feet; and
what every one of us shall complain of, at our last and sorest sickness, it
is to us vacertaine. Only thrice happy is that person, who though he be
uncertain with what disease his body shall be distempered, at the time of his
death, shall so look to himself, as that he may be assured that his soul shall
not waver, nor be distuned from God. Thus are we unlike to Hezekiah, in this
prediction, Thou shall die and not live.

It may be some man here may object, that many of the heathen men have
beeneforewarned of the time of their death, as also of the place: as was
Alexander of Macedonia, told that Babylon should be fatal to him. Quintus
Cart.
It may be some will object what Saint Paul said, I know ye shall see my face
no more, Act. 20.25. It may be they will likewise object what was told unto
Saul at the house of the witch at Endor, 1. Sam. 28.19. And from these things
some will think, that either by the stars, or some other natural courses, a
man may know both the time and place of his death long before. But first, as
for heathen men, who can deny but God by extrtordinary means revealed further
things to them, as to Pharaoh, and Nabuchadonosor, in their dreams, and might
by some extraordinary means let some of them know these thigns we speak of.
Secondly, to think that such particular things may be known by the stars,
is a mere vanity, for though I deny not but that they may have some power over
the sensual inclination, yet neither so much as that man is subject thereto
upon necessity, according to the old saying in the Schools, Astra inclinant,
Dr. Andre. epist. Cic estre^s. ad M. W. librum. respons. pa. 108.
non necessitant: neither yet in casual actions, so far as to direct
particular iournies, whereon these things depend, as Saint Austin shows by
his instance, Aug. de ciuit. Dei. li. 5 ca. 2 Tacit. Annal. li. 6. ca. 5.
which for breuities sake I do but name: and as for the famous prediction of
Trasullus unto Tiberius, (which is so much admired by Tacitus, as also by
Xiphiline: Xiphilin. li. 54. in Aug. Caesar. Lips. monit and exempl. polit. li.
1. ca. 5 Basil. in hexem. homil. 1.
) Lipsius has well observed that it might well be done, not by Astronomy, but
by chance. So might it be to Alexander, and others, that the place of their
death by chance is thus foretold: for if any man shall think to use the
stars to such end, I must for this time briefly bonclude with Basil,
Astrologia iudiciaria, negotiosissima vanitas, This judicious Astrology, is a
most busy vanity. As for that of Saint Paul, it was extraordinary, as was his
other revelations. But for Saul his doings by the witch at Endor, I say no more
at this time, but that if it were not an imposture and spoken by chance, yet
surely it was then extraordinary. So, that still by any natural means we are
not assured until our death, either of the time, place, or means of our
death, only this we are sure of, we shall die, and not live.

Now as we have propounded, Hezekiah is here told from God, when, where, and
how he shall die: does it so come to pass? dies he presently of this
sickness, and in this place? we find it otherwise. For in the third verse of
this chapter, presently upon this message, Hezekiah turned his face unto the
wall, and prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord answers in the fifth verse, I
have heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears, behold I will add to thy days
fifteen years. How will he add to his days? The days of man are
determined, thou have appointed him bounds which he cannot pass, Job. 14.
Shall Hezekiah then live fifteen years longer then God had determined? God
forbid: but God will add to the time past of his life fifteen years, yet to
come.

It may be, that the time past of his life, was the longest time that he could
have lived according to the course of nature. A candle burns so long as the
tallow thereof does endure, when the tallow is consumed then it goes out: yet
if to the last wicke of the candle you put a little oil, it will burn a
little longer then otherwise it would: So the life of man endures as long as
that calidum humidum, or moist heat, is duly preserved in the body of man; but
when that moist heat, or hot moisture is corrupted wholly, then is the life of
man naturally extinguished, as it may be, it was in Hezekiah; then God adds
olem potentiae, the oil of his power to prolonge his life, fifteen years
beyond the natural period of his time.

But yet this question remains unsatisfied concerning the event of this
prediction. God foretold to Hezekiah, that he should speedily die in this
place, of this disease. Hezekiah now has his life prolonged for fifteen
years. How is God true then in the prediction? or how does God alter his
determinations? For the answering whereof: true it is which God himself does
say, I am God, and I am not changed, Malak. 3.6. For he is not as man that he
should repent, 1. Sam. 15.29. But briefly to satisfy this perplexed question,
Gregory the great, has an excellent speech, Nouit Deus mutare sententiam, sed
nunquam nouit mutare decretum, God knows how to change his sentence, but not
his decree. The decree of God was that Hezekiah by praying should obtain the
continuance of his life, for fifteen years. To make Hezekiah fall to his
prayers, God sends the Prophet with this menacing message; yet as in all
menaces of God, is there a secret exception: unless Hezekiah earnestly pray.
So that there was an exception to be understood, although not expressed. Ye
may see the dealing of God with King Abimelech: God threatened him because he
had taken from Abraham his wife: Behold, thou art but dead, Genesis 20. Ye see
the sentence in show is resolute: yet was there a secret condition to be
understood, for you shall find it expressed in the seventh verse of the same
chapter thus, If thou deliver her not again, thou shall die the death. Thus
must we understand the message sent to Nineveh, yet forty days, and Nineveh
shall be destroyed, Iona. 3. understand, sinful Nineveh shall be destroyed:
Nineveh shall be destroyed if it do not repent, but the sins of Nineveh, shall be
forgiven if it do repent. So although God himself in thine own conscience tell
thee, that for thy horrible sins, thou shall be eternally tormented: yet if
thou shall seriously repent, God for Christ his sake will change his sentence,
that so he may bring to pass his decree of saving thee. And thus much shall
suffice to have spoken of the first part of my text, I come now to the second,
the exhortation.

2. Put thy house in order.
Seeing God has sent to Hezekiah the message of death, 1. There must be a
preparation for death.
he sends also unto him the advice to prepare himself for death. An
admonition necessary for us all. Plerique inter mortis metum, and vitae
tormenta miseri fluctuant; vt viuere nolint, and mori nesciunt, says Seneca;
Many miserable men waver between the sorrows of life, and the fear of death:
to live they are unwilling, yet how to die they know not. We undertake no very
long journey, without long preparation of things necessary: death is our
longest journey, and in that voyage the soul will need much preparation a
forehand. No great and dangerous war is undertaken without great and long
preparation of arms and vittailes. In death there is a sorer conflict. David
lamenting Abner, said, Died Abner as a fool dies? 2. Sam. 3.33. And many
notable men die as fools, because they prepare not themselves for death. You
may not come to receive Christ in the blessed Sacrament of the Lords supper,
without good preparation: and can ye think that ye shall be admitted to the
presence of the glory of Jesus Christ, to the multitude of Angels, to the
innumerable society of the blessed Saints, without due preparing of your
selves against the time of death, the time of your entrance?

2. There must be then a preparation against death: but how? surely, Order is
the best preparation. In the general Chaos of all things, there was confusion:
But to bring all things to perfection, God took order for Order, and of all
things since, Ordinatione tua perseuerant, They continue even to this day by
thy ordinances, said David to God, Psalm. 119.91. The Church of God, is acies
ordinata, as an army with banners, Cant. 6.9. In the Church of God, it is Saint
Paul his rule, Let all things be done honestly, and in order, 1. Cor. 14.40.
(which that it may be observed, he says) other things will I set in order
when I come, 1. Cor. 11.34. For, Order conserueth all things, confusion is but
disorder. To prepare a man therefore against death, he must set all things in
order: as Jacob set all things carefully in order, when he was to meet his
brother Esau, Genesis 32. And though Job say, that in the shadow of death, is no
order, Job. 10.22. yet if before death, all things be set in order, all will
be comfortable; therefore to prevent the miseries of death says Esaias, to
Hezekiah, Put thy house in order.

3. Not a corner of thy field, or a part of thy house, but put thy house in
order. I and my house will serve the Lord, said Joshua, Ioshu. 24.15. That
thou may be in order, Put thy house in order. But what house? or how to be
put in order? Men in their dwelling houses furnish some chief rooms, and the
other rooms will need the less decking. There be three especial rooms in
this house of man, which being put in order, the whole house of man's life will
be the better ordered. 1. The clock-house. 2. The storehouse. 3. The
closset-house.

First, the clock-house, whereby the time of man is ordered: for if the time
be not observed, but that the clock give an uncertain sound, how then shall
business be disposed? this made the Psalmist thus to petition unto God, Teach
us, O Lord, so to number our days, as that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom, Psalm. 90.12. This numbering of our days, is the well ordering of the
clock-house: and that they may be well numbered, we must take heed of
multiplication, that we be not like unto that rich man, Luke. 12. who dreamed
of many years, when he had not one night to live. We must rather number them
by substraction first, and then by division. First, by substraction set down
all the time ye have lived, suppose thou art forty or fifty years old, out of
those years first substarct the time spent in sleeping, and out of forty
years, ten will be the least that can be taken; Humanae vitae publicanus
somnus, sleep takes a large tole out of the life of man: then substract the
time spent in idleness, Magna pars vitae nobis perit dum nihil agimus, said
Seneca, out of the other thirty years will be deducted a very great portion:
thirdly, substract the time spent in things unprofitable, which might as well
have been left undone as done, and this alone will cut off the very greatest
part of many men's lives: for multo maxima pars vitae dum invtilia agimus: far
greatest part of life perishes, while we do those things which are
unprofitable. And last of all, deduct the time spent in sinful actions,
remembering that The just man falls senen times a day, Pro. 24.16. let all
these be deducted, and then if ye will judge what remains of all the time
of our life to prayer, and meditation, and other holy excercises, ye shall
find a poor pittance in most of us.

Then number we our days again by division, and that in such order, as
Merchants divide their debts, some desperate, some doubtful, some few perhaps
certain: your days are your debts, for which God will call you to account.
The days past, not well spent, are desperate debts, the future days are
altogether uncertain: and therefore the Psalmist makes but a suppose of it,
Snppose a man live fourscore years, etc. Psalm. 90. The present time is only
certain, and to be relied upon. Maximum impedimentum boni est, quod dependit a
crastino, the greatest impediment of being good, is the deferring of it until
to morrow; the heathen man would have us think, every day to be our last day:
the Scripture wills us to pray but for panem quotidianum, our daily bread,
and wishes us, to day if we will hear his voice, Heb. 3.7. behold now is
the acceptable time, behold now is the day of salvation. 2. Cor. 6.2. Many
poor souls now lie in endless torments, which made not good use of the
present time, but deferred their amendment for a time, of which they were
disappointed by death. Thus theu if we number our days first by substraction,
secondly, by division: we put our clock-house or the house of our time in order.

The next house to be put in order, is the storehouse, or the house of our
wealth and worldly estate: this no dying man carries with him out of this
world. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither
again, said Job, in the second chapter of Job. Peter took a fish in the Sea
with money in the mouth of it: we come not out of our mothers womb with money
in our mouths, neither do we carry our wealth with us. Wealth may accompany
us to the grave, afterward it serves for no use to us: and therefore to
prepare us for death, this our storehouse must be put in order; that from
thence may arise no confusion when we leave it. Of dying Abraham it is said,
Abraham gave all his goods to Isaac; And unto the sons of the concubines
which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, Genesis 25.5.6. Thus dying Jacob disposed
of his blessings, Genesis 49. I know that Heliogabalus wished to be heir to
himself, and to see the ending and dying of all things with his own person.
And I make no question, but many a miserable earthworme grieueth infinitely to
leave his wealth, and that he cannot still live always to be his own heir.
But as trauailers that walk a journey on foot, use their staves in their hands
while they walk, but when they come home they set them behind the door, or
in some corner: so is man to use the staff of bread, and of his wealth, during
the time he walks in this world, and when he is by death entering into his
long home, he is to order it in such a convenient place, that it may stand fit
for others, who shall need it. The storehouse then of our worldly estate must
be put in order against death: For first, no man can always keep it:
secondly, others shall need it: and thirdly, unless it be put in order,
discord and confusion ensues amongst the living.

But now for the manner how this storehouse should be put in order: that he
who makes his will may observe the will of God, that so the testament of man
may agree with the testament of God, these things following must be observed.
First, that a man leave not the grievous curse of God upon his storehouse, and
them to whom he shall leave it, let a man be sure, that if he have ill
gotten goods, he restore them again to the owners, or their heirs, as Zacheus
did, Luke 18. If I have deceived any man by forged cauillation, I restore unto
him four fold. This duty, as of all others it is most neglected, so is there
none more necessary, unless a man carry with him an anathema from God out of
this world, and leave to the rest of his goods rottenness and corruption.
Consider why God threateneth the Israelites so sorely, The spoil of the poor
is in your houses, Esaias. 3.14 mark what the Prophet Habakkuk says, The stone
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it:
Woe unto him that builds a town with blood, and erecteth a city with
iniquity, Hab. 2.11.12. observe what Saint James says, Behold the hyre of the
laborers which have reaped your fields (which is of you kept back by fraud)
cries and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of
the Lord of hoasts, Iam. 5.4. What a lamentable case is here to be observed;
thou lie sick upon thy bed, every hour expecting to be carried unto the
tribunal of God: thou through hope and fear cryest unto God for mercy. In the
mean time, in every corner of thy house, is one thing or other, yea perhaps
thy very bed thou lie upon, gotten by injustice and oppression, all crying
unto God for vengeance against thee and thine heir: and that with a louder
note, then thy sick heart or voice is able to reach unto. Oh remember Samuel,
how he would clear himself with all care, Whose ox have I taken? or whose
ass have I taken? 1. Sam. 12, 13. remember what Abraham said to the King of
Sodom, that he would not take of his so much as a shoe latchet, least thou
should say, I have made Abraham rich, Genesis 14.23.

Secondly, to order this storehouse, whosoever will be helped by God in
sickness, and in time of need, must be open handed to the poor: to such is
God a help in sickness, mark the Psalmist, Blessed is he that considers the
poor and needr, Psalm. 41.1. How is he blessed? The Lord shall visit him
when he lies sick upon his bed, in the third verse of the same Psalm. When
one lies sick upon his bed, it is a comfort to be visited by his friends:
yet of some may it be said, as Job said to his friends: Miserable comforters
are ye, and Physicians of no value, Job. 16.2. one comes and talks of your
old mad prancks with a mad mind, another comes, and he is full of
contention with you; a third comes, and he is all for the world with you; a
fourth comes, and he is all in the passion of those to whom Saint Paul says,
What do ye weeping and breaking my heart? Act. 21.13. all miserable
comforters, but when God comes to visit thee in thy sickness: Oh the grace
and peace that he shall speak unto thy soul, never man spoke as he will
speak. Put thy storehouse then in order, so as they that are in need, may by
thee be remembered, and God will remember thee, and visit thee in time of
need. The spaniell that comes to some deep or large ditch or river, over
which he cannot get unless he swim, will use the benefit of the water to
swim over; but as soon as he has passed to the dry shore, he will shake off
the superfluous water, and so moysten the dry ground. You have a great Sea of
this world to pass over, when you come from your mothers womb, ere you come
to your grave: you use your wealth as the water, by help whereof you may
swim over, when you are upon the shore, Oh shake off from your abundance
that which may refresh the weary and needy soul: Make you friends with the
riches of iniquity, that when ye shall want, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9.

Thirdly, in disposing of the other part of the storehouse, to give all to
strangers, and not to wife and children, or the nearest in blood of the same
family, seems to be contrary to the law of nature, and the rule of Saint
Paul, If there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them of
his household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel, 1. Tim.
5.8. Abraham gave all his goods that he had to Isaac, to the sons of his
concubines he gave gifts. Genesis 25.5.6. In the family, then there is respect to
be had, who is to have more, who less. And by the speech of old Jacob to his
eldest son Ruben, it seems to be grounded upon the law of nature, that the
eldest son should be most regarded: Ruben, mine eldest son, thou art my
might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of my dignity, and the
excellency of my power, Genesis 49.3. although for some especial causes it has
otherways come to pass, as that Ephraim is preferred before Manasses, Genesis
48. and the elder shall serve the younger, Romans 9. and as for that lex salica,
whereby women are debarred from inheriting, it seems contrary to the course
which God took for the daughters of Zelophehad, Number. 27.7. I will not say more
but this, that it seems unreasonable to leave one amongst many children a
coach to ride in, and the other scarcely a pair of shoes to walk with: one
all, and the other none: and ungodly it is to leave all well without an earnest
prayer of the blessing of God upon all. Thus must the storehouse be set in
order.

3. And now I come to the closset-house, to show how that must be put in
order: and by this closset-house, I mean the close house of a man's soul and
conscience: close as yet from the world, but to God only open and to a man's
self. And indeed although a man put all the rest in order, if he do not put
this house in order; how much better is he then Achitophel? of whom the
Scripture says, that he put his household in order, and hanged himself, 2.
Sam. 17.23. for such a man orders his wealth, and utterly overthrows
himself. How this more private closset-house must be set in order, if we
well consider, we find that as the souls internal operations, are either in
knowledge, or in the more particular working of the affections and of the will;
so the means to put the house of the soul in order against death, are either
in meditation, or in action. And first in meditation, there must be diverse
things ordered: by keeping the soul in often meditating upon these three
things; first, to meditate of death: secondly, of this life: and thirdly, of
the great change which will happen to diverse men presently after death.

First by meditation of death, Oh death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee
to a man that lives at rest in his possessions, Ecclesiast. 41.1. better
thoughts for him, he judges to be the remembrance of his neighbors misery,
his own worldly felicity, his full bags, his great storehouse of costly
buildings: Is not this great Babell which I have built, Daniel. 4.27. and thus,
they spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they go down to the grave,
Job. 21.13. I know that the Emperor Otho did judge it to be the part of a
cowardly and weak mind, often to speak and think of death. But our blessed
Savior (who is far greater then the greatest of the sons of men) did very
many times both think and speak of his death, to his disciples: to leave us
an example, that whosoever will prepare himself for death, must think of it
many times in his life. But what should a man think of death? That a man may
well meditate of death, so as he may thereby put the house of his soul in
order for death, there are three things to be meditated on.

First, let a man remember what death is to all men by nature: and there he
shall find that death never came into the world but by sin: By sin came
death, 1. Cor. 15.21.
The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. and by that means entering with an
enemy, it self also is an enemy to the nature of man: so is it called by the
Apostle, The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death. 1. Cor. 15.26. Life
of it self is a great blessing of God to every living thing: and no living
creature, but will strive to preserve the life of it self, and to shun
death: the poor worm, or bird, tam viuit vita quam Angelos, said Saint
Austin, and is desirous to preserve its life, as the Angels would preserve
theirs. And that they may do so, God has given to every living creature some
pleasure or luster whiles they live; and ordered things so, that few or no
living creatures dye without pangs; yea even very herbs and trees when they
die, lose their luster and beauty, every living creature therefore, even from
the highest Angel, to the meanest plant, either by reason, sense, or natural
instinct, shunneth death as an enemy. Yet this enemy which when it comes
brings pangs, when it is come, spoyleth the natural luster in all things,
must we meditate to yield our selves, Put the house of thy soul in order,
with this meditation.

Secondly, meditate what death is to evil men; beasts die, and after the few
pangs of death, they feel no more: a wicked man dies, and when he is here
dead, yet he is not all dead: but with an endless lingering death is always
dying in endless torments, so that he cannot be altogether dead: the soul
perishes, Non it a, vt non sit, sed vt male sit: and essentialiter viuere, non
amittit, sed beat viuere perdit, said Gregory, in the fourth of his morrals;
The soul perishes not so that it dies, but so that it lives most miserably,
if it felt no more after this death, there would be an end of pains: but
after this bodily death, by reason of their pains, men shall seek death, and
shall not find it, and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them,
Revel. 9.6. Here in some sore sickness, great losses, heavy crosses, men wish
for death, what are all the troubles of this life, to those after bodily death?
we may well here take up the words of the heathen man, who said that death
was (...) of all fearful things the most fearful. How may a guilty man who
has spent his days in iollitie, at the hour of, his death cry to his
trembling soul, as the Emperor Adrian did, Animula, vagula, blandula, Hospes
comesque corporis, Quo nunc abibis in loco, Pallida, rigida, nudula, Nec vt
soles, dabis iocos? Oh my wandering, flattering, little soul, the guest and
companion of my body, into what places art thou now to go, pale, affrighted,
naked, neither as thou were wont shall thou henceforth make me merry? By this
meditation of death, Put thy house, thy closet-house in order, that thou may
shun this evil in death.

Thirdly, meditate what death is to good men. In the greatest pangs of death,
they feel joy; after death they lose not their luster, but get a far greater
then ever they had: true it is, that even of the Saints Saint Paul says, to
the^ death is an enemy, 1. Cor. 15.26. But such a one, as being now conquered,
serves but for the glory of the conquerers: The natural man shunneth death,
the sanctified man although he stay till death come, yet he desires to be
dissolved, Philip. 1.23. death is to me advantage, Phil. 1.21. Vsurparis ad
laetitiam, matter maeroris, vsurparis ad gloriam, gloriae inimica, vsurparis ad
introitum regni, porta inferni: Bern. in cant. ser. 26. Thou art now used to
mirth, O mother of sorrows: thou serves us to glory, O enemy of glory, thou
helpest our passage to the kingdom, which were the gate of hell: it brings
us to the joyful presence of the Trinity, where all the Angels and blessed
Saints, will joyfully embrace us, after all our labors ended. Oh let this
meditation of this happy estate after death, serve for us to help to put thy
house, thy closset-house in order.

I will be, and have been very brief in these things; the time compels
me. Secondly, That skin for skin, and all that ever a man has, will he
give for his life: Job. 2.4. and therefore it should seem to be a most
matchless thing. God forbid that I should by words or thought debase so
glorious a work of the living God, as life is. Yet what our life in sin has
made life to be, let me speak a little. First, when we consider some in
their wealth, beauty, honor and strength, it appears I must needs say, a
beautiful life: but yet even as it is then, it is but as that mare vitreum,
the Sea of Gods Glass, Revel. 4.6. a Sea full of surges, troubles, waves of
discontent, and enmity; and besides, brittle as glass: whiles riches take them
the wings of an Eagle, and speedily forsake their owners: so to honor,
beauty, strength, the most glorious life therefore is but brittle, and
troublesome. Secondly, consider a man plagued for his offenses, with many
crosses, not one amongst many, but takes up the complaint of Job, crying out,
Wherefore is the light given to him that is in misery? and life unto them that
have heavy hearts? which long for death, and if it come not, they would even
search it more then treasure? Job. 3.20.21. But thirdly, consider a good
Christian, who in his estate outwardly is content and satisfied: he, no doubt,
desires earnestly to serve God sincerely, yet the best are diverse times
overtaken by sin, that they sin, and then repent, and by and by sin
again, and then repent again, and then sin again, and repent again: so
that they are forced by sin creeping on so fast, to cry out, O miserable men
that we are, who shall deliver us from the body of this death, Romans 7.24. Oh
how blessed a thing is it to live but such a life, in such a place, as not
only all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, but all sin from our souls,
where we shall be fure, we shall never sin more. In this life we cannot
but sin. Thus meditating what this life is to all sorts, thou wile be helped
to prepare thy self the more willingly to embrace death, and to put thy house,
thy closet-house in order.

Thirdly, that we may have our souls the better prepared for death, let us
consider the great change which shall happen to diverse men after death: many
which have seemed happy in this life, in the next life shall be most miserable,
many which in this life have seemed contemptible, in the next world should
truly be most glorious: As appears by Lazarus, in this life most miserable,
in the next life most happy: as the Rich man after his costly raiment and
delicious fare in this life, beggeth miserably, and is denied utterly a cup
of water to cool his tongue. Joseph did place Manasseth to the right hand of
Jacob, and Ephraim to his left hand: but Jacob blessed Ephraim with his right
hand, and Manasseth with his left, Genesis 48. So many a one which in this life
seems to be at the right hand of God, by his many external blessings, shall
after death be turned to the left hand of the vengeance of God: and
contrarily, many that seem now by their many calamities, to be at the left
hand of the curse of God, shall there be brought unto the right hand of his
unspeakable glory. There are the prisoners at rest, and hear not the voice of
the oppressor, There are the small and the great, and the servant is free from
his master, Job. 3.18.19. Some few shall be so happy, as both here and there
to be at the right hand of God. Think now what thou art, think what change
will follow and let this meditation help thee, to prepare thy self for death,
to put thy house, thy closethouse in order.

And thus much for those things, which help forward the closset-house to be
well ordered by meditation. Now to those things which help it forward, and
consist in action. And those I will reduce to four heads, of which I will very
briefly speak.

The first is, that whosoever will have the house of his soul prepared against
death, suffer in his soul no such traitors or weapons as may help death
against him, those traitors, those weapons are our sins, The sting of death
is sin, 1. Cor. 15.56. as it appears in many a dying man and woman, dying
with great impatience, not so much because they must die, as that they are
netled with the remembrance of such and such horrible sins, for which as yet
their peace is not made: then they curse the time, not that they die in, but
wherein they ever knew such a man, or such a woman, that hereby it easily
appears where the sting of death lies: and is felt either before death, or
after death: this makes the devil so busy, now and then every day to crowde
one sin or other into our souls and consciences, as if he were now setting
in a staff, now a dagger, now a sword, now a gunne, now one weapon, now
another, which he might have ready in our own souls to wound our selves
withal. If therefore we will order our selves aright, let us look into the
house of our souls, and see what weapons stand which may help the devil and
not us, as all unrepented sins do, and let us cast them out: take out
blasphemy, cursing, oppression, impatience, hypocrisy, fling them from you,
that so you may put your house, your closet house in order, and thrice
miserable are they who give the devil leave every day, to crowd what weapons
of sin he list into their souls.

Secondly, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, Revel. 14.13. All these
dyed in the faith, Heb. 11 13. Dying Jacob out of faith could say, Lord I wait
for thy salvation, Genesis 49. As he that was stung by the fiery serpents, was to
look unto the brazen serpent, and so recover: so he that is stung by sin and
death, must have a living faith to behold Jesus Christ withal, and he shall
be cured, John. 3. Miserable wordlings, when wealth and Physicians fail,
their hope fails: A Christian always gets faith, that thereby Christ may
dwell with him here; that by Christ his sins may be covered, that by the
touch (not of the hemme of Christ his garment) but of Christ himself, all the
bloody issues of his sins may be dried up: that when the eyes of his body
grow dim by approaching death, he may yet by the eyes of faith, see Christ
Iefus at the right hand of the Father, making intercession for him, labor
therefore that thou may be faithful, that so by faith, thy house, thy
closet-house may be put in order.

Thirdly, David prayed against death, saying, What profit is there in my blood,
when I go down to the pit, Psalm. 30.9. I know Jonah prayed earnestly against
it, Io. 3. and so did this good King Hezekiah, of whom we speak. There may be
some secret cause, for the quieting of the conscience after some great sin, or
recovering the glory of God, by the sin of his servant impeached, or some
such like, Nolle^ me hae in vest, vt videat Thais, loath I am to die before my
conscience be fully settled, or I have again satisfied the Church of God after
such a sin: or at such a time as the Church has most need of me, so as it
cannot be well without me. Yet for all this, the Saints of God have always
opened to God most willingly, when the time has come that God would have them:
so old Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word, Luke 2.29. On the contrary, a wicked man's soul must be fetched and
twitcht from him, This night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee, Lu. 12.
Malus est miles qui imperatore gemens sequitur, He is a bad soldier who
follows his General with sighs and sobs. When one comes and knocks at
your doors to speak with you, if you perceive him as he is coming, and know
him to be a friend you must use, you open the doors before he can well knock;
but if it be one you desire not to speak with, then though you are within, yet
will you answer not, and besides, your doors shall be fast barred or locked. So
when God comes to some man and knocks at his door by sickness, and
calls, Thou soul of man come forth, and I must talk with you: away skuds
the soul, bars the door with violent desires to prolong life, with impatience
at God his knocking, and by no means will open, till God breaks in upon it:
but when he comes to another man full of grace, and knocks at his body by
sickness, calling, such a soul come forth, the Lord will speak with thee:
presently answer is cheerfully made, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Act. 7.59.
Hilarion (that holy Saint, as Saint Jerome writes) when he was about to die,
and felt in his soul an unwillingness to die, he thus spoke to his soul:
Egredere anima, quid times? nonaginta tribus annis seruiuisti Christo, and mori
times? Go forth my soul, why fear thou ^ninty and three years have thou
served Christ, and art thou afraid to die? Thus must the soul be prepared
willingly to die, that so the closset-house may be put i^ order against death.

Fourthly, as the bird flies to heauen-ward, not without wings, and the
mariner passes not the Sea without sails: so that the house of our souls may
be put in order against death, must we always pray, that (if it may be, when
God shall close our mouths, he may close them, not cursing, or altogether
busied about the world, but even praying and calling upon the name of the
Lord. Thus the good converted these dies praying, Lord remember me, when
thou cammest into thy kingdom, Luke. 23.42. Thus out blessed Savior, Father
into thy hands I commend my spirit, Luke 23.46. Thus they stoned Steven, who
called upon God, and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Act. 7.59. Thus as
Eliah was taken into heaven with a fiery chariot: so much we, so must our
souls ascend in the midst of denout prayers; Thus most thou order thy
closset-house.

Conclusion.
Thus then have we seen the sentence of death to have been irreuocable
against us all, and that we ought therefore to put our house in order, and how:
now in a word to conclude. When any of us was in our mothers womb, that she
began to look big with her burden, there was made preparation for v^ before
we were borne, there were cloves provided, a midwife and other wives bespoken,
and other things prepared against our birth into this world. The day of our
death in this world, is but the day of our birth into another world. We come
out of the narrow compass of our mothers womb, into this more spacious
room, fuller of brightness: we go into another, which yields us as many
more pleasing objects the^ the womb of this world yields, as this worlds womb
yields more then our mothers womb. In the mothers womb we somewhat (although
but a little God wot) help our selves by drawing nourishment to our selves
with our vegetative faculty, before we come into this world, to the midwife and
other wives. Behold, the spirit of God will be as the midwife, the blessed
Angels will be as the helping wives, the bundle of life eternal is instead of
other clouts provided to wrape up our souls in, in, in the time of our coming
unto the other world: only now whiles we are in the womb of the world, or
rather of the Church of God, let us by faith and charity, our believing and
charitable powers, suck such moisture of grace, as that afterward we may
joyfully be received, as a child borne into heaven, when we shall have put
our houses in order, for we shall die, ane not live.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

