ALBIONS England. Or Historical Map of the same Island: prosecuted from the
lives, Acts, and Labors of Saturn, Jupiter, Hercules, and AEneas: Originalles
of the Brutons, and Englishmen, and Occasion of the Brutons their first
aryuall in Albion. Continuing the same History unto the Tribute to the
Romans, Entry of the Saxones, Invasion by the Danes, and Conquest by the
Normaines.

With Historical Intermixtures, Invention, and Variety: proffitably, briefly,
and pleasantly, performed in Verse and Prose by William Warner.

Imprinted at London by George Robinson for Thomas Cadman, dwelling at the
great North-doore of S. Paul's Church at the sign of the Bible.

To the right Honorable, my very good Lord and Master: Henry Carey, Barron of
Hunsdon: Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter: Lord Chamberlane of her
Majesty's most Honorable Household: Lord Governor of Barwicke: Lord Warden of
the East Marches for and anempst Scotland: Lord Lieftennant of Suffolk and
Norfolk: Captain of her Majesty's Gentlemen Pensioners: and one of her
Highness most Honorable Privy Council.
THis our whole Island, aunchiantly called Brutaine, but more anchiantly Albion,
presently contaynyng two Kingdoms, ENGLAND, and SCOTLAND, is cause (right
Honorable) that to distinguish the former, whose only Occurrants J abridge,
from the other, remote from our History, I intitell this my Book ALBIONS
ENGLAND. A Subject, in troth (if self conceit work not a partial Judge)
worthy your Honorable Patronage: Howbeit basely passed under so badd an
Aucthor. But for great Parsonages gratfully to intertaine the good wills of
bad workmen, is answerable to themselves, and animating to feeble Artistes. I
therefore secure of your Honors Clemency, and herein not unlike to Phaoton,
who at the first did fearfully admier even the Pallas of Phoebus, but anon
feareles adventure even the presence of Phoebus, having dedicated a former
Book, to him that from your Honor deriueth his Birth, now secondly present the
like to your Lordshippe: with so much the less doubt, and so much to more
duty, by how much the more J esteem this my latter labor of more valewe,
and (omitting your high Tytelles) J owe, and your Lordship expects espetiall
duty at the hands of your Servant. And thus (right Honorable) hoping better
then J can perform, and yet fearing lesser then J may offend, desirous to
please, despret of praise, and destitute of a better Present, J make tender
only of good will, more J have not, for your Honors good word, less J hope
not.

Your Lordships most duetifull and humble Servant, W. Warner.

To the Reader.
WEll know I, that Pearls low-prised in India are precious in England: that
even Homer was slightly aucthorised in Greece, but singularly admyred
elswheare: and that, for the most part, the best Authors find at home their
worst Auditors* how beit whatsoever Writor is most famous, the same is
therefore indebted to his native Language: Neither prefer I above three
speeches before ours, for more sententious. Only this error may be thought
hatching in our English, that to run on the Letter, we often run from the
Matter: and being over prodigal in Similies, we become less profitable in
Sentences, and more prolixtious to Sense.

Written have I already in Prose, allowed of some: and now (friendly Reader)
offer I Verse and Prose, attending thine indifferent Censure. In which, if
grosely I fail (as not greatly I so fear) in Verity, Brevity, Invention,
and Variety, profitable, patheticall, pithie, and pleasant, so far of shall
I be from being oppynionat of mine own labors, that my self will also
subscribe, to prescribe the same for obsurd and erroneous. But in vain is it
either to entreat or fear the curtious or captious: the one will not cauell,
nor the other be reconscyled.

My labor is past, and your liking to come: and things hardly founded, may
easily be confounded: Arrogancy is Lynx-eyed into advantage: Envy capiable of
the least error: and inconsiderat and self conceipted Readers, to detract from
other men's Travails, deal as did sacraligious Denis in the Heathen Temples,
who to stripp the Idolles of their golden Ornaments, alleging the same for
Summer to hot, and for Winter to cold, so enriched himself, and robbed the
Saint. But such are good minds, and the Contraries of these men in reading of
Books, as were the Paganes in reuerencing their Gods, sacrafising as devoutly
to a wooden Jupiter, as to a golden Jupiter: to an Ox, a Cat, or vnreuerent
Pryapus, as to the Sun, the Stars, or amiable Venus: devotion and
discretion being evermore senceles in ditraction. Of the latter sort therefore
I crave pardon, presupposing their patience, to the former, presupposing
impatience, I offer pardon: resting to either, and to you all, in good will
such as I should:

Yours. W. W.

ALBIONS ENGLAND. The first Book of ALBIONS England.
CHAP. I.
I Tell of things done long ago, of many things in few:
And chiefly of this Elyme of ours, the Accidents pursue.
Thou high Director of the same assist my Artlesse pen,
To write the gests of Brutons stout, and acts of Englishmen.
When arked Noah, and seven with him the empty worlds remain,
Had left the isntrumental mean that landed them again:
And that both man and beast, and all did multiply with store,
To Asia Sem, to Affricke Cham, to Europe Iapheth bore
Their Families. Thus triple wise the world divided was:
one language common unto all: until it came to pass
That Nembroth son to Chus, the son of Cham, old Noah his son,
In Chaldia (never seen vefore) an Empire had begunne^
As he and his audatious crewe the Tower of Babell rear,
Pretending it should check the clouds, so to avoid the fear
Of following flooddes, the Creator of creatures beheld
The climing tops of cloud-high Towers, and more to be fulfilde.
To cut of which ambitious plot, and quash their proud intent
Amongst a world of people there he sundry speeches sent,
So that, unable to confer about the work they went,
The Tower was left unfinished: and every man withdrewe
Himself apart, to join with those whose language best he knew:
And thus confused tongues at first to every nation grew.
THE Babylonian Saturn though his buildings speed was bad,
Yet found the means that under him he many nations had.
He was the first that ruled as king, or foreign lands subdude,
Or went about into the right of others to intrude:
Ere this aspiring minds did sleep, and wealth was not pursude.
His son Jove Belus after him succeeded: he puruaide
For dreadful wars, but aw^esse death his dreadful purpose staide,
Then Ninus prosecutes the wars prevented Belus sought,
And filde the wronged world with arms, and to subjection brought
Much people, yet not capable of such his nouile fight,
From Caldia to Assyrea he translates the Empier quite:
And caused fire on horses backs before him ever borne
To be adorned for a God. Thus out of use was worn
In Caldia and Assyria to the honor rightly due
To high Iehoua, God indeed. Idolatry thus grew
From Ninus first: he first of al a Monarchy did frame,
And built in fomous Niniuie, that bore the builders name.
His warlike wife Simeramis, her husband being dead,
And son in nonage, faining him she ruled in his steed:
Delating in a males attire the Empire new begone:
The which, his years admitting it, she yealded to her son.
Thus Cham his brood did borgon first and held the world in awe:
But Iapheths Line to Iabans land from Assure does me draw.
Much praise is spoke of Thessalie and Pegasus his springs,
and how the nymphs of Moena in Tempe did great things,
And how that Cecrops and his seed did honor Athens so,
As that from thence are said the Springs of Sciences to flow.
Not only arts but Cheualrie from Greece deri^e we may:
Whereof (omitting many things) my muse alonlie say
How Saturn, Jove, and Hercules did fill the world with ^auie
Of justice, prowess, and how they both men and Monsters tame:
And so from these derive the mean how Brute to Albion came.
In Create did flourish in those days (the first that florisht so)
Vranos: he in wealth and wit all others did out-goe.
This took to Wife (not then forbode) his Sister Vesta fair,
The crooked Titan did to him an comely Saturn baer.
The elder of deformities in making and for mind*
with Parents and the people too, did lesser liking find:
The younger by the contraries gave hansel in his prime
Of many virtues, honoring their Owners ^lder time.
Away slips age: death spares none: Vranos leaves the stage:
His body (now deprived of pomp) inter^d the worms do gage.
Well may a rich man's Hearse want tears, but heirs he shall not miss,
To whom that he is dead at length no little joy it is.
This error notwithstanding did Vranos Sons lament:
Yet scarce the Fathers Ghost from grave to heaven or hell was sent,
But that his heirs did fall at ods about the vacant Rain:
and Titan chafes disabled then the Scepter to sustain.
Each eye did follow Saturns form, each heart applaudes his fame,
and to conclude, with whole consent he winnes away the game.
Yet for because the Birthright should inure to Titan still,
In Mars his Church did Saturn vow his Issues Males to kill.
Not meanly glad was Saturn then his head possessed of Crown,
When, of his building, he was Lord of many a peopled Town,
He gives laws, his laws are kept, he ^ids, and all obey,
and equally beloud and feared he wealds a kingly sway:
He teaches men (untaught before) to ear the lusty land:
and how to pearse the pathlesse air with shaft from Bow-mans hand:
God D^s did quail to see his gold so fast conuaid from hell
and fishes quakt (...) amidst their floods did dwell
Who loves not (...) did not the king of Creat excel?
But what avail or Towns, or Laws, or what do Subjects move?
Sheaues, Shafts, or Ships* or Gold, or all? king Saturn is in love.
He loves, and is beloud again^* yet so might not suffice,
In former vow to Titan made his pain of pleasure lies:
But no man from the Monarke Lou^ by wealth or weapon flies.
Cybella, fair Cybella is espoused to her brother:
and as do Venus killing Birds so love they one another.
In Coiture she does conceive: (...) son is borne, and slain:
And Saturn of the hansell hard does malconsent remain.
CHAP. II.
THE Son had compast all the Signs, and Cybell brought to light
Her second Breed, a smiling boy, and Jupiter he hight:
Together with the Queen of Gods (so Iunos style we wright.)
The infant smiled at his birth: but Cybell (joy bereft)
And Vesta, whom Vranos had an heavy widow left,
Did both lament: for Saturn wild the newborn Babe should die,
Both to acquit him of his vow, and frustrate Destiny.
For at the Oracle he had, his wife a son should bear,
That should expel him from his Realm: his vow therefore and fear
Did hasten on (unwillingly) the slaughter of his son:
For which (his sorrows granting speech) his moan he thus begun.
And want not stately crowns their cares? With pomp have Princes pain?
Ah, die he must, and die he shall, else may not Saturn rain.
Yet, might a Septers want suffice, I gladly would resign:
But sworn by Stix and wreakfull Mars at periuries repine.
Then far be it that they repine, least I too late repent:
It doubles sin, if sin by sin we practice to prevent.
From this time forth, Melancholy, for Surname Saturn had:
No mirth could wrest from him a smile, each smile would make him sad.
His servants fear his solome fits, when if they ought recite.
He either answers not at all, or from the matter quite.
Unpeopled rooms and pathlesse ways did fit his humor best:
And then he sighs, and sheadeth tears when all things else did rest.
Who so could cite a Tragedy was foremost in his credde:
For, balking pleasant company, on sorrows did he feed.
Death likes him, that mislikes himself, in gesture robes and all
He shows himself like to himelfe* and hence it does befall
That men to Melancholy given we Saturnists do ^all.
His wife and Sister kissing often her Nephewe and her son,
(For she his Aunt and Mother was) with Vesta seek to shun
The voted fathers deadly doom: to kill so sweet a child
Their eyes and very souls abhor: who (nothing so vnmilde)
do weeping kiss his laughing mouth, in mind the Babe to save:
Howbeit fear of Saturns wroth contrary council gave.
But when in have the Babe his heart was sent for by and by,
So Saturn wild, so Cybell must, and Vesta not deny*
It was a woe to hear their woe, and death to see them die.
Unhollowed wretch, then Cybell said, in womb why did I bear
This double Burden? happy Twins, save that my Twins they are.
So that my teeming with these throws had ending well were I:
Or would I might not give them life, that living forthwith dye.
Thy Scepter (Saturn) is not worth perfourmance of thy vow:
Thy conscience does a scruple hold that Gods nor men allow.
From Gods, from men, from brutish beasts, from nature naught does gro
But fosters what it brings forth: thou only do not so.
Thy sons alone for slaughters serve, and I mean while their mother
Am Saturnes wife, less proud of it then that he is my brother.
Unhappie Cybell borne to bear, and therefore borne to woe,
And fruitless fertile to a man that sows not to more.
Now tears had drowned further speech, till she as one bestrought
Did cry that with a knife the Babe should to her bed be brought:
My self (quoth she) will be his death, with whom my self will die:
For so may Saturn save and shun his vow and destenie.
But it did Vesta contermaund: yet Saturns will must stand,
For Jove must die, or they not live. A Damsel there at hand
Was then enforst to that charge. Thrice touched her knife his Skin,
But thrice his smiles did cause her tears: she fourthlie did begin:
And fourthlie ended as before. Betide me death or life,
Live still (at least for me) she said: and casting down the knife,
She kissed that sweet and pretty mouth that laughed on her lips*
And brings him back to Cybels bed. Her heart, revived, skips,
Reviving life where reckned death had wrought repentant tears.
The father fronted with a guile, at length the damsel bears
The infant unto Oson town: and in her Ladies name,
Entreats Melissus daughters twain to nourish up the same.
Up to mountain bear they him, and in a secret Cave
A mountain Goat did give him milk, and so his life they save.
His Nourses, sounding Simbals once to drown the Infants cry.
A many Bees (the Muses birds) into the Cave did fly,
Where making Honnie, Saturnes son did long time live thereby.
CHAP. III.
IT does remain of Jupiter, as bow (but then a lad)
From Epire to Pelasgis him the Lords Epyrotes had,
To fetch their pledge Lycaon hild, when time of truse had end:
Lycaon faining to consent, that did not so intend,
Next day as though he would dismiss the Legates with estate,
Did make to them a solemn feast: when having slain of late
His noble pledge, he brings his limbs and sets them before
His Countrymen to feed upon in saused dishes store.
The Strangers and his Subjects too abhorring such a sight,
Sit gazing each in others face, bereft of speech and sprite:
Until that lusty Jupiter, a Stripling to behold,
Did take the limbs dismembered so, and with a courage bold
Did show them through Pelasgis streets, declaring by the way
The murder of their blooddie king: which did so much dismay
The Citizens, that even they detesting such unright,
Did rise in arms against their king: where youthful Jove did fight
So valiantly, that by his force Lyacon took his flight.
And after did by Roberies, by blood, and Rapines live:
For which to him a Wooluish shape the Poets aptly give.
IN Fpyre and Pelasgis thus Jove first his honor won:
But greater things untouched are by this same Worthy done.
And partly, in the monstrous war that Titan and his Crew
Did hold with Saturn, when by search of Issues males he knew
The which his brother had alive, against their Covenant made:
When, T^tan Uictor, fast in hold was vanquished Saturn laid,
Together with his wife and friends: where sorrow much they past,
Till Jupiter did understand his parentage at last.
He therefore landing took in Create, with well provided men:
And slew his uncle Titan, and the Giant Tiphan then,
With most part of the Titanoies, and sets his father free:
By means whereof they reconcile, and well a while agree.
NOt brooking then Apollos fault, in that he entertaind
The Remnant of the Titanoies, that after wars remainde,
Apollo was by Jupiter enforced for to fly
His kingdom Paphos, and to live exilde in Thessalie:
Where love, but chiefly penury, constrained him to keep
(Until he was restored home) the king Admetus sheep.
And for his Son disdainfully envied Jove his praise
Jove was the same Physicians death, that dead to life could raise:
Whose fame grew thus. As Asculap an heardsman did epsy,
That did with easy fight enforce a Basalique to fly.
(Albeit naturally that beast does murder with the eye.)
Apollos son perceauing him with Garland on his head,
Imagins (as it was in deed) some herb such virtue bred:
And for a proof he caused him to cast the wreath away,
When strait the beast her only eyes the silly man did slay.
Then Asculap him self did take the wreath, and puts it on,
And by that means he overcame the Basalique anon.
In herbs that deeper force is hid then Science may contain
I find, said he, an herb by herb into his mouth did strain
That lay for dead, an herb at last reviving him again.
Henceforth, me^ thought him more the^ man, when by his wondrous skill
He rendered life to many like, so winning great good will.
But as he waxed famous thus, he famous waxed proud,
Disdaining all, yea Jove him self for Peer he disaloud.
Until that Saturns angry son revenged it by death:
Correcting justly each abuse, as Rector on the Earth.
THe Sons renound thus added grace unto the Fathers name,
But shadows wait on substances, and envy follows fame.
Even Saturn, pompous Saturn, rid by Jupiter of Foes
And fear of Titan, did renew his superstitious woes
As touching former Oracle: and hastis sommons sent
Throughout his Realm to muster men, in purpose to prevent
By death of Jove his destenie. The men of Create repinde
To put on armor to his ill whom they had found so kind:
But will they nill they so they must, for so their king assign^.
And Saturn with his armed troops into Arcadia went,
Where Jupiter, forewarned of his fathers ill intent,
Entreated peace, to him denide: so that perforce he must
Defend him from his froward Sier, or rather foe unjust.
There might ye see king Saturn fight like to a Lion wood,
Whilst Jupiter did bear his blows, and spares his fathers blood:
and him that foo-like would him sley, he friendly did defend,
Desiring Saturn to retire, till words were to no end.
The wilful man pursuing blood, Jove cease to persuade,
And rushing in amongst his foes so hot a skirmish^made,
That every blow sets blood on broch, and so in little space,
Even he who late he did entreat, is followed now in chase
By Arcas and his company: for Jove refraind the flight,
Because against his countrymen he had no will to fight.
Whilst lucklesse Saturn did escape by flight and fortune then,
And wandered long in vnquoth Seas, depriude of wealth and men,
Uictorious Jupiter was crownde with glory king of Create:
And Saturn now ariude at Troy, for succor did entreat.
Ganymaedes, king Trois son was sent in Saturns aid:
A worthy knight, and valiant war to Jupiter he made.
But he and his were chased back even to their City walls,
For who so stood with Jupiter, by Jupiter he falls.
And there the Troyan Paragon Ganymides was taine,
Twixt whom and Jupiter thencefoorth sound friendship did remain.
Then Saturn did the second time to Seas with shame retire,
And never after durst by war against his son conspire:
But sailing into lower Realms, in Italy did dwell:
And hereof it is said his son did chase him into hell.
Mean while, less joyous of his fame then ielous of his freakes,
Her wrong Queen Juno on the Truls of Jupiter she wreakes.
Which was the cause that all too late, he purposing return
To rescue Danae (in whose love he amorouslie did burn)
Was cast by storms into the Seas, that forthwith took the name
of him whom for his Piracies Jove vanquished in the same.
Ye might have seen AEgaeon there with wreakfull wroth inflam^
At sight of Jove, at whose decay he long in vain had aimd.
And how that Jove had now the worst, and in a trise again
The Giant with his twice three Barks in hassard to be taine.
The Centaures show them valerous, so did Ixeon stout,
and brave Ganymaedes did deal his balefull dole about:
But when courageous Jupiter had beaten to the ground
AEgaeon, and in selfsame Chains wherein he often bound
The harmless souls that crossed those Seas himself in fetters lay,
Ye might have said, and truly said, that then did end the fraie.
So many were his high exploits, whereof such wonder bread,
That for the same the Heathen folk do deifie him dead.
Which since they are so manifold, I many ouerpasse:
And though Amphitruo blush to hear how he deceived was,
And that Alcmena pinch my tongue, possessed with bashful shame,
Yea though that Jupiter himself my lavish tongue shall blame,
Yet since that jealous Juno knows already of the same,
I dare not tell how Jupiter so cunningly beguild
his love Alcmena, that by him she traueld great with child
Of Hercules: whose famous acts I orderly shall tell,
Whereof the first, but not the least, in Cradle-time be fell.
CHAP. IIII.
Queen Juno, not a little wroth against her husbands crime
By whom she was a Cockqueane made, did therefore at the time
In which Alcmena cride for help to bring her fruit to light,
Three nights and days inchaunt her throws: and (of a Devilish spite)
Intended both the Ladies death, and that wherewith she went:
Till Galinthis vnwitching her did Iunos spells prevent.
Howbeit cankered Juno still pursuing her intent,
Two poisned Serpents got by charms into the chamber brought
Where Hercules in cradle lay, and thinking to have wrought
A Tragedy, did let them lose: who smelling out their pray,
skaerd Hercules his brother that in self same cradle lay.
But Hercules, as Children use with little whelps to play,
Did dally childishlie with them, and no whit did dismay:
Until at last his tender flesh did feel their smarting stings,
And then displeasd betwixt his hands the Snakes to death he wrings.
Amphrituo an the Thebans all of this same wonder tell:
And years permitting Hercules did with Euristeus dwell.
This King by spightfull Iunos means, did set him task on task,
But Hercules performed more then both of them could ask.
Yea, yet a good Lad, for Actiuenes the world did lack his like,
To Wrestle, Ride, Run, Cast, or Shoot, to Swim, Shift, or Strike,
As witness (his invention first) those solemn active Plaios.
That were on Mount Olimpus tried, where he had prick and praise.
For which his Novel, and himself, in those not having Peers,
The Graecians by the Olimpides kept reckoning of their years.
KIng Atlas daughters in the Isles of Hesperae did hold
A many Sheep: and Poets feign their fleeces were of Gold:
(For rarenes then of Sheep and Wool in figures so they saw)
Euristeus pricks his Pople on this nouile Prize to gain.
The Greeks apply their sweating Oars, and sailing do persist
Until they reach the wished shore: where ready to resist
their entrance to the closed Isles an armed Giant stayed,
Whose grim aspectes at first approach made Hercules afraid.
Now buckle they, and boisterous bloes they give and take among.
A cruel sight, But Hercules had victory ere long.
The Giant slain, Philoctes took the vanquisher in hand:
An harder task had Hercules then pausing now to stand.
Most dreadful was their doubtful fight, both lay about them round,
Philoctes held the harder fight by keeping higher ground.
The Son of Jove perceauing well that prowess not auail'd,
Did feign to faint: the other thought that he in deed had quaild,
And left the advantage of his ground, and fearcely smites his Foe:
But Hercules, whose pollecie was to contriue it so,
Renewing fight most eagerlye, so strikes, and strikes again,
That to enduer the doubled force his valiant Foe had pain.
Who, yealding to his Uictors will, did find in him such grace,
As Hercules did thenceforth use his friendship in each place.
Hesperides, the goodly Nymphs, their Keepers chance lament:
But Hercules did comfort them, and cure their discontent:
And shipping the^ of Rams and Ewes a parcel, thence he went.
IN coasting back by new-built Troy, he saw a moneful sort
of people, clustering round about their yet unconquered Port.
He musing much, and striking Sail, did boldly ask wherefore
They made such dole: Laomidon then standing on the Shore
Did tell the cause: the cause was thus. Laomedon ere than
To rear the stately walls of Troy (a costly work) began,
And wanting pay to finish up the work he had begone,
Of Neptunes and of Phoebus Priests (the Gods of Sea and Son)
He borrowed money, promising repaiment of the same
by certain time which thereunto he did expressly name.
The walls are built, the time is come, the Priests their money crave,
Laomedon forswares the debt, and naughty language gave.
Forthwith the Sea (the Devil then did many wonders show)
Began to swell, and much of Troy with violence ouerfloe:
And thereupon the swealtie Sun (the wastfull Sea retierd)
So vehemently did shine upon the Oesie plasshes myerd,
That thereof noisome vapors rose, and of those vapors spread
Such plagues, as scarce the living might give burial to the dad.
Repentant then, their wrethed king to holy Delphos goes.
Where at the Oracle he knew his wrongs to cause suc wees:
And how the Godds of Sun and Seas, offended do require
Each month a Uirgin, to appease a seaish Monsters ire:
Wherefore to save their common weal, the Troyans did agree
One Uirgin, as her Lot did light, should pay that monthly fee.
Now after many murdered Maids (for monthly at one day,
The fearful Monster at the Port expects his wonted pray)
The lot fell to Hesione the daughter of the king,
whom to the Port to be deuourd with tears the Troyans bring.
When Hercules thus understood the hard occasion why
The guiltles Lady should have died, he purposing to try
his valiantnes, (for what was it that Hercules would fly)
Did ask the king what gift should gro to him that should both free
His daughter, and his kingdom of that monthly blooddie fee.
The king, whom now at doubted hope of proffered help made glad,
made promise of two milk-white Steedes as chiefest gemmes he had.
Brave Hercules, whose ventrous heart did only hunt for fame,
Accepts th'assumpsit, and prepares the fiend like fish to tame.
Anon the dreadful Devil drives the Sea before his breast,
and spitting mighty waves abroad, disgorgde from monstrous chest,
Liftst up his ugly head above the toubled waves to catch
The trembling Lady, for which pray his yaning jaws did watch.
But he, whose strength exceeded sense, with iron Club in fist.
Did bootelesse long with brusing wait the boistrous Whale resist:
The greater strokes, the fiercer was the Monsters awlesse fight:
So that the Greeks and Troyans all misdoubt their dreadlesse knight.
Still Hercules did lay on load, and hild the fight so long,
That in the end the Sea retired, and left the fish among
The bared sands: and so for want of water, not of strength,
Good fortune honors Hercules with victory at length.
Now when the king, his Troyans, and the Grecians had behild
The substance of the ugly Shape, even dreadful being killed,
they bring the Champion to the town with triumphs, gifts, and praise:
And who but he beloved in Troy, whiles that in Troy he stays*
Alone the king (a man no doubt predestinate to ill)
Observing how his Subjects bore to Hercules good will,
and fearing least their love to him might turn himself to hate,
And seeing now himself and land in prosperous estate,
unfriendly did exclude his friend from out his city strong,
Whilst with his Greeks he hunts abroad, mistrustlesse of such wrong:
and when the Champion and his men did from their sport return,
Not only did gainsay in Troy that longer they soiourn^*
But also (impudent in guiles) withhild the Corsers twain,
Which Hercules so dearly won, in hassard to be slain.
Alcmenas son abashed then to find so lewd a meede,
In lewe of well deserved love, was chollericke in deed:
and made a vow (if life gave leave) he would such vengeance take
on Troy, that even the stones thereof for dread of him should quake,
and that the living Troyans then should say, and justly say,
That they were happy whom the plague and Monster made away:
and threatening so the trothlesse king did leave the hated Port,
And shortly did ariue at Thaebes, and feasts in Creons Court.
THence brought he war, and wrack to Troy, and in his army kings:
And by the way Larnessas walls unto the ground he flings,
And sets Tenedos on fire, whose fearful flames espide,
gave Sommance unto careless Troy for worser to provide.
Before the Greeks had reached Troy the Troyans by the way
did bid them battle: many men on either part decay:
The sounding armours crack with blows, whilst pearcing arrows fly,
This lies dead, that fame is maimd, and more at point to die.
Heads, arms, and armor fly about, and bodies swim in blood,
and fresh supplies did fall with them on whom they fighting stood.
But Hercules, above the rest, bestird himself so well,
That still before his balefull Club by Shoks the Troyans fell.
Who, fainting now, seek to retire into their fensiue Town:
where Hercules their Porter was, and rudely knocks them down.
Thus won be Troy, and sacked Troy, and Channels flowed blood,
Nor did he breath whilst any part of all the City stood,
Save stately ^^ion: in the same a many Ladies were,
Whose piteous tears wrought Hercules that only place to spare.
As for the false Laomedon he secretly was fled,
And valiant Pryamus his son to Greece was captive led.
CHAP. V.
AT home returned, Queen Juno craves his company at Creat,
Whom, there arriud, with hartlesse joy his Stepdame did entreat.
What? hear thou not my son (quoth she) how Argiue folk complain
Of Lions three, that in their fields both men and herds have slain?
And this she said, as knowing him to seek such hard affairs.
To win him to which desperate fight no Corse nor cost he spares.
When this was said, enough was said, and half was yet behind
When Hercules did vow redress, and Juno had her mind.
He joys to hear of that exploit, such was his ventrous heart,
And thanking Juno for her news did so from thence depart.
Philoctes now and Hercules in Nemea Forest be,
Long seeking what they could not find, till crying from a tree
an Heards-man said, friends shift away, or else come up to me:
Least that those cruel Lions three now ranging in this wood,
which have deuourd those Herds I had, and with my Manies blood
Imbrud their fierce devouring chappes, and forced me to clime
This Tree, where I (unhappy man) on leaves have fed long time,
may, all too soon, with tearing teeth destroy you in like case,
The quaking Heards-man scarce had said thus much, when as a pa^^
from out a Thick the Lions three on Hercules did run,
Philoctes, trustlesse of his Prowse, by climing did then shun.
And now the Rampant Lions great, whose only view would quail
An hundred knights, though armed well, did Hercules assail.
And sometimes with their churlish teeth and pinching paws again
So grievously endanger him, that near he faints with pain.
Howbeit (glory checking grief) he twain had now dispatched:
The third, and dreadfulst of the three, though many a blow he caught,
yet neither Club nor Sword had force to harm his hardened Hyed
Until that (weapons laid apart) by strangling hands he died.
Not Hercules himself conceaude more joy of this success
Then did Philoctes, who erewhile did hope of nothing less.
The Paster, poor Meloreus, like as Hercules he him wild
Uncaest the Lions, fearing long to touch them being killed*
And in his Cottage to the knights a Country feast he hild,
The Argiues, hearing of this deed, with Triumphs him entreat,
And offer all: but leaving all he does return to Create.
Whom golzing Juno, against her mind, with cost did intertaine,
and with a tongue repugnant quite to her malicious vain
Commends his deeds, when rather she did wish he had been slain.
and therefore with an harder task his labor did renew:
But what was it that manhood might, and he would not pursue?
IN Egypt was a grievous drought: the cause thereof unknown:
which to redres, their Devilish Gods an Oracle had showen.
Do offer up strange blood, they bid, and so auart our ire,
Busiris prone before to blood, had now his hearts desire:
No sooner Stranger touched the shore, but them the barbarous king
To fry in flames before his Gods for Sacrifice does bring.
Yea custom added worse to ill, his Subject and his friend
(when Strangers miss) supply the flames: his murders had no end.
Howbeit, with these Butcheries the drought did still remain:
For in Busiris was the blood that should redeem the rain.
The Gods did mean (which they not mind) that lewd Busiris he
an Alien borne, that Stranger was, who dead, no drought should be.
A Noble man of Iunos kin Busiris late had slain,
For loss of whom the crafty Queen did often sorrows feign.
Cease (Madame) says Hercules, not long the time shall be,
But I his tyranny shall end, else they give end to me.
Her sorrows did not tith her icy, when he had given consent
To undertake that deathfull task: for death was it she meant.
Now Hercules in Egypt meets Busiris and his Crew,
When suddenly with maine assault on him the Giant flew:
Supposing to have dealt with him* as he had done before
with other Strangers: Hercules alonelie, and no more
to take his part, with skathfull strokes bestird his Club so well,
In battering of the Tyrants bones, that strengthlesse down he fell.
Then did he kill and chase away his lewd and cruel train,
Till hearing of no further foe, he comes back again:
and takes up the wretched king, that cries out for aid:
And on the Altar, where himself had Strangers often laid,
Himself was made a Sacrifice: and as his blood did stain
the Altar, even at the same time there fell a joyful rain.
With ended drought, and Tyrants death, a common joy befell:
And all in Mimphis intertaine the unknown Champion well:
From thence returning back to Thaebes he there awhile did dwell.
King Creons daughter Megara, at Thaebes he did espouse:
To cou^tina^ce their wedding feast did want nor knights, nor prowse.
Which triumphs ended, when the knights should thence depart away,
Pirithous to his wedding bids them all: and names the day
Wherein to meet at Thessalie: to which did all consent,
and at the time concluded of at Thessalie convent.
Amidst their cheer, the solemn feast the Centaures did disquyet:
Whom by no means, the nobles there the patience might entreat:
For they an hundred Giants strong, with drinking whitteled well,
amongst their cups, from words to blows, and worser dealings fell:
And (too outrageous at the last, fierce Eurytis their Guide)*
Unreurentlie they ravish thence Hippodame the Bride.
But Hercules not brooking it, to arm himself begone,
and all alone in rescue of the rapted Bride did rome.
By this time did Ixeons Seed stand still in battle raie,
When he, but one against them all, began a blooddie fraie.
Each arrow that with aiming hand from sturdie bow he sent,
Did answer by the death of one, the Sender his intent.
Whilst Hercules with deadly bow had store of Centaures slain,
and, wanting arrows, with their blood his valiant Club did stain,
The Bridegroom and the other knights came to the ceasing fight,
When all were foyld, excepting twelve that save their lives by flight.
Alonely Lycus yielded him a prisoner, and lives:
And living unto Hercules much after sorrow gives:
But Nessus, that escaped then, in time him worser greeues.
CHAP. VI.
THE glory of this high attepmt, and saving of the Bride,
They all ascribe to Hercules: and whilst they here abide*
To exercise his Piracies as Pluto king of Hell,
(Such was the lewdnes of his life, and place where he die dwell
That he and it were titeled so) lay houering near the shore,
And saw the folk of Cicilie their Gods with rights adore:
This rouing king, with armed Guardes of his disordered Crew
did come a land, to make their Pray: but (for to outward view)
They feign devotion, none suspect the ill that did ensue.
Anon a wreathing Garlands sweet hard at her mothers side
King Pluto saw Proserpine: and liking whom he spide:
Concluding with his company how to convey her thence,
Betwixt his boistrous arms he took the fair and fearful wench:
and do what the Cicilians might he sets her a board:
and to his guilty Sails the Air did gentle Gaeles afoord.
A number eyes in Cicelie for her did weep, in vain:
For her, her mother Ceres and her Loues-mate did complain,
Her self (sweet Lady) of her moan did find no mean God wot
Though Dis to please did say and give what might be said or got.
Embarked then, with him his Harp did woeful Orpheus take,
and to Molossa Plutos Realm with speedy Sails did make.
Where he, unknown, at gate of Hell did harp such Music sweet,
as lump^sh Cerberus could not but shake his monstrous feet:
His foul and warpt ill favored face, or ^huge with cole-black hairs,
his Horslike teeth, his ^olling lips, his Doglike hanging cares,
His hooked nose, his skowling eyes, his filthy knotted Beard,
and what not in his ugly shape? But presently appeard
More milder than his common mood, and lesser to be feared.
This hellish Porter deeming that such music would delight
his weeping Mistress did convey the harper to her sight.
Where Pulto swore by dreadful Stix if Orpheus bid by play
But make her laugh, what so he asked he should receive for pay.
Anon such heavenly Harmony on skilful Harp he played,
That she her husbands music knew, and joyful was she made,
And Orpheus did a watchword give, and she to laugh began:
And for reward to have from thence his wife he asked than.
Although it galled Plutoes soul his sweet heart to forgo,
Yet for to quit him of his oath he yields it shall be so:
With this condition, that before they fully passed Hell,
He should not backwards look on her, what chance so'ere befell.
Now as they pass through blind biwaies, he fearing least per chance
she err or lag returns a look: and who should mark that glance
but Cerberus, that purposelie for such advantage waits:
Who still detaining her, did shut her Husband out the gates.
When Ceres heard of this mischaunce, she Cicil leaves anon,
And knowing all the Knights of Greece to Thessalie were gone,
She thither goes in hope of help: where presently she meets
with Thaeseus and Pirithous, whose salutings she regreetes
they wondering what the noble Queen of Cicill there should make:
Become inquisitiue thereof: to whom sad Ceres spoke
first of Proserpine her greef, and then of Plutoes guile:
For her she weeps, of him she railes, and moves them mean while,
The mother of false Dis his rape had more behind unsaid,
When AEgeus and Ixions Sons did jointly offer aid.
About the desert parts of Greece there is a valley low,
To which the roaring waters fall that from the Mountains fl^e:
So Rocks ouershadowe it that scarce a man may view
the open air: no Sun shines there. Amidst this darksome Mewe
does stand a City, to the same belongs one only Gate,
But one at once may come thereto the entrance is so strait,
Cut out the rough maine stony Rock: this City did belong
to Pluto, and because that he was ever doing wrong,
And kept a Theeuish Rabell that in mischiefs did excel,
His Citizens were Devils said, and City named Hell.
When to this Cities ruthlesse gate were come the friendly Knights,
Fierce Cerberus did rouse him self, and scarcely barking bites:
He thought the world had lackt the man that thither durst repair:
And troth to say, not one till then to do the like did dare.
Now fiery sparks from thundering strokes in dark did give them light,
And Ceres Champions valiantly maintain their ventrous fight.
But stout Pirithous, too too bold, a deadly wound he caught:
And Theseus, though Combattan-like he long the Helhound matched,
Yet with his fellow had he fallen, who flying fears to cope.
Expecting nothing less then life, but hap exceeded hope.
For Hercules at Thessalie did fear so hard event:
Whence lanching out, he made in show as if to Thaebes he went
But with Philoctes all his train and Licus home he sent.
And he himself to aid his friends did to Molossa go,
Where like as did his mind presage, he found it very so.
For even as currish Cerberus with gorie bloes did chase
the wounded and the weary Knight, came Hercules in place.
An unexpected happy sight to Theseus at that tide:
Whom Cerberus forsaking then at Hercules he flide:
Upbraiding him with threatening words, and like him self did rave,
And reached him many a crabbed rap with his presumtious Glaue.
The Danter then of Trespasses perceauing Theseus dry
his grievous wounds, and at his feet Pirithous dead to lie,
Desirous to revenge them both lays lusty lode about,
And with his still victorious Club did Cerberus so cloute,
That, quite dismayed at such a match, he reeling to the ground,
Did send from out his Doggish throat a loud and devilish sound:
But when the victor suer enough the vanquished had bound,
He leaving Theseus weak without into the City went:
Whereas he found the wicked King, and Citizens that spent
their frutelesse time in vices foul, and dealings most unjust,
As those that in their Porters strength reposed all their trust.
With these did Hercules play Rex, and leaving Dis for dead,
Not one escapes his deadly hand that dares to show his head.
Whole thousands then did breath their last, and who had seen ye sight,
Might well have said it Hell indeed: for every thing outright,
Besides that sullen Mewe it self, did give a figure plain
of self same Hell, where damned Souls abide in endless pain.
Save howlings out and shuddering fear can naught to ear or sight,
With grievous gro^es of dying Ghosts: and so much more their spite,
By how much more he found them then in pleasures and delight.
This horror hanging. Hercules in buskling up and down
In Plutoes Palace* to her joy Proserpine he found:
And told her of enlargement thence. And then in harrowed Hell
( Pyrithous buried) he, nor she,, nor Theseus longer dwell.
But waying Anchor with the Queen of Cicels Daughter went
To Thessalie: where present greefes pretended joys prevent,
For, hearing of Pyrithous death, not one but did lament.
Hippodame (a widow now) especially bewailes
Her ouer-hardie Husbands death. But weeping less preuailes
Then does Revenge: for Hercules unto her dome commits
Her greefes Contriuer, Cerberus, almost besides his wits
For fear of death his due desert: whom causing' to be ^ound
both hands and feet, and to be dragged along the ragged ground,
A knauish Skull of Boys and Girls did pelt at him with stones,
And laying on with staves and whippes did break both flesh and bones.
WHen Hercules should pass to Hell as has before ben said,
And that Philoctes of his men he had Lieftenant made,
And as Philoctes with his charge on Seas to Thaebes did pass,
He met Androdamus: the King of Calcedon he was.
Androdamus, not knoweing yet his Cosen there inthralde,
(For Lycus was his Cosen) to the Thaebane Pilots calde
To Ken of whence and where they would. But ere the Thaebans might
Give answer, Lycus clogged with chains on hatches stood upright
And cride, Androdamus behold and succor me thy friend,
That shamefully, unless thou help, am like my life to end.
I Captive am to Hercules, and thus to Thaebes must go:
Give aid therefore. Androdamus deferres not doing so,
But sets on Philoctes, that himself and ship defendes
And part of Calcedons he slew, and part to Sea he sendes:
But where the n^^er tripold there for them the Battle ends
When Lycus was discharged of bands, and stout Philoctes bound,
He told what skath the Centaures late in Thessalie had found.
Amongst the slain he named some allied to the King:
For which the savage* Tyrant swore revenge on Thaebes to bring:
And sailing thence prevailed there by coming unawares.
And puts all to sack and sword, nor old nor young he spares.
He slaieth Creon, and in hold fair Megara was cast:
And leaving Lycus King in Thaebes, from Thaebes the Tirant past.
Whilst Lycus thus did Lord it there, the error of his ^ie
Did vex his heart: but Megara his lu^t did chastely fly.
And Hercules by now had news how things at Thaebes fell out,
And how that Lycus there was Lord, and none for him durst route.
Disguised then he thither comes and to the Palace went:
Whom, when the Porters would have staide, his rags he of did rent,
And shows himself like to him self, no blee in vain he spent
that sets not breath or blood abroch. This uproar Lycus heard,
And thinking that some private Fray had fallen amongst his Guard,
Presuming that his presence would appease the growing heat,
Did cast his haughty arms abroad, as who would say be quiet,
Or here am I that can as well command it as entreat,
Which Hercules so sodenlie chopped off that (yet vnmist)
He thinking to have used Arms, was armeles ere he wist.
Then Hercules, our Hercules is come all Thaebes it cride,
Now shake we of our servile Yoke and follow him our Guide:
And so they did, till none were left to hold on Licus side.
The Medley ended, Hercules did bring the Centaure bound
To Prison: whereas Megara in misery he found:
For Licus, speedles in his lust, against her so had frownde.
Yea (more reuengefull) seeing her embraced by his Foe,
And hoping nothing less then life to vex them ere he go
He said: thou dootest overmuch to entertain that Whore,
The falsest Lady under heaven, for let me live no more,
If Megera (I speak by proof) embraced so of thee:
Has not offended diverse ways, and common ben to me.
Then Hercules supposing that his speeches had been true (...)
Sweapt of the lying Centaurs head, and that in chol^^ slew
(To credulent) his guiltless wife: but dead, her ^^ath did ru^
FOr loss of her, and slaughtered friends, he vexed at the heart
did then from Thaebes (an heavy man) to Foreign lands depart,
Distressed in the Trojan Rhode he succor sought for pay:
To which (his peoples triple plague) Laomedon said nay:
And to provide their second scourge saild Hercules away.
And coming back with Iasons Prize from Calchos he complains
of churlish king Laomedon, and so an Army gains.
At Troy the Greekish Peers and he did land their armed men:
Whom to resist Laomedon did range his Battles then.
The Trojans they bestird them well, the Grecians stood not still,
Laomedon fights valiantly, and many a Greek did kill.
Till Hercules (disgesting ill to see his Foe pursue
such good success) encounters him, whom easily he slew.
And having slain the traitorous king he cease not to die*
his Thaebane Club in Phrigian blood, till all began to fly.
But with the Trojans, Telamon, and Hercules both twain,
And by their valor all the Greeks the gates and City gain:
And kill who so of Troy they caught, and raced to the ground
the City, whilst that house by house, or stone on stone they found:
And ventrous Telamon, for that he entered first the gate,
For Prize had fair Hesione, of Troy the latest fate.
For Priamus to quit her Rape, long after sent his Son
To ravish Hellen from the Greeks. So thirdly war begone:
Hesione the cause to Troy, and Hellen to the Greeks,
And all did work that Trojan Brute the Albions Climate seeks.
THE SECOND BOOK ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. VII.
THE twice sacked Town the Grecians then did meerilie forsake,
And Hercules for new affairs, did land in Egypt take.
There in a Port he did epsy a Fleet of Ships from far.
Well fraught with men, Munition, and what pertaines to war.
When Affer (he chief Captain was of that same Fleet) did spy
the Ensigns of the famous Greek, he knew them by and by:
And entertaining on his knees the Owner of the sam^,
Rejoiced to behold the man so honored by fame.
With Affer sailed Hercules to Libia, to put down
the Giant king Antaeus, that had aided to the crown
of Egypt against the Egiptians wills Busiris lately slain
by Hercules, in whose conduct they doubt not to obtain,
And taking land in Libia now, and having in their sight
the threatened City of the Foe, his Tents did Affer pight,
And girts it with a sudden Siedge. The Giant then did shake
his hideous head, and vowed revenge, yea sharp revenge to take.
But issuing out his City gates he found the Foe so hot,
That, notwithstanding such his bragges, the worst Antaeus got:
For Hercules did canuase so his carkas, that at length
he did retire himself and men, as trustlesse of his strength.
His Libions slain, and he not sound, Antaeus Truse did crave:
For grant whereof unto his Foes mean time he victuals gave:
And whilst the Month of Truse did last the Giant, bruised sore,
Did heal his wounds, and to his part sollicites aiders more,
Mean while the Greek to Mauritan did pass unknown of all,
and there in king Antaeus aid he found supplies not small:
And for he looked souldier-like they brought him to the king,
who offered pay^ not so (quoth he) I mean another thing,
Discharge these Bands, or else I will discharge thee of thy breath,
That all alone to thee and thine oppos^ me to the death.
When Atlas knew him Hercules, that conquered of late
The Island which his daughters held, and brought to latest fate
His Giant that defended them, and captiuated then
His friend Philoctes, he twixt fear and fierceness waxed wanne.
And look how fast the rattling hail upon an house does fall,
So fast they lay on Hercules, that holds wag against all.
and as the Smith with Hammer beats his forged Metal, so
he ^ubs his Club about their pates and fleas them on a roe.
And whilst (not daring to look down) by heaps on him they fly,
Some stumbling on the bodies dead are smoldred so and die:
Some sliding in the slipperie blood, wherewith the place did swim,
were strangled so: some others whilst disorderedly at him
They freat and soyne, are crowded on by those that hindmost be,
and with their weapons spoil themselves and fellows two or three:
Some others with the wounding points of broken weapons die:
and others daring with their Foe their bootles force to try,
were in a moment slain by him: and thus in little space,
Without Resistants Hercules had Lordship of the place.
And maugre swords or studied Stars brought Atlas to the Seas,
whereas Philoctes did in time his pensiuenes appease:
And to his friend comemnds the Foe for bounty, which at last
himself did find: and when as time his grief had ouerpast,
The same that for Astrology the Skies Support was said,
In such his Science Hercules a perfect Artist made.
The Month of Truse by this had end, and Hercules returns
To Affer, that encamped at the Lybian walls soiournes,
A second battle then begone. Antaeus like a Baer
Bes^^es himself amongst his Foes: whilst Hercules did faer
as roughly with contrary blooes, till none to fight did daer.
But humbly all submitting them selves subdued by his might:
He gave them grace, and stayed there to do them law and right.
Mean time Anteus, lately fled, returns from Mauritain,
And with a mighty Troop of Moors renewed fight again.
And all the Fields with Carcases of mangled men were filde,
And nombers failed to the Moors that Hercules then killed.
But when Anteus saw his men to lessen more and more,
Resolving or to win the Spurs or lose him self therefore,
He makes a blodie path until the Thaebane he espide,
And finding him, bestow on me thy blows the Giant cried,
That am both able to enduer and to repay the same,
A Fly is not an Eagles pray, nor Mouse a Lions game.
My death might countenance thy deeds (if that it so would be)
But make account that I anon will triumph over thee.
In saying which he smites his Foe, perfourming wondrous might:
And body unto body they with equal damage fight.
But Hercules disdaining that so long Antaeus stands
with him in combat, griping him betwixt his angry hands,
Did crush his Carcass in the air that life did leave him so:
And thus did reap a Monarchy, and rid a mighty Foe.
Then Hercules (Antaeus dead) with ease he overcame
all Libea, with the Provinces and Kingdoms of the same:
And makes Affer King of all that bears the doers name.
IN expedition of which war when Hercules would dwell
no longer time, but purposed to bid his friends farew^ll,
A warlike Wench, an Amazon, salutes him by his name,
And said know Hercules (if it thou know not by fame)
how that the Scythian Ladies, late e^peld their native Land
by King of Egypt, have contrived amongst themselves a band,
And with the same have conquered all Asia, Egypt, and
all Capadocia. Now that for we Uictors understand
the Africanes are our Allies, and minding to proceed
In further conquests, tendering them, thus is therefore decreed:
That you two Champions shall elect, and they will also send
two Ladies, that for victory shall with your Knights contend.
And if your Champions vanquish ours, then we will tribute pay:
And if that ours do vanquish yours, then you shall us obey.
But hope not so, more profit gives our bounty then our blows,
And vninforced tribute may procure you friendly Foes:
Then Hercules, admiring much the Chalengers, did yield
two adverse Knights the morrow next should meet them in the field.
And mounted well on Corsers twain next light by dawne of day
Into the Liestes came Hercules and Theseus. Mid the way
upon a brace of milk white Seeds the two Viragoes meet
the Knights: and each the other did with civil Congies greet.
Then either part retiring back began to make their race,
And coutching well their valiant Spears did run a wondrous pace.
With Menalippe Hercules the sight did undertake,
And Theseus with Hippolite did his Encounter make.
They meeting, either part both horse and load to ground were cast,
Whereat the Africanes did muse and Scythians wear aghast.
Unhorsed thus, disdainfully each Knight defendant took it:
And either Lady so disgraced as scornefullie did brook it.
Then settle they to handy Arms, the which was long and fierce,
And with their cutting weapons did both Helms and Harnes pierce.
But Hercules, though never matched so hardly in his life,
Disarmes at length his Scithian Task, and ended was their strife,
But Theseus with his Combattesse in doubtful battle fights,
Till, blushing at the Maidens blows, he checks his mending sprits.
And laid so hardly to her charge, not able to sustain
his fresh-got force, that he also the second Prize did gain.
Antiope, a third unto those warlike Sisters twain,
Beholding how sinisterly the double fight had past,
Makes sorrow, whilst the Africanes reioise for it as fast,
The Scythians to the Africanes did Homage then, and pray
their Ladies might be raunsomed. Which suit did Theseus stay,
For he through Lance, his Foe through love went Uanquisher away.
And ther-fore when the Athenian Knight and Amazon were matched
in marriage, Menelippe then from Durance was dispacht.
And Hercules: (then which to him no greater Prize could be)
had Queen Antiope her Bealt and Armor for his f^e,
And sets the Dames of Thermodon from other ransom free.
And Theseus with Hippolite at Athens landing takes,
And Hercules to Calidon a Desmal^ usage makes.
THere did King Oeneus bounteously receive so great a Guest:
Where scarcely had he any time from p^ssed toiles to rest,
But that proud Achelous sent Ambassidors to know
If that King Oeneus on him his daughter would bestow,
If not to threaten wreakfull wars: which much abasht the King,
Till Hercules, who then was come about the self same thing,
(For love to Deianira both Compettitors did bring)
Expelled fear by offering aid to back him from the Foe:
By means whereof vnsatisfide away the Legates go.
The Tyrant Achelous then, with all Epirus force
inuades the bounds of Calidon, and spoil without remorse.
But Hercules he leading forth his Army got the day,
And well was he amongst his Foes that fastest ran away.
They and their King, with hard escape, inmure them selves at length
within a Castle near the Sea, a Hold of wondrous strength,
The Thaebans then as resolute to spoil both Foe and Fort,
Did burn his Foes forsaken ships left riding in the Port:
And with a few beset the Hold. When Achelous he
so slender watch about the walls of Enemies did see,
He scorned that so weak a siedge should pen him up so straight,
He having ten for one of them, did issue out the Gate
against the Greeks, that willingly his coming did awaite.
Espying Hercules, he cride, lo yond same devil is he
that drove us out of Calidon: who so of mine he be
that slaieth him, shall be inritcht with great rewards by me.
But he that made such offers large, did offer them in vain:
For when his men saw Hercules approaching them amain
With fiery eyes, and angry looks, and dreadful Club insist,
They thought it needles to assail, and booteles to resist.
And every man retired back into the hold again,
Where many days, attemting slight, they cowardly remain.
From war at length they fell to wiles. There lay upon the shore
a broken Hoy, that had not brookt the Seas of long before:
The Mast they boring full of holes, in every hole did stick
a burning Torch, and lancht it out in night when clouds were thick.
No sooner was the fiery keele a floot upon the waves,
And that the Greeks espied it, but each man rashly craves
the viewing of so strange a sight. Their Captain that did smell
the presupposed Stratagem, did rainge his army well,
And marching near the guilefull light, did find ambushments there,
That playing on advantage thus (prevented though) appear.
Occasion happening, Hercules would not admit the same,
But took them as he found them now, and fights it out by aim.
When Achelous he behild his guild by guile to fail,
Well might he chafe, be harder chance his courage might not quail.
For look how fierce and boistrouslie a chafed Bull does fight,
So Acheleus lustilie on either side did smite:
And by his only prowse then a many knights were slain,
Whilst Hercules with like success his Opposits did pain.
And now, by chance, amidst the brunt the valiant Woers twain
do single, and togethers tug, and as two Lions strong
each one desiring others blood did hold a Combat long,
king Achelous minding her for whom began that broile,
To conquer where he did contend annexed hope to toil.
Alcmenas Son remembering to whose cause he did defend,
Even hers on whom his being and his very soul depend,
So chargd his Contrary with knocks, and used his Club so well,
That vanquished (though valerous) king Achelous fell.
Thepirotes when they saw their king a Captive led away,
Their hearts were done: and Hercules subdude them ere day.
And Achelous in exile did end his latter days:
And all AEtolia was filled with Hercules his praise,
To whom the king did give to Wife fair De^anira, she
the pleasing prise of that his prowse, and dearly earned Fee,
Who after of her own decay, and his, the mean should be;
The Centaure Nessus was the man that made her err so much:
Of which her error, but his sin, the circumstance is such.
CHAP. VIII.
WHen over deep Euenus Foord the passage did not fit,
This Giaunt, of a Stature tall, did offer help to it.
And Hercules forgetting him (for at the Centaures Fray
The same unslain, but not vnskard, escaped then away)
Did pray him to the farther shore with Deianir to wade,
And so he did, whilst Hercules this side the River staid.
Whom Iunos Breed on further banks his Passenger had set,
Then lust and long conceived grudge to foul revenge did whet:
Not Deianira could avoid a Rape, or little less:
Or Hercules disioynd by Foord, give aid to her distress.
One while, contrary to himself, full humbly he intreates,
Anon, like Hercules indeed he did command with threats.
But first nor latter might prevail, for Nessus hald her thence?
I may not follow, nor in slight is (Centaure) thy defense
said Hercules, His deeds approve his latter saying true,
For letting she a fatal Shaft the Rauisher he slew.
And though the arrow galled him even at the very heart,
Yet for a while he did endure the not enduring smart.
And having brought his trembling Rape into a vallie said:
See Deianira how thy Love an end of me has made.
Yet is my death less grief to me then that thou should bestow
thy self on such a changing Churl as Hercules: I know
(sweet Wench I know) he does prefer contrary Loves to thee,
Wherefore my grave (the less my grief) in this thy good shall be.
Take this (he gave a folded cloth and to the bane therein
he mixed somewhat of his blood) this same (quoth he) shall win
To thee again thy Husbands love when he shall it estrange:
For out of doubt, I know it I, he takes delight in change.
When thou suspectast such a wrong, do boil a shirt with this:
No sooner shall he wear the same (herein such virtue is)
but that his novel Love will change and fall whence he did fly:
Mean while do not the unction touch, least so the virtue die.
In all this time betwixt his arms he did the Lady claspe,
And hild her so, as Hawke a Pray, until his latest gasp.
Then leaving him a liuelesse Coarse, mistrusting naught his drift,
She meaning simply took with her the Traitors poisoned gift*
And Hercules by this had past the River deep and wide:
Who ( Deianira first imbrast) drew from the Centaures side
the fatal Shaft that should the death of brave Achilles prove,
In Phoebus Church, by Paris hand, for Polixenas love.
THE Centaure left vntoombed there, He, She, and all their train^
are come to Lerna, whom the king did nobly entertain.
There had he from the common tears the cruel hauock made
by Lernan Hydra, whom in Fenne not armies durst invade.
His v^per parts had humane form, his nether Serpentine,
The whole was monstrous, yet his wit more monstrous, but most fine,
(For wit is monstrous when the same from virtue does decline.)
Such were his subtle arguments, and still supplies therein,
That he by often loss of heads was fained heads to win.
And witty thus to others wrong confounded all he found,
Propounding questions, and a word unanswered was a wound.
The scourge of Tyrants hearing this, did promise death or aid,
Whilst fearful Deianira did the contrary persuade.
But woman's speech from weapons use might not withdraw him then,
Till entering Palus he had rousd the Monster from his D^nne.
Disdainfully did Hydra take the presence of his Foe,
And after subtle arguments too sturdie fight they go.
Two blows at once with Glaue and Tail made Hercules to reele,
Who since he first had used arms the like did never feel,
Not long he borrow^d had the Loan, but Hydra had the like:
So either twain repaie their debt, and neither faintlie strike.
But who might stand with Hercules? By him the Monster fell:
Who burning up his ugly shape did pass his soul to hell:
Which happy fate of Hydras fall left Lerna glad and well.
From whence to Athens, and from thence to Lycia did he sail*
Then to Hesperia Gerions Realm his outrages to quail.
HE by his triple tyranny (for Geron he was said
three-headed, in respect that him three other Giants aid)
So spoild and plag'd the neighbor Realms with daily wrongs and war,
That all the force of Africa his fury could not bar.
In Gadira when Hercules his Pillars reared had,
The which (our Western world not known) men farther ^^nd forbad,
Then with victorious ships he sets on Gerions chased Fleet:
And secondly at Megida did either army meet.
There Geron with his brothers twain the City did beset,
And scornfullie advance themselves as men not to be met.
Providing therefore murall works, they threaten hot assault:
Whilst Hercules contrary wars unto his soldiers taught.
The Gates wide opened out he comes unto the Giants three,
Your men he said are well at work, well met are also we.
This less then Monster, more than man, a Fiende in humane shape
the Spaniard said, is he from whom I made so hard escape.
Yet hardlier shall thou now escape, said Hercules, and than
between them four, three to one, A cruel fight began,
And every of the Giants thought himself an ouer-match
to Hercules, who almost gave to one a quick dispatch,
The second he dispatched in deed, who fell his latest fall.
Then thousands came to rescue them, yet one he fights against all:
Till Theseus with the other knights did march their Army out,
And join to him, their Foes with them, and all make battle stout.
Then Gerons brother fights again, and both did bath in blood,
It was no fighting where they fought, or standing where they sto^d.
King Meleus, Theseus, Hispan, and Philoctes did no less:
But soueraignlie the Son of Jove bestird him in the press.
The Giant Gerons brother then by him did breath his last,
And Gerion did retire his men into their Galleys fast.
But where they land, there Hercules won landing, though he past
the Pikes: notwithstanding thousand Swords, and warding thousand slings
himself alone, ere yt his men to fight on shore he brings,
Then Geryon, cursing heaven and earth, bestirre ye friends he cride,
Now is the time to live or die, let good or or bad betide,
Do live as men, or die as men, see ^enne we are for one*
What lets us then from victory, that victors have been known?
Revenge your selves, revenge your friends, revenge our common moan.
Nor did he shrink from what he said, or said not as he wrought:
His only deeds were manies death. Til Hercules he sought,
Whom singling after combat long, of him his end he cought:
So to subjection Hespera by Hercules was brought,
NO better Spanish Cacus sped for all his wondrous strength,
Whom Hercules from out his Realm debelled at the length.
A richer King or Tyrant worse lived not in any Land,
Nor any one against Hercules in hardier fight did stand.
Yet chased by his Conqueror he was enforced to fly
up to a Mountain in those parts: where as at point to die
through famine, by his Magic Art he made the Mountain flame,
And by that shift escapt his Foe long wondering at the same.
Then sled the Giant night and day (for fear did lend him wings)
And as about from place to place the wandering Tyrant flings,
He on a Mount in Italy called Auentine did light,
Where labored Cacus did repose his wer^^d limbs all night.
In this same Hill he found a Cave which fitting place espide,
He did resolve in secrec^e thenceforth himself to hide
in that same Mount from sight of men. And being there alone,
That words at least might vent his woes he makes thus his moan.
Ah wretch (quoth he) no longer King, that title now must change.
Thou late weart fearful unto all, now fearing all must range.
This ragged Cave must now suffice in stead of Royal seat,
And though (alas) the place should please, yet want I what to eat.
where be my solemn banquets now? where is my stately traien?
My Tributes? nay my proper Goods? or do my friends remain?
Not one I fear, proud wealth was such, that now in time of need
I know not where so seek a friend in any hope to speed.
And yet despair not, Picus lives, indebted much to me
for great good turns: to him I will ere here I settled be,
Thus drove he forth the dismal night, and up by peep of day
he sped him unto Calabrei, for there king Picus lay.
His daughters three of long before, and still did love him well:
And whether with the kings consent, or not, it so befell
he took them all to Auentin, and there with him they dwell.
About his boisterous neck full often their dainty arms they cast,
Still plying him with kisses sweet, no sport was over past
That Cacus would and they might work: and more, their custom was
by pleasant tales in order told the weary times to pass.
And once especially it was concluded on a roe
That each of them should tell her tale, the first beginning so.
CHAP. IX.
KIng Aganippus ere his death had with his Lords decreed
his only daughter Daphles should in Empire him succeed.
A fayrer Lady lived not then, and now her like does lack,
And nature, think I, never will a second She compact.
The king intombed, Daphles of his Scepter was possessed:
And one there was, a Noble man, that could it not digest.
Who (for he was of fame and force) did bid her battle, and
In doubtfall end of victory their civil quarrels stand.
At length the Argiue Maiden Queen she Doracles subdued:
But (Cacus) of this Stratagem a Tragedy ensued.
Now Loves, not Lances came in ure, the man that lost the day,
and lies in Chains, left her in cares: her Conquest was his pray.
Full often did she blame her self for loving him her Foe,
But oftener thought she it more blame not to have erred so.
Thus whom in Camp she loathed late, in chains she loved now,
And thought him sure, because so sure. To Princes prisoners bow
Thinks she: and watching fitting time unto the Prison went,
Where at the door of such his Lodge a many tears she spent.
But entering, when her eyes behild the Image of her heart,
To her still peerless, though his bands had altered him in part,
She casting down her bashful eyes stodd senseless then a space,
Yet what her songlesse love adiornd was extant in her face:
And now the Jailer left to her the Prisoner and the place.
Then cheering careful Doracles let it suffice (quoth she)
That I repent me of thy bands, and frankly set thee free.
And let that Grace grace out the rest, for more remains behind
then, being said, may decent seem to such as faults will find.
My self, my Land, my Love, my life, and all what so is mine
possess: yet love* and save my life, that now have saved thine.
Then sownes She at his sullen feet that yet abode in thrall:
Which to avoid, he faintly rubbs his Liver on his gall:
And with his hand, not with his heart, did rear her sinking down,
And faining to approve her Choice, had promise of the Crown.
But neither Crown, nor Countries care, nor She (worth al ye rest)
nor grace, nor duty, reconcile whom envy has possessed.
No sooner was he got at large, and wealth supplied his lack,
But he to seek her over throw to foreign aids did pack.
Demand not how the wronged Queen disgested such her wrong,
But ask if she, the tidings told, and hear them lived so long*
She lived in deed, yet sowned often, and sowning ouerpast,
From her mistempered head she tears her lovely Tresses fast.
And beats on her Iuorie breasts, and casts her on the ground,
And wrings her hands, and scricheth out, and slingeth up and down.
Her Ladies pitying her distress had got their Queen to rest:
From whencefoorth outward signs and sighs her inward grief expressed.
Her sparing Diet, seldom sleep, her silence, and what not?
Had framd her now right Louer-like, and hild her so God wot:
Who hearing where he made abode these lines to him she got.
WHat fault of mine has causd thy flight does rest in clouds to me,
But faultles have I heard of none, and faulty may I be.
Yet not my Scepter, but my self, have kingly Suitors sought:
Did all amiss, save thou alone, that set both at naught?
At naught said I? Yea well I said, because so easily cought.
But cite a Crime, and for it I will shed a million tears:
And to be penitent of faults with it a pardon bears.
Ah Doracles, if our extremes, thy malice and my love,
The formers ever ill shall not the la^ters good remove.
I hear thou do frequent the wars, and war thou will with me,
Forgetful that my Argiue men impatient Warriors be:
Sweet, hassard not the same to sword that Love does warrant thee.
Each Spear that shall but cross thy Helm has force to crase my heart*
But if thou bleed, of that thy blood my fainting soul has part.
With thee I live, with thee I die with thee I loose or gain,
Live safe therefore, for in thy life consists the lives of twain.
Most wisely valiant are those men that back their armed Steeds
In beaten Paths, ore boorded Tylthes to break their staffe-like Reeds.
Where not the dynt of wounding Lance, but some devise of love,
Sance danger, has sufficient wait their manhoods to approve.
Where brave Aspects of lovely Dames Tantara to the fight,
Whose forms perhaps are wedgd in hearts, when Favors wag in sight.
Whereas the Uictors Prize is praise, and Trumpets sound each blow,
Where all is well that seems but well, in courage or in show.
Where Ladies doffe their Champions Hol^ies, and kiss where Beauers hid.
And parlie v^der Canapies how well or ill they did.
Retire therefore, sweet heart retire: or if thou will be armd,
Then sight as these where all things make that all escape vnharmd.
Such manhood is a merriment: things present are regarded:
Not thousand drammes of blood in war, one drop is here rewarded.
In few, the wars are full of wooes, but here even words of war
have brauer grave then works themselves, for Courts from Camps be far.
Then are the valiant, who more vain? Then Cowards who more wise?
Not men that travel Pegasus, but Fortunes fools do rise.
Me thinks I see how churlish looks estrange thy cheerful face,
Me thinks thy gestures, talk, and gate, have changd their wonted grace:
Me thinks thy sometimes nimble Limbs with armor now are lame:
Me thinks I see how scarres deforme where swords before did maime:
I see thee faint with Summers heat, and droup with Winters cold:
I see thee not the same thou art, for young, thou seem old:
I see not, but my soul does fear, in fight thou art too bold:
I sorrow lastly to have seen whom now I wish to see,
Because I see Loves Oratresse pleads tediously to thee.
If words, nor we^^ings love, nor lives, if ease, nor toil in ^ight.
May waine thee from a pleasing ill, yet come thou to my sight:
Perchance my presence may dissuade, or partnership delight.
But woe am I, dead paper pleades, a senceles thing of woe:
It cannot weep, nor wring the hands, but say that she did so:
And says so vncredited, or if, then thought of corse;
Thus thus, because not passionate, to paper fails remorse.
O that my griefs, my sighs, and tears, might muster to thy view,
Then woes, not words, then pain, not pen, should vouch my writing true.
Yet fare thou well, whose farwell brings such fare ill unto me:
Thy farewell lackes a welcome home, and welcome shall thou be.
These lines subscribed with her name, when Doracles did view,
He was so far from liking them, that loathing did ensue.
And, least that hope should ease her heart or he not seem unkind,
In written Tables be to her returned thus his mind.
The Bees of Hybla Honnie bear, but with their honnie stings,
And beauty does not want a bait that to repentance brings.
Content thee Daphles, Mooles take mads, but men know Mooles to catch
and therefore wakes ye Dav^lian (...) toward ye sloeworms watch.
I have perused I wot not what a scrole forsooth of love,
As if to Dirus in his Tent should Cupid cast his glove.
A challenge proper to such Sottes as you would make of me,
But I disdain to talk of love, much more in love to be.
Nor think a Queen in case of love shall ^enie to consent,
But hold the contrary more true, and it no consequent.
For persons must in passions iumpe, else love it proves lame:
Nor think I of a woman's grant, but as a woers game.
Your Ser withstands not place and speech: for be she base or hie,
A woman's eye does guide her wit, and not her wit her eye.
Then senceles is he, having speech, that bids not for the best:
Even Carters Malkins will disdain when Gentry will digest,
The be^ter match the braue^ mart and willinger is fought:
And willing fute has best event: so Vulcan Venus cought.
I argue not of her estate, but set my Rest on this,
That opportunity can win the coyest She that is.
Then he that rubs her gamesome vain, and tempers toys with Art,
Brings love that swimmeth at her eyes, to d^ue into her heart.
But since the best at best is bad, a Shroe or else a Sheep,
Just none at all are best of all, and I from all will keep.
Admit I come, and come I then because I come to thee?
No, when I come my coming is contrary sights to see.
My leisure serves me not to love till fish as haggards fly.
Til Sea shall flame, til Son shall freese, till mortal men not die,
And Rivers climing up their banks shall leave their channels dry.
When these shall be, and I not be, then may I chance to love:
And then the strangest change will be that I a lover prove.
Let Beuers hide, not busses hurt my lips, for lips unfit:
Let skarred limbs, not careful loves, to honor, honor get.
I skorne a face effeminate, but hate his bastard mind
That borne a man propostrusly by Art does alter kind:
with figures, Ladie-like, with locks, with looks, and gauds in print,
With fassions barbing formeles beards, and robes that brook no lint,
With Spear in wrest like painted Mars, from thought of battle free
With gate, and grace, and every gaude, so womanly to see,
As not in nature but in name their manhood seems to be.
Yea sooner then that maiden hears bud on his Boyish chinne,
The fury of the fiery God does in the fool begin.
And yet to win whom would be won these woo with lesser speed
Then might be wun a town of war: the croppe not worth the seed.
But let them travel til they tire, and then be rid for Iaides,
If Gamesters fair, if Souldirs mild, or Lovers true of maids.
They love in sport, or leave in spite, or if they stoop to luer,
Their kindness must have kindly use: faults only make them suer.
D^d fancy? noe, did fury? yea, hang up the Thracian maid.
The wonders seven should then be eight could love thee so persuade.
But love or hate, fare ill or well: I force not of thy fare:
My welcome which thou do pretend shall prove a thankelesse care.
When Daphl^ heard him so unkind she held her self accursed:
And little lacked of so well but that her heart did burst.
And wheare she read the churlish scrole she fell into a sown,
But, brought again, upon a bed her self she casts down,
Not rising more: ^ho so her love and life together end.
Or (if I so may guess) in death her soul did live his friend.
The Queen interred, and Obbit kept (as she in charge did give)
A Knight was shipped to Calidon, where Doracles did live,
To offer him, as her bequest, the Argiue Throne and Crown.
Not that we force, or fear, (quoth he) thy favor or thy frown
We move this peace, or make thee Prince, but Daphles swore us so,
Who loving more then thou could hate, nor lived nor died thy Foe.
And is she dead (quoth Doracles) that lived to my wrong?
I gladly do accept these news expected for of long
The Lord and Legate were imbarkt, and Ship ran under sail,
Until into the Argiue Strond the Mariners did hail.
To Dirce by adoption there inthronized a King,
He diverse years good fortune had successiue in each thing,
All friends, no Foes, al wealth, no want, still peace, and never strife,
And what might seem an earthly heaven to Doracles was rise.
A Subject but a Noble man, did ritchly feast the King:
And after meat presented him with many a sight and thing.
There was a chamber in the which, po^traitered to the quick,
The Picture of Queen Daphles was: and deeply did it prick
The King his conscience, and he thought her like did not remain,
So, whom her person could not pierce, her picture now did pain,
A Kissing Cupid, breathing love into her breast did hide
Her wandering eyes, whilst to her heart his hand a death did guide.
Non moereens morior, for the Mott, inchased was beside.
Her courtesy and his contempt he calls then to mind,
And of her beauty in him self he did a Caos find.
Recalling eke his late degree, and reckoning his desert,
He could not think, or faintly thought, his love to stern her heart:
And to the maker of the feast did such his thoughts impart.
And doubts your Grace the Feaster said* if Daphles loved or no?
I wish (I hope I wish no harm) she had not loved so:
Or you not loathed as you did, then she had lived yet:
To what her latest speech did tend I never shall forget.
My self, with diverse noble men whose tears bewraid their care
was prsent, when her dying tongue of you did thus declare.
My hap (quoth she) is simply bad that cannot have, nor hope:
Was ever wretch (I wretch except) held to so skant a scope,
I see him roue at other marks, and I vnmarkt to be:
I find my fault, but follow it, whilst death does follow me.
Ah death (my Lords) despair is death, and death must ransom bliss,
Such Ransom pleases Doracles, and Daphles Pliant is.
Not booteles then (since breathles strait) sweet love does flames contriue
The which shall burn me up at once that now do burn alive.
Alas (then did she pause in tears) that Doracles were bye,
To take it from his eyes, not ears, that I for him do die:
At least, perhaps, he would confess my love to be no lie.
But (Want-wit I) offensive sights to Doracles I crave:
Long live, dear heart, not minding me when I am laid in grave.
And you (my Lords) by those same Gods whose sight I hope anon
I conjure, that ye him inuest your King when I am gone.
Alonely say I lived and died to him a Lover true,
And that my dying tongue did sound sweet Doracles adue.
A sigh concluding such her words, she closed up her eye:
Not one of us beholding it that seemed not to die.
Thus to your Grace I leave to guess how tragic Daphles died:
In love, my Lord, yea loving you, that her of Love denied.
The Picture, and this same discourse afford sufficient woe
To him that maimed in his mind did to his Palace go.
There Doracles did set abroch a world of things forgot.
What meanst thou man? ah frantic man, how art thou ouershot?
(He said) to hate the substance then, and love the shadow now,
Her painted board whose amorous breast did break whilst I not bow
And could thou, churlish wretch, contemn the Love of such a Queen?
O Gods, I grant for such contempt I justly bide your teene.
Her only beauty (worthy Jove, that now on me has power)
was worthy of far worthier love without a further dower,
But gaze thou on her senceles sign whose self thou made thy pray,
And gazing perish for thy life is debt to her decay.
Time goeing on, grief it grew on* of dolor sprung despair.
When Doracles to Daphles Tomb did secretly repair:
There (tears a preface to the rest) these only words he spoke:
Thy Love was loss, for loss my life in recompense do take
Dear Daphles. So a daggers stabbe a Tragedy did make.
Well did this Tragic matter sort to Cacus tragic vain:
But merier matter did behoue such humors to restrain.
That knew the second Sister well, who smiling ere she spoke,
Began her turn, and of her Tale the next report I make.
CHAP. X.
A Proper Lad made Love (quoth she) unto a pretty Less:
In self-same house, foreworn with age, this Maidens Grandame was.
Her eyes were suncke into her head, her cheeks were lean and lanck,
Out stood her chin, into her mouth her bloodlesse lips they sanke.
Her toothlesse chappes disgrast her tongue in telling of a Tale,
And suck she might a Teat for teeth, and spoonage to did fail,
Her hair, since sixty years not black, was now or white or none,
The substance or her wrinkled face was only skin and bone,
Dim were her eyes, deaf were her ears, rank smelt it she could scent,
A palsy made her feeling cease, down tastlesse food it went.
Sight, hearing, scent, touch, taste, and all, thus failing with her strength,
She to her chamber, bed, and chair, betook her at the length.
But gold is loved till grave has lodged her bags and she were one:
And she must give the Maidens Dowre, or else her Dowre is none.
The young man though he loved the Maid* on whom no love was lost,
Yet did he love to live, and knew that marriage asks cost.
The oldes wives bags did let the Baues: with whom he smoothed so,
That flattered, she fantised, her moldie brains did cro^*
What Devil I wot not made her dote, she doted on the man:
Her rotten trunk and ^ustie (...) she (...) than:
And sees what she could not see, her senseless Senses work,
And underneath a wrinckled hiden wanton heart did lurk.
Unkindly two she kisses gave, which he did kindly take,
Supposing that her kindness was but for the Maidens sake.
Her crooked joints, which long ere then supported scarcely stood,
She brought unto a wallowing pace, dis^ellowing so her blood:
And all for love (surreuerence Love) did make the chewe her cudde.
Young Battus from his Omphida (for they were named so)
Dislodged by the Grandame long, to work did roundly go.
Desiring both the Maiden, and to marry her a Dower,
The olde-wise ne^led at his words, for all her love, did lower,
And drying up what drained out in belching, thus did say.
The thing (friend Battus) you demand I gladly not denay,
But well you wot that I am old, and yet not all so old,
But that the remnant of my life may spend the wealth I hold.
As all are nearest to them selves, so to my self am I.
And all shall lack ere I will lack: store is no sore we try.
If you do like of Omphida, I not mislike the match:
Love has no lack, ye both are young, wealth comes to such as watch.
You loving her, she to her self a dowry is, if not,
My money shall not sell the Maid: a sinful sale God wot.
For money shall not sell my self. And yet I cannot see,
But that a comfort to mine age an honest match would be.
My Goods besides do want a Guide, and often did I know
Your yongers upon elder wives then I themselves bestow:
And lived well and loved well But as I do not care
for marriage, so an honest match I never will forswear.
Well, Battus, take you Omphida: but if you money crave,
My bags must only vent to him whom I my self shall have.
Yet think not I mislike of you in that you have not sped,
But think I wish no better match, if I my self should wed.
Thus cunningly she closde with him, and he conceaues her thought:
Unequal was the Combat then that Love and Lucar wrought.
The one was in her flowring age, the other too too old:
The first with beauty did allure, the latter with her Gold.
But storms (thought Battus) have their stops, not long ye Crone ca^ live,
Or if my kindenes length her life, my kindenes God forgive.
Resolving therefore on such hope, with easy suit he got
Assurance to be wedded too the old deformed Trot.
Medea charmed Aeson young, Battus Medea like,
Did work no less a cuer upon this vain unwieldy Tyke.
Now on the bridell played she: yet as she laughes she looks
With ielious eyes, if Omphida he blotted out his books.
Yea she that could not move before, now crauleth every wheare,
To prye if Battus play not false, and cause there was to fear.
But all this while no marriage was, nor witness of their match:
And well he knew that widows shrink, if men forslowe dispatch.
So hastening what she hindered not, come was the wedding day.
The Morning thawde the eauening frost, and slipprie was the way:
Yet habling on her rustie joints, to Churchward goes the Bride:
Whose feet (her hearts unequal gides) could nothing else but slide.
Then Battus kindly leads her, and ever as she trips,
God bless thee Mouse the Bridegroom said, and smakt her on the lips.
The oftener stumbled then his Beast, the oftener to be kissed:
And thinks in her gentle Choice her self not meanly blist.
But when the Priest had done his part, and that they homeward come,
The Bride, for Battus, might salute the Pauement with her bomine.
She reeled often, and looked back: he saw, but would not see.
At length she stumbled headlong down, hoyst up again, quoth he:
The second time she did the like, hoyst Brock her good man said:
And thirdly falling, kindly bad her break her neck old Jade.
The old-wife took it to the heart, and home she went and dyed:
But Battus, ere his first was sick, had owed his second Bryed.
THis Jest from Cacus straynde a smyle, but quickly was it done.
Then, turning to her Sisters twain, the youngest thus begone.
Ye, Sisters, severally have told how foes in love did fall,
And age with youth: but I do say that Love can all with all.
Examples we, whom Love has brought from Court to live in Cave,
And were there need of further proof, a thousand proofs I have.
Could Latmus speak, it might accuse even Phoebe of a kis:
And of a Uotarie of hers to speak my purpose is.
But first she cheared thus her friend (for Cacus sadly sits)
Be merry man, thy pensiveness or pastimes badly fits.
Be as thou art, not as thou would, it will be as it is:
Learn then to lack, and learn to live: for crosses never mis.
Think Fortune newly hatched is flidge, and waggeth wing to fly:
All suffers change: our selves, newborn, even then begin to dye.
Be resolute, not desperate: the Gods that made thee poor,
Can, if they will (do wait their will) thy former state restoore.
At least let patience profit thee, for patience is a thing
Whereby a Beggar gayneth of a discontented King.
Know Destiny is Destiny. This Epitaph I reed,
Though common-booked Poetry, yet not unworthy heed:
Unborne, to know what I should be to Gods my mother prayde:
A Maile quoth Phoebus, Female Mars, and Juno neither said:
An Hermophrodit was I borne. My death then asked she after:
By Sword quoth Juno, Tree quoth Mars, and Phoebus said by water.
A Riuer-shadowing tree I climbed: out slipped my Sword: I slidd:
By feet I hung, stand with my Sword, my head in water hidd:
Maile, Femaile, neither, hanging, Sword, and drowning I abid^.
Thus Cacus howsoever things from likelihoodes descent
in birth, life, death, the Gods are first, the middell, and Event.
And not what they can do they will, but what they will they can:
And that they do, or do it not, behoues not us to skan.
And saying so, and kissing to, her tale she thus began.
CHAP. XI.
I Speak not of the Argiue Nymph that had the ielious Syer,
To whom, shut up in brazen Tower, Jove passage had for hyer.
Not of Europa, Semele, or Maia, will I dwell:
Not of your Foe his bastardie, or Laedas rape I tell:
Not of King Ceus Daughters fault, or other freake of Jove
speak I: save of th- Arcadian Nun with whom he thus did roue.
Calysto was as fair a Maid, as fair as one might be,
Her father King Lycaon flead, Jove chanced her to see:
And seeing liked, liking loved, and loving made it known
To her (sweet Less) for fathers loss that makes then her moan.
Take patience wench said Jupiter: with thee shall all be well,
Thy fathers deeds have their deserts, but thou in peace shall dwell.
I am his Uictor, but thy self art Uictoresse of me:
Do grant me love, my zeal is more than fatherly to thee.
The restless clouds that mantling ride upon the racking Sky,
The scouring winds that sightlesse in the sounding air do fly,
The thriftie Earth that brings out and broodeth up her breed,
The shifting Seas whose swelling waves on shrinking shores do feed,
Shall fall, and fail, ere I be false ( Lycaons Impe) to thee:
Of hearty Love this kiss (he kissed) an happy hansell be.
But hapless terms are these, quoth she, unfitting to a Thrall:
Yet, in respect of that I feel, I hear them not at all.
A friend (ah friendlesse name I Friend) it being as it is,
A friend I say, much more a foe (and more, and worse then this,
The son of Saturn) should, and shall, that speed and hearing miss.
Do rid, ah rid mine eyes of tears, and set my heart at rest,
By taking life* not making Love: the former likes me best:
Or if that poor Calistos life shall lengthen to her woe,
Grant that among Dianas Nuns a votarie I go:
For neither fits it now to love, or ever shall it so.
What viewed Jupiter this while, not pleasing to his sight?
Or what vnuiewed did he guess, not adding to delight?
Not excellent, but exquisite, was all to mind and eye:
Save she* the hansell of this love, did him of Love deny.
It greenes that Natures Paragon in Cloister, not in Court,
Should loose the beauty of her youth, and he thereby his sport.
But constant in her chaste pretense, he graunts that would gainsay:
And seated in Religion now, with Phaebe did she stay,
Blame Jupiter of other Loves, of this do set him clear:
It was his first, and first is firm, and touches very near.
He did forgo, but not forget Calysto in her Cell:
When setting higher thoughts apart, the Frithes did please him well:
He takes his Quiver and his Bow, and where she hunts, hunts he:
And sacrificed to his eyes that day he did her see.
About the Quarrie, Chase, and Toils, Dogs, Bows, the Stand, and al
he uses double diligence: so often did befall.
Not only sight of her his Saint he got, but also talk,
Whilst thus for his Calistos love* he haunted Phaebees walk.
But sight and talk accrue to love, the substance must be had:
And for to bring his drifte about* he virgin-like is clad.
His nonage kept his Beard from bloome, no Wench more fair then he,
Whom at her Nunnarie a Nun Diana takes to be,
And with his Sisters brotherly do guess him to agree.
Thus faines Lycaons Conqueror a Maid, to win a Maid:
His hands too wool, and Arras work, and woman's Chares he laid,
That not so much as by the tongue the Boy-wench was bewraid.
Yet thought is free, he sees, and smiles, and longs perhaps for more:
No marvel, for that Sister-hood had goodly Ladies store:
Scarce one for birth and beauty to was there unworthy him,
Yet chiefly to Calistos vain he formed life and limme.
And Sister-like they single often, and chat of many things,
But that Cal^sto minds love no likelihood he wrings.
So Jove not once durst mention Jove, and force was sin and shame,
But love is hardy. Thus it hapt: by long pursuit of game.
She weary rests in the Thicks, where sitting all alone,
He seeing her is resolute or now to end his moan,
Or for so sweet a bodies use, to leave his soul in love.
And Nymph-like sits him by the Nymph, that took him for no man:
And after (...), with nearer signs of Loves assaut began*
He feels often her Iuorie breasts, nor makes coy to kiss:
Yet all was well, a Maiden to a Maiden might do this.
Than ticks he up her tucked Frocke, nor did Calysto blush,
Or think abuse: he tickles to, no blab she thinks the Bush.
Thus whilst she thinks her sister Nun to be a merry Less,
The Wanton did disclose himself, and told her who he was.
Away the Uirgin would have sled, whom he withhild by force:
Thy love (sweet Nymph) has urged this shift, well worthy thy remorse
he said: nor scorn with u^e a King to join thy self a Queen:
Or do but Love, and I will live in Phaebees Celles unseen:
And there in beds, in bushes here (my Fainings fit so well)
we may enjoy, what Love enioynes, and none our scapes shall tell.
She would not love, he could not leave: she wrangleth, and he wooeth:
She would resist, he did persist and sport denied does,
That done, which could not be undone, what booteth disco^tent?
As God be pleased, as not be easd: away Calysto went
To Cloister, Jupiter to Court: nor much she did repent,
Until her growing womb disclosed an ante-cedent fault,
Then in the Chapter house she told of Jupiters assault.
Diana, and her virgens all, admyring that escape,
Did gird at her, maligning Jove for such his subtell Rape.
And who more ready to control, then Athalanta was?
Whom shortly Meleager brought unto the self same pas.
The Lady Abisse did discharge Calysto from her Cell:
And, silly Nymph, she great with child some otherwhere must dwell.
Pelasgis it was Jupiters, and he her cause of blame,
The King her father in exile, her self in this defame,
What then remained? even secracie, to hyde her self from shame.
Keep close (quoth she) from world ye woods mine error, Jove his crime:
And settling there in simple Cave, did wait her childing time.
At length was hairie Arcas borne: no sooner cold he go,
But that his wildnes esked to his wretched Mothers woe.
No beast so strong that he would shun, and man he never saw,
Nor yet his vexed mother cold from fearcenes him withdraw.
Seven years, the Daughter of a King, she lived thus in Cave,
Not wanting grief, but wanting all that poorest wretches have.
And (worst of all) her savage son, whose manners did agree
Unto his birthplace, howerly threats his mothers death to be:
And angry once, pursued her so long from place to place,
That even into the City gates he followed her in chase.
The people when they did behold so fair a Nymph in flight,
A Baer-like Arcas in pursuit, (for being naked quite,
His skin was swart and hairie) they did wonder at the sight.
And some that would his passage stop, he rudely casts down,
And spares no spoil: until the sight was noysed through the town.
Then out came Jupiter in Arms, whom when Calysto knew,
Help Jove (she cryde) for lo thy son his mother does pursue.
He knew his Leiman at the first, and ioyed of her sight:
Then kiss they, when the Savage boy by force did leave to fight.
Calysto lived Lady-like, yea Iunos Ryuall now:
And Arcas, nobly managed, such virtues him indowe,
That ( Jove consenting) him for King Pelasgis did Allow.
A Son well worthy such a Syer: and for his prowes and fame,
Pelasgis then, of Arcas, took Arcadia to name.
BUt rather might these Ladies fair by any pleasant tail,
Or daseling toye of masshing love, (sweet Consorts to prevail)
Dissuade outrageous Cacus from vnpatientnes of mind:
Who in his greatest tyrannies did chiefest pleasures find.
He sleas the harmles Passengers, from eldest soul to child,
He burns and spoils the neighbor parts, and women he defild:
And to his Cave ( Troponius Cave) did bring the spoils he gaynes,
In which (except to do more harm) he secretly remaynes.
Whilst none did pass, that did repasse unspoiled or vnkild
(None knowing how) all Italy with fear thereof was filled.
But, lo and help: when Hercules had slaughtered outright
Ten Giants of Cremona Kings, and put th-eleauenth to flight,
From thence the Worthy did ariue with his victorious band
At King Euanders City, that by Auentin did stand.
Amongst a many ritcher Spoils, though none to him so rare,
He brought a sort of Spanish kyne. Euander taking care
(Because the like misfortune often had happened there before,)
Least Hercules should loose: his Kyne, of which he made such store,
Gave counsel that within the walls they might be kept all night.
And better to approve his words) with tears he did resight
The murders, theftes, and cruelties, without compassion maid
Upon his Subjects, and their goods: by whom could not be said,
But that the gods (for so they guess) for sin them so invade.
I am resolved, quoth Hercules, where gods do vengeance crave,
It is not strong or fensiue walls that any thing can save:
My Kyne shall therefore graese abroad: if mortal man it be,
Then know, a Tyrant is my Task, his blood the Taskers fee.
The Cattle graesing then abroad (as was his use always)
The Giant left his cruel Den, to seek his cursed prays.
The Moon not wanting of her light, the Kyne he did espy:
And knowing them, he also knew his feared Foe was nigh.
And f^r much better fear had been, then malice at that tide:
But hardly shunneth policy, what destinies provide,
He might have lurkt a while in Den: but of a peevish spite,
Eight of the Kine with fastened cords, by policy and might,
^e dragged backward by their tails into his devilish Nest:
Then stopping up the subtle hole, did lay him down to rest.
Now Hercules (the rather pricked by king Euanders talk)
Into the fields to see his Kine by prime of day did walk.
Where missing eight, he could not guess which way they should be gone:
A many therefore had in charge, to search them out anon.
The Searchers following every sign, great store of footings found.
Discending from Mount Auentine, into the lower ground:
But for the footings did descend, and not ascend, they thought
of no such cunning as in deed, in Auentine was wrought.
Alcaeus Grand-sonne searching long the Thefts he could not find,
Was much disquieted in him self, and angry in his mind:
And chasing when he should depart, he twice or thrice did shake,
A Tree that grue on Auent^ne: which ^ooted up did make
So large a vent, that one might view the hollow Cave below,
And Cacus with his Leash of wives, they were disclosed so.
Whom, when the Greek espied there, O graceless King he said,
Whose Tyrannies have made the Realms of Hespera afraid,
Whose cruelties have been the cause of all the less thou have.
What moves thee in Italy to prosecute such waste?
Think thou, whom neither mighty Realms, nor royal Gards of me^
Could late defend, now to escape, enclosed thus in Den,
The just reuengement of the Gods? no, no, the Heavens we see,
Have brought to light a wretch so lewd, even by a senceles Tree:
And since that neither wealth nor want to goodness may thee win,
A grievous death, condignly, shall cut off thy grounded sin.
To it did Cacus answer thus, do thou pursue me still?
Who only art the chiefest cause of these my doings ill.
Not suffering me to live the rest of my unhappy days
Among the fruitless rocks, a wretch in misery always.
Cease further prate, said Hercules, in troth it greeueth much,
To see a King in this Distress but since thy life is such
As nather in adversity, nor prosperous estate,
Thou can afford one jot of good, I purpose to rebate
Thy wicked days by worthy death, prepare therefore to dye.
When Cacus saw he must perforce so hard a combat try,
He by enchanted flames again endeavored to fly.
But Hercules deluded once by that devise before,
Had learned now for being so deceived any more:
And casting fear a side did leap into the flaming Cave,
And so by Art did conquer Art. The Giant then to save
Him self, did take his Axe in hand, where Hercules and he
Courageously bestirre themselves, until they did agree
To try it out in open air. So doleful was their fight,
That Lookers on could not discern to whether best should light.
The frighted Ladies did their best to help their fighting friend:
But Hercules had victory, and Cacus had his end.
CHAP. XII.
FOr Giants of Cremona flayne, and Cacus ridded so,
The Latin Princes praise on him and presents did bestoe.
Where Rome is now, Pallantia then, Eua^der he did frame
A Temple, and to Hercules did dedicate the same:
And he (entreated thereunto) in Italy did stay:
To honor whom did Princes come from far and every way.
King Faunus had affaiers abroad, when from Laurentum came
His wife Marica, Facua some this lovely Queen do name.
From liking, did she fall in love with Hercules, and he
More ready to have made demand, then like to disagree,
Conceauing her by circumstance, so cuppled by contract,
That, had King Faunus never lived, Latinus had not lackt:
Yet home came Faunus, fathering his late Coriuals act.
But whether gotten lawfully, or thus in love forbod,
Latinus, Brute his Gran-dams Syer, was son unto a God.
WHilst that in love of this same Queen, and lawde of all besides,
The vanquisher of Vulcans son in Italy abydes,
Of Calabries a mighty Oste King Picus he prouides.
And in revenge of Cacus, swore his Slayer should be slain:
But he, ere long, that so did swear, vnswared it again:
When, chased home into his holds, there sparred up in gates,
The valiant Thaebane, all in vain, a following fight awaites.
He, for dispatch, did feign himself a Legate to the King,
And him the Porters, as the same, before their Tyrant bring.
Then, shaking of his civil Robes, his shining Arms appear:
And renting down an Iron sparre, both Prince and people fear.
Some ran to Armor, other some did fight with him their last:
Both Court and City in the end did lay upon him fast.
There Picus, worthily, did win of valiantness a name:
Yet Hercules more valiantly by death does Picus tame.
And to attend their King his ghost, he sends flock by flock:
His fury was as fire to Fern, his foes as waves to Rock:
Nor did his Lions Spoil give place to darting or to knock.
Mean time his men assault without, whilst he assayles within:
Then fightes he to beat down the Gates, and so the Goal did win.
Within the King his ransackt Court he Iole espyes,
Whose tears, then mounting from her heart, dismount the^ from her eyes.
King Picus (now a lifeles corse) was father of this maid:
In vain therefore did Hercules her pensiveness disswayde.
Nor could he but lament her faate, and love so sweet a face,
Whose person also did contain the type of female grace.
At first she was so far from love, she rather seemed to hate,
Yet could she not so give the Check, but that she took the Mate.
Then eithers love, was eithers life: poor Deianira she
was out of commons, yea of thought: an other had her fee.
WIth this so fair and portly wench, he sailed into Thrace:
And hears how Diomedes did tyrannise in that place.
No Stranger scapes vnraunsomed: but Ransom wanting, then
He casts them, as prouendor, to Horses eating men.
A Guard of Tyrants like himself, attending on him still,
Who richly did maintain themselves, by such their doings ill.
The Scourge of such was moved, not to be removed now
by Iole, whose loving tears such labors disalow.
With Diomedes and his Guard in Forest did he meet:
Who with their common Stratagim the Stranger think to greet.
Hands of, commanded Hercules, for Horse I am no hay,
All Strangers Ransom once for all, my coming is to pay:
Which said, himself against them all began a noble fray.
The sturdie Thracians, mighty men, did hardly loose their ground:
But, then the King, a mightier man not any where was found.
These all at once assail, and strike, and thunder on his Sheeld:
But number fitted to his force, unwonted so to yield.
For with his Club he skuffles then amongst their Curates so,
That speedy death was sweeter dole, then to survive his blo.
Well mounted comes the King himself, whom he dismounts anon,
But, rescued to his Horse again, away he would be gone.
Less haste, he said, I Hearts out run, nor shall thou me out ride:
Out stripping so the man-fead horse, he topled ore his side
The monstrous King, that rescules to flying people cride.
Who, lying all to frusshed thus, the son of Jove did bring
His cruel Iades, that soon devour their more then cruel King.
The Thracians all submit themselves, and joy their Tyrants death:
And think some God had left the Heavens, to succor men on earth,
From such, as what they would they will, and what they will they can,
And what they can they dare and do, and doing none withstan.
Nor thought they better of the man then did his deeds approve,
That never was a Conqueror unto his own behoue,
But to establish virtuous men, and Tyrants to remove.
This common Soldiour of the world with Iole did land
in Lycia: and, the earth in peace, discharged there his band.
Sweet busses, not sharp battelles, then did alter man and mind:
Till he, as others, sorrow in security did find.
From Assure went the Empier then, when Tonos he had time
To court his Trulles: Arbaces so espying place to clyme.
Secure in Tomyris her flight, was valiant Cyrus slain.
From Capua, not from Cannas, grew the brave Carthagians vain.
The same to whose victorious Sword a second world was sought,
That Macedon in Court, not Camp, to traytrous end was brought.
A Lover, not a Soldiour, went Achilles to his grave.
And Caesar not in steel, but silk, to Rome his farewell gave.
Even so, this second unto none, superior unto all,
To whom did sooner Causes cease, then Conquests not befall,
This Monster-Master Hercules, this Tyrant-Tamer, he
Whose ligh Exploytes did leave the Earth, from spoil and Spoylers free,
In pleasures did perrish now, that did in perrilles thrive:
A grievous Task I undertake his dying to revive.
CHAP. XIII.
WHen Deianira understood her husbands back return,
She thought it strange, that he from her so strangely did soiorne:
Explorers sent to search the cause, return was made that he
Did loyter in a Strangers love: and Iole was she
That ever hanged at his lips, and hugged was of him,
And that, his armor laid apart, in silk he courts it trim.
The daughter of th- Atolian King did little less then rave:
And can the churl (quoth she) prefer in love a captive Slave
Before his wife? whom late he faynd inferior unto none:
Ah Hercules thou art a man, thy manhood thus is known.
Fie, may a foreign Strumpits arms so fasten on his neck.
As he (the Rector of the Earth) must bow if she do beck?
Oh how unlike to Hercules, is Hercules in this?
But, leaving men to natures fault, in her the lewdnes is:
No man so chaste, but such as she may work to do amiss.
Thus whilst her overplus of love to Ielosie did grow,
She simply mynds the spightfull gift that Nessus did bestow.
And, for he dying spoke the words, she held it as her Creed
That it could win him to her self: of which (now having need)
She uses part: and sent a Shirte so boiled as she bad
To Hercules: and Hercules was of the Present glad:
Confessing her his only Wiffe: And whilst he did repent
His breach of love, on Oeta Mount to sacrifice he went.
Philoctes Paeans valiant Sonnne, and Lychas he that brought
The poysned Shirt, were present there: but of no treason thought:
Nor Deianiras self (good Soul) till trial made it plain,
When as his body and the fire gave moisture to the bayne.
His stoutnes hid such torments long, as else could none abide,
Yea till the baine his Bowels and his very Marroe fryde.
But when his torments had no mean, the Altar down he throes,
And from his martred body rents the gory smoking clothes,
And striving to strip of the Shirt he teareth flesh from bone,
And left his breaking Synooes bare, his Intrailes every one
Did boil, and burst, and show themselves where lumpes of flesh did lack,
And still the murdrous Shirt did cleue unto his mangled back.
Espying Deianiras Squire, that quaking stood, he said,
And art thou wretch the Instrument of my destruction maid?
Whom swinging then about his head, he slinged down the hill:
And so did silly Lychas dye, that purposed no ill.
Then running down from hill to Plain, from Plain to hill again,
He rents up Rocks and mighty Hills in error of his pain:
Till, sadly leaning on his Club, he sighing, vows that none
Should be the death of Hercules, but Hercules alone.
And to his friend Philoctes took his Arrows and bis Booe,
And gladly to the hallowed fire as to his bead did go.
Where lying down, and taking leave with reared hands to sky,
The Earths Protector so, in peace, amidst the flames did dye.
Philoctes, near or gone with grief, his Ashes did conuaye
To Italy, in shrined in his Temple there to stay:
And woeful Deianira hears of Hercules decay.
His Ghost she voucheth and the gods to witness, that her mind
Was giltles of a traitrous thought: nor think me so unkind,
(Sweet Husband) as to have the will to ouerliue thee here,
But that my ghost, before thy ghost it self of guyle shall clear:
And now I come, ah now I come, forgive ye gods the deed
She said: and pearsing so her breast, a breathles Corse did bleed.
AS Greeks lament their Champions loss, so did the Phrygians joy:
And Priamus did fortefie his stately City Troy.
Twyse Hercules had raised it, and thirdly was it reard
By Pryam, strong in wealth, and walls, through Asia loved and feared.
He called to mind Laomedon whom Hercules had slain,
His Sister too Hesione, that Captive did remain
in Salamis with Telamon: and well he was a^ayde,
In that the doer of the same lived not the Greeks to aid.
His Sister therefore not restoorde, his Legates asking it,
By stealing of the Spartane Queen did Paris cry them quit.
Twelve hundred fifty five war-Shippes, with men and Armor frought,
By seauentie Kings and kingly Peers, from Greece to Troy were brought,
To win her thence. King Priamus (besides his Empier great)
Had ayders Princes thirty three: less Lords I not repeat,
Nor Sagitar, that in this War did many a valiant feate.
Ten years, ten months, and twice six days, the siege they did abide:
Eight hundred sixty thousand Greeks, by Trojan weapons dyed:
Six hundred fifty six thousands of Trojans fighting men,
Besides the slaughtred at the sack, by Greacians perished then:
And (if that Hector, Troilus, and Paris, so we name)
Fell forty Kings: omitting more, of little lesser fame.
Mislike, and ciuell quarrelles, when the Greacians homewards drew,
Did well near waste the remnant Kings that Phrigia did subdewe.
Thus secure Troy was ouer-set, when Troy was over stout,
And over rich, was overrun, and tardie looked about.
The Greekish Ships with Phrigian Spoils through Xant and Samoies roe:
For now Antenor had betrayde Palladium to the foe,
And with Palladium Priamus AEneas sought to hyde
From Pyrrhus Polyxena, she for whom Achilles did,
Wherefore upon Achilles Tomb her self was after slain,
What time old Hecuba discryde young Polydor his bayne:
For which AEneas banished hoysts sails, it is said, to wind,
And, after many perilles, rule in Italy did find.
AENeas dead, Aschanius reigned: Aschanius dead, his brother
Posthumus Syluius did succeed. Lauinia was his mother,
Her Syer Latinus, Faunus his, and Picus him begot,
And Saturn him: from mother thus Posthumus lacked not
The noblest blood. On Fathers side his petigree was thus:
Jove had Dardanus: and the same begot Erictheus:
He Tros: Tros, Assaracus: he Capys: and the same
Anchisis: he AEneas had: of him Posthumus came:
And he was father unto Brute: and thus the Brutons bring
Their petegree from Jupiter, of Pagane Gods the King:
And add they may, that Brute his Syer of Venus son did spring.
Thrice five degreees from Noe was Brute, and four times six was he*
from Adam: and from Iaphets house does fetch his petegree.
Posthumus Syluius perrishing in Chase amongst the brakes,
Mistook for Game, by Brute his son: Brute Italy forsakes.
And to assosyate his Exile, a many Trojans more
At all adventures put to Seas, uncertain where to go:
To whom did Fortune, Fortune-like, become a friend and foe.
Till Brute, with no less pain and praise then had his Grandsier late
Achiued Latium, landing here, suppressed so the state
Of all the Feend-bread Albinests, huge Giants fearce and strong,
Or race of Albion, Neptuns son (else some derive them wrong)
That of this Isle (vn-Scotted yet) he Empier had ere long.
THE THIRD BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XIIII.
NOw, of the Conqueror, this Isle had Brutaine unto name,
And with his Troianes Brute began manurage of the same.
For raised Troy, to rear a Troy, fit place he searched then:
And vewes the mounting Northern parts: These fit (quoth he) for men
That trust as much to flight, as fight: our Bulwarks are our breasts,
The next Ariuals here, perchance, will gladlier buyld their nests.
A Trojans corrage is to him a Fortres of defense.
And leaving so, where Scotts be now, he Southward makes thence:
Whereas the earth more plenty gave, and air more temprature,
And nothing wanted that by wealth or pleasure might allure.
And more, the Lady Flood of Floods, the River Thamis, it
Did seem to Brute against the foe, and with him self to fit.
Upon whose fruitful bancks therefore, whose bounds are chiefly said,
The want-les Counties Essex, Kent, with which the wealthy Glayde
Of Hertfordshire for Cities store affords no little aid,
Did Brute buyld up his Troy-nouant, enclosing it with wall:
Which Lud did after beautify, and Luds-towne it did call
That now is London: evermore to rightful Princes true,
Yea Prince and people still to it as to their Storehouse drew,
For plenty and for popilous the like we no wheare vewe.
Howbe-it many neighbor towns as much ere now could say,
But place for people, people, place, and all for sin decay.
When Brute should dye thus to his sons he did the Isle convey.
To Camber Wales, to Albanact he Albanie did leave,
To Locrine Brutaine: whom his Queen of life did thus bereave.
THe furous Hun, that drowning there to Humbar left his name,
The King did vanquish, and for spoil unto his Navy came.
Where Humbars Daughter, Patragon for beauty, such a Dame
As Love himself could not but love, did Locrine inflame,
That Guendoleyne, the Cornish Duke his daughter, Locrins Queen,
Grew in contempt: and, Coryn dead, his Change of Choice was seen*
To Cornwell goes the wrothfull Queen to seize her fathers Land,
From whence she brought, to work revenge, of warriors stout a band:
And bids her husband battle, and in battle is he slain:
And for their son in Nonage was, she to his use did rain.
The Lady Estrild Locrins Love, and Sabrin, wondrous faier,
Her Husbands and his Leimans impe, she meaning not to spaier,
Did bring unto the Water, that the Wenches name does baier.
There binding both, and bobbing them, then trembling at her ire,
She said: if Scythia could have h^^d the wandering King thy Sire,
Then British waters had not bin to him deserved bayne:
But Estrild, snout-faire Estrild, she was sparde, forsooth, to train
With whorish tricks a vicious King: but neither of you twain,
Thou stately Drabb, nor this thy Brat, a bastard as thy self,
Shall live in triumph of my wrong: first mother, and her Elfe,
Shall ^ish in Flood for Humbars soul, and bring him news to hell,
That Locrins wife on Locrins Whore revenged her so well.
They lifting up their lilly hands, from out their lovely eyes
Power tears like Pearls, and wash those Cheeks where naught save beauty
lies:
And seeking to excuse themselves, and mercy to obtain,
With speeches good, and prayers fair, they speak and pray in vain.
Queen Guendoleyne so bids, and they into the Flood are cast,
Whereas amongst the drenching waves the Ladies breath their last.
As this his Grandame, such appeared Mempricius, Madans son,
Whose brother Manlius traytrously by him to death was done.
And since of noble Brute his line prodigious things I tell,
I skipping to the Tenth from him, will show what befell.
ABout a thirty years and five did Leit rule this Land,
When, doting on his Daughters three, with them he fell in hand
To tell how much they loved him: the Eldest did esteem
Her life inferior to her love, so did the Second deem:
The Youngest said her love was such as did a child behoue,
And that how much himself was worth, so much she him did love.
The foremost two did please him well, the youngest did not so:
Upon the Prince of Albanie the First he did bestoe,
The Middle on the Cornish Prince: their Dowry was his Throne,
At his decease: Cordellas part was very small, or none.
Yet for her form, and virtuous life, a noble Gallian King
Did her, vn-dowed, for his Queen into his Country bring.
Her Sisters sick of Fathers health, their Husbands by consent
Did join in Arms: from Leir so by force the Scepter went:
Yet, for they promise pentions large, he rather was content.
In Albanie the quondam King at eldest Daughters Court
Was settled scarce, when she repynes, and lessens still his Port.
His second Daughter then, he thought, would show her self more kind,
To whom, he going, for a while did frank allowance find.
Ere long, abridging almost all, she keeps him so lo,
That of two badds, for betters choice he back again did go.
But Gonorill at his return, not only did attempt
Her fathers death, but openly did hold him in contempt.
His aged eyes power out their tears, when holding up his hands,
He said: O God, who so thou art, that my good happ withstands,
Prolong not life, defer not death, my self I ouer-liue,
When those, that owe to me their lives, to me my death would give.
Thou Town, whose walls roof of my wealth, stand evermore to tell
Thy Founders Fall, and warn that none do fail as Leir fell.
Bid none affie in Friends, for say, his Children wrought his wrack:
Yea those, that were to him most dear, did loath and let him lack.
Cordella, well Cordella said, she loved as a Child:
But sweeter words we seek then sooth, and so are men begilde.
She only rests untried yet: but what may I expect
From her? to whom I nothing gave, when these do me reject.
Then dye, nay try, the rule may fail, and Nature may assend:
Nor are they ever surest friends, on whom we most do spend.
He ships himself to Gallia then: vut makes known before
Unto Cordella his estate, who rueth him so poor,
And kept his there ariuall close, till she provided had
To furnish him in every want. Of him her King was glad,
And nobly intertayned him: the Queen, with tears among,
(Her duty done) conferreth with her father of his wrong.
Such duty, bounty, kindness, and increasing love, he found
In that his Daughter and her Lord, that sorrows more abound
For his unkindly using her, then for the others crime:
And King-like thus in Agamps Court did Leir dwell, till time
The noble King his Sonne-in-law transports an Army great,
Of forcie Gawles, possessing him of dispossessed Seat,
To whom Cordeilla did succeed, not reigning long in queate.
Not how her Nephews war with her and one of them slew the other
Shall follow: but I will disclose a most tyrannous mother.
CHAP. XV.
GOrbodugs double Issue now, when eighteen Kings were past,
Hild jointly Empier in this Land: till Porrex, at the last,
Not tied so by brotherhood, but that he did disdain
A fellow King, (for never can one Kingdom brook of twain)
Did levy secret bands, for dread whereof did Ferrex fly,
And out of Gallia brings War, in which himself did dye.
Then Porrex only reigned here, and ruled all in peace:
Till Iden, mother Queen to both, her fury did increase
So fearcely, as she seeks revenge even in the highest degree.
Why lives this (quoth she) a King? in grave why lies he?
Dye Iden, dye: nay dye thou wretch, that me a wretch have maid:
His ghost, whose life stood in thy light, commands me of aid.
Nor want I (Ferrex) will to aid: for why the Gods I see
Defer revenge, nor with a Devil the Deuilles disagree.
The heavens, me thinks, with thunderbolts should press his soul to hell,
Or Earth give passage, that at feast with men he might not dwell:
But I my self, even I my self, their flacknesse will supplye,
And mothers name, and Nature both to such a Son deny.
Dead night was come, when Iden found the King her son a sleep,
And all was still: not then as now did Gards their Princes keep.
Admit they had, who would have feared such mischief in a mother?
She whispring softly, sleep thy last, yea sleep as does thy brother,
Did gash his throat: who starting up, when strength and speech were gone,
Lifts up his faynting hands, and knew the Tyrantisse anon:
And makes signs, as who would say, ah mother, thou have done
a deed, as never mother erst did practice on her Son.
But name of Son, nor signs did serve him still with wounds she plyes,
Nor (more then Monster) did it please that simply so he dies,
But that his body, peecemeale tore, about the Lodging flies.
And thus from noble Brute his line the Scepter then did pass:
When of his blood for to succeed no heir suruiuing was.
Four Dukes at once, in ciuell broils, seiunctly after rain:
Near when, the Scotts (whom some accuse by Ante-dates to gain)
Did settle in the Northern Isles. These people bring their line
from Cecrops, and that Pharo, he that ever did declyne
from Moses, seeking Hebers house from Egypt to convey.
His daughter Scota, Gathelus their Duke brought thence away,
When Pharos sin to Jacobs Seed did nere that Land decay.
And Cecrops son brought then from thence (as Scotts enforce the same)
The Stone that Jacob slept upon, when Angles went and came.
Of it was made their fatal Chair: of which they bear in hand,
That wheresoere the same is found, the Scotts shall brook that land:
At Westminster that Monument does now decaying stand.
In Lusitania Gathelus did first his Kingdom found:
And of his race (of Scota, Scotts) when Spanish Scotts abound,
Ariue in Ireland, and in it a second Empier ground.
And thirdly, when their broodie Race that Isle did ouer-store,
Amongst the Islands Heb^edes they seek out dwellings more.
These Irish, sometime Spanish Scotts, of whence our now- Scotts be,
Within the Isles of Albion thus, whilst Brutaines disagree,
Did seat themselves, and nestle too amongst the Mountain grounds:
What time a Scythian people, Pichtes, did seize the middle bounds
Twixt them and us: and these did prove to Brutaine double wounds.
The Penthland people and the Scotts alying, friendly live,
Until the Pichtes, by British wyles, contrary cause did give.
Then from their Captains fell the Scotts, and choose to them a King:
And Fergus out of Ireland did the Chair of Marble bring:
In which, instal'd the first Scotch King in Albion, so he wrought,
That Pichtes and Scotts, then up in Arms, were to atonement brought.
Three valiant people thus at once in Albion Empier hold,
Brutes, Scotts, and Pichtes: the latter twain less ciuell, but as bold.
The Pichtes were fearce and Scythian like: much like the Irish now
The Scotts were then: courageous both: nor them I disallow
That wright they fead on human flesh, for so it may be well,
Like of these men their bloody mynds their native Stories tell:
But to our British business now, to show what there befell.
Not how the tri-partited Rule unto his quartarne Rain
Donwallo, after forty years, did Monarchize again:
Not what precedent Kings in France, and Denmark, did obtain
Speak I. From Porrex forty Kings in scilence shall remain:
Save only valiant Brennus, and his brother Belyne: they
Unpraised for their wars and works shall not escape away.
CHAP. XVI.
THese Brothers, thristing amplier Raynes, did martially contend,
Till Brenn his force was not of force his brothers to defend.
To Norway sails he, where he got an Army, and a Prize,
The Prince of Norwaies Daughter: whom he wins in this wise.
The King of Denmark stood with him, until the States decreede
That both should plead before their Prince, and better Pleador speed.
And when the Norgane Prince and Peers were seated for their strife,
The King of Danes beginning first, thus pleaded for a wife.
Not yet a King, King Phillips Son with none but Kings would cope,
His reason was, inferior strife of glory gives no hope.
I am a King, and grant the Prize in question worthy me,
But grudge that my Compettitor a banished man should be.
Do grant him what he has for-gon, and neuermore shall git,
Yet were he but a Demi-king, to challenge me unfit.
Dunwallos younger Son, that has his Brother to his Foe,
And worthily, his trecheries have well deserved foe.
And yet (audatious that he is) he blusheth not to hear
The troth of his untroth, nor yet an here Repulse does fear.
Would she for whom I must contend, were not to me the same
She is, or he that stands with me a man of better fame.
But since in this unequal Plea I must my self imbace,
Know, Norwaies, that my pleaded cause concerns your public case.
It is the King of Denmark does your Prince his daughter crave,
And note, it is no little thing with us Allie to have.
By League, or Leigure, Danske can fence, or front you, friend, or foe,
Our Neighborhood does fit to both, your welfare or your woe.
Combyne therefore in needful League our near conjoined States:
I may your good, naught less can he that thus with me debates.
He is a Bruton (if Exile allow we call him so)
And far from ayding you, that knows himself not to bestoe.
Admit he were received home, what Empier does he sway?
A sorry Islands Moyetie, and far from hence away.
Her Dowry is your Diedeme: what Ioynter can he make?
Not any: give not then to him, from whom ye cannot take.
And Lady (She for whom they strove was present) well I wot,
My love does claim a greater debt, then so to be forgot.
I wish (mine Opposite his want) that Arms might give the right,
It is not dread, but doomed (sweet wench) that thus with tongue I fight.
Proud Bruton (frouning so on Brenn) disclaim in her my dew,
Else thou repyning shall repent: do make thy choice a new.
At least amend thine Error, and mine Envy shall have end:
I need not force so weak a Foe, seek thou so strong a friend.
Norwaies concent, and Lady, be no Conter-mande to this:
Descent not Brenn: conclude her mine: else my Conclusion is,
If not for worth, by force perforce to win her from you all,
Yea though our banished Cops-mate could his British Succors call.
The King of Danes concluded thus: and after scylence short,
The Brutaine Heroes veiled, and did answer in this sort.
Most gracious Norgane Peers, you hear the ouer-tearming taunts
Of this Appelant, that himself, and Scepter ouer-vaunts.
It lesser greeueth he should grudge that I with him co-riue,
Then this so parramptorie speech in youx dispight to wiue.
It greeues, in troth, not for my self, but for he beardeth you,
And seems disdainful of your aid, that does so proudly owe.
How captiously he derogates from me, and mine estate?
And arrogates unto himself, to bring me so in hate.
How daintely his eyes endure so base and Objects vewe?
How despretly does he conclude, and threatens me and you?
Well, bark he, byte he, bragges nor blows shall dare me to defend
A Challenge, where so brave a Prize stands for the Wagers end.
Nor think (vainglorious that thou art) me lesser then a King,
Or greater then by suite, or sword, to prize so rare a thing.
Upbrayd me not with banishment, nor Belyns quarrel touch,
Nor yet my Petite Signorie: nor more then troth by much.
These present Nobles know the cause for which I hither come:
Not as an Exile, but for aid, and they assure me some.
Then know, the cause is honest when their Honors give supplies:
As capable are they of troth, as thou art apt for lies.
My Brothers Kingdom seems, forsooth, an Ouer-match to mine,
My Kingdom, Cutlake, therefore is an Under-match to thine?
Nay, give (and so I hope ye will) the Prize to me, and than,
Let Cutlake with his Crown of Danske vn-crowne me, if he can.
Then he, disabling me to make a Ioynter, happily,
With Denmark such a Ioynters want (if wanting) should supply.
But neither have I such a lack, nor hold I such a love,
As that her Dowry (not in quest) before her self does move.
He harpeth as himself would have, that makes love his Staile:
Else would he sewe in milder sort, and, sewing, fear to fail.
For, Lady, see your Lovers Plea: your love, says he, is debt:
And if not words, nor worthiness, then Armor shall you get.
Brave words, and fit to fear, not feed, a courted Ladies vain.
But say he cannot owe in print, but Soldiour-like and plain:
Nor I, in sooth, more loves my heart then can my tongue explayne.
Conclude we therefore Soldiour-like, and let a Combat yield
Unto the hardier of us twain the honor of the feeld.
If not: then, if my Lords so please, or she thereto agree,
Although thou should by force of Arms subdew her hence to thee,
Yet from thy strongest Hold in Danske I would thy Conquest free.
Lo here my Gage (he terr'd his Glove) thou know the Uictors meede:
(So did he pause, his Pledge untouched, and then did thus proceed)
Then freat thy fill, and worse thy worst: deliver, Lords, your wills:
Ye have experience how this same with bragges, not battle, killes.
He threatens only, I entreat, he claims her of dew,
I wish, and hope for to deserve. The Counsel then withdrewe
themselves aparte: and soon for Brenn a verdict did ensewe.
The Dane enraged failed thence, and rigged out a Fleet,
And did with Brenn, resayling home, at great advantage meet.
Their Ships did grapple, and their swords did sunder life from lim:
So fought they, as their Ships did seem in Seas of blood to swim.
But multitude oppressed Brenn, he hardly did escape,
His Lady will be, nill he, left the King Denmarkes Rape.
Not meanly insolent the Danes hoyst up their home-meant Sails:
But after many crabbed Flawes, and long contrary Gayles,
The Kings and Norgane Ladies Ship was tossed to the Cost
Of Brutaine: where, imprisoned, King Belyn was their Host:
Until, sufficient Pledges had that Denmark it should pay
Continual Tribute to the Brutes, he them dismissed away.
Howbeit Brenn, received now amongst the Gawles, did threate
For Norgane Lady him withheld his Brothers self and Seat:
For Time, alaying Love, did add unto domesticke hate.
He with the Cenouesean Gawles, whose Prince his heir of late
He had espoused, did invade the Empier of his Brother:
And almost did their Battelles join, when thus intreates their Mother.
I dare to name ye Sons, because I am your Mother, yet
I doubt to term you Brothers, that do Brotherhood forget.
These Prodigeies, their wrothfull Sheilds, forbodden Foe to Foe,
Do ill beseem allied hands, even yours allied foe.
O, how seem Oedipus his Sons in you again to strive?
How seem these Swords in me (aye me) Iocasta to reuyue?
I would Dunwallo lived, or ear death had lofte again.
His Monarchy, sufficing Four, but now to small for Twain.
Then either would you, as did he, employ your wounds elswheare:
Or for the smalenes of your Power agree at least for fear,
But pride of rich and rome-some Throones, that wingeth now your darts,
It will (I would not as I fear) work sorrow to your hearts.
My Sons, sweet Sons, attend my words, your Mothers words attend,
And for I am your Mother, do conclude I am your friend:
I cannot council, but entreat, nor yet I can entreat
But as a Woman: and the same whose blood was once your meat.
Hence had ye Milk (She baerd her Pappes) these Arms did hug ye often:
These fyled hands did wype, did wrap, did rock, and lay ye soft:
These Lips did kiss, or Eyes did weep, if that ye were vnqueat,
Then plye I did, with Song, or Sighs, with Dance, with Tongue, or Teate.
For these kind Causes, deer my Sons, disarme your selves: if not,
Then for these bitter tears, that now your Mothers Cheeks do spot:
Often urge I Sons and Mothers Names, Names not to be forgot.
Send hence these Soldiors: ye, my Sons, and none but ye would fight:
When none should rather be at one, if Nature had her right.
What comfort, Beline, shall I speed? sweet Brenn, shall I prevail?
Say yea (sweet Youths) ah yea, say yea: or if I needs must fail,
Say noe: and then will I beginn your Battle with my baiel.
Then then some Stranger, not my Sons, shall close me in the Earth,
When we by Armor ouer-soone shall meet, I fear, in death.
This said, with gushing tears eftsoons she plies the one and other,
Till both did show themselves at length Sons worthy such a Mother:
And with those hands, those altered hands, that lately threatened blooes,
They did embrace: becoming thus continual friends of fooes.
Glad was the Queen: and Beline hild sole Empier: more he had
From Denmark Tribute: and to this a greater honor add,
His daughter Cambra, wedded to the Almayne Prince, gave vain
Unto the Cimbrians, holding Rome so long and warlike game.
Some (if no Error) give to him for foreign Conquests fame.
His Ualour, War, and Peace ^re-past: now speak we of the Knight,
That this side and beyond the Alps subdewed all by fight.
The stateliest Towns in Italy had Brenn their Buylder, and
Even Rome, the terror of the World, did at his mercy stand.
The Senate, giving to the Earth eax-while both war and peace,
Could not themselves, their City, scarce their Cappitoll release.
THeir Gander Feast, what Manlius and Camillus did therein,
How This the Cappitole, and That from Brenn his Spoils did win,
I pretermit. The three-topt Mount Parnassus had beloe
Appollos Temple, whether men for Oracles did go.
This, with the God and Goods the Gawles did put to sack and spoil:
And whilst, encamped here, they kept such sacraligious coil,
The God, or rather Devil, whom The Almighty did permit,
His Deity profaned, to deceive the world in it,
With Tempests, Earthquakes, Stench, and Sights, so cryde the Spolers quit,
That most did perrish, few disparse, and all were out of heart,
Yea Brenn himself discouraged did change in every part.
He looking after, and upon, the scattered, and the slain,
Did seem a second Cadmus, save less patient of his pain.
And, shaming to be seen to weep, devoured sightles tears:
And in these words his hearty greefes did number to their Ears.
Sweet Soldiers leave me to my self, it likes me that ye leave me,
More takes your tarriance from my health then can these plagues bereave me.
Each of these Mass of Courses dead, has bin a death to me,
Deliver then mine Eyes of you, too many deaths I see.
Survive, and tell the Western World what we exployted have:
How that to Rome, amidst her Roof, the Maiden Sack we gave.
Tell of our Battelles, Booties, and our Buyldings: lastly tell
(An honor to our Overthrow) that we at Delphos fell
By wounds divine, no human Arms. But God, who so thou be,
Less is thy courage then thy means, else would thou cope with me,
As Pluto with Alcides did, and Mars sometimes with men:
Do me like honor, and these Graves shall lightly grieve me then.
But thou full little dare so. Nay I do dare to much,
That with my so unhallowed tongue thy Deity dare touch.
Ah, see these Slaughters, and reserve alive this small Remain,
Let last me, and only me, eeke to the number slain.
But bootlesse to a ruthles God I see my prayers spent,
As haughtelie do thou revenge, as humbly I repent.
Well (God of Delphos) since our tears, this Incence, nor these Graves,
Appease thine ire, parsist to plague this flesh, that henceforth craves
No pity: to the Hebrewe God, of power exceeding thine,
(Men say) appeal I, and bequeath the Souls of me and mine:
Accept my simple Legacy, O Godhood most deuyne,
Said Brenn. And with a selfe-wrought wound did perrish: and his men
Departing, won, and left the name to Gallo-Grecia then.
The rightuous Gorboman might add fresh Subject to our Muse,
But skipping to his Fathers Sons, of them it thus ensewes.
Five years had Archigallo reigned, when, hated doing wrong,
He was deprived of his Realm, and lived vagrant long,
And fearing all that frended none, kept close the Woods among.
There Elidurus hunting found his wretched Brother, and
They gasing each in others face, with sighs and weepings stand.
A King, as Elidurus is, once was I thinks his brother,
A wretch, as Archigallo is, I may be thinks the other.
The lowly King alights anon, and when they had embraced,
Then Archigallo secretly in Ebranks Town was placed:
In which, the King commanding so, the Nobles did convent,
To whom did Elidurus thus inform of his intent.
If Fortune had bin cross (my Lords) to me, or any fear
Of Armor were approaching us, I should perchance appear
Faint, and false-harted in my charge, but ever lackt the one,
Nor has the other likelihood, for quietler rules none.
Yet Kings may think their heads to weak their Dyademes to sustain,
For endless cares concur with Crowns, a bitter sweet is Rain:
Howbeit, Subjects falsely judge their Princes blessed are,
When both of peace and perrilles they contain to common care,
And yet for this they grudgingly from Pounds a Penny spare.
Not these, my Lords, make me disclame in it which all pursue,
But Justice biddes my Brothers right I should commend to you.
This one Request includes, I know, exceeding dangers twain,
To me, if for a private life I change a public Rain,
To you, if whom ye have deprived ye shall bestoore again.
But for I have done right, no wrong, though Justice wants not fooes,
And though unto a Magistrate digrading brings woes,
Yet to the bad a conscience good may save it self oppoes.
Nor be ye fearful of revenge, that did no more then right:
Even Archigallo will confess his sin, and clear your spite:
Whose restitution (were he wrong) at least shall you acquire.
You hassard less, re-kinginge him, then I un king'^ to be,
And Danger ouer-dares, if it from Justice disagree.
Then, good my Lords, do right his wrong, at leastwise do him right,
Whose smarte, no doubt, has wrought in him a reconsciled spright.
Just Gorboman his brotherhood, succeding in their Line,
Then Archigallo should be King, to him let me resyne.
So much the King did urge this Text, that Archigallo raynde:
And Elidurus willingly in private life remaynde:
The one restored, for his late depryuing nothing mou'de,
The other (wonders tell I now) dis-crowned yet beloved.
Ten years did Archigallo rain, beloved well, and dyed:
And Elidurus once again the Kingly Throne supplied:
Until his Brothers secondly depoose him of his rain,
But they deceasing, thirdly he was crowned King again:
And so, until his Dying day, with honor did remain.
A many Kings whose good or bad no Wrighter has displayde
Did follow: Lud, and Hely, for their stately buyldings maid
Rest chiefly famous: nor forget King Bledgabred I shall,
Whom Brutons did their Glee-god for his skill in Music call.
The next whose days gave famous deeds, Cassiuelan is fayde:
Whom Caius Julius Caesar did with Armor thus inuayde.
CHAP. XVII.
THis Conqueror of Gallia, found his Uictory prolonged
By British Succoures, and for it, pretending to be wronged,
Did send for Tribute: threatening else to bring the Brutons War.
The former going forward first, the Albinests to bar
A common fooe, concur as friends: and now was come the Spring,
When Caesar out of War-wonne France victorious Trowpes did bring.
But eassier won the Grecians land at Pargama by much,
Then got the Latins footing here, their Contraries were such.
Ye might have seen of Hectors race, tenn thousand Hectors here,
With policy on either part, the Romans buying deer
The bloddy Shoore: the water yet less deerer then the land
To them, whom valiantly to proof the Ilanders withstand.
Often battle they, the Brutons still victorious, and in vain
Their fooes were valiant: only here was Caesar's force in wayne.
And as our men unto his men were as tempestious Thunder,
So did his ankred Ships on Seas by Tempest dash in sonder.
But twice (quod Caesar) Fortune, thou weart opposite to mine,
But thirdly here, to Caesar's self thou (wontles) doste declyne.
Conuaying than his weerie men into his wasted Ships,
To Gallia, there to Winter them, he miscontented slippes.
Of this same Uictorie did spring security and strife,
The Scotts and Pichtes did sunder hence, the Brutons,, over ryffe
In Largess, making frollike Cheer, a quarrel then aroes
Betwixt the king and Luds false Son, and they dis-ioyne as fooe^:
That Caesar slippes Advantage such were error to suppooes.
Even of the Brutons some there were recalling back the Foe,
And Winter past, with dubled power he back again did roe.
The Romans more, the Brutons they far fewer then before,
Offend, defend, fight for, fence from, to winn, and ward the Shore.
But Caesar landed: and ensew'd continual cruel fight,
Thrice put the fearce Cassiuelanes the Caesarines to flight:
And still the King encouraging in every wing appears,
So giving needles spurs to sight, his Soldiers brookt not fears:
Nor little did the Cornish Belles offend the Roman ears.
When Caesar's often successes fight had tired him and his,
Inringed with his mayhmed Camp, the Roman speaks this:
Are these same Bands, those self-same Bands, yt never faught in vain?
And ye the men, that following still my Standard, still did gain?
Even these, and ye, are very those: nor can I discommend
Your manhoodes, that with lesser work, brought greater Wars to end.
But not, as was my wont to wright, the Senate now shall reed,
I came: I saw: I ouer-came: such Foes forbid such speed.
Nor let the Senate muse, for Troy with Troy does here contend:
This warlike people (fame is so) from whence sprung we descend.
Yea, if AEneas had not left the Phrygian Gods to us,
And Greeks Palladium shipped to Greece, this Fortune foyling thus,
I would have thought those very Gods had followed our anoy:
But them have we, these only have undaunted hearts from Troy.
But what? shall Caesar doubt to fight against so brave a Foe?
No, Caesar's Tryumphes with their Spoils shall give the brauer shoe.
Ye Gods that guide our Capital, Mount Palatin thou Throne
Of stately Rome, ye Followers too of her affairs each one,
Delay not, but deprive me quite my Triumphs, now in hand,
Nor let me live, if so I leave unconquered this Land:
This Land, the last of Western Isles, an Isle unknown ere this,
Which famous now, through Caesar's fight, and our misfortune is.
Enough, my fellow friends in Arms, enough we Romans have
To seek revenge: your Conquest is a Country rich and brave:
And (which persuades Uictorie) in Troynouant there be,
That hold that City to our use: the Brutons disagree,
No Scot or Pichte assisting them in rhese our Wars I see.
Their ciuell strife will prove their skourge, how stout soere they seem,
And perpetuity does fail in every thing extreme.
Not Fortune still is good or bad, and now let be our day:
To long we live, if that so long we shall on triffles stay,
Said Caesar: and with such his words did so inflame his men,
That with less patience did they live, then linger battle then.
The Romans bid the Ba^e, and then did cruel War begin:
And little wanted, that the Brutes the better did not win.
But Caesar so foresawe Supplies, and Succors here and theare,
Persuading this, dissuading that, controuling flight and fear,
That, after many Romans slain, the Brutons took their flight
To Southern Shoores: whereas to proof Cassiuelan did fight
With often Erruptions out of Woods: until the traytrous Knight,
The Earl of London yeeldes his Charge and City to the Foe,
Through which disloyal presedent did other Cities foe:
And then with hard-won Tribute hence the Conqueror did go.
BUt he, that won in every War, at Rome in ciuell Robe
Was stabbed to death: no certentie is underneath the Globe.
The good are envied of the bad, and glory finds disdain,
And people are in constancy as April is in rain:
Whereof, amidst our serious pen, this Fable intertayne.
An Ass, an Old Man, and a Boy, did through a City pass,
And whilst the wanton boy did ride, the old man led the Ass:
See yonder doting fool, said Folk, that crauleth scarce for age,
Does set the boy upon his Ass, and makes himself his Page.
Anon the blamed Boy alightes, and lets the Old Man ride,
And, as the old man did before, the boy the Ass did gide:
But passing so, the people then did much the old man blame,
And told him, Chur^e, thy limbs be tough, ye Boy should ride for shame.
The fault thus found, both man and boy did back the Ass and ride,
Then that the Ass was ouer-charg'd each man that met them cride.
Now both a-light, and go on foot, and lead the empty Beast,
But then the people laugh, and say, that one might ride at least.
With it they both did vndershore the Ass on either side,
But then the wondering people did that witles pranke deride.
The old man seeing by no ways he could the people please,
Not blameles then, did drive the Ass and drown him in the Seas.
Thus whilst we be, it will not be, that any pleases all:
Else had bin wanting, worthily, the noble Caesar's fall.
CHAP. XVIII.
AVgustus, quayling Antonie, was Emperor alone:
In whose vn-foed Monarchy our common health was known.
The Brooser of the Serpents head, the Woman's promised Seed,
The Second in the Trinity, the Food our souls to feed.
The Uine, the Light, the Door, the Way, the Shepherd of us all,
Whose Manhood joined to Deity did Ransom us from thrall,
That was, and is, and evermore will be the same to his,
That sleeps to none that wake to him, that turns our Curse to bliss,
Whom, yet unseen, the Patriarchs saw, the Prophets have fortold,
The Apostles preached, the Saints addore, and Martiers do behold,
The same ( Augustus Emperor) in Palastine was borne,
Amongst his own, and yet his own bid cross their Bliss in skorne:
Bi-formed Ianus then in Mewe: so would this Prince of peace,
That Caesar's Edict every where should Mars his envy ceace.
THen reigned here King Cymbelin, King Theomantius son:
Next him Guiderius, that withheld the Tribute Caesar won.
The Romans that, in our respect, neglected Misia, Spain,
Armenia, France, and Siria, then Recusants of their Rain,
Not by their Captains, but himself the Emperor of Rome,
Into relapsed Brutaine with imperial Ensigns come.
Then hotter then the Punick Wars to Romans did begin:
And Claudius loses valiantly all that the Brutons win.
But Romish Hamo, from whose death Southhampton had that name,
In British Arms salutes the King, and slew by gyle the same.
Duke Aruiragus, using then the Armor of the King,
Maintained fight, and won the field ere Brutons knew the thing.
This hardy Knight, his Brother slain, was Crowned in his place:
And with his winnings, also won the Emperor to grace:
Who sending for his Daughter fair Genissa, so did end
The Wars in Wedding: and away did Claudius Caesar wend.
But Aruiragus after this revolted, and to stay
The havoc made of Romans here came succors every day.
His Queen Genissa, childing dyed, when his Revolt she knew:
And Voada, deuorsed late, became his Queen of new.
Then he, that at Jerusalem the fatal siege begone,
Was sent from Rome: and warring here, the wonted Tribute won:
And through his gentle Uictorie, bound Aruiragus still
A friend to Caesar, whom the King adopted heir by will.
I here omit the dismal War in the Isle of Nona made
Against the Romans, whom the Priests the Drudes invade
With banning words, and women, with their hair untrussed, stand
With brands of fire in furious wise about their desperate band:
The King deceased, Voada and her two Daughters, they
Abused by the Roman Lords, do hotter wars assay.
THe noble Scot King Corbred, he confeddrats with the King
of Pichtes, and they and British Peers to field their Armies bring,
To aid the Queen of Brutes: that like the Amazonian Dame
That beating down the bloody Greeks in Priams succor came,
Had pight her Iauelen at her feet, when entered in among
The fearce Confedrates, thus she spoke amidst the scylent throng:
My state and sex, not hand or heart, most valiant friends, withhild
Me wretched Cause of your repaier, by wicked Romans ild,
From that revenge which I do wish, and ye have cause to work:
In which, suppose not Voada in female fears to lorke.
For lo my self, unlike my self, and these same Ladies fair
In Armor, not to shrink an ynch where hottest doings are.
Even we do dare to bid the Bace, and you your selves shall see
Your selves to come behind in Arms, the Romans too that be
Such Conquerors, and valiantly can womenkind oppress,
Shall know that British women can their Romish wrongs redress.
Then arm ye with like courages as Ladies shall present,
Whom ye, nor wounds, nor death, the praise of Onset shall prevent.
Nor envy that our Martial rage exceedes your manly ire,
For by how much more we endewer, so much more we desire
Revenge on those, in whose default we are unhallowed thus,
Whilst they forget themselves for men, or to be borne of us.
Ye yield them Tribute, and from us their Legions have their pay:
Thus were to much, but more then thus the haughty Tyrants sway.
That I am Queen, from being wronged does nothing me protect:
Their Rapes against my Daughters both I also might object:
They Maids deflower, they Wives enforce, and use their wills in all,
And yet we live deferring fight, inferring so our fall.
But valiant Brutons, ventrous Scotts, and warlike Pichtes I err,
Exhorting, whom I should dehorte your fearcenes to defer.
Less courage more considerat would make your Foes to quake:
My heart has joyed to see your hands the Roman Standards take,
But when as force, and Fortune fayld, that you with teeth should sight,
And in the faces of their Foes your women in dispight
Should fling their sucking Babes, I hild such valentnes but vain:
Enforced flight it is no shame, such Flyers fight again.
Well, here ye are, that with the King my valiant Brother dead
the Latins, wondering at your Prowes, through Rome in triumph lead:
Ye Mars-stard Pichtes of Scythian breed are here Coleagues: and more,
Ye Dardan Brutes, last named, but in valor meant before:
In your Conduct, most knightly Friends, I supersede the rest:
Ye come to fight, and we in sight to hope and help our best.
Scarce did this brave Bellona end, when as the Battelles join,
And life and death was bought and sold with courage, not with coin.
Above the rest the Queen of Brutes through blood did cut her way,
Six thousand Ladies Lyons-like exployting like a Fray:
Till Cattus with his Roman Arms subdewed, flead away.
Of Romans seventy thousand dyed, of Brutons then were slain
Twice fifteen thousand, and the rest their ceased freedom gain.
When valiant Plancius, Presedent in Gallia, heard such news,
He waffes an Army out of France, and Voada pursewes.
The Albinestes to aid the Queen assemble at her call,
And then began a second War, nor was the slaughter small.
The Brutons, barring flight, had closde themselves with Waines about,
In which the awles women stood, suruaying who was stout,
Controuling Cowards, and among did fill the air with dinne:
But, valiant though the Brutones were, the day the Romans win.
In vain the furious women then on Sons and Husbands call,
Themselves with Sons and Husbands did by adverse weapons fall.
Queen Voade past help, and hope, betook her self to flight:
Till looking back, vnfollowed then, and having in her sight
The senceles Troukes of slaughtred friends, she leaning on her Lance
Did power forth tears, and grew at length impatient of the chance,
And said: my self, my trusty friends, will with my dearest blood
Keep Obite to your happy Gosses, that for your Countries good
Be as you be, and I will be: no Roman sword shall boste
Of my dispatch, So on her Lance she yielded up her Ghost.
Her Daughter then, for to revenge her friends upon her foes,
Assisted by the vanquished, against the Uictors roes,
And slaughtring through ye Roman Tents the brave Virago goes:
Till Plancius, ever provident of perrilles, brought supplies,
What time Vodicia, urging wounds, with constant courage dies.
SUch business hanging, Lucius here the first Baptized King
dyed issules: and for the Crown did long contention spring.
At length Constantius Caesar (for the Brutons yielded so)
Did Helen, Colis daughter wed: of her do praysings go
For finding of the holly Cross, and her devotion raier:
From These proceeded Constantine, the most undoubted haier
Both to the Roman Monarchy, and this his Parents Reame.
He turned the Empiers ebbing pomp into her flowing stream,
And was a Prince religious: yet (with reverence be it said)
If less religious, then not he the Empier had decayed,
By largess to a pompeous Priest, Appostolique ere then,
But now intruding even on God, insulting over men.
Nor sparest thou his native Realm that seized thee of Rome,
Admit his franknesse were a fault (as is their common dome,
That say he made a Paul a Salve, that made a Priest a Prince,
And in that grace the Empiers grace disgraced ever since)
Find thou no fault, with such a fault whereby he fitted thee:
But if thou will ungrateful prove, ungracious cease to be:
A Traitors Tutor is a.K. nor force we such a.T.
Let such a Prelate bless or banne, with Candle Book or Bell,
He cannot raise himself to heaven, nor rid a knave from hell.
Uayne are his Bulls, engendring Calves, sent hither from his Stalles,
To feed (mad Fools) the Foul, that by his name the Sender calls.
Nor think he dreamed this in vain, that dreamed thus of late:
One seemed to have passed Styx, and entering Plutos gate,
Saw Hecat new canonized the Sourantisse of Hell:
And Pluto bad it hollyday, for all which there did dwell.
Sterue Minos, and grinne Radymant, descend their duskie rooms:
The Docket to was clear of Gosts, adiorn'd to after doomes:
The Furies, and the deadly Sins, with their inuectiue Scroles
Depart the Bar: the Feendes rake up their ever burning Coals:
The Elues, and Faries, taking fists did hop a merry Round:
And Cerberus had lapp enough: and Charon leisure found:
The ayrie Sprightes, the walking Flaures, and Goblines great and small,
Had there good cheer, and company, and sport the Devil and all.
To Tantalus the shrinking flood nor starting fruit were such:
Nor Tityus his bowelles did the hungry Uultur touch:
Upon his Stone sat Cisaphus: Ixeon on his Wheel:
The Belides upon their Tubbes: no wonted toil they feel.
Till in this anticke Festival, these last rescyted five,
Of dignities, for duties there, they earnestly did strive:
And then the quarrel grew so hot that hell was hell again,
And flocking Gosts did seu'rally their Fauctors part maintain.
With Cisaphus took part the Gosts of mynds that did aspire,
And by ambicious clyming fell, deserts unlike desire.
With Tantalus hild starued Gosts, whose pleasure was their pain,
Whose ever Hords had never use, and gettings had no gain.
To Belides assisted Souls of Unthriftes, whose supplies
Did pass from the^ a Sea through Ciues, whose wastes no wealths suffice.
Unto Ixeon stood their Sprights that had their lusts for law,
Rebellants to a common good, and sinning without awe.
To Tityus lastly joined Gosts, whose hearts did empty hate
As Todes their poison, growing when it seems to abate.
About fly Apples, Stones, and Tubbes, the Wheel was tumbled down,
The Uultur girds, no Ghost but had at least a broken crown.
This skufling and confedracie in hell made such a rear,
That, wontles of such braules and blows, Proserpine did fear.
But Pluto, laughing, told his Bride to Ela it was fay:
To morrowes dinne should prove that same to be a ciuell day:
In peace, these were their practices on earth, and here in hell
(Save that their Souls have never peace) we find them as they fell.
They work to me, each of these five, though daily coumpt I ask,
Do newly number Million Souls, whose torments is their task.
The Queen of Such, not free of fear, replied thus again,
And yet, me thinks, that Pluto should have pity on their pain.
He lowers: and Feast with Fray had end, and drink did every Soul
Of Lethe: who, their joys forgot, even yet in torments houle:
Nay Pluto must be Pluto still, and so I will (quoth he,)
For this same only day the Gosts indebted are to thee:
For as the like shall never come, so never like befell,
But henceforth all, yea Prince, and Pope, shall ever find it hell:
So dreamed one: but ouer-long fantazies I dwell.
CHAP. XIX.
THe Cosen of great Constantyne in Rome and here succeedes:
Betwixt the Brutes, the Scotts, and Pichtes, continual trouble breeds:
And long the reg'ment of this Land the Romans did inioye,
Transmitting Captains evermore as Foes did here anoye.
But Rome it self declined now, and Brutaine was oppressed,
No longer were the Scottish Spoils by Roman swords redrest.
Then ends the Tribute, then began new troubles, worser far
Then Tribute: for the Scotts and Pichtes infer consuming war.
The Brutons, under Rome secure, as men that did rely
On others, were disabled now by Martial means to try
The fame of fight: but Captaineles, confusedly they deal,
And give a wretched instant of an headles Commonweal:
And whom so many Roman Peers, Grand-Captaines of such might,
Of whom Nine Emperors themselves, in persons here did sight,
Could hardly foil, were fronted now even of a barbrous Foe:
And at the point (a wondrous change) their Country to forgo.
Such fruit has ease, such policy did serve the Romans turn,
Who, wayning Martial mynds, themselves the quietler here soiurne.
The Brutons thus dispoy^d of A^mes, and courage in effect,
Of Prince, of Captains, and advise, their business to direct,
Dispatch their Legate to the Land Deminatiue in name
To Brutaine: where the Legate thus his Ambassie did frame:
The back-slide of our helples friends, the downfall of our state,
Our lack of Prince, of people, and our wealth not now as late,
The savage dealing of our Foes, consuming ours and us,
Is cause (right mighty King) that we approach thy present thus.
Not for we are in blood allied, or that whilst Fortune smiled
Your Ancestors had rule from us, not for the Dames defiled
At Cullin, who withstanding lust for it did loose their lives,
That else to Conon and his Knights had lived noble wives,
We are imboldned in our suite: though all of these might move:
But for our former Wants, O King, and for thine own behoue,
Great Brutaine does submit it self thy Subject (if thou please.)
Or else dispose it at thy will: provided we have ease
Against such foes, as would not save our lives to have our Land:
Whom to conclude (except thou help) we never may withstand.
The King Aldroen pitying much the Cause of his Allies,
Armed thence his brother Constantine, a Captain stout and wise.
He chacing hence the Scotts and Pichtes, with glory wore the Crown,
And through his virtue stayed up a Kingdom sinking down.
WIthin a while did Vortiger the Duke of Cornwalle rain,
When Constans son of Constantine he traytrously had slain.
The Scotts did ruffle then anew, nor did the King affye
In Brutons, for they hated him, and reason had they why:
And Saxon Fleetes from Germany in Armor here ariue,
Through whose support, ye King in wars against the Scotts did thrive.
The Foe by Hengest foiled thus, he and his Brother git
The chiefest credit with the King, but few gainsaying it,
Necessity of Soldiers here so well for them did fit.
And Hengests Daughter intertayn'd King Vortiger so well,
That to misliking of his wife, and liking her he fell:
And sotted thus in foreign love, did wed the Saxon Wench:
Which wrought unto the Saxons weal, but to the Brutes offense.
For whatsoere the Queen did ask, the King would not deny,
Until his Subjects rann to Arms, and made the Saxons fly:
And, putting down the Father, then did set up Vortimer,
Who, poisoned by his Stepdame, they restored Vortiger:
With this condition, that he should no Saxons intertayne.
But Hengest hearing from the Queen that Vortimer was slain,
And Vortiger his Sonne-in-lawe re-kinged did resayle
With Saxon forces: though with fraud, not force, he did prevail.
For thus by policy he did the Brutons circumuent:
He craved Parlie, as a man that were to quietness bent:
The place appointed, Parlants him in simple meaning meet
Far from their Army all unarmed, whom Saxon Traitors greet
With deadly wounds, by hidden knives, and held the King with them:
Confounding so the British Oste. Nor cease they to contemn
Both Christian rightes, and ciuell Rule, subuerting either twain:
And what they would of Vortiger through fearful threats they gain.
And plant themselves in Southfolke, Kent, and elsewhere at their will:
And ruffling run throughout the Land oppressing Brutons still.
The King and Brutons flead to Wales, and Feend-got Marlyn theare
Bewrayed more, then I believe, or credit seems to bear:
As showing how the Castle work reared daily, fell by night
By shaking of two Dragons great that underneath it fight,
With other wonders, tedious, if not trothles, to resight.
Aurelius Ambrose, brother to King Constans murdered late,
From either Bruton having aid, won so the Kingly state:
And, ere that Hengest or his son stout Octa he subdew'd,
First to revenge his Brothers death he Vortiger pursew'd.
In vain the Welsh wild Mountains fence the flyer from his Foe,
Or Gerneth Castle, when as flames throughout the buildings go:
In midst whereof the wretched King did end his days in woe.
THe Brutons thus had peace awhile, till Vortigerus Son,
And Guillamour the Irish King, in new Conflicts begone:
Whom, whilst that Vter valiantly in Wales to wrack did bring,
His brother Ambrose did decease, and Vter then was King.
What Vter did by Marlyns Art, in compassing his will
Upon the Wife of Garolus, transfigured by skill
Into the likeness of her Lord, on whom he got a son
Renowned Arthur: or to name the Acts by Vter done,
Were much and needles: only note he was a valiant Prince,
But such as was his noble Son, was not before or since.
Yet blazing Arthur, as have some, I might be ouer-seene:
He was Uictorious, making one amongst the Worthiest meene.
But (with his pardon) if I vouch his world of Kingdoms won,
I am no Poet, and for lack of pardone were undone.
His Scottish, Irish, Almaine, French, and Saxone Battelles got,
Yield fame sufficient: these seem true, the rest I credit not.
But Brutone is my task, and to my task I will retier:
Twelve times the Saxone Princes here against him did conspier,
And Arthur in twelve Battelles great went Uanquishor away:
Howbeit Saxone forces still amongst the Brutons stay.
This King to intertaine discourse, and so to understand,
What Accedents in after-tymes should happen in this Land,
He with the British Prophet then of Sequelles fell in hand.
Of Syx long after Kings the man, not borne of human seed,
Did Prophecy, and many things, that came to pass in deed.
Now Arthur, chief of Cheualrie, had set his Crown at stay,
And to his Nephewe Mordred did commit thereof the sway,
When with his Knights, the wonder of the world for Martial deeds,
Beyond the Seas in foreign fights he luckely proceeds:
Till faithless Mordred calde him back that forward goes with fame,
For at his Uncles Dyademe he traytrously did ame.
Twice Arthur won of him the field, and thirdly slew his Foe,
When deadly wounded, he himself victorious dyed foe.
INterred then with public playnts, and issules, ensewes
A drouping of the British state: the Saxon still subdewes,
Howbeit worthy Kings succeeded: but Destiny withs^ood
The aunciant Scepter to inure in Bruts succeeding blood.
Unlou'd Careticus was he that lost the Goal at length:
Whenceforth, in vain, to win their loss ye Brutons use their strength*
Yea God, that as it pleases him, does place or dispossess,
When foes, nor foyles, nor any force, their courage might suppress,
Seemed partial in the Saxon Cause, and with a Plague did cross
The Brutons, that had else, at least, rebated from their loss:
For Cadwane, and Cadwallyne, and Cadwallader, the last
But not the least, for valarous, of British Princes past,
Brought out of Wales such knightly Wars as made their foes aghast.
The Plague (worse spoyler then ye Wars) left Cambre almost waste,
Which to avoid, the remnant Brutes into their Ships did haste.
Cadwallader, in leaving thus his native Shore he fixed
His eyes from whence his body should, and with his sighs he mixed
His royal tears, which giving place, he speaks thus betwixt.
Sweet Brutaine (for I yet must use that sweet, and ceasing name)
Adewe, thy King bids thee adewe, whose flight no weapons frame:
But God co^maunds, his Wroth co^maunds, all counter-maund is vain,
Else, for thy love, to dye in thee were life to thy Remain.
Thus times have turns, thus Fortune still is flying to and fro:
What was not, is: what is, shall cease: some come, and others go:
So, Brutaine, thou of Nation and of name endewrest change,
Now balking us whom thou have bread, and brooking people strange.
Yet (if I shoot not past mine aim) a world of time from me,
Part of our blood, in highest pomp, shall Englands glory be:
And chiefly, when unto a First succeedes a second She.
But, leaving speeches ominous: Cadwallader is woe,
That seeing death determines grief, he dies not on his foe.
Ah, Fortune fails mighty Ones, and meaner does advance:
The might Empier Rome has change, then Brutaine brook thy chance:
Let it suffice thou were before, and after Rome in fame:
And to endure what God intends were sin to coumpt a shame.
Nor vaunt, ye Saxons, of our flight: but if ye needs will vaunt,
Then vaunt of this, that God displaced whom you could never daunt.
This said, ye tears contrould his tongue, and sails wrought land from sight:
When (save a Remnant small) the Isle was rid of Brutons quight.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF ALBIONS ENGLAND.
CHAP. XX.
THE Brutons thus departed hence, Seven Kingdoms here begone:
Where diversely in diverse broils the Saxons lost and won.
King Edell and King Adelbright in Diria jointly rain:
In loyal concord during life these Kingly friends remain.
When Adelbright should leave his life, to Edell thus he says:
By those same bonds of happy love, that held us friends always,
By our by-parted Crown, of which the Moyetie is mine,
By God, to whom my Soul must pass, and so in time may thine,
I pray thee, nay I Conjure thee, to nourish as thine own
Thy Niece my Daughter Argentile, till she to age be grown,
And then, as thou receiuest it, resign to her my Throne.
A promise had for this Bequest, the Testator he dies:
But all that Edell undertook, he afterward denies.
Yet well he fosters for a time the Damsel that was grown
The fairest Lady under heaven: whose beauty being known,
A many Princes seek her love, but none might her obtain:
For grippell Edell to himself her Kingdom sought to gain,
And for that cause, from sight of such he did his Ward restrain.
By chance one Curan, son unto a Prince in Danske did see
The Maid, with whom he fell in love as much as one might be.
Unhappie Youth, what should he do? his Saint was kept in Mewe,
Nor he, nor any Nobleman admitted to her vewe.
One while in Malancholy fits he pynes himself away,
Anon he thought by force of Arms to win her if he may,
And still against the Kings restraint did secretly inuay.
At length the high Controller Love, whom none may disobay,
Imbased him from Lordlynes, unto a Kitchen Drudge:
That so at least of life or death she might become his Judge.
Access so had to see, and speak, he did his love bewray
And tells his bearth: her answer was she husbandles would stay.
Mean while the King did beat his brains his booty to achiue,
Not caring what became of her, so he by her might thrive:
At last his resolution was some Pessant should her wiue.
And (which was working to his wish) he did observe with joy
How Curan, whom he thought a Drudge, escaped many an amorous toy^.
The King, perceiving such his vain, promotes his Uassall still,
Least that the bacenesse of the man should let perhaps his will.
Assured therefore of his love, but not suspecting who
The Lover was, the King himself in his behalf did owe.
The Lady, resolute from love, unkindly takes that he
Should bar the Noble, and unto so base a Match agree:
And therefore, shifting out of doors, departed thence by stealth,
Preferring poverty before a dangerous life in wealth.
When Curan heard of her escape, the anguish in his heart
Was more then much, and after her from Court he did depart:
Forgetful of himself, his bearth, his Country, friends, and all,
And only mynding (whom he mist) the Foundresse of his thrall.
Nor means he after to frequent or Court, or stately Towns,
But sollitarilie to live, amongst the Country grownes.
A brace of years he lived thus, well pleased so to live,
And Shepheard-like to feed a Flock, himself did wholly give.
So wasting love, by work, and want, grew almost to the Waene:
But then began a second Love, the worser of the twaene,
A Country we^ch, a Neatheards Maid, where Curan kept his Sheep
Did feed her Drove: and now on her was all the Shepherds keep.
He borrowed, on the working days, his holly Russets often:
And of the Bacons fat, to make his Startups black and soft:
And least his Tarbox should offend he left it at the Fold:
Sweet Growte, or Whigge, his Bottle had as much as it might hold:
A Sheeue of bread as brown as Nut, and Cheese as white as Snow,
And Wyldings, or the Seasons fruit, he did in Skrippe bestow:
And whilst his py-bald Curre did sleep, and Sheep-hooke lay him by,
On hollow Quilles of oten Straw he pyped melody.
But when he spyed her his Saint, he wipte his greasy Shoes,
And cleared the driuell from his beard, and thus the Shepherd owes.
I have, sweet Wench, a piece of Cheese as good as tooth may chawe:
And bread, and Wyldings, souling well: and therewithal did draw
His Lardrie: and in eating, see you Crumpled Ewe (quoth he)
Did twinne this fall, and twinne should thou if I might tupp with thee.
Thou art to eluish, faith thou art to eluish, and to coye:
Am I, I pray thee, beggarly that such a Flock enjoy?
I wis I am not: yet that thou do hold me in disdain
Is brimme abroad, and made a gibe to all that keep this Plain.
There be as quaint (at least that think themselves as quaint) that crave
The Match, which thou (I wot not why) may, but mislik'st to have.
How would thou match? (for well I wot, thou art a female) I,
I know not her that willingly with Mayden-head would dye.
The Plowmans labor has no end, and he a Churl will prove:
The Craftsman has more work in hand, then fitteth unto love:
The Merchant traffaquing abroad, suspects his wife at home:
A Youth will play the Wanton, and an old man prove a Mome:
Then choose a Shepherd. With the Sun he does his Flock unfold,
And all the day on Hill or Plain he merry chat can hold:
And with the Sun does fold again, then iogging home betyme,
He turns a Crabb, or tunes a Round, or sings some merry ryme:
Nor lackes he gleefull tails to tell, whilst that the Bole does trot:
And sits singing care-away, till he to bed has got:
There sleeps he soundly all the night, forgetting Morrow caeres,
Nor fears he blasting of his Corn, or vttring of his w^eres,
Or storms by Seas, or stirs on Land, or crack of credit lost,
Not spending franklier then his flock shall still defray the cost.
Well wot I, sooth they say, that say: more quiet nights and days
The Shepherd sleeps and wakes then he whose Cattle he does graize.
Believe me Less, a King is but a man, and so am I:
Co^^ent is worth a Monarchy, and mischiefs hit the hye.
As late it did a King and his, not dying far from hence:
Who left a Daughter, (save thy self) for faier, a matchles wench:
(Here did he pause, as if his tongue had made his heart offense.)
The Neatresse longing for the rest, did egg him on to tell
How fair she was, and who she was. She boore (quoth he) the bell
For beauty: though I clownish am, I know what beauty is,
Or did I not, yet seeing thee, I senceles were to mis.
Suppose her beauty Hellens-like, or Hellens somewhat less,
And every Star consorting to a puer complexion guess.
Her Stature comely tall, her gate well graced, and her wit
To marvel at, not meddell with, as matchles I omit.
A Globe-like head, a gold-like haier, a Forhead smooth and hye,
An euen-Nose, on either side stood out a graish Eye:
Two rosy Cheeks, round ruddie Lips, white just set Teeth within,
A Mouth in mean, and underneath a round and dimpled Chin.
Her snowish Neck, wlth bluish Uaynes, stood bolt upright upon
Her portly Shoulders: beating Balls, her vayned Breasts, anon
Add more to beauty: wand-like was her Middell, falling still,
And rising whereas women rise: but ouerskip I will,
What Males in females ouerskip, ymagin nothing ill.
And more, her long and limber Arms, had white and azure Wristes:
And slender Fingers answer to her smooth and lilly Fistes.
A Leg in print, and pretty Foot: conjecture of the rest,
For amorous Eyes, observing form, think parts obscured best.
With these (oh thing divine) with these, her Tongue of speech was spaer:
But speaking, Venus seemed to speak the Ball from I Would to baer.
With Pallas Juno, and with both her self contends in face:
Where equal mixture did not want of mild and stately grace.
Her smyles were sober, and her looks were cheerful unto all:
And such as neither wanton seem, nor waward, melt, nor gall.
A quiet mind, a patient mood, and not disdayning any:
Not gybing, gadding, gawdie, and her faculties were many.
A Nymph, no tung, no heart, no Eye, might praise, might wish, might see,
For Life, for Love, for Form, more good, more worth, more fair, then she:
Yea such an one, as such was none, save only she was such:
Of Argentile to say the most, were to be scylent much.
I knew the Lady very well, but worthles of such praes,
The Neatresse said: and muse I do, a Shepherd thus should blaze
The Coote of Beauty. Credit me, thy latter speech bewraies
Thy clownish shape, a coined show. But wherefore do thou weep?
(The Shepherd wept, and she was woe, and both did scylence keep.)
In troth, quoth he, I am not such as seeming I profess:
But then for her, and now for thee, I from my self digress.
Her loved I, (wretch that I am, a Recreant to be)
I loved her, that hated love: but now I dye for thee.
At Kirkland is my Fathers Court, and Curan is my name,
In Edels Court sometimes in pomp, till Love contrould the same:
But now. What now? dear heart how now? what aylest thou to weep?
(The Damsel wept, and he was woe, and both did scylence keep.)
I grant, quoth she, it was too much, that you did love so much:
But whom your former could not move, your second love does touch.
Thy twice beloved Argentile, submits her to thee:
And for thy double love presents her self a single fee:
In passion, not in person chaung'd, and I my Lord am she.
They sweetly surfecting in joy, and scylent for a space,
When as the Ecstasy had end, did tenderly embrace:
And for their Wedding, and their wish, got fitting time and place.
Not England (for of Hengest then was named so this Land)
Then Curan had an hardier Knight, his force could none withstand:
Whose Sheep-hooke laid a part, he then had higher things in hand.
First, making known his lawful claim in Argentile her right,
He warred in Diria: and he won Brenitia too in fight:
And so from treacherous Edell took at once his life and Crown,
And of Northumberland was King: long reigning in renown.
CHAP. XXI.
THe Saxons (...), in these Disce^ts, derive from Gods, and men,
Jove, Minos, Geta, Flokwald, Flyn, Fredwolfe, Fra^loffe, Woden,
Each as I name them others Son, not only Conquer here,
But with their wandering Armies spoil the World through out welnere.
The English Saxon Kings oppress the mightier ones the weak:
Each trifeling cause suffising here, there love and leagues to break.
One seazeth of his Neighbors Realm, and is disseazd ere-long:
For Empier some, for Envy some, and some to right their wrong
Contend unto their common loss, and some like like Monsters rain:
As Sigbert, who for tyranny did banishment sustain.
He wandered vnbewayled long, a man whom men exempt
From house, and help, pursewing him with cappitall contempt.
Forlorn therefore, with drouping limbs, and dropping eyes, in vain,
He friendles walks the fruitles Woods, and foodles did complain.
A Swinheard meeting him by chance, and pitying his estate,
Employed this Western King, unknown, on his affairs to wate.
Nor did the needy King disdain such room, for such relief:
An Under-Swinheardship did serve, he sought not to be chief.
But when by speech, and circumstaunce, his Master understood
His Servant was the sometimes King: blood cries (quoth he) for blood:
My giltles Master in thy pomp, thou Tyrant did slay:
Nor, unrevenged of his death, thou shall escape away.
With that he took a Libbat up, and beats out his brains:
And dead (so odious Tyrants be) not one for him complains.
NOt all so ill, yet cause of worse unto the English state
Was Osbret of Northumberland: his love did win him hate.
Enamored on Lord Buerns wife, as tired in the Chase,
H^ left the Hounds, and with a few dismounts at Buerns Place.
Her Husband absent, heartily his Lady intertaynes
The King, and feasts him royally, not sparing costs or pains.
But he that fead on Fancies food, and hungered whilst he eats,
Thought Venus sparer in her Loves, then Ceres in her Meats.
The Train and table voyded, then he taking her a-parte,
Directs her by his tongue and tears, unto his loving heart.
Delay, he says, breeds doubts, but sharp denial death:
Or do not long surcharge my bliss, or soon discharge my breath:
For if my prayers add no edge unto thy begged doom,
The Uintage of my thristles love is blasted in the bloome.
Be favor able to my fire: for thy sweet sake, be bold,
I durst attempt even Hell (if hell so sweet a thing might hold.)
Well, think her coye, or think her chaste, my Censure I suspend:
Most women yield not at the first, yet yield they in the end.
She gave repulses to his lust, and he Replies of Love:
Not all the Wrights Diana had, might Cupids Plaint remove.
She countermaunding his demand, he ceased Courting now,
And did with her by vyolence, what virtues disalowe.
And then departed, leaving her in self-conceit disgraste:
More trespassed then some would think, and yet perhaps as chaste.
Home came her Lord, whose Brows had buds, and found his wife in tears:
And (foolish thing) she told a troth: for which revenge he swears.
But so the Man did prove a Beast, he better might have hid it,
Some such are mistically domme, yet dombly do forbid it:
His wifes Escapes done secretly if by the man detected,
Shows hilled bu^pes (supposed bu^pes) mere horns, not horns suspected.
At Denmark in his Cosens Court, he tells of his wrong:
And gains against his sovereign Lord, of Danes an Army strong.
Hungar, and Hubba, and himself, Conductors of this Oste,
Did with their foreign Forces land, and spoil the Northern Cost.
The vicious valiant Osbret, that had vanquished ere then
The King and Kingdom of the Scotts, though wanting Arms and men,
Thought skorne his Foes should beard him so, and bar him up in walls,
And therefore issuing out of York, upon the Danes he falls.
A bloody Bargane then begone, no fight might fearcer be,
And of the Danish part were slain for every English three.
But manhood lost, and number won, the Danes they got the feelde:
And Osbret dyed valiantly, that not to live would yield.
Mean while the Danes with fresh Supplies ariue at every Shore,
And war almost in every Shire, infesting England sore.
With whom courageous Etheldred contended long in vain,
By them was he, King Ella, and the holly Edmond slain.
Nothing was done, but all undone, till King Alured he
In danger of his royal self did set his Subjects free:
For every day, in every place, the Danes did so increase,
That he nor any English King enjoy one day of peace.
Nor mightier men at Arms then they, might any where be found:
Who in their diverse Wars els-where, did diverse Realms confound:
For as the Goths, the Vandales, Hunnes, and Saxons erst did range,
So now the Danes did plague the world, as sent by interchange.
This Western and victorious King, and greatest Monarke here,
Perceiving of this spoiled Isle a toward Rewen nere,
Disguised like a Minstrell poor, did haunt the Danish Tents,
And with his feats and melody the Enemy presents:
And of their sloth, their gluttony, and Councels privy so,
He took advantage, giving them a sudden ouerthroe.
And slays Hubba, Hungar, and the Cause of their repaer,
And puts all to Sword and Seas, that unbaptized waer.
Yet to Northumberland returned fearce Gurmond with the Danes,
Mean time did King Alured dye, the Hatchet of their Tranes.
But Adelstane (one King betwixt) not only cleared the Land
Of Danes, but of all England had sole Empier in his hand.
Thus of this long dismembered Realm was he the only King:
In which, till Egelred his reign, did prosper every thing.
He reigning, much of England then the Lordly Danes did hold,
Exacting Tributes every year, and selling Peace for Gold.
And (which no doubt did hatch those Plagues) the King a wicked one,
Did enter by his Brothers blood, extorting thus his Throne:
KIng Edgar that subdew'd the Scotts, and slaughtered the Danes,
And of the Welsh had Tribute Wolffes, of whom it more remanes
That, as it were in Triumph-wise, Eight Under-kings did roe
Him, Sterns-man, on the River Dee, with diverse honors more,
This Edgar by a former wife had Edward, by an other
This Egelred, a Son unto a kind and cruel Mother:
For as she labors to prefer her own by well and ill,
So to destroy her Sonne-in-law she wanted means, not will.
And means did hit. King Edward hunts, and hunting lost his Train,
Whom Man-les at her Castle Corfe the Queen did intertayne.
He having seen to whom he came in courtesy to see,
Made haste away in Quest of them that still a Hunting be:
And mounted, when he should depart to him his Stepdame drinks,
Whom pledging, him an Hierling stabbed, and lifeles down he sinkes.
Thus Egelred obtaynd the Crown, but for his crowning so
His Subjects grudge, and he became the Preface to their woe.
For when this proud and vicious King, was neither loved of his,
Nor lived safely for the Danes, his secret Edict is,
That suddenly, in one self hour, throughout the Land should pass
A common slaughter of the Danes, which so performed was:
And Welwyn, called Wealth-wyn then for promptnes in that charge,
Beginning, other Towns as it themselves from Danes enlarge.
CHAP. XXI.
THis common Massacre of Danes, was common mirth to all
The English, whom they did oppress with slaueries not small.
Compelling men by grievous Draught as Beasts to plough their Land,
Of whom the English as of Gods, or Feends, in terror stand.
The Husband durst not use his Wife, if liked of a Dane,
Nor House, nor Goods, nor aught he had, for who resistes was slane.
That prankes and feeds daintely, this pynes and fares ill,
And of his Sweat that has the sweet, and is imperious still.
Each house maintained such a Dane, that so they might prevent
Conspiracies, if any were, and grope how mynds were bent:
Lord Dane the same was called then, to them a pleasing name,
Now odiously Lur-dane say we, when ydell Mates we blame.
When Swayne the Dacian King did hear his Danes were murdered so,
With bitter vows, he shipped his men for Englands ouerthroe:
And landing, spaerd no Shrine, nor Saint, nor Sex, nor any State,
Not wanting Ayders Englishmen, that held their King in hate:
Especially false Edricus the Admiral deceiues
His King, and Country oftentimes, and Bribes of Swayne receives:
And Egelred his cowardisse encouraged the Foe,
Till Swayne at length, by Masses great, was bribed hence to go.
But, making short return, the Peers of England that disdain
Th'indignities of such a King, that did feebly rain,
Submit them Subjects unto Swayne: and Egelred did fly
Unto the father of his Queen, the Duke of Normandy:
And Swayne, possessed of the Land, did shortly after dye.
His son Canutus present here, had Seazen of the Crown,
Till Egelred, returning back, by Armor puts him down.
Who scarcely gives breathing time, but that he back resayles
From Denmark, and by force, by friends, and Fortune here preuayles:
For in this War King Egelred did sicken, and decease:
And then the broils ( Canutus King) did for a time decrease,
Till Edmund, son of Egelred, did interrupt that peace.
COnferring Arms to Edmunds age, when Egelred did lie
On Deathbed, to his Son he said: not quite forlorn am I,
Whose life has had so much of grief, thus graciously to dye.
Add more, thy virtues glad my death, yet two things grieve among,
To leave my Kingdom thus in Wars, and thee for Wars so young.
So may these troubles waer to none, as thou do wax I pray,
And so possess thy fathers Seat, that all approve thy Sway.
Not to be made a King (my Son) is so to make thee proud,
For mildnes fitteth Majesty, high mynds are disaloude.
See me thy father now a King, and by and by but earth,
Nor think that every King has happ to dye a happy death.
Let Nature for perfection mold a Paragon each way,
Yet Death at least, on finest lumpes of living flesh will pray:
For Nature never framed it, that never shall decay.
The brauest are as Blossoms, and the longest Liver dies,
And dead, the louelest Creature as the lothsomst Carrion lies.
Then think not but that Kings are men, and as the rest miscarrie,
Save that their fame or infamy continually does tarry.
Deem past Examples Sentences, and (which did fail in me)
Make use of those not now in use, for now will cease to be.
Attempt not things beyond thy reach, join Fortune to thy will:
Least Phoebus Chair do else surcharge rash Phaoton his skill.
If Fortune help whom thou would hurt, freat not at it the more:
When Ajax stormed, then from him the Prize Ulysses bore.
Try friends by Touch, a feeble friend may prove thy strongest Foe:
Great Pompeis head to Caesar's hand it was betrayed so.
Admit thou had Pactolian waves, to land thee Gold at will,
Know, Craesus did to Cyrus kneel, and thou may speed as ill.
Abandon lust, if not for sin, yet to avoid the shame:
So Hoggs of Ithacus his men the Latian Witch did frame.
Be not to modie in thy wrath, but pause though Fist be bent:
Often Phillips Son did rashly strike, and leisurly repent.
Content thee with vnthreatned Mean, and play not AEsops Dog:
The Gold that gentell Bacchus gave, was greedy Midas Clogg.
Be valiant, not to venterous, but fight to fight again:
Even Hercules did hold it ods, for one to strive with twain.
Be not ambiciously a King, nor grudgingly decline:
One God did root out Cis his stock, and raise up Iesses line.
Jest not with edge tools, suffer Saints, let mighty Fools be mad:
Note, Seneca by Neros doom, for Precepts penance had.
Have care to whom, of whom, and what to speak, though speech ^e true*
That Miss made Phoebus contrary his Ravens Swan-like hew.
He frames torments to himself, that feeds a Tyrants vain:
Perillus was by Phalaris adiudg'd to selfe-taught pain.
Praise not the beauty of thy wife, though she of form be sped:
For Gyges, moved so, did graft on Candaules his head.
Shun Ielosie that hart-breake Love, if Cat will go to kind:
Be sure that Io has a mean that Argus shall be blind.
Commit not Treasure with thy Child to greedy minded men:
Thou leauest Polydor a Spoil, to Polymnestor then.
Occurrants give occasions still of like, in which be sure
To serve thy God, to save thy self, and well to all procure.
Be virtuous, and assure thy self thou can not then but thrive:
In only Virtue is it said that men themselves survive.
As for the vicious, such they are as is the heedlesse Fly,
That killes it self, and hurts his sight, that has her in his Eye.
Farewell my Son: England farewell, thy never happy Prince
Does take his leave, an happy leave, if taken so long since.
And, Edmund (burying not with me thy virtues, nor my speech)
I bless thee in his blessed name whom I of bless beseech,
Said Egelred: and shortly gave a quiet gasp or twain,
And being dead, his noble Son succeeded him in Rain.
THis like himself, even knightlike and an Englishman in deed,
Did quicken Englands quayling Prowes, and Mars-like did proceed.
A brauer Captain then was he not any Band might have:
And yet a Mars did match this Mars, Canutus was as brave.
These Wonders of that age for Arms, and Dirij of those days,
Did often battle, equally to eithers loss and prays.
Now after many bloody Fields, when none might estimate
The better or the worser part, a Knight that saw the state
Then present, and by likelihoodes presaged what might fall,
Said (hearing it the diffring Kings and Soldiers almost all:)
We ever war, and never win, Edmund has Fortitude,
Canutus Fortune, neither thus of other is subdude.
Death fears not us, nor for their lives our Contraries do crare:
It follows then, that all must dye, where all so despret are.
If all be slain, then who shall serve our Princes that survive?
Or fence out Forrens? better one, then none of both should thrive.
To thrive therefore, were not a-misse, that seeing one of twain
Will Owner all, that only they the quarrel do maintain.
Or if Combattansie not please, the Land is rich and large,
And they Coperciners may live, and us of death discharge.
If Combat nor Partition be, then will this War revive,
Till one, suruiuing all of us, wants one with whom to strive.
This said, the Kings did mark and make a profit of the same,
And did conclude by Combacie to loose or win the Game.
Within a little Island nere, round which the Armies stand,
The Kingly Champions try their force, by fighting hand to hand.
They spur their Horses, break their Spears, and beat at Barriars long,
And then, dismounting, did renew a Battle brave and strong.
Whilst either King thus Martially defends, and did offend,
They breathing, King Canutus said: we both I see shall end,
Ere Empier shall begin to one: then be it at thy choice,
To fight, or part. With it their Knights cry out with common voice,
Divide most valiant Kings divide, enough ye have of sight:
And so the Champions did embrace, forgetting Malice quight.
Partition equally was made betwixt these Princes twain,
And brother-like they live and love: till by a deulish train,
Earl Edricus, a Traitor to the Father and the Son,
Did murder Edmund: and his head (supposing to have won
The favor of Canutus so) presenting said (O King)
For love of thee I thus have done. Amazed at the thing,
Canutus said, and for that thou have headded him for me,
Thy head above all English heads exalted it shall be:
The Earl was headded, and his head poolde up for all to see.
Of England, Danske, and Norway, then Canut was perfect Lord,
And in his triple Regment all with virtue did accord.
Harolde, and Hardi-knought his Sons, each did succeed:
Of either which small certain Fame of well or ill we reed,
Save, by their Raynes, to Englishmen did grievous thraldom breed:
But after Hardi-knought his death, the Danes were chased hence,
Not intermedling with the State of England ever sense.
CHAP. XXII.
OF foresaid Egelred his Sons, Alured, and his brother,
Was Edward King: (for Goodwyns gile had made away that other.)
Religious, chaste, wise, fortunate, stout, frank, and mild, was he:
And from all Taxes, wrongs, and Foes, did set his Kingdom free.
By ouer-ruling of his Lords, entreating long the same,
Least, dying Issules, he leave succession out of frame,
He took to Queen a Damsel fair: howbeit, by conscent,
In vows of secret chastity their loving lives they spent.
The Father of this Mayden-wife in sitting by the King,
And seeing one that stumbled, but not falling, up did spring,
He laughing said, the brother there the brother well has easd,
(His meaning was the Stumblers Feet.) And, had thou so pleased,
So had my Brother, quoth the King, bin easing unto me.
The traytrous Earl took bread and said, so this digested be
As I am giltles of his death: these words he scarcely spoke,
But that in presence of the King the bread did Goodwyn choke.
Harolde his son, by Hardi-knoghts late daughter him suruiues,
He, crossed by contrary winds, in Normandy ariues.
There Goodwyns Son did take an oath, Duke William urging so,
To keep unto the Duke his use, when Edward hence should go,
The Crown of England: clayming by Adoption, and by blood,
But Harolde, after Edwards Death, not to his promise stood.
And for he was in wealth, in friends, in blood, and Armor strong,
And title had his Mothers right, he forced not the wrong:
But arming him against the Duke, so urged unto wroth,
Did seize the Crown unto himself, contrary to his Oath.
Whilst William therefore works for War, King Harolde had not rest,
For Harolde Hare-foote King of Danes and Norwaies, much oppressed
The English with his pusant Bands. But Harolde him assayles,
And, after fearce and doubtful fight, most valiantly preuayles:
And with the Norgayne Prince he slew his people almost all:
When, for division of the Spoil, did much contention fall
Betwixt the King and Englishmen: and many a noble Knight
Not only murmor and malinge, but did forsake him quight.
Such malice growing, William with his Normanes taking land,
Found hot-spurr Harolde pressed in Arms, his pusance to withstand:
And either Battle Marshalled as either Captain wild,
The King of England eagerly the Normane Oste behild,
And with his cheerful speeches thus his men with courage filled.
See (valiant Warr-friends) yonder be the first, the last, and all
The Agents of our Enemies: they henceforth cannot call
Supplies: for weeds at Normandy by this in Porches groe:
Then Conquer these would Conquer you, and dread no further Foe.
They are not stouter then the Brutes, whom we did hence exile:
Nor stronger then the sturdie Danes, our Uictorie erwhile:
Not Saxony could once contain, or scarce the world beside
Our Fathers, who did sway by Sword where listed them to bide.
Then do not ye degenerat, take courage by descent,
And by their Buryalles, not abode, their force and flight prevent.
Ye have in hand your Countries cause, a Conquest they pretend,
Which (were ye not the same ye be) even Cowards would defend.
I grant that part of us are flead and linked to the Foe,
And glad I am our Army is of Traitors cleared so:
Yea pardon has he to depart, that slays Mal-content:
I prize the mind above the man, like zeal has like event.
Yet troth it is, no well or ill this Island ever had,
But through the ill or well Support of Subjects good or bad.
Not Caesar, Hengest, Swayn, or now (which nertheles shall fail)
The Normane Bastard ( Albion true) did, could, or can prevail.
But to be selfe-false in this Isle a selfe-Foe ever is,
Yet, wot I, never Traitor did his Treasons Stypend mis.
Shrink who will shrink, let Armors wait press down the burdned Earth,
My Foes with wondering eyes shall see I ouer-prize my death.
But since ye all (for all, I hope, a-like affected be,
Your Wives, your Children, lives, and Land, from Servitude to free)
Are armed both in show and zeal, then gloriously contend.
To win and wear the home-brought Spoils, of Uictorie the end.
Let not the Skinners daughters Son possess what he pretends,
He lives to dye a noble death that life for Freedom spends.
As Harolde hartned thus his men, so did the Normane his:
And, looking wishly on the Earth, Duke William speaks this.
To live upon, or lie within, this is my Ground or Grave,
(My loving Soldiers) one of twain your Duke resolves to have.
Nor b^ye Normanes now to seek in what ye should be stout,
Ye come amidst the English Pykes to hew your Honors out,
Ye come to win the same by Lance, that is your own by law,
Ye come, I say, in rytious War revenging Swords to draw.
Howbeit of more hardy Foes no passed Fight has spead ye,
Since Rollo to your now Abode with Bands victorious lead ye,
Or Turchus, Son of Troyelus, in Scythian Fazo bread ye.
Then worthy your Progenitors ye Seed of Priams Son
Exployt this busnesse: Rollons do that as ye wish be done.
Three People have as many times got and for-g^n this Shore,
It rests now ye Conquer it, not to be Conqured more:
For Normane and the Saxon Blood conioyning, as it may,
From that consorted Seed the Crown shall never pass away.
Before us are our armed Foes, behind us are the Seas,
On either side the Foe has Holds of succor, and for ease.
But that Advantage shall return their Disadvantage thus,
If ye observe no Shore is left, the which may shelter us,
And so hold out amidst the Rough, whilst they hael in for Lee,
Whereas, whilst men securely sail, not seldom Shipwrackes be,
What should I cite your passed Acts, or tediously incence
To present Arms? your faces show your hearts conceive offense:
Yea even your Courages divine a Conquest not to fail:
Hope then your Duke does Prophecy, and in that hope prevail.
A People brave, a terren Heaven, has Objects wroth your Wars
Shall be the Prizes of your Prow's, and moun^ your fame to Stars*
Let not a Traitors perjured Son extrude us from our right:
He dies to leave a famous life, that does for Conquest sight.
By this the furious Battelles join, a bloody day to either,
And long they fight, the Uictorie inclyning unto neither:
At length the English had the ods, who keeping close array,
Unto the Duchy Forces gave no entrance any way.
Then fayning fear, and Martially retyring as oppressed,
The English so became secure, and follow on dispersed.
To which advantage, furiously the Normanes did return,
And got a bloody victory. In vain the English th^^ne
Amidst the Pykes against the prick: (...) Harolde then was slain:
From him began the Normanes sole, but soon ^^^ioyned ray^e:
For second Henry, Mawde her Son, freed Englands blood again.
Since whence (and ever may they so) that Offspring ruled us:
Of whose Conjunction in the Crown, the Genalogue is thus:
King Edmund Irne side Issue had Edward the Our-law: he
Had Margret: Mawde by Mancholyn the King of Scotts had she:
Mawde to the Conqueror his Son first Henry Mawde did beire:
This second Mawde, the Angeos wife, had second Henry heir.
EDward, King Harolds Preregnant, of this same Change foretold,
Who present, and succeeding times thus dying did unfold:
It is a World, to note (quoth he) the ways that men adoor,
And how Hippocrasie has bred of God-like Deuilles stoer,
That speak to seem, that seem to shift, that shift to spoil by gile,
That smooth, and sooth, and yet deceive with Scriptum est mean while:
But let them heave their hands to Heaven, they have their hier in Hell,
That seem devout to cloak deceit, and say, but do not well.
The Rich are retchles in their wills, their ^iking is for law:
The Poor repine, and Goods not theirs, by ydell Shiftings clawe.
The Lords and Landed ouer-rent, and cunningly the same
The Parrasite does ouer-reach, and bears away the game.
One rises by an others fall, and some do clime so fast,
That in the Clouds they do forget what Esymates they have past.
But Egell-winged mynds that fly to nes^ell in the Sun,
Their lofty heads have leaden heels, and end where they begun.
It is a common point on which the aged grosely run,
On^e to have dared, said, and seen, more then was ever done.
The Youth are foolish-hardie, or less hardy then they ought,
Effeminate, fantastical, in few, not few are naught.
At Cypris not the wanton Saint, nar yet her wily Son,
Did want their Orgies: nor at Rome did Vesta lack her Nonne:
The Lampsacens gave Pryapus his filthy Rytes: and Creat
To Jove his Bulls: and Cicilie to Ceres tythed Wheat:
The Thracians with their Bachinales did Lybers Temple fill:
And Italy did blood of Babes on Saturns Alters spill:
And fatal wreathes of Myrtell boughs were sacred unto Dys:
In few, there was no Pagane God his Sacrafice did mys:
But Englishmen, nay Christian men, not only seem prophayne,
But Man to Man, as Beast to Beast, holds ciuell duties vain.
Yea Pulpits some, like Pedlers packes yield forth as men affect,
And what a Synod shall conclude a Sowter will correct.
The rude thus hosting Litrature, one Sisme begets an other,
And grosely though a Sisme, yet has each Sismatike his Soother.
Mean while the learned want their Meede, and none with profit hears
The tedious Doult, whose artles tongue does preach to weary Ears.
Here could I enter in a Field of Matter more then much:
But guess that all is out of frame, and long time has bin such,
And what shall be let time disclose. This only will I touch:
A Green Tree cut from withered Stock, divided Furlongs three
From proper Root, it shall reioyne, and after fruitful be:
Thus said the King. And thus do some expound that Prophecy:
The Tree this Land, the Stock and Root the thralled English line:
King Harold, and the Williams twain, the Furlongs some define:
Henry the Normane that begot one Mawde his English Queen,
Mawde second Henry's Mother, was the Trees Return to green.
KIng Stephen first, though not so firm, did in this Turn preceed^*
But second Henry perfectly restalled Wodens Seed.
Nor supersticiously I speak, but.H. the Letter still
Might be observed ominous to Englands good or ill.
First Hercules, Hesione, and Hellen, were the cause
Of War to Troy, AEneas seed becoming so Out-lawes.
Humbar the Hunne, with foreign Arms did first the Brutes inua^^.
Hellen to Romes imperial Throne the British Crown conuaed:
Hengest and Horsus first did plant the Saxones in this Isle.
Hungar and Hubba first brought Danes that swayed here long while.
At Harolde had the Saxone end, at Hardi-knought the Dane.
Henry's the first and second did restore the English Rain.
Henry Letigious Lancaster and York unites in peace.
Henry the Eight did happily Romes Erreligion cease.
Much more escapes this Catalogue. In Honor God increase
Good double.H. this works Defense, her Council and Allie
That rules us, and safe may rule long after I shall dye.
FINIS.
An Addition, or Remain in Prose, to the Second Book of ALBIONS ENGLAND:
containing a Breuiat of the true History of AENEAS.
ACcept him (friendly Reader) where he is, not where he ought: and as he
speaks, not as he should: Misapplyed he is not for Matter preceadent,
howsoever the penning or misplacing may like or mislike for the English or
Order. The Printers forwardness presented me of seating AEneas in his (...) I
the Task to prosecute his History in Uerse: howbeit rather has my Remisnes
borrowed of Decorum and your patience, then that a Patriarch of our Brutones
should be obruptly estranged. Of AEneas therefore it thus follows:

AEneidos.
WHen the reuengfull Flames of Troy, properly called Ilion, the the^
Metrapolitaine City of Asia, had perfected the more then Ten yearrs Siege of
the Gretians expugning the same: then AEneas (howsoever by some aucthorities
noted of disloyalty toward Priam) in this not unworthily surnamed virtuous,
burdning his armed Shoulders with his feeble and most aged Father Anchises,
that labored also under his Loode of the Troyan Gods and sacret Relics,
AEneas (as I say) with such his Burden, leading by the hand his Son
Ascanius, of the age of twelve years, followed not only of the beautiful
Creusa his wife, the Daughter of King Priam, but also of a many Troyans
participating that common calamity, brake through the wastfull Flames, mauger
the wrothfull Foes, into the fields of Phrigia. There the Air emptied of
downe-burnt Turrets, and filled with smoke of fixed Buildings, assured from
their hearts more tears to their eyes, then the benefit of their present
Escape could promise them comfort.

Troy therefore not to be rescued, or Creusa, in this business lost and
perishing, to be recovered, AEneas and his Followers imbarking themselves in
Simois, after long and weary Seafaring, arrived in a part of Thrace called
Cressa, bounding on Mygdonia. Here AEneas purposing an end of his tedious
Saylings, and not meanly furnished of Treasure conuayed from Troy, laid
Foundation of a City, after the Founder, called AEnea. This City going
forward less effectually then was expected, AEneas supposing the Gods to be
yet opposite to the Troyans, knocking down a milk-white Bull, pitched an Alter
to do Sacrafice. Near at hand were growing vltiers shrubbed Trees, the
Boughs whereof, for the greater reverence and exornation of the present
Solempnetie, he cutting and sliuing down, perceived blood in great abundance
issewing from the broken Branches: whereat long admyring, and with great terror
and devotion intercessing the Gods, on his knees, to reveal ye meaning of that
miraculous Accident, at the length he heard a pitiful and feeble voice (for
diversely, in those days, did the Deuilles answer and give Oracles) thus
aunswering.

Reason were it (AEneas) that ye Graves of the dead should privilege their
bodies from the tyranny of the living: but by so much the less do I esteem
my prejudice, by how much the more I know thee unwittingly injurious. Thou
tearest AEneas, in these Branches thou tearest, the body of thy unfortunate
Brother-in-lawe Polydor, Son to the like starred Priamus. Troy as yet was
only threatened, not besieged, when my Father (as thou know) delivered me
with a world of Treasure to Polymnestor the barborous King of this Country:
here daungerles (as he pretended) to abide, as the Conseruor and Restoration
of his House and Empier, whatsoever should betide of him, his other Issue, or
the Wars beginning. But the Greeks preuayling, Auerice, and the declyning
State of Phrigia, imboldned my Garden (fearlesse of Reuengers) to the
murdering of me: which he traytrously accomplishing on this Shoore, secretly
raked me up in these Sands, without honor of better Sepulcher: and of my body
(so has it peased the Gods, and Nature) are sprung these Branches, in tearing
of which thou tormentest me. Howbeit, in respect of my desire to profit thee
by fortelling of thy Destiny, I accoumpt me happily harmed: For know (AEneas)
that in vain thou do build, where the Gods deny thine abode: leave
therefore these defamed Costs, and prosperously plant the Remain of Troy, and
thy Posterity, in the fertile Italian Clime.

The voice thus ceased to speak, and AEneas, without further touch of the
forbidden Shrubbes, continuing his fear finished the Sacrafice, and after the
Phrigian fashion solemnly held an Obit to the ghost of his murdered kinsman.

THen by this admonishment, he and his Trojans leaving the new reared City,
disanker from Thrace in quest of behighted Italy. But no sooner had they put
to Sea, then that the winds and the waves sollycited (a Poetical fiction) by
the wife of Jupiter, so tossed and turmoyled the disparkled Navy, that the
horror of the circumstaunces, continually threatening their lives, left only
hoped for death as the remain of all comfort. At length, these instruments of
their long wandringes, and the causes of Anchises, and of many noble
personages, their perishing, cou^terpleaded (as is fabled) by Venus, tossed
their distackled Fleet to the shoore of Libya.

Near to the place of their arrival, stood the beautiful City of
Carthage, which Elisa (whom the Phaenicians for her magnanimious dying, did
afterward name Dido) had newly builded: AEneas by a safe conduct received from
her, repayring thither, found such royal entertainment, that in respect of
the present sollace, he had forgotten al passed sorrows, and his hart-spent
Trojans, found bountiful supplies to all their late endured scarsities.

In the meanewhile AEneas for personage the Iouilist, for well-spoken the
Mercurilist, and no less fortunate under Venus her constellation, with his
comlines so intised the eyes, with his speeches so inchaunted the ears, and
with his virtues so enflamed the heart of the amorous Carthagian Queen, that
hardly modesty discented, that her tongue affirmed not the love, which her
eyes outwardly blabbed, and her heart inwardly nourished. In thend, not able
longer to contain such extraordinary Passions, in this order she vented the
same to the Lady Anna her Sister.

My trusty Sister, quoth she, (then sighing out a paws^) how many great
Princes, since the decease of my late husband Sichaeus, and our departure from
Tyrus, have in vain labored a marriage with me, has been unto thee no less
apparent, then of me hitherto vnapproued. But now (haled on I know not by
what desteny) our newcome Guest AEneas the Trojan, whose matchless personage
and knightly prowess I partially commend not, all confirming of him, no
less then I can affirm, the same, even the same has supplanted my chaste
determinations of continual widdowhood, with an amarous desire of a second
marriage: howbeit, to determine without him, as I must, were to be deceived of
him, as I may. What counsel? My self (Anna) ah my self to motion love were
immodestie, and to be silent less tolerable the^ death. I would (a violent no
volentarie wish) that Elisa knew her self beloved of AEneas, AEneas not
knowing himself so loved of Elisa.

Her Sister with a cheerful countenance promising comfort, performed the
same in this answer. Dum signs (quoth she) have their speeches: not any that
observes your looks, but easily aymeth at your love: greater is the wonder
of your strickt chastity, then it would be a novel to see you a Bigama: that
pryuately peuishe and curious, this publicly, common and commodious. Or ever
Carthage be perfected in the air, Elisa may putrefie in the earth: What
Moniment then leauest thou to thy Tyrians, scarce warm in Affric, then a
Cities imperfect foundation? Which being already an eyesore to the wild and
warlike Libyans, Barchaes, Getulians, and the rest of the Affricans, shall then
be utterly extinct, with the very name of the Foundres. But in matching with
so great and valiant a Prince as is AEneas, thou shall not only live with
whom thou do love, and by consorting thy Tyrians with his Trojans, strongly
disapoynt the envy of those Nations, but (for Nature has not given thee such
beauty to dye barren) being a wife, become (no doubt) a mother, and by
legistimat propagation so glad thy Subjects feareles of civil discentions. Who
can then dislike that Elisa should so love? Bury Sister the thoughts of
Sichaeus with his dead bones, and prosperously prosecute and prevail in thy
sweet passions of AEneas. Plie him with all provisions and amorous
entertainments, only for his Shippe-workes said delatorie wants: and by
Winter be past, he partly coming will (fear not) be perfectly reclamed. This
counsel of Anna, though it heaped as it were Athos on AEtna, yet was it
praised and practiced of Elisa: for Counsel soothing the humor of the
councelled, howsoever unprofitable, is accounted plausable. Henceforward the
Queen to be admyred, not matched for her exquisite beauty, and rather
borrowing of Art then scanting Nature, as brave in apparel, as beautiful in
person, and voted, even in her better part, to the love of AEneas, so sorted
all her devises to his best liking, that shortly him self labored with her in
one and the self same pain of wished for pleasure. Omytting therefore the
circumstaunces of their discourses, feastings, and all Poetical faynings,
only proceed we, in few, to the Event of these their amorous Begininges.

A hunting was generally appointed: the Queen, AEneas, their Ladies, and
Knights bravely mounted: the Stands were prewned: the Toils pitched: ye
Hounds vncopled: the Game rowsed a foot, and followed: when suddenly amidst
the harborlesse Desert in the hottest pursuit, the Sky, ouercast with black
Clouds, shewred down such flashes of Lyghtning, vollies of Thunder,
Haylestones, and Rain, that glad was every of the Tyrians and Trojans,
dispersing themselves, to shyft for one, Elisa and AEneas, in the meanewhile,
finding a Cave that sheltred them twain. Being there all alone, unknown of,
and unsought for of their Servant. Opportunity the chief Actrisse in all
attempts, gave the Plaudiat in Love his Comedy. Imagine short wooing where
either party is* wylling: their faithes plighted for a marriage to be
solemnized (with kind kysses among) he did what harmed not, and she had what
displeased not: A young AEneas should have been molded, had he not been
marred (as might seem) in the making. When this sweet Calm in the sharp
storm, was with the Tempest thus ouerpassed, then came they both out, not such
as they entered in: and were received of their Traynes, attending their
pleasures, not examining their pastimes: and so having continued the Chase,
until night discontinued their sport, they retyring to Carthage, were
sumptuously feasted of Elisa in her Palace. During these their Alcion days
(not generally liked of all) one there was, a Noble Trojan, that had these
speeches to AEneas.

Should thou believe (far be it from AEneas so to believe) that the
Oracles of our Gods, behighting us the Conquest of Italy, were supersticious,
then believe also (vndeceiued may thou so believe) that our effeminate abode
here is vain and slanderous: to attempt that former without an Oracle, yea
with the loss of our lives, is honorable, because we are Trojans: to
entertain this latter, invited and daungerles, reproachful, because we are
Trojans. Ah (AEneas) have we shipped our Gods from home, to be witnesses of our
wantonness here? Believe me, better had it been we had dyed in Phrygia men,
then to live thus in Affric like women. Consider also the place whereinto we
are now brought, and then conceive of the possibility of our here abode:
shall I tell thee, were there not (if in the mean while no other Accident
cross thy now bliss) were there not I say, an Elisa here to love thee, or
were there not an AEneas to be belooued of her, no sooner should the first
deceased of you be delivered of life, then the Suruyuors of us Trojans be
denied this Land: and then, if we should prove so ungrateful as to resist our
Releuors, yet having number we want Munition: for neither our Ships be
tackled, nor we armed, but at the delivery and appointment of the Tyrians.
Learn therefore (AEneas) after so long pleasure in love, at the last
profitably and politickly to love: and whatsoever thy play be in Afric, let
henceforth the Main be Italy. Meanwhile command (most humbly we desire to
be so commanded) that thy Ships be secretly calked, tallowed, ballaced,
tackled, victled, and armed: and then (thy self also reformed) wittingly or
unwillingly to Elisa leave her and her effeminate City: with resolution
nevertheless (if thou so please) at more leisure to love her. So effectually
did AEneas lysten to this motion, that gyuing order for the readiness and
secret repayring of his Fleet, he promised a speedy and sudden departure:
and his men not slypping opportunities, executed the same with as effectual
diligence.

It happened in this meanewhyle, ye Queen to mount the high Turrets of her
Palace royal, where looking toward the Rhode, she perceived how earnestly
the Trojans labored in trymming, pauashing, and furnishing their Navy: then
assuring her self not deceived, that she should be deceived, and discending as
it were maiestically mad, meeting with AEneas, she said.

Before (AEneas) I beheld thy shypwracks and wants, I believed some God aryued
at Carthage: yea when I knew thee but a man, yet has my conceit honored thee
with a Deity: but now these thy inhumaine Trecheries, not worthy the
vnworthyest Tytles, argue so far of from a Godhood, as thou show thy self
less then a Man, and worse then a Devil. What has Carthage not worthy
AEneas? I assure thee, if any be so much, no City is more happy then
Carthage. But the Queen pleases not AEneas: oh that AEneas had not pleased
the Queen: then might I have bettered my choice for honor, or not have
bewailed thy change for the dishonor. But (ungrateful) will thou indeed
leave me? yea, then that thou meanest the contrary nothing more false, but to
derive thy departure from any desert of mine, nothing less true. If therefore
the life of Elisa, the love of Elisa, the land of Elisa, her wealth, thy want,
her tears, thy vows, her distress, thy dishonor, the delights of this
Shore, the dangers of those Seas, Carthage possessed, Italy unconquered,
peace without war here, war without peace there, thy wracks past, the
Winter to come, any evils whereof I warn thee, any good that I have wrought
thee, and more good that I have wished thee, if any thing said, or more then I
can say, has or does want Argument to seat thee in Afric, yet at the least
for thine own safety, stay a more temperate season: urging in the meane-while
excuses, for thine vnurged departure: and so I flattered, shall either patient
my self, or repent thy fleeting in a mylder Ecstasy. I did (well may I
forethinke me so to have done) entertain thee beyond the degree of an
Hostess, or the dignity of a Gueste: and yet (ungrateful Guest to so kind an
Holtis) for such welcome thou have not pretended a farewell. Thus alas finding
thy love less then it ought, I repent to have loved more then I should: and
because thou appearest not the same thou were, I am not reputed the same I am:
but as the by-worde of the Tyrians, the Stayle of the Trojans, and the scorn
of the Affricans, howbeit (in truth) the fayth-plyghted Wife of faythlesse
AEneas. But who will so believe? nay believe not so who will, thy departure
shall be my death, my death thy sin, thy sin the worlds speech, the
worlds speech thy reproof, and thy reproof my purgation: for were thy self
Iuror and Judge of the more offensive, my credulencie, or thine inconstancy,
the Iuror could not but give Uerdict for Elisa, and the Judge sentence against
AEneas: then (if not for my suit) yet for thine own sake, let me not plead
tediouslye, and without grace, that plead so truly, and with more grief
then for the quantity I may suffer, or for the quallitie thou can censure.

AEneas, not lightly gauled at her impatience, whom he still loved more then a
little, howbeit lesser then his now regard of honor, thankfully acknowledged
her great bounty, counterpleading to have pretended a departure without leave
taken, vouching moreover the displeasure of his Gods for contempt of their
Oracles, manifested by fearful Dreams and sundry Uisions, as also the urging
of his Trojans impatient of tarriance: so that he resting in Resolution, not
to be won by wooing, or reclamed by exclaiming, the Queen became speechles
and senseless, and was in a swoune conuayed from his presence: In which
business he boording his Ships, in the dead of night hoysting up sails,
left Carthage to seek Italy.

THe Queen, not capable of any rest, by day appearing discried from a Turret
the Rhode cleared of the Trojan Navy: then not willingly silent, nor able to
speak, she stood as stood Niobe, after the foureteenth revenge by Latonas
Issue. Which her then, and after Extremities, to be glaunced at, not judged
of, breefelie I thus decyfer: Imagine, (for vnimagined, vnacted) a substa^tial,
and palpable appeara^ce of Love, Wroth, Sorrow, and Despair, acting in their
aptest habits, and extremest passions, and then suppose Elisa not only the
same, but more fervently loving, more furiously wrothfull, more confusedly
sorrowful, and more impatientlye desprett. Imagine lastly the first three
imagined Actors, after long parts occupied, leaving the Stage to the fourth,
as to the perfectest Imperfection: and then from such imagined Stratagem attend
this actual Catastropha.

A Wyzarde or Wytch (the too common Oracles of many too credulent women) had
instructed the Queen, that an Emollation or burnt Sacrifice offered to the
infernal Deities, of the Armor, Ornaments, and al what soever the Relics of
AEneas, left behind him at his departure from Carthage, would effectually
estraunge the outrage of her passions, and extinct in her ye very remembrance
of AEneas. This Counsel (either for that at the first she believed it
possible, or for that opportunity so offered it self to practice the thing
she did purpose) Elisa entertayning, opened the same to Anna her Sister: who
simply, vnsuspitious of the sequel, provided secretly as was given her in
charge, a pyle of dry Faggots, crowned with Garlands for the dysmall Sacrifice:
which, and Elisa her self in a readynes, AEneas his Armor being her eyes
Object became in this wise her tongues Subject.

With this quoth she (eying the Armor) ye craking Trojan bosted to have
buckled with the gallant Diomedes, not seldom to have offended the defenclesse
Grecians, and after many loned blows at the sacking of Troy, valiantly to have
boordded his thence-bent Navy: this Armor profitable to my prejudice, there
defensive to him, to be here offensive to me, were it unnecessary to this
Sacrifice, should nevertheless burn for the same trespass. This Cup, this
Phrigian Cup, too guilty of too many Tyrian draughts, Assystaunts in forming
me audatiously amorous, shall now occupy these cerimonial flames, as the then
Accessarie to a contrary fire. These Bracelets, and these Earinges, by too
often and offentious hands fastened, and loosed, with begged and granted
kysses among, and now less precious by the Gyuer his practice, shall also
add Cynders to the repentant payment of mine ouer-rated pleasure. Lastly are
remaining only two Relics of that Recreant, this Sword, and Elisa her self.
But what? did thou (AEneas) leave this, and thine Armor in Carthage, as if
in Italy thou should encounter an other Elisa? inconsiderat that thou art,
albeit such feareles Conflicts best beseem such effeminate Captains, yet no
Clymat can affoorde thee one so foolish, and therefore in no Country expecte
such Fortune. The Storm (ah from thence are these tears) sheltring us twain
lately in one Cave, was (no doubt) ominous to these evils: for then should I
have remembered, that like as Shelters are chiefly sought for in Storms, so
men labor our favors only in extremities: but their lusts satisfied, or
wants supplied, as of Shelters in Sunne-shyne they estimat our bounty, leaving
thenceforth even to seem such as (in troth) they never were: but what is
natural is of necessity, only let it be granted, he is a Man, and it
follows necessarilye he is deceitful. Fly Traitor, AEneas fly, vnfollowed and
vnfriended of Elisa: ever may the winds be contrary to thy Course, and the
Seas not promise thee one hours safety: ever be thy Ship drowning, and thy
self never but dying: often resayle in a moment, whence thou were sailing a
month: let no blaste from the Air, or Billowe in the Sea, stir but to thy
prejudice: and when no horror and mishap has failed thee, with thy dead body
to the uttermost plagued, perrish also may thy Soul unpardoned. But least mine
incharitie prove less pardonable then his Injury, I that will not live to
hear it so, heartily disclame to have it so: pardon therefore ye Gods me
desiring it, and him deserving it. Troth is it, this one Sacrifice shall give
end to mine infinite sorrows: but not (alas) with these burninges rather
found guilty of new beginninges, but with my hearts blood, the latest Ceremony
wanting to this Exquisie. Scarcely had these words passed her mouth, when with
AEneas his Sword she pierced her Breast: so performing on her self a Tragedy
sought for, and to hers a terror unlooked for.

WHilst Dido (so named of this her death, or, as have some not less probable
of so preventing Hiarbas, minacing her marriage) was thus passionate, and did
thus perrish, AEneas after weary Seafaring, much sorrow many people and
places seen and sailed from, arryuing in Sicilie, was joyfully entertained of
his ancient friend King Acestes: and there (as the year before, at Drepaum)
did solemnize an Anniuersarie, at the Tomb of his father Anchises. The
Masteries, feats, and active pastymes, tried here by the Trojan and Cicilian
youth, with land and sea Skirmidges by running, ryding, leaping, shooting,
wrestling, and such like, with Bacing on foot and on horsback: this last a
sport lately used of our English youths, but now peuishly perhaps,
vnpollitickly I am sure discontinued: Or how ye Women of Troy (where of many
were also imbarcked from thence) tired with the perils of the Sea, and intised
with the pleasures of Sicilie, to prevent further sailing fired their Shyps,
not without great loss rescued: Or how AEneas buylding there the City
Acesta, peopled the same with his women, and impotent Trojans: Or of the
drowning, and Reuise of Palinurus: and many Occurrants happening here, at Cuma,
Caieta, and els-where I omit, as less pertinent then the hastening of AEneas
into Italy.

Wherefore shypping him from Sicilie, I now land him in Latium: in which part
of Italy reigned and was Resident in his City Laurentum the King Latinus, to
whom AEneas addressed a hundred Knights, one of them delyuering this Ambasie.

Ignorant are we not most gracious King (for in that Title art thou famous,
and in that trial may we prove fortunate) of thy Consanguinitie with the
Trojans, by noble discentes from Dardanus our ancient Progenitor: neither
can thou but know that Troy is sacked, and her people for the most part
slaughtered: only know, (if already thou know it not) that AEneas our Duke,
with a few his Folowers, hitherto reserved to more infortunes, after more then
seven years sailing, are lastly (and luckily I hope) arrived in thy
Country. Howbeit of many unpeopled places, for pleasure and fertility most
worthy manuring, have we abandoned the quiet possession: yea many the greatest
Princes of Europe and Afric, have voluntarily desired our Taryance denied:
only infinite Seas have we sailed, and more sorrows sustained to seek this
Clyme, from whence we Trojans deryue our Originalles, and whether our Gods have
dyrected us by their Oracles. This thy Country in respect of the bigness, may
easily affoorde rome for a new Troy to be builded: A plot more spacious we
do not ask, A smaller suit thou can not grant, if with our present
extremities thou also peise our purposed loyalties. Never were we thy foes, and
ever will we continue thy friends. Seated we must be, and here we would be. We
dare not disobey the Gods commanding it, nor would we discontent thee in
demanding it: graciously therefore conceive of our Petition, and gratefully
receive from AEneas these worthless Presents.

Having thus said, he in the name of AEneas, presented the King with a most
rich Mantell or Robe* with an inualuable Crown of Gold, enchased with
precious Stones: and with the late royal Scepter of King Priamus: with a
standing Cup, and other Treasure: which Latinus cheerfully receiving,
returned the Trojans this answer:

Had not the Gods commanded your hither repair, which I gainsay not: or were
we not of Alliance, wherein I disclame not: Or my Kingdom not rome-some enough
to receive you, as it is: Or had ye not brought precious and peaceable
Presents, as ye have: yet to dismiss Wayfarers vnrested and vnreleeued, were
contrary to the Gods of Hospitality, and (which they defend, that I should
therein offend) Latinus his honor. Over fast he sits, that securely
sits: for as he that is timorous has too little providence, so he that is
feareles has too much presumption: yea less grievous are expected then
unlooked for euilles. I speak not this as I fear to fall, but as I foresee I
may fall: for the vnpearching of others should be for preachings to us. Privy
am I unto your distress, applying the like possibility for me so to decline:
for who is privileged from becoming such? and who is such that would not have
succor? My dear Friends and Alies, sorry I am that ye have so ill cause to
estrang your selves from home, but glad that I am in so good case to
entertain you here. Let AEneas seat him, and prosper ye in Italy: my land
well may abide it, and my self brook it. Yea more: (for the Oracle of my
mind consorts no doubt with those of our GODS) Lauinia my sole Daughter and
heir, forbidden a Natives, and behighted a Strangers Marriage, has found a
Husband, and I a Sonne-in-lawe: at the least I wyshe it would be, and hope it
will be. Make my thanks to AEneas for his Presents, and be you Masters of your
Petitions.

The Trojans sumptuously feasted: every man on a given Corser bravely and
ritchly mounted: dismissed: returned: and Latinus his answer and Present
delivered: AEneas nevertheless, as far from being secure, as joyous of such
Tidings, knowing the good speed of a Stranger, to be an Eyesore to the
people, and therefore not careless suspicious of it that might causeles
succeed, strongly inmured his Men in a new-built Fortress.

In the meane-while, their Arrival and Entertaynement with Latinus, occupied
and for the most-part, offended all Italy. Enuiously stormed Amata the Queen,
that Lauina her Daughter and Darling should be wedded to a Stranger, an Exile
(as she termed him:) and therefore, when she could not dissuade the King by
flattery, she insensed his Nobles and Subjects to resist it, forcibly.

On the otherside, Turnus, Prince of the Rutules, in person exceeding all for
comlines, and in Arms equal to any for his courage, to whom Lauinia was
before promised in Marriage, as Mal-content as any for being thus circumuented
by AEneas, therefore held a Counsel in his sumptuous City Ardea, situate
in the territory of Latium, how to intercept the Trojans by wyles, expel them
by wars, weaken them by wants, disapoynt AEneas, and possess himself of
Lauinia. Often sent he Messengers, and sometimes Menaces, to advertise Latinus
that he was promised he should, and to assure him he purposed he would enjoy
her, or anger him. But by how much more Latinus was religiously vnremoouable
in his Resolution for AEneas, by so much the more did Turnus give loose raynes
to his headye anger: Howbeit sufficient matter wanted for his malice to work
upon, until by evil hap his chollor took advantage of his color.

Ascanius, with diverse Trojan Gentlemen his Friends, and others his Attendants,
Hunting in a Forest not far from their Fortress, by chance did encounter
strike and chase a fair and well spread Stagge, which ye Children of one
Tyrrhus the Kings Raunger, and Steward of his Grounds, a Man of no mean
account amongst the Latins, had from a Fawn nourished, and so entreated that,
no Beast might be more tamer. This S^a^ge thus stricken and followed of the
Trojans, and taking the readiest way to the house of Tyrrhus, with bleeding
hawnches entering the Hall, was first espied of Syluia or Ilia, a young
Gentlewoman, in whose lap he sleeping had often laid his head, and at whose
hands he had many a time taken Brouse, been kemed, and trimmed. She seeing
the Stag in such plight, almost swouned ere she could weep, and wept ere she
might speak, and spoake ere she was heard, and was heard ere she was
pitied, and pitied ere she was comforted, and comforted only in promise of
Revenge.

At the winding of an Horn, came flocking thither in a tryse, the Heards-men,
Shepheardes, Plow-men, and Hyndes: this Anticke of Grooms, finding Almon the
eldest Son of Tyrrhus, and their young Mystres Syluia grievously passionate,
and their old fellow the Stagge bloody and braying his last, question no
farther what should be done, but were furiously inquisitiue after the dooers.

In this meane-time by evil hap, Ascanius and his Company drawing by Parsie
after the Stagge (which they knew not for tame) were entered the view of this
School of enraged Clownes: who all at once and suddenly, with such weapons as
they had or found nearest at hand, as Staves, Sheep-hookes, Dung-forks,
Flayles, Plow-staues, Ares, Hedging-Betels, yea Lybbattes newly snatched from
burning, and what not? fearcely assailed with down right blows the amazed
Trojans: who not having leisure to ask questions, courageously entertayne the
unknown Quarrel. And so long and daungerously for either part continued this
confusion of blows, and effusion of blood, that by now it was bruted at the
Fortress, and at Laur^ntum, and was anon increased by rescue from either
Faction: neither had this Skufling an end until night was begun: at what
time the Latins, Rutules, and Trojans, left the wild Medlye, howbeit not
discontinuing their malice.

Of chief account amongst the Latins, were slain lusty Almon, and aged
Galesus, a man of an honest and wealthye condition, whilst he unseasonably
amongste blows, delivered unregarded persuasions of Peace.

The wounded Corses of these twain, did Turnus cause to be conuayed to the
view of Latinus, as Arguments of their common damage: him self with an
envious heart, and an enuectiue tongue, amplefying the same to the uttermost:
not vnasisted therein by the yrefull Queen Amata, or vn-furthered by the hurly
burly of the impatient people, all laboring the King to denounce Armor
against the Trojans.

Latinus in this tumult of his Subjects, and travel of his Senses, assuring
himself that AEneas was ye man prophesied to the Marriage of Lauinia, and
succession of Latium, Dissuaded, but might not Persuade with the heady
multitude. In few, with such efficacy did she dead Corses inuit it, the
Queen entreat it, Turnus affect it, and the People follow it, that lastly,
though against his mind, the King did suffer the Laurentines to rear on their
Walls absolute Tokens of imynent Wars. Thus found Turnus that which he
longed for, and AEneas no less then he looked for: and either sollyciting
succors, were not long unfurnished of hardy Soldiers: yea, in respect of
their multuous Armies, the Wars lately ceased at Troy, might now have been
said revived in Jtalie.

But as in his Wandringes, so in his wars, my purpose is breuity: either
which the Lawriat Trumpetor of his glory has so effectually sownded, that many
might amplify, I could itterat, but not any can amend it: nevertheless in
remembering of this History, I have also used other Authorities.

YT follows: After long Wars valiantly on either part performed, Many
great Kings, Princes, and Parsonages perrished: when lastly the Rutiles
begun to be repentant of their wrong, and the Trojans weary of the Wars,
AEneas and Turnus meeting had these words. And first AEneas.

Often Truces have we had ( Turnus) for the burial of our dead, never
Entreaties of peace for the welfare of those alive: only once (as I have been
ever) did thou seem (thou did but seem) provident that no more should
miscarie, offering me Combat, which I accepting have in vain expected: but
since thy mind changed I wot not by what means, have changed ye lives of I
wot not how many. But now, even now (when for the palpable leas^ng thou
should not speak like Turnus, should thou deny the better of the wars
to abide with AEneas, and yet I still be AEneas, though playing upon that
Advantage with Turnus) even now, I say, my self do request thee of that
Combat, whereby further Blood-sheds may, happily, be concluded. Believe me,
were thou a Beggar, and I a Monark, yet (so much do I emulate, not envy, thy
glory) I would hazard all in a Combat, requested of so valerous a
Competitor. But least (perhaps) I ouer-breath thy tyckled Conceit with more
selfe-lyking then is expedient, know Man, Turnus know, Nature, Beath, Art,
Education, nor whatsoever are in any thing more beneficial to Turnus, then
that justly be may envy as much or more in AEneas.

To this answered the Rutule thus: Whether thou speak this (AEneas) as
insulting over my infortune, or as insolent of thine own felicity, or emulous
(as thou say and I believe it) of my glory, trust me, (only if thus, in thy
better success, to abandon thy self to such offered disaduauntage be not
indiscretion) never heard I wherein to derogate from thy policy: but say it
indiscretion, yet by Jupiter (AEneas) it is honorable indiscretion. Not to
encounter so heroical (for in thee I envy not that Epitithon) a Combattant,
is as contrary to my thought, as contenting to my very Soul, and as contenting
to my Soul, as if AEneas were already conquered and Turnus Conqueror: either
which I divine, at ye leastwise I am determined to adventure: be provided
therefore (AEneas) of courage, for thou prouokest no Cowarde, but even Turnus,
that would have asked no less, had he not doubted AEneas not to have dared to
answer so much. Thus, and with these Conditions: that further wars should
finish, that the Espousall of Lauinia, and Succession of Latium should be the
Prize to the Uictor, A Combat to be tried by these twain body against body
was, upon Oaths taken and other Circumstaunces, ratefyed.

Now were they Armed, Mounted, and did Encounter: their Coursers were
breathles, the Ryders Dysmounted, and buckled on Foot: both offended, either
defended, and nayther faynted. Lastly, not with unrequited blows, was Turnus
Disarmed, the Uanquished pleading for life, and the Uictor not purposing his
death, had he not espied on his Shoulders the sometimes Badrike of his once
especial Freende Pallas, King Euander his Son, whom Turnus in Battle
ouercomming had put to Sword: then AEneas saying, only in this Spoil thou
shall not tryumphe, and only for his sake am I vnintreatable, shoffed his
Sword through his Breaste, Turnus so ending the World, and AEneas the Wars.

Then was he peaceably wedded to Lauinia, and shortly after possessed of
Latium: After which, about three years he dying, left his Kingdom to
Ascanius, and Lauinia with Child. She at her time, and at the house of the
before remembered Tyrrhus, was delivered of Syluius Posthumu^: so called of his
being borne amongst ye Wooddes, after the death of his Father. To him (because
in right, it was the Inheritance of Syluius from his Mother) did Ascanius
voluntarily resign the Kingdom of Latium: and of him, for his honorable
Regyment, were all the after Latin Kings called Syluij: Finally he Hunting
and mistaken amongst the Thickets for a Stagge, was slain with an Arrowe by
his Sun Brutus. This Brutus, for sorrow and his safety, accompanied with
many lusty Gentlemen, and others of AEneas his Trojans Ofsprings, imbarking
themselves, after long Sailing, aryued in this Island, then called Albion: whose
Cyantlike Inhabitants (in respect of their monstrous making and inciuill
Manners said to have been engendered of Deuilles) he ouercomming, Manured their
Country, and after his own name called it Brutaine. And thus having begotten
Brutus an Original to our Brutons, I conclude this abridged History of his
Grandfather AEneas.

William Warner.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by George Robinson for Thomas Cadman. Anno. Do. 1586.


