Antichrist, That is to say: A true report, that Antichriste is come / where
he was borne, of his Person, miracles, what tools he works withal, and
what shall be his end: Translated out of Latin into English. By I. D.

O Lord, why haste thou broken down the hedge of thy vine (in England) that
al they, which go by, pluck of her grapes? The wild Boore out of the wood
does root it up, and the wild beast of the field deuoureth it. Turn thee
again, thou God of hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visit this
vine. It is brent with fire and cut down. etc. Psalm. 80.

Imprinted in Sothwarke by Christophor Trutheall.

Cum priuilegio Regali.

1556.

The translatour to the reader.
I Commend in to thy gentil hands (good reader a most notable and godly
learned work of five Homelies / set furthe in Latin about.ix. years past by
the reverend and right famous clearke Rodulphe Gualter of zuirik / at such
time as the Bishop of Rome bestowed the treasures of his blessing with fire and
sweorde (by Italianes and Spanyardes) upon certain parts of Germanye: which
nevertheless were (by the mighty power and providence of God) so preserved in
the mids of affliction / that the more travail Satan (by his son and heir
Antichrist took to have suppressed the Gospel of Christ / the more it
florisheth: and the more he persecuted it / the stro^glyer it is confirmed /
and the depelier it has taken root. yea and (as it is Gods wonted practice
/ to turn the malice and fury of his enemies to the furtheraunce of his
glory) it never prospered in Germanye (thanks be to the mercy of God for it)
as it does now. And for as much as we English me^ did (by solemn oath)
abjure his usurped power and forged authority (whom the said author of this
work calls the myghtie houge Antichrist) in the days of Gods lawful
appointed Ministers of famous memory / King Henry theight / and his son the
blessed King Edward the sixthe: and seeing there is no less tirannye and plage
purposed / and hanging at this present (by the just judgment of God / for the
peoples unthankfulness / negligence / and advised perjury) over the noble
realm of England / than at that time was attempted in Germany: I thought it
good / to translate and set furthe this notable work / into our vulgar
English tongue / for iij. causes. Furst to stere the favorers of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ / and the weak brethren / to give God most hearty thanks for
his merciful gift of knowlage in this case / and with tears (for the
miserable condition of our natural country / now pressed with the tirannous
yowke of antichrist) to pour out fervent prayers to God almyghtie / that he
would (of his abundau^t mercy (for Christ's sake) vouchsafe to wythdrawe (once
again) this deserved and justly sent misery. Secondarely / to desire those men
/ which esteem and measure religion and Gods word / by the success of
worldly things: to behold (with indifferent consciences) what wealth and
pleyntie of meat and money / the Mass (the daughter of Antichrist) has
brought with her again into England: and thereby (though they count litell upon
Gods word) to behold how horrible a thing it is / to fall into the hands
of the living God / by committing of wilful perjury: and in what state they
stand against the dreadful day of the Lord (whose eyes and judgment no
colorable pretense can deceive \ for receiving again of his most blasphemous
enemy / whom they hade renounced by a necessary lawful oath / made in his
holy name. Thirdly / to provoke the bringers in again / and mayntenours of his
pretenced power and authority (whom this author calls Antichrist) either to
repent and revoke their popish and damnable errors / and confess and embrace
the truth of Christ's Gospel with us: or else to confute this work / not with
men's traditions nor vain falsely usurped titles of the church / and
catholic faith: but with the manifest word of God (whereupon the catholic
church of Christ / and the true christian justifying faith is builded) if
they can: as I know / they can not. For their artillarie is to short and to
weak / yea all the ordinance of the very gates of hell shall never be able to
encountre it / much less to prevail against it. In the mean time / we being
established and quieted in the invincible truth of Gods most holy sacred
word (whereby the author of this work translated by my poor travail / does
most learnedly and muinciblye paint out unto thee that great enemy of God /
Antichrist) shall by the assistence of Gods holy spirit / patiently digeste
their railyng and tirannye. And considering our former vnthankulnesse /
carnalitie / and necligence in our vocacion / we shall most humbly submit our
selves to our heavenly fathers rod and correction: and look for deliverance
at his own merciful leisure / knowing that in the mids of his wrath / he
remembers mercy.

Take pains now to read over diligently these five Homelies with the Autors
preface / good reader. And if God lighte^ thine heart with this candle / to
consent unto the truth with us / whereof thou wast either ignorant before / or
in case thou be already persuaded / yet if thou be the better instructed and
more soundly satled hereby in this behalf: I have my hole desire / and full
recompense. God give thee understanding in all things / and in him right
hertely well to fare.

The Autors own title of this book / is thus.

Antichrist. That is to say, five Homilies, wherein it is proved, that the
Bishop of Rome is the right and mighty houge Antichrist, whom the oracles of
the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles told before should come, and that we
should beware of him: Set furthe by Rodulphe Gualter of Zuirik. etc. To his
dear brethren, that preach the Gospel of Christ in the County of zuirike,
Rodulphe Gualter, grace and peace from him, which only (and none but he) is
made unto us of his heavenly father, peace, righteousness, wisdom,
redemption and sanctificacion.
THat chosen instrument of God and teacher of the gentiles, the Apostle Paul,
when he should take his last leave of the Elders of the Ephesia^s, and had
faithfully warned them of many matters, yet among other things, he thought good
to give them this lesson withal: Take heed to your selves, and to the hole
flock, of whom the holy Ghost has set you to be overseers (or Bishops) to
govern Act. 20.
the church of God, whom he has purchaced with his own blood. For I know
this, that there shall (after my departure) grievous wolves enter in among you,
that shall not spare the flock.

Which words (right reverend brethren and fellow Ministres) forasmuch as
they were spoken to those men, whom the self same office was at that time in
the church of Christ committed unto, which is (at this day) committed unto
us by lawful vocacion, we shall think them also spoken unto us: yea unto us
most specially, whom the last seasons of the world 1. Cor. 10.
are come upon, which not only the prophets, but also Christ and the
Apostles, have told before hand certainly, shall be (of al others) the most
perilous seasons, by reason of rauenyng wolves, false greasye anointed ones,
and false prophets.

It stands us therefore necessarily in hand, to pondre this gaire diligently,
that we may know, what an office it is, that the Lord has committed unto our
charge: and what care, study, and diligence we ought to use in the same.

For if it be the manner of such men, as are given unto the world, and to
private pleasures, to apply their diligece unto those things, that earthye
princes commit unto their charge: it shall become us (with much more studious
endeavor) to give attendaunce upon that office, which the most high King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, Jesus, Christ, has laid upon our shoulders, and
shall one day require a reconyng of it at our hands, Math. 24 and. 25.
wha^ he shall come in his glory with all his Angels unto judgment.

But now thapostle Paul says, that we are ordained Bishops, (or overseers)
not promisyng us a certain Empire or realm (as we se almost all the Bishops
of our time challenge to them selves, by the authority of this title) but
admonishing us of our office.

For as much as the Greek word Episcopus (which is englished a Bishop)
signifies in latin Speculator, that is in english, a Watcheman: And where
Paul says, we are ordained to be Episcopi, Bishops, that is to say,
watchmen, he uses the same manner of speech, yt God did, wha^ he ordained
Ezechiel to be a watcheman over the Ezech. 33.
house of Israel, chargeyng him most diligently to warn the people before
hand, of the sweorde that should come, for their sins and wickednesses: and
with his faithful preaching, to save the wretched synful people from
destruction. And in deed me thinks, that Paul espied the proud abuse of this
name (Bishop) before hand, where he says: Take heed to your selves, and to
the hole flock.

For like as he commits the Lords flock, that is to say, the congregation
(or church) to the ministers charge: even so bids he him also to beware and
take heed to him self, that he set not his mind upon private honors and
pastimes, neclecting them that he has taken charge of, and so work his own
destruction. Yea Paul tho^dreth at him also, with the Lords own saying unto
Ezechiel: Except thou speak plainly, and dissuade the wicked from his wicked
Ezech. 33.
way, that he may live, the wicked indede shall dye in his wickedness, but
his blood I will require at thy hands.

The Apostle byddeth us also, take heed unto the hole florke: allowyng here no
respect of persons, for us either not to regard any person for baseness and
poverty, or to bear with any for his estate or wealths sake. But he byddeth
us govern (or rather feed) not contrarieng Christ's words, which forbadde
his disciples to rule and reign as earthy princes do: but chargeyng us to
ministre the word faithfully, which prescribes the way and the vnfailyng
rule of salvation, and there withal carries me^ into the pleasant pastures of
the soul, wherein they find that meat, which Psalm. 23. Ioh. 6.
only fedeth and fills unto eternal life, after such sort, that it is not
possible for them after the digesting of it, to feel either hungre or thirst
any more.

And least we should for any cause, reckon the office committed unto us a small
trifling matter, he teaches us, how chargeable a flock it is, that we are
bounden to govern and feed: even the self same flock, that ye son of God
has vouchedsafe to deliver from destruction, with his own blood. And that
one reason (if there were non but it) is of so high autorite (brethren) that it
were hable alone to drive all lustlesnesse and sluggish drowsynes out of our
minds. For who knows not, that in safe keeping of a worldly thing, that a
man is put in trust withal, there is special great fidelity and diligence
required? Than how much more faithful and diligent ought me^ to be in Gods
matters, and namely in safekeping of that flock, which the Lord has rau^somed
with his own blood, and laid up in stoare in our custodye?

Another may we say, that our office is out of danger, by reason of the
presence and aid of him, that is the chief and good shepehearde in deed, and
under that prete^se we to take the less head and travail. For Paul speaks
before hand of horrible and sore daungiers. For I know this (quod he) that
after my departure, there shall grievous wolves come in among you, which shall
not spare the flock.

He says, wolves shall com, and that sore grievous ones: which will not spare
so worthy a flock, so dearly a bought flock, so noble a flock. And in an
other place, where he painteth them out with more circu^staunces of words, he
says: The spirit speaks evidently, that in the later days 1. Tim. 4.
some shall depart from the faith, and give ear to deceaueable spirits and
doctrines of Deuilles. Tha^ there shall deceauours rise up, yea such ones as
shall disquiete and make havoc of this flock, not only with men's lyeng
commentaries, but also with doctrines of very deuilles, both false and
pernicious.

The same matter also has Christ testified: who, like as he sends out his
disciples as sheep among wolves, so does he tell us, that false anointed
greasye ones, and false prophets shall starte up (to the undoing of a great
meanye) and their study shall be to peruerte and corrupt the doctrine of the
truth. He warns us also, that wars Math. 24. Luc. 19.
shall be stered up by their procurement, to assault and destroy faithful
men's bodies withal.

Moreover the head and prince of 2. These. 2.
all this rabble, is in an other place declared (even the great Antichrist him
self) which shall give the onsette upon this sely flock of Christ thick and
three fold, both with false forged lies, and open tyra^nye of cruel weapon. All
which sayenges, if we compare them with those things, that have happened in
our time, and do daily happen still, we shall confess Christ to be true in
his saying, and that Paul also spoke out of the spirit of truth: yea it
shall furthermore manifestly appear, who be those false anointed ones, and
false prophets, and who that myghtie houge Antichrist is, whom our flock
ought to beware of.

Now to the intent we may set our minds considerately upon our office, and
as well take heed to our selves, as to se to, and (as much as lies in our weak
nature) to provide for the flock committed unto our charge, we must needs have
a ripe knowlage of the perilles, that are wo^t to be most troublous and most
noisome to the church. Which, albeit they are infinite, and past al nombre,
that are daily blustred up of him, which like as he walks about as a roaring
Lion to destroy us, so is he most crafty in layeng of snares 1. Pet. 5.
and false deceaueable baytes: yet we ought before al things, to considre two
matters: false doctrine, and the grief of the cross and persecution, which are
special snares to overthrow our weakness withal. For the devil knows the
disposicion of our nature, that in divine and heavenly affairs, it is
wonderful dull and drowsye, and may very easily be deceived: but in other
causes (in religion specially) it estemeth every thing according to the
success and speed, and so it is offended at persecution and aduersite. By
reason whereof we se, that he uses always this knacke against the flock of
Christ, that either he deceaueth the simple sort with falsely conceived
opinions, or disquieteth them with co^tentions and wrangling disputatio^s: or
else he fears them with the cross of persecution, and bloody wars of
cruelly procured tyrannes.

If any man would require examples hereof, he shall mete them so thick, that he
shall not need to take much pain in searching of them. For the deuelishe
dreams of the Nazarenes may stand for an example, which iomble the law and
Christ together, and make his merit of none effect. And when those dreams
were even scarcely repressed, there was persecucion done by that monstre of
nature. Nero. Hereunto we may make rehearsal of Cerinthus, and his successor
(that prodigious slave of lechery, pride, and cruelty) Domitianus. Among these
we will recke^ Arrius, and the tyra^nes that followed his heretical madness.

And like as the nerer we draw to the end of the world, so much yt more
pernicious and more perilous is every thing: so in our time we see that mighty
houge Antichrist (the bishop of Rome) far excede al his predecessors in
tyranny, and so outragiously rave with both these sweordes, that a man can not
well discern, with whether he does hurt the church The virtue of the Popes
doctrine.
the sorer. For he has brought in doctrine, that is clean contrary
repugnaunt to the true doctrine. For it draws men from God, and makes them
to serve creatures: it teaches me^ also to seek salvation in their own
merits, and to trust in their own strenghtes.

He has also forged such a kind of religion, as has more twitle twatle
toys in it, then the Leuitical law, and all the supersticion that ever the
gentiles used. Yea it is patched together with part of both of them, and is
most far of from spirit and truth. Ioh. 4.
And yet under pretense of this religion, he is advanced to so high power and
tyranny, that he is hable to compel them that repyne against it, to repress
them that speak against it, and to kill and slay them that resist, and can not
believe it.

Therefore the lyeng spirit of error plays the devil in the church at this
day, and the Bishop of Romes tyra^nical sword lays on load withal, and that
not upon private persons now as in times past long ago, but upon most mighty
Princes, the most famous cities: yea upon al sorts of people his sweorde is
drawn, and makes streams of blood to run down every where. For now we see
great cities taken and throwe^ down, fields laid waste, honest weme^ and
mayde^s defiled with abominable lechery, and young babes also either killed, or
else (which is the more horrible) maimed of their limbs. We se the flower of
youth brought to the horrible wickedness of buggery, and al hole Germany in
the mean space every where cruelly vexed. And albeit that chosen instrument of
Satan (Antichrist) rage with open tyranny, yet (by ioynyng lies to his tyranny)
his drift is to cloak his deuillishe attemptates, and the occasions thereof, to
enueagle the unlearned and simpler sort with false forged causes, and craftily
to cause many folks, to hate the truth of the Gospel and true religion.

Let us awake therefore (brethren) and seeing we are placed in the watch tower,
let us reprove the sweorde, not that is yet coming, but presently come, and
lays on load, yea and batheth it self all ready in the bowelles of the
flock. For in this case there is many a man's faith assayed. There be some,
which because they perceive not the feate of forgeing of lies, are sone begyled.

There be some which because they can not discern the true doctrine and
ymagined supersticio^ asondre, take falshead for truth. And some there be, that
are yet still afraid of the tho^der bolt of the Romyshe curse, that is to
say, Antichrists curse. And some there be also, which are so offended, when the
cross and heat of persecucion comes, that after that trial, every man may
plainly perceive, they received the sede of the Gospel in to stonye ground.

In this case therefore, is our dilligent cure required, good brethren. In this
behalf it stands us necessarily in hand, to show our selves faithful
watchemen, so as the people being warned by us, may be hable to know false
fained doctrine, to beware of forged supersticion, to shonne the baits and
snares of lies, and in no wise to be offended, wha^ persecucio^ comes.

And principally it shall be our part to give the onsette upon the autour of so
heinous a mischief (the bishop of Rome) whom not only the prophets, but also
Christ and thapostles (according to the histories) directly proclayme, to be
the right and mighty houge Antichrist. He it is therefore, whom our duty is
to reprove, and to set him out plainly in his colors, for the congregatio^s to
look upon him, that no man be amassed by reason of his falsely and causeles
usurped person or title, or be afraid of his vain go^neshotte of words,
because of his prati^g power.

And against forged supersticion and lyeng doctrines, there is (doutles) no
presenter a remedy, than to know the truth. For where the light of the
truth spreads out his beams, there may the devil put up his pypes, for any
hurt he can do, with his dark dongeon of lies.

As for the talks of some fine fyngred te^drelinges, they are not worth the
hearing: which because they are afraid of their own carcass and pelf, would
in no wise have an enemy of so great might and power spoken against, and to be
provoked through such manner of open mouthed plain declaracio^s. Is there not
unquiet trouble enough otherwise, say they? Is there not dissension and
tumultuous vproares enough besides? what avails it to throw fire in to the
furnace, and oil in to the fire?

I beseech you (good brethren and fellow curates) bear with me, though I
answer these men plainly home at few words. For I could easily contemn
their prittle prattle talking, if there were not some of their company, that look
to be reported not only for fanonrers of the gospelles truth, but even
doctors also, and that not of the common sort of doctors. Who forasmuch as
they wonderfully myslike this work, which I purpose to set furthe, can not
fantasye all those pains that men take, in speaking and doing against the
Bishop of Romes tyranny. And yet for all that, these same fine carpet doctors
make them selves wo^derous busye and earnest, in dryuyng away a sort of
lowsye harlot Friars, and maungie Masse-priestes. In this they think they do
gaily. And if they chance at adventure to hitte upon a new term of speech,
to floute and taunt those ungracious mo^stres withal, Lord, so brag they are
of it. But yet they would not have the head and chief prince of these monstres
to be meddled against, in no wise.

But I would have them to answer me. Do you think it to be true (O you
saweye, and more than arrogaunt frierly divinity doters) that the Apostle
Paul, yea that God him self has ordained you to be watchemen in his house?
Sure you will say, it is true, for you can not deny it onles ye will lose all
the glory of your estimacion, which ye set so much by.

Than what think you is the office of a watchema^? Is it enough for him to
tang the watchebell, when a rascal common soldier (or two) of the enemies
band comes, and when the chieftayn of the Army, and high Emperor him self
approaches with his hole host, to make no sign at al? I think you will not
grant that.

But than chiefly should the trompet sound, than should he ring alarm most
of al, than must the cytezins be commanded to harness specially: tha^ is the
greatest daungier of all other. And except the watcheman do thus, he shall not
only be called a necligent cowheardly wretch, but also a false knave, and a
traitor to the common wealth.

What a madness is it than (in the deuilles name) for a man not to think that
necessarily requisite, in the administracion of the church, which seems not
only profitable, but also of necessity to be done in the temporal common
wealth? And I pray you, what weapones are they, that Antichrist does most
hurt and villanye with all? even lies and craftye deceate are the things,
that he sets him self out most with all. Because he is furnished with a
false title, he reigns in many men's hearts, whose ignorant blindness and
simplicity he abuses, to establishe his tyranny. Shall we than suffer the^
to be seduced through ignorance still, seeing it lies in us, to deliver them
at ones, from that so heinous a tyranny, by the light of the truth? Shall we
be afraid to reprove that cruel rageing beast, for fear of making him
angrye, whose use is to do more hurt with flattery, tha^ furye? That may not
be, my brethren. Nay, we must pluck of this monstres visour, that he vau^teth
him self in, and tear of his painted Lions visage, that men may se what a
slowche eared ass he is, that all this while would needs be taken for that
invincible triumphaunt Lion of the tribe of Judah.

Concerning his displeasures, we ought not to be afraid of them, nor adradde
of his thonder clappes. As for Apoca. 6.
this beast, he has already rose colored him self a great while, with saints
blood. There be innumerable souls of saints under the great altar, who^ this
beast has murdered for the word of God, and the testimony that they bare
unto Christ. And there are served of the same sauce, every day moo and moo. And
all they cry How long Lord thou that art holy and true, iudgest not, nor
reue^gest our blood from them that dwell on earth? But the Lord hears their
voices, and is ready to come forth to execute judgment, and to be revenged as soon as the measure of the beast is fulfilled, and the nombre of his martirs
perfitlye made up. Let us in ye mean time do the parts of good thriftye
stuardes, and trusty watchemen, as it becomes us to do. Let us feed the
Lords flock with the prouau^dre of his word: let us reprove, stamp under
our fere, and cast away poison, that it do no hurt. Let us point thenemie and
all his false crafts and weapones we our fyngre, that Christ's sheep may
know, whom they ought to flee from. And so shall we receive the bou^teous
reward, that is prepared for us. And as for those men, that suffer so much as
the simplest sheep of Christ's flock, to be lost through their necligence, there
remains horrible pain in stoare for them.

Now being moved by these reasones, I have taken upon me this labor (not being
ignorant what dau^gier lies upon it) to prove the Bishop of Rome, to be very
Antichrist. And this same work (loving brethren and fellow ministers) I
thought good to dedicate unto you: not ye I thought my self hable, being a young
man, to instruct mine au^cientes: being unlearned my self, to teach my
betters in learning: and being a yongling and barbarous my self, to inform
men of most famous eloquence, with these my dooinges: but that my mind was to
render a plain rekonyng of my studies unto those men, whom I saw travail
this many years (like hearty and constaunt faithful men) in this matter, and
did much good wtal. And so I thought it not unprofitable, that this doctrine
should openly come to light, being set forth under the public privilege of al
you, seeing it is necessary, principally in this sorrowful time of affliction.

But before I make an end of my tale, I think good to speak a little
concerning Antichrists other sweord (that is, his open tyranny) that men may
the more easily understand, what is the occasion of the cross and persecucion,
and that we ought patiently to bear it.

But furst of al, it is to be enquired by whose counsel, mocion or suffering
it is, that Christ's church tastes of the smarte of the cross. Marye, that
do we learn of the only and undeniable scholemaister of the world, which
has been in the fathers bosom from everlasting, and therefore seeing he knows
al secrets, he has opened them unto us, as far as it is lawful and
profitable for us to know. When he sent furthe his disciples to preach the
Gospel, after that he hade talked much concerning the cross and persecucions,
at last he says thus: Are not two sparowes sold for a farthing? And yet not
one of them falls Math. 10
to the ground without your father. All the hears of your head be nombred. Be
not afraid therefore, you are much more worth, tha^ a great meignye of
sparowes.

In these words now, the Lord shows us the principal cause of the cross:
that what so ever it is, that the godly are wont to have chance unto them, it
comes by the will and decreed cou^sail of his father. For although it is not
the knowing of Gods will, that sets those that be persecutours on work,
but the lust of their own private affection, hate, malice, and despite of
Gods word: yea and albeit Satan (the father of all murder and violence)
stere them up: yet none of al these have any power, strength or force against
Christ's church, except the Lord him self suffer them to rushe in, and to
have his church somewhat exerciced therwithall.

For that cause the Lord calls the King of Assiria, the rod of his fury:
Esa. 10. Psalm. 17.
and David calls the wicked, Gods hand and Gods sweorde: where as another
the King of Assiria hade any respect unto the will of God, another do the wicked
regard the cou^sail of Gods providence. But this (loving brethren) is full of
comfort, that another the adversaries have (of them selves) any power against
us, nor that any thing befalls us without the will of God. For seeing the holy
scriptures declare unto us, that Psalm. 11. 2. Corin. 1.
God is not only a ryghteous Lord, but that he is also a most merciful father,
certainly what adversity so ever chau^ceth unto us through his cou^sail, it
threatteneth not to destroy or undo us, but promises us salvation. For how can
he mind ye undoing of me^, which is the maker of ma^kynd? would a father have
his own children destroyed? would he be content to have them utterly destroyed
and slain? No. But forasmuch as that property is most far from the nature
of a mortal man, that is a father: doubtless we may Luce. 11.
not think God, which is the fountain of mercy and grace, to be more
vngentil and harder hearted, than a mortal man.

Why than (say they) suffers he most merciles enemies to fall upon us by
heaps so? why does he cast us in to their hands, and upon their we apones
than?

But what are you (good folks) that grunt at this gaire? Think ye it a
wondre, or never heard you, that a father shakes the rod at his children?
yea Hebre. 12.
and that he clappeth them on the buttockes to, for their correction? Let us
rather look upon our selves, and we shall sone see the causes of all this
gayre. For where we being Psalm. 51.
conceived and borne in sin, could not chose, but be like our own original
state, and therefore should be the slaves of death and damnation, the father
of heaven tendering us with mercy (by his own son) has taken away our
sins, and chose^ us to be his children, and has made us heirs of his grace
and kingdom. This joyful and gracious prouide^^ of our salvation, even the
doctrine of the gospel brings us word of. And that is it that tells us
how we are endetted to god again therefore. It enformeth us, how we must believe,
it teaches us how to frame our life, and it corrects our naughty corrupt
manners.

Howbeit forasmuch as our flesh can not abide to be corrected and nourtured,
it would not in this case be monished, rebuked, corrected nor found fault at:
no, it abuses the doctrins of the gospel, to clooke his licencious liberty
and lust wythall: and the more careless security and liberty it has to live
at pleasure, so much the more it follows his own affections, and renneth
wild without bridling. Than therefore it stands with the heavenly fathers
justice, that they which would not amend with courteous warnyng of words,
must be corrected with stripes. And yet he sends not them for any cause, but
yt we should cast away our careless neclige^ce, and turn in to ye right way
again.

As for examples or testimonies of scripture there needs none in this case,
seeing every one of us f^leth in our selves, this corrupt disposicio^ of our
own nature. Nevertheless I think it not amysse, to note such things, as have
fallen in our time.

The word of the gospel has (by the favorable grace of God) ben revealed
and preached to the people of Germanye, now about five and twenty years and
more. There has been disclosed, the frauds, the false sleightes, subtle wiles,
and blasphemous devises of Antichrists tyranny. All darkness has been
scowred away by the light of the truth. The endless knottes (that before time
were indissoluble) and the most sorrowful bo^des Hebre. 4.
of death, were let lose and cut in pieces, with this most kene two edged
sweorde, the Gospel.

And when this gaire was ones losed, all that ever Antichrist hade builded in
men's consciences, fell suddenly down, and the vain dredes of conscience
vanished away like smoke. That made the Bishop of Rome sorry for it, straight at
the furst beginning. And right mighty Emperors, Kings Princes, and people,
were grieved at that. Yea they laid their heads together at sundry counsels,
whereby they would feign have trodden down the corn of the gospel, which was
than but grene, and newly sprongen up. But al would not serve. No. we have seen
the^ fall out among them selves, and horribly torn and arrayed with making
wars one against an other, which intended to make war against Christ. And
now even the same are at hand, ready to cheoppe of our necks: now they set
upon us with fire and sweorde: now they make havoc of every thing, with
murdering and smothering. But what is the cause? Is Christ more weak, and
less skillful in his science, than he has been before time? Is it because he
is not hable to restrain, that he has restrained and kept of (all this
while) unto these days? No, That is not the matter. But we have deserved this
misery through our own sins. We have provoked him unto wrath through our
unthankfulness. Our adversaries are weaponed with our own wickednesses: and
therewith they make batail against us. And because we have sinned, in that we
have shamefully abused the quiet rest, that God has given us now a great
while, he looks upon us (his neclige^t naughty children (with this his present
sharp rod. Howbeit this we may comfort our selves in, that seeing he is our
father, he desires not the destruccio^, nor the death, another the undoing of
us his children, but would have us to amend, to be saved, and to live. And the
very cause of the wars and persecution, which the Bishop of Rome him self
prete^deth in every place by his bulls, is an undeniable proof of this matter.
For he cries out to have us burned, because (he says (we are heretics.

But what heresy is it? Mary Sir this: because we will none of the Romish
supersticion, we trust not to what is heresy with the Papists.
our own merits, we layne to none but only Christ. Him we acknowlage to be
our head, our king, our Bishop, our only and sufficient sacrifice: and because
we (accordingly as the Apostle Paul did) know nothing, saving Christ Jesus,
and that he was crucified. And although by reason of our wickednesses (which
forasmuch as we are infected wtall) we frame not our selves according to the
profession of our faith, our heavenly father suffers us to be plagued: yet yt
is not the matter, yt they (which are a great deal wickeder tha^ we) are angrye
with us for, but for this only cause they are horn wood against us, that we
hold us to Christ alone, and are gone quite from their filthy faithles God
service. For where some find fault at us, for a disobedience I wotte not what,
it is a most vain tittle tattle, and even the bishop of Rome him self proves
the^ liars by his own Bulls. Let us behold therefore ye exceeding Da. 3. 9.
goodness of God, in this behalf. we hade deserved to be destroyed for our
sins, that are both heinous and many, for co^te^ning ye word of God, and
for our unthankfulness, and because we have lived carelessly, we hade need to be
scourged: but yet the Lord will not have our pain slau^dred with that title,
Act. 5.
but reputeth us worthy of this honor, that his pleasure is to have us put in
perile for his names sake, for ye true faith, and for religion (which is a
matter of most excellency, and of most high honor) and so to count us among
the company of his holy martires. O what a fatherly loui^g ki^dnes is this? O
most abundau^t pleynteous mercy. O most rich treasures of gods gracious
favor. he is content to make us vessels of his grace, which had already To. 9.
made our selves vessels of his wrath: and he voucheth safe to have his
glory set up, the vineyarde of his church watered, and his faith and truth
testified in that blood of ours, which deserved to be sheadde for our own
exceeding great sins. Who is it therefore, that could be weary of this cross?
who ca^ be sorry to suffer afflictions? In deed our most cruel blood thirstye
enemies, are not ware of this glory of our persecution: and therefore it is
meat and drink to them, wha^ our bodies are destroyed and murdered. They
know not that judgment abides them, that when our Lord God has chastifed
us enough with their furious madness, they must be cast into everlasting fire,
like an unfruitful rod, that is good for no use any more. But as for us, it
is our part to say now with the Apostle Paul: who shall separate us from
the love of God? shall affliction? shall strait Romans 8.
keeping? shall persecution? shall ho^gre? shall nakedness? shall perile? shall
sweorde? nay, in all these things we have the victory by him, that has
loved us. Yea Christ the son of God has loved us, and like as he gave him
self unto death for our sakes, even so does he love us, and puts us to
honor now at ye last cast, after such wise, that he turns the infamy of
the pain, which we hade deserved, in to the most glorious honor of the
cross, which we must bear for his sake. Notwithstanding his mind ^s not,
that we should be so tormented and afflicted, that al must perish in his
persecucio^ suffering: but he requi^eth this, that we should abandon fleshely
security and express that faith in our conversation, that we profess in our
communicacion. And as soon as we do so, he receaueth us, which are now
unthrifty children, and clippeth us hard in his arms, and so he makes his
words to be proved true, which he spoke long agoo: As surely as I do live, I
would not the death Ezech. 18.
of a sinner, but that he should repent and live.

These things therefore it is convenient for us, to warn and teach the
^ongregations committed unto our charge, that the weak be not afraid of
persecucion, that they be not offended, wha^ any thing chau^ceth amysse, and
that they esteem not our faith and religion thereby: but let them remember them
selves of those things, that they have deserved the wrath of God by, and
amend them: that they being turned to the Lord God, may see him also turn
unto them. Let the words sound in men's ears (yea let them sound
continually) that the Lord speaks by the prophet: O that my people would
have harkened unto me, for if Israel hade Psalm. 81.
walked in my ways. I should sone have put down their enemies, and turned my
hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should have fallen
(like slaves) unto their fete, but their time should have endured for ever.

If men would take heed to these sayenges with atte^tyue godly hearts, they
should not be offended at persecucio^, but should have most present redress
of al their miseries. But what want there is every where in this behalf, I
think you see it, not without grievous sorrows of your hearts, loving brethren
and fellow ministers.

Me^ have not yet laid away their pernicious security of sinful life. We
are not yet weary of our wickedness, we are not yet sorry for our sins. And
like as wicked obstinate me^ have not suffered them selves as yet, to take
courteous warning by the word: even so it is not possible for them to be
afraid, when plagues come upon them. And forasmuch as we se perforce that
kind of unbridled licenciousnesse in our people, we se also our adversaries
wax daily stronger and stronger, and our selves shrink and become weaker and
weaker. But seeing the world is in this case, that we should Esa. 1.
utterly despere of it, if the Lord hade not reserved his remnauntes of chosen
people: it shall be our parts, to apply our dilligent endeavor, that none be
cast away, through our slothfulness or necligence.

Let us therefore exercice the talent, that the Lord has given us. Let us
win as much as lies in our possible power. The Lord will not fail them,
that apply their duties godly. But like as he alone gives the 1. Cor. 3.
Math. 3.
encreace: even so is he hable of stones, to make children of Abraham.

Let the dangerous using of our office constrayne us, to have it always in
our mind, and to take heed to our selves and to the hole flock, that the
church sustain no loss, either by false doctrine, or by grief of
persecucion. Let us not spare any pains taking, let us not spare for any
labors, for any watchi^ges, no nor yet for our own life, for it is rather to
be called a death. Let us not spare our body, for it can not be better spent,
tha^ about the husbandrye of the Lords vineyorde: that at the later day in the
dredful judgment, we be not found companiones of that slothful servant,
but that we may hear that pleasant and most comfortable saying: Well fare
you good and faithful Math. 25.
servants, you have been faithful over a few things, I will put you in
authority over many things: Enter into your Masters joy. Amen. Farewell
brethren and reverend fellow ministers. At Zuirike the xii. day of Dece^bre.
1546.

The furst of the five Homilies, of Rodulphe Gualter, concerning the latter
times and Antichrist.
In this furst Homily are contained two specialties. Furst it proves by
Christ's words in the. 24. of Matthieu, that Antichrist is. Second, it
co^futeth the false gloses of certain men, and teaches what Antichrist is: and
brings furthe two places of scripture, whereby Antichrist may be certainly and
truly perceived and known.

THan if any man say unto you: lo, here is Christ or there, Math. 24
believe it not. For there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and
shall show great miracles and wonders, in so much that if it were possible,
the very elect should be brought in to error. Behold, I have told you
before. Wherefore if they say unto you: Behold, he is in the deserte, goo not
you furthe: Behold he is in the secret places, believe it not, etc.

Our Lord and saueour Jesus Christ, as his disciples beheld the mighty and
noble building of the temple of Jerusalem, said unto them: See you all these
things? verily I say unto you, there shall not one stone be left upon another,
that shall not be destroyde. And with these words of Christ his disciples were
excedingly amassed. And where as according to the custom of their auncettours
and of their own time, they hade as yet the busye and glistering gaye
ceremonies of outward worishipping (that in times past were set furthe by
Moses law) in great price, and even so esteemed them worthy to be honored and
observed; with a certain devotion of conscience: they were much afraid at
this so grievous and sharp sentence of their Lord and master Christ,
concerning the temple. Whereupon at the time that they came al one unto him,
when he tarried alone in the mountain, they desired him to solute unto them
three questiones, which they propounded unto him. Furst they asked him, wha^
the Temple and city of Jerusalem should be taken and destroyed. Secondarily,
where in the end of the 23. Chaptre (after he hade so sore quereled with the
scribes and chief rulers of the Jews) he made mention of his last coming:
they questioned thereof with him also, and of the despeching of all the hole
world, when it should be. Thirdely, they required tokens, whereby they might
discern, as well when the destruction of the city and temple, as also the
finalle end of all the hole world, and his coming again should draw nere,
and be at hand.

To these three questiones (therefore) the Lord makes answer in this chaptre.
And where as he being a trusty teacher of those that his are, does truly teach
those things, that only serve unto our salvation, he talks nothing in this
place of the appointment of the times, ne yet shows what year, month, or
day these things shall chance: that is to wete, because the certainly
perceived knowlage thereof, should make nothing at al to the furtheraunce of
our salvation, or to thamendement of life, but should most specially provoke
us unto careless slothfulness, and necligent leaving undone of good works and
virtuous deeds. But he instructs them with evident and vnfailing signs, by
token whereof they might clearly discern, that these things shall assuredly
com to pass, and also he teaceth them, whether they shall shortly com to pass.

And forasmuch as Christ the Lord, is the universal teacher of all the
world universally, we shall not recke^ that these tokens were given to non
other, but to the Apostles alone: for it is manifest, that they were given no
less to us, than unto the^, to the intent undoubtedly, that we should be
diligently occupied in the consideration of them, and that when we see them
happen, we should shake of all drowsinesse of our minds, and (like faithful
hearty servants) look for the coming of our Lord. For this conclusion of
his doctrine the Lord him self does most diligently treat upon, in this
Chaptre, and in the Chaptre, following.

Finally whereas the disciples desired to be instructed, not as touching the
destruction of the city and temple only, but also concerning the final
despeche of all the world, and the last coming of Christ: and required for
that purpose tokens of sundry kinds, where by they might be hable to discern
the truth, and the time of both those matters: the Lord sets furthe such
manner of tokens unto them, whereof the most part of them may and ought to be
applied to both the questiones on either part. For like as the Lord God in
times past, chosed the people of Israel to him self, peculiarly out of all
other naciones and people, and coupled them to him self with a most holy sacred
covenant: even so was it his will, that the same people should be an example
to al other, where into (as in a certain common glass) all people should look.
And therefore that heinous and horrible destruccio^ of that same people, ought
to be a figure of the last coming of Christ the saueour, and thending of all
the world, which indede to all wicked persons shall be both heinous and
horrible.

But in this present place, which I have now out of Christ's words rehearced
before, the eleventh token is set furthe unto us, and not without exceading
holsom commandment and faithful admonicion, wherewith we are informed by our
saueour, what is to be done of us in this behalf. There shall rise (quod he /
false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great miracles and wonders,
in so much that if it were possible, the very elect should be brought in to
error. Therefore believe not their false promises, and feyned tradicions.

Herein furst of al (well-beloved brethren in the Lord) this is our part to
search out, that we may know fully, what this word Christ is, what the
meaning of it is in the scriptures, and what it signifies. For thereby it shall
also evidently appear unto us without doubt, who is a false Christ, and who
be false Prophets, that commonly set furthe unto us a false Christ.

This word Christ is taken out of Greek, and signifies ye same, that the
Hebrews understand by their word Meschia, and sounds in English, anointed.
And the manner of anointing among the people of Israel was this, that the chief
Bishops and kings should be anointed with holy oil, and so dedicated to
their offices: in so much, that (as concerning kings) anointing was the same
among the^, yt the custom of Coronacio^ is among us. Here unto the places of
scripture do bear record, as Exo. 29. Leui. 7. and. 8. and also. 1. Re. 10.
and. 16. Chap. where the anointing of Saul and David is treated of. And of this
manner custom of anointing of Bishops and kings, that sede that was promised
from the furst beginning of the world, even the saueour of all ma^kinde is
called in Hebrew, Meschia: in greek, Christus: in Latin, Vnctus: and in
English, Anointed: for this cause sake, that he is anointed with the oil of
gladness, that is to say, with the spirit of God, even he (that very chief
Bishop, and most victorious King) which came in to the world, and was made
man: and in offering him self up for our sakes, took away the sins of the
world by his death, and delivered us quite from the cruel tyranny of the
devil, death and hell: and so by this means he is become our most mighty
valeau^t king, that proclaymeth the laws of everlasting salvation, and
defends and reuengeth us, from all the crafty wyles and assaults of our enemy
the devil. Finally like as he is the only son of God, that for us was made
man, and is the one only redemer and saueour of us all: even so must al they
needs be false Christ's, that set out who is a false Christ.
them selves for redemers and saueours of men. And than also they are false
prophets and show a false Christ, as many as teach men to seek salvation and
redemption, forgiveness of sins, the way of life, the grace of God, and the
true eternal blessedness any where else, than at the fool and only son of
God, our redemer and saueour Jesus Christ. Whereof it is in this place to be
noted, that this word Christ is used for redemer, saueour, and revenger, so
that the meaning of our Lords words is this: When the destruction of the
temple and city begins to draw nere (O brethren) there shall rise many that
shall boast them selves to be saueours of the people, and shall wythdrawe many
of the people unto their parts, for as much as they also shall have Apostles
and Prophets of their own, that shall praise the^ unto the simple rude
people. And in like case there shall not a few (in the later times) goo before
my glorious coming, which shall boldly take upon them to be that thing, that
none is but only I: that is to say, they shall crepingly insinuate them selves
in men's consciences, to be such (through false setting furthe, and wicked
arrogauncie) as though they hade in their hands the grace of salvation,
redemption, forgiveness of sins, and everlasting life. Believe not these
manner of men, yea although they send furthe preachers of their name and
doctrine neue^ so many, to praise them most highly with words and studious
diligence: yea and though they do miracles and such wonders, as have hitherto
ben scarcely seen or known of. For they are deceauours, and most falselyeng
seducers of the simple rude common people. Behold therefore I have told you
before, and forewarned you. Learn you this lesson (at least way) to remember
my warninges, and to beware, and to escape so great a mischief.

Now tha^, like as Christ faithfully admonished those that his were, of these
things: even so the matter it self bears record, that he was a true prophet,
and the verity of the deeds afterward proved his saying true. For if a man
consider the destruction of the city and temple, and the things that went
before it, he may find, that there were many of this kind of guydes and
rulers connyngly seen in crafty deceates: that is to wete, a sort of magical
philosophers (co^nyng in deuillishe sciences) and other wicked knackehardye
fellows, among the nombre of whom, a certain Egipcian is chiefly reckoned: than
Caphedon, Theodas and others: which like as (through their false promises)
allured the people, that were (of them selves) to much inclined to sedicio^,
eue^ so were they Autors unto many, of most deep miseries, and extreme sorrows.
Look for these matters in Josephus, the 20 book of antiquities, the 11. 1^. and
14. chap. Furthermore, in case False Christ's in the primative church.
we mark respectively the apostles times, and the things that chanced about
the primative church, it shall evidently appear, that even at that time also
many rose, which partly took upon them the office, to give ye grace of God, and
the gifts of salvation, and partly which declared, that they must be hade some
where else, tha^ at our sole and only redemour Jesus Christ. For to this
meaning the text ought to be applied, that we read in Act. 8.
the acts of Simon magus, which was so sawcye, as to name him self the
mighty power of God. To this saying also ye swarms of heretics are to be
accounted, which by and by even in ye apostles times, or sone after, arose and
withdrewe me^nes minds from Christ Jesus, and miserably disquieted men's
consciences, with their doctrine. Hereunto shall worthily be referred ye
blaspemous helhou^d (the deuilles own mynion) that deceauour Mahomet
Mahomet: who (as he is the author of a new law) has with his abominable
entreprise, feined also a new kingdom of heavens not heard of before, new
blessedness, new way of salvation, and a new sect. To be short, unto this
purpose belong they, that from the lips forewarde (as touching the title)
advance the religion and faith of Christ, and for all that, they commonly set
furthe remission of sins, the grace of God the father, eternal life and
salvation, not in the only merit of our saueour Jesus Christ, but train away
men's simple rude minds, to other purposes. Of this sort we say, that all
the Popish doctors are, which in deed Teachers of Popery
profess Christ with their mouth, but yet the manner of the^ is, to teach the
folowers of their doctrine and religion, to put their trust, partly in their
own works and merits, and partly to train them unto Saints merits, unto
Saints intercession, unto Popes pardones, unto Saints images, and finally
unto many such sorts of trifles and fantasies of man's brain, or rather
supersticion: and also to seek comfort of mind, peace and quietness of
consciences, in such gaire. For it shall appear more clear than the day
light, that even these sorts of men, are no less meant by Christ's words,
than the other sorts are, in case the things that are spoken of in this
place, be compared with their tradicions. For they are not afraid to declare,
not only that remission of sins and salvation of souls must be atteyned by
some other means, than at our saueour Christ, but also to set forth eue^ that
same our Lord him self, in sundry places contrary to the authority of the
scriptures, and of the word of God.

For as concerning Christ (which was hanged on the cross and dyed, and after
that when he was raised up again from death, carried his very own true body
into the heavens, in the sight of his disciples) they teach (contrary and
besides the plain articles of our catholyke faith, and besides the truth of
the holy scriptures) that he is contained without all doubt, in the sacrament
of the aultare corporally, and also in ye same substance, as he was hanged on
the cross, and offered up him self for us, and that he lies enclosed in the
churches or boxes (as they call them) that are consecrate to that end: and so
they show him in those same places, to the sely rude people, whom they have
with their tradiciones and fa^tasies, brought in to such a madness, that they
forgette the faithful admonicion of this our Lord Jesus Christ, and put their
confidence in these men's tryfling toys: and a great part of me^ following
these deceauours, goo about to seek the Lord Christ (the saueour of the
world) in bread, in boxes, in the aultare, and in other so^dry sorts of
places.

And how great (and how far out of square) this error of ye world is, it
shall be declared in other places more plenteously, God so willing. And
forasmuch than, as we hear, that the Lord Christ him self in this place,
names false Christ's: And seeing that mention is made of such manner of
deceauours, which (by their false prophets) should seduce too many men: and
yet in the mean time, this common and uniform sentence of all me^ is heard,
which believe, that before the last coming of Christ, and the^ding of all the
world, a certain great Antichrist shall rise, to the destruction and damnacion
of many folks: me thinks this present place does require, that (for as much
as it is our chance to see the last days) we should search, and weighe the
hole universal business of Antichrist, with all our possible studious
endeavor: that in case we be in any danger thereof, we may be hable to beware
of it, and avoid the things, that might hyndre our salvation.

Wherefore to the intent the matters that make to this purpose, may the more
clearly and openly appear unto us, it seems, that before we goo to the matter
it self, we must weighe three things. Furst we must search, whether any
Antichrist shall certainly com or not. Than what the name of Antichrist
means, and who is Antichrist, and also that we may perfitly perceive, how
me^ have been yet hitherto deceived, in the knowi^g of him. Thirdly what is
written unto us in the holy scriptures, concerning Antichrist, and what is
necessaire for us to think, and believe of him.

That Antichrist shall rise up in whether there be Antichrist
the last times of this world, before the last and glorious coming of Christ
to judgment, it is written with sufficient testimony, in the kokes both of
the old testament and of the new. For the Prophet of God Esaie in the 11.
Chap. going about to describe universally, the hole business of the promised
Messiah our saueour, among other of his doings, he records this also, that
he shall slay the wicked one with the breathe of his lips. In which place, by
this word (wicked one) is not to be understood every adversary and enemy of
God, but that notable and great enemy of God, even Antichriste: that he (as
the chief head of most high wickedness, according to his excellency) may be
called the wicked one. In this behalf Paul the Apostle is our wittenesse, who
in his later epistle to the Thessalonianes, speakink of the ^leaing of
Antichrist, uses the Prophets testimony and words of this place. Here unto
shall the 10. Psalm of David be worthily recited, who also (according to the
meaning of Saint Hierome and Augustine) under the title of the wicked one, does
handsomely paynt out the parson of Antichrist. To this purpose also makes the
godly Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 38. and. 39.
which by Gog and Magog, does (in figure) pretily set furthe the image of
Antichrist. Besides these the most noble Prophet and most heartily desirous man
Daniel in the 7. and 11. Chap. tells all the business of Antichrist, with
such playnesse of descripcion, that he might seem not to prophecy of things
to come, but to write a story of a matter all ready done. In like case also,
Zachary the Prophet in the 11. Chap. makes mention of the same mo^stre, where
he speaks of a certain folishe pastor, and an Idol rather than a Pastor,
that should be most far of from all office of a true Pastor. And if we goo
to the books of the new testament, we shall much more evidently and more
perfitely see this matter, as we shall all other matters also. For he that is the
Lord him self, and the undeniable teacher of the truth Jesus Christ, names
here false Christ's: and describes them yet more plainly, in the end of the
Chaptre. And the disciple whom Christ our saueour loved, used the very self
word Antichriste, in his furst epistle, the second Chap. writing on this
manner. Babes, now is the last time, and as you have heard, that Antichrist
shall com, there begin many Antichrists, to be even now already. Furthermore
in his holy sacred apocalipse, which he received by the reuelacion of Christ,
he expresses all Antichrists business, with such study and diligence, that
he shows the springing and furst begynnynges of this wicked one, his
procedinges, his power, his streinghtes, his subtilties, his doings, his end
and destruction, and also shows his time and place (by name, in a manner) and
points them, as it were with his fyngre.

The same thing does Paul also that great Apostle of Christ, 2. Thessa. 2.
Finally to the same end, ought the sayenges also to be applied, that are
written. 1, Tim, 4. and.2. Pe. 2. and in many other places, wherein all the hole
guard of Antichrist, that is to say, all the rabble of false Prophets is in
most ample wise painted out, in their own colors. Therefore we must in no wise
doubt, of the rising and tyranny of Antichrist, but rather watch and give
most diligent waiting attendaunce, whether now (seeing he is strate up) he
practice ye same his tira^ny, yt the prophets have spoken of before.

Moreover, that other thing which we propounded in the second place, is here
most chiefly necessary to be what Antichrist is.
known, to thi^ntent we may understand, what Antichrist is: wherein we shall
perceive the blyndenesse of mankind, and the working wylynesse of Satan,
wherwyth he has made us such Dawepoopies, that we have served Antichrist
with all kinds of diligent services, and yet we were not hable to know him.

Howbeit all this gaire, the most wyly crafts man has (after his accustomed
manner) by the darkness of lies, brought to pass. For in forgeing a false
feyned fable of Antichrist, he has caused so great an ignorance of ye truth,
that (by means of a false ymaginacion conceived in our mind) we can not
discern the right Antichrist, lurking under such masking visours.

For of this matter we see it also The false forged fable of Antichrist.
mentioned in writing, that the orinal beginning of Antichrist should be
such, that he must necessarily be borne of the people of the Jews, of the
tribe of Dan: because Jacobs prophecy is thus. Dan shall become a Ge. 49.
serpent in the way, and an adder in the strait pathe. And that he shall so
be conceived in sins, that inco^tinently upon the time of his conceauing,
Satan shall lay hold on him, lyeng in his dammes belly, and never leave him.
Than that he should be borne in Babylon, and fostred up at Bethsaida and
Corozaim, by Christ our Lords own witness, which for that Math. 11.
cause is read in the story of the gospel, that he cursed those cities, and
thondred that horrible woo upon them. And (because nothing should be behind
in that subtle fliering fable, that seems to belong to the outward similitude
of the truth) men that were most fit to deceive, have (by the instincte of
Satan) added many other things to wtall. For like (say they) as he shall be
brought furthe in to light, in his plain deuillishe concepcion and nativity,
so shall he also be streinghtned continually with swarms of magical
philosophers, inchau^tours, and sorcerours, which shall instruct him by and by
in his furst te^dre years, in the exercice of such abominable sciences, and
shall make him handsome to deuillishe services. But as soon as he shall com
through to Jerusalem, his seat shall be set in the temple of God, and as many
of the nombre of christianes and faithful people, as he could not begyle with
his lies and wily deceates, he shall torment with horrible kinds of
punisheme^t, such as has not ben heard of, and than put them to death. For
they write, that Salomons temple must be builded up again by him, so as he
shall sytte in it, and set furthe him self, in the title of the true Messiah
and son of God. And he shall also send furthe his apostles, in to all the
world, by wose ministry and travail, he shall draw away unto his side,
furst the princes minds, and than the common people: of whom, some being
corrupt with rewards and desire of richesse, some being frayde with
threatenings and fear of dangers, and the rest being begyled with new
facions of miracles, and with innumerable deceates, shall apply unto him. But
as many as will not believe in his forged lies, he shall slay and destroy them
with cruel pains: among whom both Helias and Enoch (the foreru^ners of ye
last judgment) shall necessarily be put to death. And at leinght, wha^ these
tyra^nous persecucions shall have endured, the space of two years and an half:
ye last day of the Lord shall come upon him, and make an end of miseries.

These (I say, well-beloved brethren in Christ) are Satanes forged fables of
Antichrist, which that wicked crafts master of lies, has decked and
garnished even with testimonies of scriptures, to thinte^t undoubtedly, that wha^
we have conceived a false ymaginacio^, and look an other way, he might be hable
in the mean time; to stere up the tyranny of the right Antichrist, and with
myghtie power to confirm it, to men's destruction and undoing. For this same
cause therefore, his drift was, to declare him to be among the unfortunate
people of Jews, and to send abroad the ymaginacions of our wits out to
Babylon, and than to make much pryttle pratle of Salomo^s temple (which after
the undeniable sentence of Christ our Lord, shall never be possible to be
builded up again) to the intent in the mean while, he should not once come
in our remembrance, that has exalted his head at Rome, in the co^gregacio^
of the faithful, and being (with such abominable saucy entreprise) exalted
even against the Lord himself, has infected the simple and rude men's
minds with most grievous errors. We had need therefore to be in this case, so
much the more careful and studiously diliget, as it is convenient for us, to
mark more narowly this word, Anrichrist: and more diligently to boult out the
meaning of it, so as it may most fully appear unto us, to what manner man,
that name ought to be imputed.

Antichristus is a Greek word, and being compounded of Anti, which signifies
contrariety and ouerthwartenesse, and Christus, whereof we have spoken before,
betokens him that is contrary and against the Lord Christ, and chalengeth
to him self, by unjust title and wicked arrogauncie, the honor, glory, and
al offices else, which are due to none, but to Christ our saueour. Whereupon
Paul respecting the matter rather than the name, calls him Antikeimenon,
because he sytteth in the temple of God, and exalts him self above all that
is worshipped, in the stead of God. And by the same compounde figure also, the
Antichristian men call him Antipapam, that is either unlawfully chosen of
others, or being moved of his own folly, obiecteth him self against the
laufully chosen Pope, and wrongfully vexes, or else occupies that seat of
abominacion.

To be brief, inasmuche as the name of Antichrist sounds contrary and
against Christ, it behooves us furst of al to know and acknowlage our lord and
saueour Christ, with all those things, that proprely belong unto him. For
thereby we shall openly see, who is the right Antichrist, and who ought to be
rightely called Antichrist.

Now than as touching Christ Jesus, the holy scriptures paynt and set him out
unto us of such sort, as him that being from everlasting very God (and of all
one essence and substance with his heavenly father) took upon him for our
sakes (at the times appointed) the very flesh and nature of man, being like
unto ours in all things, sin except, to thinte^t he might be our chief high
bishop: Whose office he has so accomplished, that in offering him self on the
altar of the cross, he made oblation unto God the heavenly father, with a
perfect and a sufficient sacrifice for the sins of all the world. And wha^ he
hade fynished the business of our rede^pcio^ on the altar of the cross, he
was buried, and by his own divine power he raised up from death his body,
that is to wete, the very manhead, which he hade taken, to the intent he might
break and put quyte away the power of death, which it hade over us. Than
after ward he carried his body in to the heavens, that he might set open unto
us again the gates of heaven, which the transgression of our furst parent, and
the sins of us all, hade shut up before: and that he might there appear
before God the father, a faithful advocate and mediator for us, and might also
be instead of a pledge and a gage, whereby our faith should be confirmed,
whereby also we believe, that our bodies shall (through faith) have possession
in the very same kingdom of heavens, and everlasting blessedness. For which
causes sake, ye holy scripture is accustomed, to name the self same Christ: our
head, our high priest, our king, our saueour, our redemour, our mediator, and
even the one only way of life and everlasting salvation, which the scripture
also does make good, with most abundaunt testimonies, as much as we have now
spoken of. For Paul the apostle writing to his Philippianes, in the 2. Chap.
says thus: Christ Jesus when he was in the shape of God (that is to say,
very God) thought it no robbery to be equal with God: nevertheless he made him
self of no reputacion, taking on him the shape of a servant, and became like
unto men, and was found in his apparail as a man (that is to say, a very man,
made like unto us in all things, sin except) he humbled him self, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Again in his furst epistle
to Timothee the. 1. Chap. Christ Jesus (quam he) came in to the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief. etc. And in an other place Hebr. 9. he writes on
this wise: As it is appointed unto all men, that they shall once dye, and than
comes judgment, even so was Christ once offered, to take away the sins of
many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear again without sin,
unto salvation. And a little before these words, we read that the same Apostle
wrote on this manner: For Christ is not entered into ye holy places, that are
made with hands (which are similitudes and examples of true things) but is
entered into very heaven, for to appear now in the sight of God for us, not to
offer him self often, as the high Priest entered into the holy place, every
year with strange blood, for than must he have often suffered, since the
world began. But now in the end of the world has he appeared once, to put
sin to flight by the offering up of him self. All those sayenges belong also
to this purpose, which the apostles speak of Christ Jesus, in this meaning: as
these be, Christ is of God made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption. 1. Corin. 1. God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I
to the world. Gal. 6. Also: There is one God, and one mediator between God and
men, the man Jesus Christ. 1. Timo. 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate
with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And he it is, that obteyneth
mercy for our sins, not for our sins only, but also for the sins of all
the world. 1. Ioh. 2. There is non other name given unto men under the sun,
wherein they may be saved, but only the name of Jesus. Act. 4. To this same
end, perteyneth the voice of God the heavenly father, wherewith he sounded once
and eftesones from heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved son, in who^ I am
pleased. Math. 13. and. 17. chap. Hereunto must the saying be referred, that
the Lord him self (by his holy spirit) speaks in Esaye the prophet: I the
Lord. This is my name and I will not give my glory to any other. But the
glory of Christ our Lord is this, that he alone (with his raunsomyng blood)
has set us free from the tirannye of sin, death, hell, and satan: and is
therefore the Lord of us all (that is to wete, whom he has redeemed with his
own blood, which was shead for us) and so ought to be acknowlaged of us all.
Concerning this glory and honor he says, and professes, that he will give
it to none else. Out of which words of Christ, it shall appear by evident
and steadfast demonstration, that he is Antichrist: who is Antichrist.
who so ever gothe about to rob our Lord and saueour Christ, of this glory
and honor, and take it upon him self. Who so ever than takes upon him self,
to give remission of sins, the benefits of the grace of God, the gifts of
salvation and the kingdom of heaven, is Antichrist. Who so ever takes upon
him self that honor of priesthode, to say, that he sacrifices for the
sins of the world, is Antichrist. Who so ever makes him self an
intercessour to God the father, for the quick and the dead, by any other
reason or manner, than we are commanded to pray mutually one for an other
(according to ye trade of the scriptures) is Antichrist. Who so ever also
declares, that these gifts of our salvation which we have now rehearced
(either all together, or singularly by them selves) may be hade any where else,
than at our Lord Jesus Christ only: and teaches men to seek them else where,
than at him alone, which was offered for us once for all, and now sits bodily
in heaven: he sets out unto us a false Christ, yea even Antichrist, and is
of the nombre of those false prophets, whom Christ our Lord rekoneth up here
by name.

Whereupon this also shall evidently appear unto us, that Antichrist is not only
one man by him self (as we thought, when we wandered in the darkness of
popish supersticion) but that there are many Antichrists, as we showed a
litell before out of John the apostle. And yet there is an head, and a certain
chief ruler of this abominacion: yea all these fellows have a kingdom, and a
chief seat of their kingdom. And he that occupies it, is that undoubted very
great and chief Antichrist, in whom the common enemy of mankind, satan,
sets furthe all his streynghtes, all his might, all his power and operacion:
yea and al his endeauours, deceates, frauds, subtilties and cou^sailes, to
men's undoing and utter destruction.

This matter we shall treat of, in the third place, so as we shall set furthe,
what is contained in the scriptures hereof, with the most plain demonstracion,
that we possibly can.

But forasmuch as the holy sacred scripture in many places (as we have
already noted) speaks of this abominable business of Antichrist, it would
be a work of great labor and trouble, and a work that should bring in more
darkness than light, if we would study to bring forth all the places of the
prophets and apostles, yt are touching this matter. Therefore out of al, we will
chose only two, which ypou^de unto us, all this ado thoroughly, and al his
mysteries most plai^ly painted out. The furst is of Daniel, whose writings in
this behalf, ought worthily to be hade in most high credence and authority
with us, inasmuche as we may see the same things rehearced of Christ our Lord
in this chaptre, who also does move us, to the dilligent reading and knowlage
Math. 24
of it. And that other shall be taken out of Paul the noble and excellent
apostle of Christ, which also is called the elect vessel and instrument of
Act. 9.
God, and being rapte in to the third heaven, saw secrets of the kingdom 2.
Cor. 1^.
of heaven, wiche can not be expressed with tongue.

The prophet of God, and desirous man Daniel, being (by divine reuelacio^)
taught the order of ye things that should happen from his time to the last
end of the world, and mynding to have the same notified unto them that
should com after him, writes on this sort. I saw in my vision by Dan. 7.
night, and behold the four wyndes of the heaven strove upon the sea, and
four great beasts came up from the sea, not one like an other. The furst was
like a Lion, and yet had he eagles wings. I saw yt his wings were plucte
from him, and he taken away from the earth, that he stood upon his fete as a
man, and that there was given him a man's heart. Behold, the second beast
was like a Bear, and stood upon the one side. Among his tethe in his mouth he
had.iij. great long tethe, and it was said unto him. Arise, eat up much
flesh. Tha^ I looked, and behold, there was an other like unto a Leoparde, this
had wings as a foul, eue^ upon the back. This beast hade four heads, and
there was power given him. After this I saw in a vision by night, and behold,
the fourth beast was grymme and horrible, and marvelous strong. It hade great
iron tethe, it devoured and destroyed, and stamped the residue under his fete.
It was far unlike the other beasts that were before it, for it hade ten
horns, whereof I took good head. And behold there came up among them an other
litel horn, before whom there were three of the furst horns plueked away. etc.

And forasmuch as by this little horn, the mystery of Antichrist is figured,
as it shall herafter be declared: we must furst of all mark well, the furst
part of the prophets vision. And having gotten an angel to interpret it to
him, he learned, yt by these four beasts, four Kings or Monarkes, and also
four Monarchies and kingdoms are figured: that is to say, even the same that
the heathen writours make report of, in their books of histories: and surely
they came out by the wind of Gods providence, stering the great Oceane sea
of all the world.

The furst is the kingdom of the Babilonianes or Assirianes, under whose
dominion and power, Daniel was than in subjection. And this kingdom is
compared to the Lion, that had eagles wings. For like as the lion is the
noblest among the four foted beasts, and (as a king) has power over the
residue of beasts: even so the kingdom of Babylon, or of the Assirianes,
excelled among all other kingdoms, in streynght, valeauntnesse, nobility, and
preeminence, and also in spedie and incredible fortune of victories and
successes, it ran through all the world round about, as it hade ben a most
swifte Eagle. Nevertheless because the princes of it were proud, disdaynous,
and hault, and began to have God in contempt, and (to much folishely) to
challenge all the glory to their own puissaunce, the wings of it were pluete
away: and when the fortune of victories was taken from it, it was set on his
fete as men be, in such wise doubtless, as the kings thereof being (by Gods
judgment throughlye tamed) should know them selves to be men, both mortal
and frail. The second is the kingdom of the Persia^s, yt was aduau^ced to so
high power of their most victorious king Cyrus, that it wa^ne the monarchy
and Empire of all the world. This kingdom, because it was exceading great and
houge beyond measure, and therefore very hard to be kept in subjection, is
compared to a Bear: which is a mighty houge beast and a folishe. And it is
said of him, yt he devoured much flesh, and yt he held in his tethe three
great tethe. For like as Cyrus exte^ded the limits of his Empire far and
wide: even so he occupied by and by at the beginning of his Empire, three most
large kingdoms, that is to wete, of the Persianes, Medes, and Babilonianes.

The third kingdom, is the kingdom of the Macedonians or Greeks: the furst
author whereof (we read) was Alexandre the great. This kingdom the holy ghost
co^pareth to the Leoparde, that hade four wings, and was harnessed with as
many horns. Hereby is noted the wily, subtle, and craftye natural wit of
the people of the greeks, which wrought their matters almost with subtilties and
wyles, like the Leoparde, which is an exceeding wily beast. The wings also
betoken that notable peerles celeritie of Alexandre the great: who within a
few years space with his stering of wars, went clean over Asia and
Aphrike, and subdued them under his own dominion. But this leoparde is in
sight armed with four horns, forsomuche as after the death of Alexander the
great, the hole Empire was divided of his own me^ (whom he made governors) in
to four kingdoms, that is to wete, the Egipcianes, Sirianes, Asianes, and
Macedonianes.

The fourth kingdom is the kingdom of the Romans, which for victorious
streynght, vnshrynking courage, shameless audacitie, power, cruelty and most
merciles tyranny, is compared to a new and unknown beast, that has no
certain name. For it is manifest, that the people of the Romans, being most
gredye of Empire and large authority, occupied all the kingdoms of the world,
dilated the coasts of their empire far and broad, devoured all regiones with
their insaciable gredynesse, brought all naciones and people in subjection,
gathered all the substance and richesse of the hole world in to their own
city, and trod, tare and stroyed all naciones under the cruel fete of their
ambicion. In these men's empire and monarchy, Daniel describes all the
mystery of Antichrist in these words: This beast hade te^ horns, whereof I
took good head. And behold, there growed out an other little horn among them,
before who^ three of the furst horns were broken, and plucked away. And
behold, there were horns in this horn, like the eyes of a man, and a mouth
speaking presumptuous things, and seemed more stout tha^ the other. Which
horn also (when I looked on) made bataile with the saints, and prevailed
against them: until the old aged came, and judgment was given to the saints
on hye, and til the appointed time was come, that the saints should have the
kingdom. Al these things (I say) Daniel was taught in vision, concerning the
mysteries of Antichrist, and the interpretacio^ of the same, which he himself
learned of the Angel, and describes here after in these words. The fourth
beast signifies the fourth Kingdom, that shall be in the world, which must
diffre from al kingdoms, and devour all the earth, and break and al to
barste it. And the ten horns betoken that out of it, ten Kings shall rise, and
after them there shall rise an other, diffring from the farther, which shall
oppress and throw down three kings. Be shall also talk of divine matters:
but he shall trappe the holy saints, and shall challenge to him self to change
the state of times and laws, which shall be delivered unto his authority,
whether it be a long space of time or a short. Finally the judgment is set,
and they have taken his dominion from him, that he may be utterly wasted and
destroyed. But to the people of the holy saints shall be delivered the
kingdom, and dominion, and largeness of kingdoms, under all the heaven: and
their kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all high astates shall serve and
obey him.

This verily is the interpretacion of the vision, which was given to Daniel by
the Angel, and teaches by some certain infallible marks, that by this litell
horn the great adversary of our saueour Christ (even Antichrist) is
represented. For the Prophet says, that he shall move batayl against the
saints: that is to say, against the faythfulles, whom Christ has sanctified
with his own blood. Besides this, that he shall speak presumptuous things,
and that with such an insolency, that he shall also entremeddle communicacio^
of divine matters. And yet it suffices not him, to have spoken such things,
but he must also take upon him power, to change the state and co^dicions of
times, and of al matters of this world, yea and the law it self, and the
ordinances at his pleasure.

All which things can ryghtly be ascribed unto none other, but to that myghtie
and famous adversary of Christ our Lord, Antichrist I mean. But of this we
shall more largely and more plainly speak, in the treatise following.

Now there is that other place of this treatise behind, which I promymised to
bring furthe of the Apostle Paul: which with more clear words, expounds
the greater part of this vision, in the later Epistle to his Thessalonians, in
the second chaptre, For where as the Thessalonians (being disquieted through
false doctrines of certain deceauours) thought, that the last day of
judgment, and the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ drew nere, and was than
already at hand: Paul a faithful doctor of those that were his, confuteth
the falsely conceived opinion, touching that matter, with these manner of words
and reasones. Let no man deceive you by any means. For the Lord shall not
come, except there com a departi^g furst, and: that the man of sin be opened,
the son of perdicion, which is an adversary: and is exalted above all that
is called God, or is wourshipped, so that he does sytte in the temple of God
as God, boasting him self to be God. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with
you, I told you these things? And now ye know what wythholdeth: even that he
might be vttred at his time. For the mystery of the iniquity does already
work, till he which now only lets, be taken out of the way. And tha^ shall
that wicked one be vttred, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy with the appearaunce of his coming: even him whose
coming is after the working of satan, with all lyeng power, signs and
wondres, and with all deceaueablenesse of unrighteousness, among them that
perish: because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be
saved. And therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies: that all they might be demned, which believed not the truth, but
hade pleasure in unrighteousness.

Thus far have I rehearsed Paul thapostles words, which co^teyne the full
and perfyt descripcio^ of all this adoo, and of the mysteries of Antichrist: and
also the plain interpretacion of the vision, that is recorded in Daniel the
Prophet. And after what sort these two places agree between them selves, and
what is the true understanding of them boche, it shall be declared in the
Homilies following, by the favor and help of God.

But out of these matters, which are thus far already said (well-beloved
brethren in Christ) this we must mark, that according to the oracles of gods
word, and of Jesus Christ, Antichrist shall surely come, which by his false
prophets shall seduce an infinite multitude of people.

We must therefore (brethren) endeavor our selves, with most earnest study and
diligence, that furst of all, we may be thoroughly perfyte in the certain true
knowlage of our Lord and only saueour Jesus Christ: wherein being instructed, we
must than also learn to know the false Christ's, and that great Anttchrist
him self: to the intent least we be made foles hereafter, as we have been all
ready heretofore, by the most false wylye deuyses of Satan, for than we shall be
hable another to know him, ne yet to beware of him.

Therefore we hade need diligently to consider the words of God, and to call
upon him also diligently, with continual prayers, that he would vouchesafe to
open unto us the true understanding of his word, and to lead us in to the
true knowlage of his son our redemour: and that we be not deceived with
Antichrists lies, but continue steadfastly in Christ our saueour, which is the
everlasting verity. To him be honor, praise, and glory everlastingly, world
without end.

Amen
Thus ends the furst Homily.
Antichrist, The.ij. Homily.
In this second Homily we are taught what the original beginning of
Antichrist is, where it shall be, and by what means and shyftes he shall
attain his so great streinghtes, and so mighty power of his tyranny.

Our Lord Jesus Christ the eternal son of God, the only redemour and
undeniable Doctor of ye world, talking with his disciples, concerning the
later times, and the periles of the same (among other things) tells them
before hand, yt false Christ's and false Prophets shall rise up, to the
destruction and marring of many men. And we are also taught by the hole mind
and consent of all the scriptures, both of the old testament and new, that
among them there shall be a certain peculiar head ryngleader, and a most rank
adversary of Christ our king and priest, whom after the common custom of the
faythfulles, and by the apostles authority, we do use to name Antichrist: like
as in the Homily before it is sufficiently declared. Nevertheless these things
are not spoken to the end (well-beloved brethren in Christ) that we should only
hear and know, what should be hereafter, having in the mean time no larger
consideracion of things that shall come: but the Lord does rather require
(by his faithful admonicion giving) that we should learn to know this chief
and notable enemy of our salvation, and to beware of his wiles, least we be
seduced therewith, and so be made partakers with him of eternal damnacion. And
therefore it is necessarily requisite for us to mark, and to co^ferre other
places of the scriptures together also, yt ca^ with more certayntie and evidence,
inform us of al those matters, which are as it were but in a few words set
expressly furthe in this place. In consideracion whereof, I lately brought
forth two places of scripture, touching this matter: the one of the old
testament out of Daniel yt prophets vii. chap. and the other out of Paul the
later to the Thessa. Which albeit by and by at the furst sight, they might
seem not to agree together in all things, but somewhat to vary, yet there is no
difference nor dissimilitude between them at al. There is also no contradiction,
nor any other variety, but that thapostle Paul, with more plain light of
words and sentences, does expou^de that which Daniel set furthe (after the
manner of a prophet) under the mystery of a vision, like as the things that
follow, shall more clearly bear evidence. And to the intent this hole matter of
Antichrist, may the more openly appear unto us, it shall be all thoroughly
comprehended and assoiled, in six questiones or proposiciones. For furst,
inasmuche as it is evident that Antichrist is, we shall inquire of his
original beginning, that is to wete, in what place he must spring out, and
where we must seek for him, in case we intend thoroughly to come to the certain
knowlage of him. Seco^darily, by what means, devises, and crafts, he shall
atteyne such mighty power and so high authority.

Thirdly, we shall make search of his person: that is to say, which a one it
shall be, and by what marks and propreties it ought to be known. Fourthly, we
must considre his works, yt he shall set his study upon. Which consideracion
even it self, does bring a certain and an vnfailing plain knowlage of him.
Fifthely, it is convenient to know his weapones (wherwyth he shall with such
luckie success fight) to attain, enlarge, defend and mayntene his kingdom
and power wythall. Sixthely, how far the limits of his wicked authority must
be extended, and upon what sorts of men, our Lord and most victorious king
Jesus Christ shall suffer him, to have so great autorite: who at leynght with
his just judgment, shall slay and despeche that fearce and proud adversary
with all his members, and (with sentence past calling again) shall judge him to
be punyshed in the torment of vnque^cheable fire. Hereunto there shall be a
faithful admonicio^ taken out of Christ's words, instede of a co^clusio^, how
the godly ones and faithful folks ought to behave the^ selves under his
rageing tyranny. And in deed I shall (by the grace of God) purpose to treat
of all these matters, with such for sight and diligence, as shall lie in my
best possible power to do.

Now as perteynyng to the furst where Antichrist was borne.
question of Antichrists original beginning, and the place of his birthe, the
holy ghost has sufficiently and perfitely instructed us by Daniel the
Prophet, which says, that the litell horn (by the which we heard in the
Homily before, that Antichrist was figured) sprung out of the fourth beast:
that is to wete, out of his head, as of that part, whereof horns commonly use
to grow out.

Now forsomuche as this fourth beast is a figure of the fourth monarchy,
that is to say, of the empire of Rome (as it is before largely enough
declared) it follows, yea it is out of all paraduenture, even by the vnfailing
demonstracion of the holy ghost, that Antichrist shall spring out of the empire
of Rome, yea and out of the head of it, that is to wete, out of the principal
city, Rome: and even there he must be sought for. Here unto that saying must
partly be referred, that How the temple of god is to be understand here
Paul thapostle speaks, of the departing, and that he teaches, that his
seat must be placed in the temple of God. For that saying may not in any wise
be expounded of the temple of Jerusalem, but it ought to be understood of the
fellowship and congregation of the faithful, which is the true and living
temple of God. Notwithstanding least the dullness of our wit might doubt
something in this behalf, our Lord Jesus Christ himself does show yet more
evidently and more clearly, and poynteth (as it were with his fyngre) that
Antichrist must be borne in the very city of Rome. For in that reuelacion,
which he showed to his beloved disciple John, the Apo. 17.
great adversary of Christ is meant by the Image of the hoore, which sytteth
upon many waters, and is carried upon a mighty beast and an unknown, that
gothe rageing grymmely with seven headdes, and armed with ten horns.

And the angel willing to interpret the mystery of the Image to John
thapostle, says: that the waters where the woman sits, are the people and
folfe, and naciones, and tongues, whom she shall bear rule over. And that
woman (quam he) whom thou saw, is the great city, which has rule over
the finges of the earth: and the seven heads are the seven mountains, where
upon it is set.

Now who is it, that sees not herin, the openly manifest and evident
descripcion of the city of Rome? For Rome, (if a man considre the old
circuit of the walls) comprehends within it seven mountains, and that of
famous report in the monumentes of old writours: of which mountains both
the tokens and the names remain even yet to this day. And the same Rome, wha^
Domitianus was Emperor there (in whose time Johan thapostle being banished for
the faith of Christ, in to the I Will of Pathmos, received this reuelacion of the
Lord) reigned and hade empire over the kings of the earth. For at that time,
the power of the Romans hade conquered and subdued with their marciall
powers, the greatest part of all the hole world, under their authority and
empire. By reason where of it is undoubtedly plain (by most certain reasones
and arguments) that Antichrist must be borne of the empire of Rome, and place
his seat in ye head of it, yt is to wete, in ye very city of Rome. And this I
say more over, The B. of Rome is the great Antichrist
and profess freely (both with mouth and mind) that ye chief and mighty
greatest Bishop, which having his seat in the city of Rome, chalengeth to him
self the dominion and name of the same city, is the very right and great
Antichrist, and the exceeding enemy of Christ our saueour, like as in these
that follow we shall (with a thicker ra^ke of arguments) most evidently
declare. Therefore those men err, and be toto much deceived, as mani as put
their co^fide^ce in those falls feined popish gloses, and mind to seek for the
right Antichrist either in the city of Babilo^ or Jerusalem. They are deceived
also, and no less begyled, than the other before, as many as being enta^gled
with ye blind and folishe love of ye empire, which at this why Mahomet is not the
right Antichrist.
present, is commonly called Sanctu^ Romanu^ imperiu^, the sacred empire of
Rome, cry out saying, that Mahomet (the author of the Turkish faith and
religion) is that great enemy of our saueour why Mahomet is not the right
Anticrist.
Christ, and Antichrist: to thinte^t they might by that mean, expelle the
slau^derous mark of Antichrists name from that empire of theirs, which they
have in so great estimacion and obedience. For albeit no true faithful person
does doubt, that Mahomete is a most pestilent wicked man, a singular enemy of
Christ our Lord, a most cruel persecutour of Christ's church, an abominacion
to be abhorred with all the powers of our hearts, and a most pernicious
seducer of very many men: yet for all that, we shall never be hable to prove,
that he is the notable and great Antichrist: inasmuche as he was another borne
in the head of the Romayne empire, that is to say, in Rome, but in Arabie
far distaunt from Rome: ne yet places nor occupies his seat in the temple
of God, that is to wete, in the congregation among them that rejoice to be
compted christianes, but makes a manifest departing quyte from them, and
teareth away the name of Christ with so vehement hate and wickedness, that he
can in no wise abide to use it to the professing of his relygion: Which not
withstanding are al applied by the notable sayengs both of the prophets and
the apostles, unto that mighty houge Antichrist. Therefore in this case we need
no white tongued words, nor groping reasones of flaterers, and of such as
say as other men say: but rather if we intend to com to the certain and
vnfailing knowlage of Antichrist, it is requisite for us to seek him in that
place, where he is most accustomed to hau^t, that is to wete, at Rome: whereof
even our elders in times past (not without the mocion of Gods providence)
commonly used this common proverb: The nerer a man comes to the city of
Rome, the farther he is of, from the faith and religion of Christ. The meaning
of which proverb although they little considered, yet it is a most true
saying. For the nerer we are unto Antichrist, so much the farther of we must
needs be from Christ Jesus, unto whom it becomed us to cleave with a constau^t
vndisseuered faith. Let this be sufficiently enough said, of the matter yt we
propounded in the furst place.

We must now therefore pass over to the second question: yt is to were, we
must search, by what means and reasons, Antichrist shall occupy yt so large
and so mighty an Empire of his. Howbeit we shall know even yt same, by ye
notable sayenges, both of Daniel the prophet, and Paul thapostle: which
considered, we will compare the bishop of Rome, and his empire and tira^nye
with them, to the intent it may evidently appear unto us, whether it be he,
whom they have set furthe in their writings. Daniel therefore mencioneth, that
ye fourth beast had ten horns, and as he marked well the horns, ye litel
horn, by whom (as I have said) Antichrist is figured, growed up: which wha^
it had taken away.iii. of the furst horns, it occupied their room. And ye
interpretour of these sayenges (the angel) teaches, that by the ten horns,
ten kings are represented which should spring up in ye fourth Empire, that
is to say, the Empire of Rome. Howbeit as soon as they are risen up, he says
that Antichrist should grow up also, which (even at the furst beginning of
his kingdom) should oppress three kings, and with their streingthes and
substau^ces, (which he shall challenge to him self) should confirm his own
kingdom. Hereunto the sayenges of Paul agree in every co^dicio^, which says,
that a Departing shall com furst, and than the man of sin, the child of
perdicion shall be revealed. And a litell after he signifies ye very same
thing, saying: For even now the mystery of iniquity does work: and that
only 2. These. 2.
is behind, until he that hinders him, be taken out of the way: and tha^
that wicked one shall be opened. etc. Which words of thapostle, ye eldest and
most catholic doctors of ye church say, ought to be vnderstande^ of ye
Empire of Rome: that is to wete, because when it is taken out of the way,
Antichrist should starte up, which tha^ was holde^ back through the myghtie
power of it. For in deed Antichrist could not chalege to him self, the
Dominion of the city of Rome, nor reign in it, as long as the empire yet
flourished and increaced his power. And for that cause the prophet Daniel
makes mention, that the empire of Rome must be divided in to ten (that is to
say, many) kingdoms. And Paul makes report of a Departing, by the which
many naciones and people should depart from the empire of Rome, and create
kings and princes of their own. Than when the empire of Rome (through such
scismes and departinges) shronke in to decay, Antichrist hade occasion and
place, to burst out in to the same his Empire. In this behalf, read the
sayenges of. S. hierome to Algasia, and of S. Auste^ in his. 20. book entitled
De Ciuitate Dei, the. 19. chap. and also the sayenges that Tertullian before
them set furthe, concerning the Resurrection of the body: and it shall openly
appear, that I dashe in no new nor strange sense, upon this place. But how
this gaire has (according to the sayengs of the scripture) come to pass, and
after what sort they have been fulfilled in deed by the bishops of Rome we
shall now show out of the most credible and approved history writers, both
of the greek and the latin.

At the time that (wha^ the grievous and horrible persecuciones of Christ's
church were slaked, which the The history of the beginning and success of
the Bisshoppes of Rome.
most cruel emperors of Rome had stered against it) ye administration of ye
Roman empire came unto Constantine the great, Helenes son: who wha^ he hade
granted peace to the faithful christianes, which they hade long wished for: in
the. 25. year of his Empire, which was al most the.CCC. xxxvi. year from
Christ our saueours birthe, he ordained the city of Bizantiu^ to be the seat
of his Empire, which when he hade builded and garnished with many royal
buildinges, he called it after his own name, Constantinopole. And that was the
occasion of the furst division of the Empire of Rome: and shortly after, it
engendered also a very scisme in deed. For the mighty chief emperor and
monarke of the world reignyng at Consta^tinopole, was called the king or the
emperor of the east. And Caesar his fellow in office which bare ye swing at
Rome, they called the emperor of the west. And this furst division of the
Empire endured continually unto the time of Valentinianus, ye third about.Cxx.
years, that is to wete, unto the year of our Lord.CCCC. lvi. But in the
mean while, there began a certain of nations to conspire new matters: and in
rising against the empire of Rome, to set them selves at liberty: by reason
whereof, the Departing came by and by, which we have read in Daniel, and Paul
the apostle. For there rose up the most warlike people of the Vadalianes,
Gotthianes, French men, Lumbardes, and Herulanes, and many other besides,
which as soon as they had created them kings of their own people, they got on
harness, and rebelled against the empire of Rome. But as soon as Valentinianus
the.iii. of that name, was slain at Rome of his own folks, and ended his
life and west Empire al at once, one Maximus a cytezen of Rome married
Valentinianus wife Eudoxia to him self, against her will. Than comes by and
by Gensericus the king of the Vandalianes, being called out of Aphrica: he
inuadeth the city of Rome, and wha^ the tyrau^t Maximus was slain, pulled in
pieces, and cast into Tiberis: he carried Eudoxia (Valentinianus the Emperors
wife) over into Aphrica. And after him, many invaded ye Empire of Rome. Howbeit
there was none that reigned stably nor long, seeing one slew an other, so as it
might trulier have been called a warfaryng, tha^ a reigning. The last of them
was Augustulus, having a name of an unlucky fortune: who when he had catched
hold of the west Empire, Odoacer king of the Herulanes gathered a great and an
huge exceeding furnished army of people out of Germany, and through he gothe
into Italy. And at Ticinum Ticinu^ is a city in Lumbardie which now is called
Pauia
Orestes the father of Augustulus met him, and was overcome and slain in
notable manly fightyng. By reason whereof Augustulus threw away his robes and
Imperial dignity for fear, and fled away from Rome. Odoacer occupies al
Italy, he enters the city Rome called Odoacria.
like a conqueror, and having changed the name of it, he called it after him
self, Odoacria. And in deed after this sort, the empire of Rome (whose
myghtie power had let Antichrist, ^s Paul says, that he could not burst
out) was despeched, oppressed, and all together decaide, about the year of our
saueour Christ's birthe CCCC. LXXI. For Odoacer ordained the seat of his
reign in the city of Rome, and reigned in it fourtene years, and that with
so mighty a power and great puyssaunce, that he could not be gotten out, for
no devise nor force of war, that Zeno the Emperor of Constantinopole could
do. Howbeit within a few years after, that is to wete, in the year of our
Lord Jesus Christ.CCCCC. LXX. Iustinianus the Emperor ordained Iustinianus.
a new Magistrate in Italy, who^ men called the Exarche. But he lay at
Rauenna, and not at Rome, because it was miserably thrown down, wasted and
spotled, by the Barbarians breaking into it. To conclude whilst the weste The
contencion for the Supremacy of Churches.
Empire fades in the city of Rome, and is after this manner utterly
dispatched: that litel pretty horn which Daniel speaks of (that is, the
Bishop of Rome) began out of hand to thrust furthe him self, and to work
the mystery of Antichrist. For in the time of Odoacers reign in the city of
Rome the year of our Lord.CCCC. lrxx. Achatius the Bishop of Co^stantinopole
Note.
wrote to Simplicius the bishop of Rome, desyryng that he would also condemn
Perre bishop of Alexandria of heresy, for following Eutices: this Achatius
being bishop of the head church, whose authority was very much regarded with
all men.

But taking occasion herby, a sort of ambicious persons began anon to
reason, of the dignity of the church of Rome, and the authority of the Bishop
of Rome, and still went on with disputacions so far, that they contended, that
the Sea of Rome was the head of all churches, and that the Bishop of Rome was
the head of all Bishops, and even the catholic or universal bishop over al.
Howbeit those bishops of Constantinopole that succeeded Achatius, objected
them selves against these men's ambicion. For they co^tended, that the
supremacy belonged unto their church, inasmuche as the Emperors of Rome hade
made Co^stantinopole the seat of their empire: and for that cause this honor
ought to be granted to the bishop of Consta^tinopole, that he may be called
the universal of all prelates and the bishop of bishops. And this same so
unworthy a contencion, and so ambicious a strife continued a long season, that
is to say, an.Cxij. years, until that horn of Antichrist (yet litel and
weak) burst out with bigger streinghtes, and growed out not a litel. For in ye
year of Christ our saueours birthe DC, there was one Johan bishop of
Constantinopole, a notable proud arrogaunt man, and excedingly ambicious. The
bishop of Constantinopole made the Supreme head.
This man, wha^ Mauricius was emperor, called the Greek bishops together
unto Consta^tinopole, to keep a counsel: wherein it was decreed and ordained,
that the bishop of Constantinopole should be called the general or universal
bishop of al churches. And when Mauricius the Emperor Gregorius magnus.
sent over the decree of the counsel unto the bishop of Rome Gregory (which
afterward was called Gregorius magnus) meaning to obtain of Gregory, that he
would also submit him self and his church, to John, the bishop of
Constantinopole: Gregory with a great aduisednesse and a singular constauncie,
refused and contraried him: not that he thought him self superior and of more
dignity than Johan, but that he so vehementlye abhorred the insolent
statelynesse, and proud ambicion of the clergy, which than begone to grow
up by litell and litell. Whereupon among certain other things to Gregory's
answer to the supremacy.
the Emperor Maurice: Be is the forrennyng messagier of Antichrist (quod he)
who so ever he be, that coueteth to be called the universal Bishop. And in an
other place, the same Gregory writting to Anastasius, Bishop of Antioche, and
Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, against the ambicion of the Bishop of
Constantinopole, says thus: Your reverend holiness knows, that this name
(universal) was offered by the sacred counsel of Chalcedon, unto the Bishop of
the sea Apostolic, which (by Gods disposicion) I serve: howbeit none of my
predecessors consented to use that so lewd a word to be called by. For (you
must understand) if one Patriarch alone be called the universal patriarch, the
name of patriarchs is taken away from the residue. But far be it from a
christian mind, to scratche that thing from any man to him self, whereby he
might seem never so litell to minishe the honor of his brethren.

Verily these are Gregory ye bishops words, wherewith he so earnestly
taunteth those proud and ambicious titles of bishops, abhorring and dephyeng
those titles as cursed and abominable: whom at this day their endeavor is
with force of arms and most cruel policies, to challenge to them selves.
Notwithstanding albeit Gregory wrote thus upon a godly zele and sincere mind:
and immediately to the intent to bridle those ambicious spirits of the
bishops, he was the furst (as some say) that named him self (Seruum
Seruorum) the servant of servants: Yet his successors by and by forgette
all this gaire, and followed their own sundry devises.

For where that most arrogaunt slave of ambicion, John the bishop of
Constantinopole after Gregory's deceasse, would not only not give over his
begone purposes, but rather with the greatest forcasting fatches that he
might, he entreprised to challenge to him self that title of universal, and the
supremacy of all the hole church: anon Boniface of Rome Boniface the. 3.
the third of that name steart up. Who being puised up with like folly and
ambicion, set his foot against him, and sought means to conueye the same title
and honor of the highest authority unto him self and to the church of Rome.
And when he hade once taken in hand that devise of Phocas ordained Rome to be
the head of al churches.
strife and ambicion, he stiffely set it forewarde still, and gave not over,
till he hade obtained of ye emperor Phocas that Rome should be called the
head of all churches.

In this behalf we must note (well-beloved brethren in Christ) what a man this
Phocas was. Even he that kept the Empire by treason and robbery. For he took
Mauricius the emperor (being a good man and a godly) and than his wife and his
children by sedicion: and in his wicked manfulnesse, slew furst his wife, and
than his children before Mauricius own face, and last of all he also slew the
Emperor him self, being a man of good age, as a man is, that is above three
score and three years. This man was the furst (I say) that ordained the
Bishop of Rome to be head of the church, and granted to those ambicious and
insolent Bishops of Rome, the tyrannous power that they hade long wished for.

Those most holy fathers therefore have to boast goodly of (in the Deuilles
name) in that they are promoted to so high dignity and power, by such a
man's authority: who, like as he carried an heart infected with treason and
falsehead, even so he was not afraid to defile his hands also in the Emperor
Mauricius blood.

But what manner men they should become, our Lords will was to show by this
toke^, that they should be most diligent folowers of their founder, and through
conspiracy, treason, and wars, hyndre the godly and holy endeauours of
Emperors. Which thing we shall a litell after show, by more evident proof.

Now then the litel horn, which in Daniel is a figure of Antichrist, was
grown out, and with an exceeding proud and gay glisteryng title, was named ye
head of the church. Howbeit he flourished not all this while with so great
streynghtes, nor achieved so mighty high power, as ye forcast of so weighty
a matter did necessarily require: For where the bishops being chosen of the
clergy and people of Rome, must needs be confirmed either of the Emperor him
self, or else of his lieutenaunt the Exarche of Rauenna, the bishops by
them confirmed, were not hable to obtain any power against the emperors of
Rome: and therefore they durst not (for their ears) ymagine any thing, that
might be in any condition derogatorious either against the power or honor of
the emperors. So that the bishops thought it not good for them to rest,
until about the year of our saueour Co^sta^tine the. 4. Benedicte the. 2.
DClxx. the matter was brought to that pass, yt Constantine ye fourth emperor
of yt name, endued bishop Benedicte the second with this privilege, that whom
so ever thensfurth the clergy and people of Rome should have made bishop, the
same should also be acknowlaged of al me^, as the head of the church, and
Christ our saueours vicare, without any mean confirmacio^, either of the
Emperor him self, or of his lieutenaunt the Exarche of Rauenna.

But anon as the proud ambicious Bishops of Rome hade obtained this, their
matters began to succeed even after their own purpose: and by this means so
great streynght, might, and authority happened to that litell horn, (which yet
hitherto appeared in all men's sight, to be but vile, weak, and naught set
by) that afterward it became intolerable, even to the Emperors them selves,
by whose counsels and help it was promoted so high, that it made batail, and
prevailed even against them their selves. And there wanted not at that time
signs and wondres, whereby the heavenly father admonished wretched mortal
folks, of the periles which should be brought in by Antichrist. For as
Platina (who out of all paraduenture was both the Bishops own secretary,
and also their trusty Orator) bears record: a fearful and an unwont blasing
star appeared, and so vehement a fire brake out of Vesuuius a mount Vesuuius.
of Compaigne, that the places round about were brent up.

By these tokens it was undoubtedly the father of heavens will, to show unto
all men, that Antichrists fire began already to burn in Italy, which (with
a sore burning flame) should consume and disquiete the consciences of many men.

For even at the furst, when the Bishop of Rome was advanced to so high
power, there past scarcely forty years, but he began to set out all his
streinghtes and authority, against the very Emperors them selves, not without
their grievous sore damage and perile. For in the year of our saueour Christ's
birthe DCCxij. Philippicus the Emperor of the Monothelites, was infecte with
the heresy of them, which hold opinion, that there is but one only will in
Christ Jesus. By reason whereof pope Constantine stryketh him with the Striving
about images.
thonderbolt of his curse, and makes this decree and statute wythall, that the
images of the holy fathers, which were present at the six furst and general
counsels, should be painted in S. Petres porche. But this matter bredde new
strife, and new hurly burlies. For upon that, the bishop hade also occasion
given him, whereby he might throw down and ouerwhelme the three horns or
kingdoms, that Daniel makes mention of. For the bishops of the greek
churches set their foot with most eagre stomachs against the bishops decree.
For in as much as they saw, God hade by his own mouth forbidden the use of
images in temples, with so earnest and so perfect a commandment, they
affirmed that no images at all, ought either to be hade or suffered in christen
men's temples.

But where as the most part followed the Monothelites heresy, they were also
overcome and overthrown, from this godly and holy sentence of abolishing of
images: and so yt use of images being confirmed by ye bishop Emperor Leo the
third banished images.
of Romes authority, brought a new part of supersticio^ in to the church.

Than four years after that, in yt year of our saueour Christ's birthe
DCCxvi. the emperor Leo yt third of that name, began his reign: which being
instruct in yt knowlage of God des law, caused al ye images standing in the
temples through out all ye coasts of the empire to be abolished, and taken
away: and sent lettres to the bishop of Rome Gregory the second, commanding
Gregory the. 2.
him, that he should also do the same. But there was kyndled a great grievous
co^tencio^, and a sore fraie. For ye Pope, that most holy father (in the
wanyau^t) had with so great study and diligence dronke^ of the
commandments, wherwt the Lord conde^neth and forbids images, yt he was
so saucy, as to call Leo the emperor (by a most odious name) wicked image
quellour: yea and also set him in so deadly an hate with the people of Italy,
and brings him in such a contempt with al men, that some would have gone about
to chose a new Emperor. And albeit there purpose took none effect, for even
Gregory him self could not allow it (the cause why was, that the bishops
ambicion could not away with any Emperor in Italy, seeing they would be
lords of al things the^ selves) yet ye people of Rauenna stered up a great
mighty sedicion, wherein the emperors lieutenaunt Paul the Exarche, and his
son were both slain, of the sedicious multitude of the commo^s. But
forasmuch as that vproare could not move Leo his mind, but he would most
constauntly goo on forewarde with his purposed intent, he was at leynght
strike^ with the curse of pope Gregory, the third of that name, and depryued
both of the communion of Gregory the. 3.
the church, and of his empire. Besides this wha^ he hade purposed to have
sent an other Exarche to Rauenna, to order the matters of Italy, the Pope also
resisted him, and wythstode him, that he could not, by reason of the
Lumbardes, whom he hade drawn on his part against the Emperor. For they with
a strong power besieged Rauenna, bette it, and at leynght took it, and
therwythall depryued the Emperor of al his iurisdiccio^ in Italy. Here now we
see the furst horn thrown down. For all the Emperors power, which he hade
yet unto The greek Emperors
this time holden in Italy, was oppressed at the popes setting on, by force of
arms of the Lumbardes: and the dryue^ out of Italy.
Emperor him self was all together thrown out of Italy.

But as soon as this was brought to pass, anon new mociones stered up new
vproares, and new contencions: by means whereof there was occasion given to the
Bishops of Rome, to throw down also that other two horns, and to enlarge
the limits of their own Empire. For Luithprande king of Lumbardie (being a in
a^ ambicious and desirous to reign alofte) challenged that part of Italy,
which was before time in subjection to the Emperors of Constantinopole, to him
self and his kingdom, in despite of the popes nose. Where upon the matter at
leynght came to that pass, that when he hade taken the cities of the bordres
round about, he pressed even the city of Rome it self, with layeng of siege
to it, and was wonderfully grievous to the pope and his. But in this case pope
Bregorie did, as the Bishops of Rome hade Note the practice of these prelates.
not ben before that time wont to do, he desired aid and defense against his
foes, at the Emperor of Co^stantinopoles hands, eue^ the same emperor, whom
a litell before he hade excommunicated for casting images out of the temples.
And he sent also ambassadors to Charles Martellus, Master Charles Martellus
of the French kings householde, desiring him to be good to the city of
Rome, and to the church now being yt furst time in trouble. Well, Charles cast
not of the bishops desires, but with loving exhortacion withdrewe king
Luithprande his friend and godfather, from the siege of the city, and set the
bishop and all the Romans at liberty, from the dangerous sore perile that
they were in. And than in deed was the furst time, that the defense of the
church was (by the bishops new and vnwo^t entreprise) translated from the
greek emperors to the princes of France.

This good turn of Charles Martellus was so thankefully accepted of the bishop
of Rome, that very great profit came thereof to his posterity, by means of
the bishops. For whereas the Frenchemen were wont, to have kings of the old
stock of kings, it came to pass (through lythernesse of the last sort of
kings) that they bare the name of king, and the honor and state of the
realm: but the treasure and all the power of the realm should be in the
governors hands, whom they called Maiores Domus, the rulers or grand officers
of ye house: in somuche that they should administre what so ever were to be
done, either at home or from home.

And wha^ Charles Martellus was dead, his son Pipine was advanced Pipine.
to so high dignity and power, that where he walowed altogether in pride and
ambicion, he began treatourously to stere again his own king, named
Chilperichus: and to ymagine denises against him, and griedyly to Chilperi^chus.
covet the hole kingdom to him self. And whereas he cou^sailed so^dry ways
upon this matter, now with the nobles of the court and of the realm, and anon
with the bishops the^ selves: at leynght he thought it good, yt a matter of so
weighty importance should worthyly be referred to ye head of al churches,
Rome. For yt wylye and subtyle witted man conceived an hope, that the bishops
of Rome would remember his fathers good turn, and that they would thankefully
give sentence on his side, against the king. So ambassadors were sent to
Zachary bishop of Rome, Burcharde bishop of Herbipola, and Folradus an abbot.
And the sum of their embassage was on this sort: Forasmuch as Zachary is
bishop of that church, which is worthily called the head of al churches, let
him give sentence, according to his authority: whether is to be compred more
worthy the kings crown, he that is King only in name, and is hable to do
nothing, either with his counsels, or pain taking: or he that alone can
sustain the hole burden of the realm.

Pope Zachary smelled the subtle question, and remembering his fathers good
turn, pronounced with purposely devised words, that Pipine (upon whose
shoulders all the travails and burden of the realm did heng) was more worthy
the kings rowme, than Chilpericus: mynding by this means, not only to
recompense his fathers good turn, but also to purchase a trusty and a valeaunt
Patron and defendour, both to him self, and to the church of Rome. Pipine
than by At the co^passing of every treason or myschief, a Bishop or a priest i^
ever in the one end.
reason of the bishops sentence, advanced him self the more stowtly. And
when he hade getten it allowed of the bishops, and certain of the nobles of
the court with all, he was crowned in a city of the Suessiones, by the
diligence of Boniface the bishop of Men's, and so he took the realm in to his
own hands. And incontine^tly he deposed Chilperichus, his sovereign liege
lord and king, being a simple man in deed (but of no evil disposition) from
his regal power and dignity: and having deposed him, he thrust him in a
monastery to live like a monk. But when the king (having suffered so much
injurious wrong) desired the public fidelity, and there wanted not good me^
and fauourours of equity, which were excedingly much displeased at Pipines so
wicked attemptate, and would not withal receive Pipine, being so notable a
rank traitor, because (you must understand) of their oath made before to
king Chilperichus: mark, Pope Zachary comes again, and where he did before
make wicked entreprises, he does now an other as evil or else a worse. For
least that man should have been iustlye rejected of the Frenchemen, whom he
hade most unjustly made a king, he assoiled both Pipine and all the realm,
from the oath and foyaltie that they hade made to king Chilperichus, and
commanded al men to acknowlage Pipine to be their king, and so to obey him.
And all this gaire (as we read) was done about the year of our saueour.
DCCliij.

Now who is he, that can not see here the second horn thrown down also by
the popes wickedness? For he that was borne of a kings blood, and lawfully
chosen king, and reigned over the Frenchemen, is depryued of his realm: and
one is put in his rowme, that was another borne of the kings blood, nor
lawfully made king, but a fit man for the bishop of Rome in all points, and
his matters he applied studiously: by whose travail and benefit we shall
hereafter hear, that the third Horn also was thrown down.

For where the Lumbardes, who (as we have said) were gredily desirous a litel
before of the Empire of Italy, would in no wise give over their begone
entreprises, but rather became the Popes enemies: and under king Aistulphus,
disquieted the Romans grounds and coasts, with continual wars, so that
the Romans were not hable to resist their enemy, his power was so great:
Pope Stephane being at leynght enforced with extreme necessity, fied Pope
Stephan.
to Pipine into France, humbly beseching him to aid the church of Rome, than
being in daungier, and to deliver it from the tyranny of the Lumbardes,
restoring it to her ancient peace and liberty. Than Pipine not forgetting the
good turn that he hade received of Bishop Zachary before, allowed Pope
Stephanes peticion: and promisyng him aid against his enemy, gathered out of
hand a myghtie valeaunt power of Frenchmen. He went with Pope Stephan
beyond the Alps, and at the strait of the mountains, giving the onlette
upon the Lumbardes, he wanne the victory, and ran through the field, and
vehemently besieged their king Aistulphus, lyeng in Papia for his sauegarde:
and at leynght he compelled Aistulphus perforce by marcial power to grant
these condiciones, that he should grant peace and obedience to the church of
Rome, and also to send over to Pipine forty men, to be pledges in
confirmacio^ of the matter. By reason whereof, Pipine him self retiered in to
France, and sent Pope Stephan with Folradus the kings chaplayne, and a
doughtie company of Frencheme^ to Rome. These things were done in the year of
our saueours birthe. DCCLV.

Notwythstanding because Aistulphus king of the Lumbardes performed nothing
that he hade promised to Bishop Stephane, and hade confirmed by an oath (being
constrained thereto by Pipines force of arms) Pipine immediately the next year
following went again in to Italy, with a mighty rowte of Frenchemen, to
deliver the Pope from the Lu^bardes army. And as soon as he passed the alps,
and came down in to Italy, Gregory, the emperor Constantine the fourthes chief
secretorie with other of them perours ambassadors, met him, and admonished
him in themperours name, that he should not meddle with the Exarcheship of
Rauenna (whom the Lumbardes hade possession of, the emperor being let of the
Saracenes) either to challenge it for him self, or give it to the pope or to the
Romans: but forasmuch as they were of the empire and not the popes, he
should cause them to be restored to Constantine again. Hereunto Pipine said
nay, and affirmed that he would not serve either Constantine or any man else,
saving the church of Rome, protesting that he hade put on harness for that
intent, to deliver the sea apostolic from the injury of all men on the
earth, and thereupon that he would do the best for the commodities of it, that
should lie in his uttermost possible power to do. And so (as soon as he hade
won the victory and overthrown the power of the Lumbardes) he gave to the
sea of Rome the Exarcheship of Rauenna, and what so ever places else hade
(before that time) ben in subjection to the Emperor and Empire.

Whereupon it came to pass, that the Grelie Emperor being before driven out of
Italy, by the Lumbardes force of arms, and yet not clean spoiled of his
right and title of just possession, has now lost them altogether: and being
driven out of al hole Italy, has lost all the Empire, that before he had in
it. Another was he hable to resist the Popes wicked endeauours, ne revenge the
wrongs done unto him, because he was let by the Saracenes wars; which
disquieted the east Empire with continual invasions of batailles. And surely it
is to see, the Popes subtle wylynesse to be such, that they have provided for
their own matters, at that time specially, as they have seen the inperours and
other kings (that were against the^) occupied with other wars, so as they
should be the less hable to wythstande their endeauours. But Pipine for doing
these his so large good turns for the bishops of Rome, hade worthily for his
labor the excellent high title of Most Christian King, Most christian king.
both to him and his successors: which the Frenchekinges are proud of eue^
at this day: for this one cause (you must understand) that they took the
places, which belonged to the Emperor in Italy, out of the Lumbardes hands,
and restored not them to the emperors again (as right was) but gave them to
the church of Rome.

Notwithstanding all this gaire, the Popes ambicion and covetousness was not
satisfied, as long as they saw the Lumbardes (whose powers were at that time
exceading great in Italy) not al together overthrown and extinct. King
Desiderius. Pope Adriane.
And therefore wha^ their last king Desiderius began to attempt some thing
against Pope Adriane the furst of that name: by and by he also besought Charles
yt son of Pipine (who afterward for his nobly done deeds, received the name
of Charles the great) for the defense of the sea Apostolic. And he easyly
Charlemayne.
obtained his desire.

For Charles renneth through by and by into Italy, with an host of men: and
when he met Desiderius with his army of Lumbardes, he cruelly bette them
down in the field: he hade all their towns yielded up unto him, and sent the
king prisoner (with his wife and children) away in to France as banished
folks. And in deed thus was the reign of the Lumbardes, which they hade
possessed in Italy more than.CC. years all together despeched. And therefore
ye third horn was (through Antichrists subtilties and violence) smytten of
also: in the year of our Lord. DCClxxvi. Than Charles the French king which
was Pipines son (after this gaire was done) came in to a perpetual league
with the Bishops of Rome: and what his father Pipine hade given before to
Stephane the second (of the lands that he hade violently taken from the
Emperor) he confirmed the same also with more ample privileges, and with a
solenne oath, to make sure work.

Hitherto now, it has with clear and evident exposicion ben declared
(well-beloved brethren in Christ) that the old notable saienges of ye holy
ghost, which are in Daniel, be most truly fulfilled by the Bishops of Rome:
and that the B. of Rome is yt littell horn, which figureth unto us the
emperial authority of Antichrist: which in deed at the furst beginning of his
reign, was but vile and naught set by, but anon he ouerlaide three very
mighty kingdoms with his wyly fatches and deceates, and with their powers
(which he claymed to him self) he was advanced to so great a height of
reignyng. Now it remains (dearly beloved brethren) that we consideratyuely
weighe (out of the Emperors histories) with what crafts he made sure, and
augmented his streinght and power, and how he became superior and above even
the emperors them selves.

The bishops of Rome being not The translating of the empire to the French
men.
without cause afraid of ye greek emperors powers, for the many and sundry
wro^ges and most mysheuous losses, yt they hade occasioned unto the^: least
padue^ture ye Saracenes and other eastren enemies being well tamed, and ye
emperors having leisure, would set upon Italy, and goo about to claim to
them selves again the Exarcheship of Rauenna, and other places belonging to the
empire, which Pipine and Charles hade violently taken from the^, and bestowed
upon ye church of Rome: by and by they began (as they are myschieuous wily
fellows) to bend their for casting studies to this end, that they might
pluck all the greek Emperors power and force away from them, that was yet
left in the west part of the empire, and to translate it from them some whider
else: and that they might get such Emperors, whose powers they should have
ye less need to be adradde of, and by whose authority and empire they should
be defended from the driftes and conspiracies of their foes. For which cause
Leo the third.
sake, pope Leo the third, being endued with very large benefits of Charles
the great, and seeing evidently his valeaunt courage of stomach, his notable
boldness, his joyous success of victories, and his ready good will wythal,
toward ye church of Rome and ye Bishops of the same: took upon him so
bold an entreprise, and to do so great a feate, as none of his predecessors
ever did greater, nor aue^tured with more perile: yt was, to translate the empire.

Than to the intent he might get the most men to favor his purpose, and the more
easily bring ye matter to pass that he would, he complained long and many
times, to ye people and clergy of Rome, of the decayed streynght of the
empire, and of the unprofitableness of the greek emperors. For they (quod he)
dwelling and being so very far of, can be hable in no wise to assiste sely
Italy, being many ways distressed, especially seeing they were daily vexed
with new (and that most heinous) batailes. And therefore sauegarde, peace, and
freedom can not be better restored to Italy again, than if a new chosen
emperor in the west, take upon him all the dignity of the empire and the
charge of the same.

These words in deed moved many me^nes hearts, which being led with the
likelyhode of the words, perceived not manifestly, what the popes drift was.
Than perceauing the greatest part of the people to incline to his purpose, in
the year of our Lord Jesus Christ. DCCCiij. he brought the matter to full
effect. For in Petres church after the solemn service, by the sentence and
at the besechinges of ye people of Rome, the pope ordained Charles (with a
great loud voice) emperor, and gave him the crown Imperial: and there unto
the people of the Romans shouted three times aloude: To Charles the mighty,
crowned of God, the great and peacemaking Emperor, be life and victory.

And albeyt the greek emperors took these matters right grievously, yet they
were not hable to lest these things from doing: both in that they were
turmoiled with innumerable wars, and also because the empress Hirene (being
polluted with the cruel murdering of her son) stered up new hurly burlies,
and exceeding great storms of business: for she can in nowise seem to have been
unknowing of this deed, seeing Charles (now made emperor) went about to mary
her, she her self not being disco^tented. So the bishops of Rome using these
knackes, promoted the French kings (their most earnest defendours, and most
trusty aiders) with wonderful sleyght and subtlety to the high dignity of
the empire: by whose help and mayntenaunce they became afterward of higher
power, than all their enemies. Than after Lewis that was called Pius gave Rome
to the Pope.
emperor Charles the great, Lewis his son succeeded, who also for his great
liberality was very dearly beloved of the bishops of Rome, and for that
cause they named him Pius, godly or devout. For he did not only confirm the
gift of his progenitors, that is to say, of Pipine his grandfather, and of
his father Charles, but he also wonderfully augmented it, and gave them (over
those things they hade before) the city of Rome with his iurisdicio^, and all the lands round about, with the cities, havens, and sea coasts of Hetruria.
Where upon bishop Antichrist is encreaced again with new streynghtes, and is
become Lord of the old ancient seat of the Empire, that is to wete, Rome.

There is no cause (well-beloved christian brethren) why we should marvel, that
the bishop of Romes dignity and power growed up on such an heyght, that he
hade all the bishops not only of Italy, but also of France, Germanye and
Spain under their daungier, and in subjection to their sea: seeing they could
find out such men to be their defendours and patrones, which hade the
administracion of all those naciones, and the power of the empire it self in
their own hands.

Now though all these matters (which we have hitherto made rehearsal of) are
much unworthy, and also full of wickedness and falsehead, yet the bishops
of Rome not content herewith, thought they might be bold, to do more
unworthy and more wicked entreprises tha^ al those. And to the intent they might
use their dignity and power with ye more ease and quietness, they were
nothing ashamed at all, to mock the Frenchemen also with the same falshead,
that they practiced before, against the greek emperors. For they thought to
chearishe and make much of Princes and peoples friendship, so far as it might
serve to mayntene their pleasur and idleness. King Beringarius.
And for that cause where as Berengarius, which at that time bare the rule in
the Lu^bardes lands, grieved al Italy very much with his power, and
disquieted it many ways: and the Frenchemen came not, when they were called,
but gave over their aid from the defense of Italy, and of the church of Rome,
ne yet followed the example of their au^cettours forewardenesse in yt behalf:
Bishop Agapetus and after him John the. 13 of that name, wrote lettres to Ottho
(which tha^ being king of Germanye, and Prince of Saxo^, was after ward made
emperor, and garnished with this syrname, Augustus) humbly beseching him for
ye love of God, and ye apostles Petre and Paul, to de liver ye holy church of
Rome, out of the daungier of Berengarius and his co^plices. In this matter Ottho
being a very mighty Prince, and moved Ottho.
also by other me^nes instaunt desires and lettres, tendered the bishops
peticiones. And thereupon he gathered a great army of Germaynes, and came in to
Italy. He overcame Berengarius, and when he hade taken him prisoner, he
banished him away with his wife and Albert his son in to Babenberge, and so
delivered all Italy from the fear and tyranny of him. And than like a
conqueror he entered the city of Rome, and was most honorably received of
pope John^, and crowned in the title of the Empire of Germany and Pannonye.

To be brief, this John^ (through whose craft and devise the empire was
translated) was he, that (as the Italian writours record) being even from his
springing youth time spotted with all the villanye in the world, and all
filthynesse, and given more to hunting (if he hade any spare time from hooring)
than to prayer, shamed the church of Rome wonderfully with his living, and
polluted that sea in many behalfes: and at leynght being taken in the
abominable sin of hooredome was slain, and suffered worthy pains of his
wickedness and hooreoome.

But how much either of honor or profit (in the wanyaunt) came hereof unto
king Ottho, being otherwise a very good and a right noble man: it may be
plainly enough perceived of the oath, that he was constrained to bind him self
in, to pope John^, that monstre of hooredome. For his successors enrolled ye
form of it in their Canones and decrees, on this wise.

To thee Lord Pope John^, I King Otthoes oath.
Ottho do promise and swear by the father, the Go^ne, and the holy Ghost, and
by this tree of the quickening cross, and by these relics of saints, that
if (by the sufferaunce of God) I shall come to Rome, I shall exalte the holy
church of Rome, and thee ye governor of the same, according to my power, life
and members, and thou shall nor lose the honor that thou haste by my will, or
by my cou^sail, or by my consent, or by mine exhortacion: and in Rome I shall
make no pleaye nor ordinance in all the things that perteyne to thee, or to
the Romans. And what so ever shall come to our possession of G. Petres land,
I shall render it to thee again. And to whom so ever I shallcommytte the
governance of Italy, I shall make him swear to be thy helper to defend G.
Petres land, according to his power.

Lo (well-beloved brethren in christ) this is the solemn and excellent
othemaking of the emperor Ottho: which oath does well bear witness, that
Ottho hade non other reward given him, for his most large good turns showed
to the pope, and for the deliverance of all Italy: but that he was
constrained to bind him self to the popes service, and become a mayntenour
and a defe^dour of that hoore of Babylon, and of her wicked tyranny. Besides
this, as soon as he came furst in Apo. 17.
to the city, he was commanded to subscribe with his own hand, to the
donacion of king Lewis, whereof we have spoken a litell before: to this end
(you must understand) that he should by no claim challenge (to the Empire)
either the city of Rome, or other places belonging to ye Empire, out of the
popes hands: and that the bishops of Rome might use their wickedly gote^
goods, with the more ease and security. These matters as they are now set out,
ye history wrytours make me^cio^, were done about the year of Christ's birthe
DCCCC. lxij. Furthermore albeit the French men took it very evil, that the
title and dignity of the empire was taken from them, and translated to the
Germaynes: yet the bishops of Rome considered that such mighty emperors of
the Germaynes, which hade bounden them selves by a sore oath, unto their will
(as it is already declared) should not be rejected. And for that cause they
set their minds (with diligent study) to this end the rather, that by some
ha^dsom mean, they might confirm the Empire to the Germaynes, and reserve the
claim and dignity of it in their own hand.

And in this case pope Gregory the. 5. Gregory the. 5.
showed his sleightye wit, which helped and set forewarde this devise very
mightyly. For he (inasmuche as he was borne in Sarone, and was kynsman also to
Emperor Ottho the third of that name) took this establishement for chosing the
emperor (Ottho him self not denyeng, but co^senting to it rather) yt it should
be lauful from thensfurthe to the Germans alone, to chose the emperor. And
he ordained six Electours, which at the deceasse of every Emperor should of
duty have the charge of that matter: that is to wete, three Prelates of the
bishops no^bre, and as many princes. The Emperor chosen by. 6. Electours of
Germany.
And unto the^ he added a seuenthe, the king of Boheme, to sattle the discord
of ye pertes. But although he would seem to have committed all the power of
chosing the emperor unto them, yet he has bounden both them and all the
Germaynes with this condition, that whom so ever they should have chosen, he
should than be taken for emperor and Auguste, in case ye bishop of Rome hade
comfirmed him. These appear evidently to be done in the year of our Lord. M.
II. But in this place also it is to see, the popes crafts and deceates to be
in a manner vnauoideable, whereby they confirmed their supremacy and power in
more ample wise than before, with a new addicion. For furst of al, he placed
among the Princes Electrours, three bishops: who, seeing they are straightly
bou^de^ to the sea of Rome by an oath, they dare chose non other man to be
Emperor, but who^ they perceive may be allowed by ye popes good will. And
moreover although the election succeed not all after ye popes mind, yet has
he reserved the confirmacion and coronacion to himself: which if he deny to
him that is chosen, he shall another be called Emperor nor August. Whereof it is
manifestly apparent, that the electours have nothing given them but bare titles
of honor, and that ye popes (by this contrefaicte color) would cloak their
ambicion and tyra^nye, which they are ashamed to practice more openly. Hereof
their own Canons bear witness, which say that like as the secular sweorde
(whereby the armed Emperor reigns) ought to be in subjection to the
spiritual, that is to say, to the bishop of Rome him self: so they claim
that power to the bishop also, that he alone by his own authority (with out al
consent, either of the hole Counsel or any prelate) may depryue the Emperor
of his dignity, if he perceive him to be in displeasure with him.

And verily they have always foughten with this their authority against every
of the most holy empeperours, not without grievous loss of al Germanye: like as
the acts of Henry ye. 4. Lewis ye. 4. Friderich Barbarosse and others make
me^cio^: of which matters it shall be treated more pleynteously, and more
clearly in the homilies following.

Of these things now, which hitherto have been reckoned up, I suppose it
appear sufficiently open enough, with what beginninges they clymbed up aloft
unto so high estate of dignity and power, whereof they use even at this day,
so prowdely and so shamelesly to boast: that is to say, that they have
conveyed these matters to their own hands, through most wicked crafts,
treason, robberies, periuries and falshead. For furst of al they obtained at
Phocas that most cruel tyra^nes hands, the proud title of general and
universal bishop, and not without stiff striving had with the bishops of
Consta^tinopole. And they used Phocas authority and power, furst of al against
ye emperors of the greeks, which were their benefactours. For where they would
not abide to have ydolles, nor maintenance of Idolatry in their temples, the
popes laid at them with the cruel tho^derbolt of cursyng, and expulsed them
from the communion of ye church, and were so bold as pertly to kill their
Exarches in Italy, pertly to drive the^ out of Italy, so as wha^ they had
drawn it al together to ye Departing, they plucked it clean out of the
emperors power. From thece they ran sawcely into France, and oppressed the
kings blood, and aduau^ced such to the crown of the realm, as they saw more
diligent to serve their lust and pride. Anon by their violence they invaded ye
most noble and most valeau^t kingdom of the Lu^bardes in Italy, and gave not
over, til they perceived it also overthrown, and the streynghtes of it al to
clattred. And thus they have in deed atteyned their power by overthrowing of
three kingdoms, so that at leynght wha^ they had trode^ the empire under their
fete to, they might abuse the emperors to what purpose they will, even at their
own pleasure.

Two of those things now which were propounded, we have hitherto with evident
exposicion declared: Furst that Rome is the seat of Antichrist, tha^ ye the B.
of Rome is figured by the litel horn, yt Daniel makes mencio^ of, and yt he
is very Antichrist. And ye residue shall be treated of, in ye homilies following.
Here now it shall stand us in hand (well-beloved brethren in Christ) to considre
thoroughly ye beginnings of popes, and of their kingdom. For like as they have
atteyned their kingdom with wiles, falsehead, treasones, and oppressing of good
Princes, even so shall they devise with the same crafts to uphold their kingdom,
glory, and power to their successors also. An evident vnfailing token of this
matter, this present tragedy declares unto us, whereby through their forcastes
and mocions, they stere up the most mighty princes and most valeau^t people to
take weapon in hand, against Christ the most high king and priest. In this
case therefore, we had need to use singular diligence and for cast (brethren) yt
we have respect only to the words of Christ, and follow the rule of the^: and
also to make the ears of God weary with continual prayers, never ceassing to
desire him, yt he would vouchesafe to defend us with his own fatherly succor,
to deliver us from the tyranny of Antichrist, to burst his horn, and power And
on ye contrary part, to set up and aduau^ce the horn and kingdom of his
son, yt we may serve him in faith, charity, and vprightenesse of life: and
at leynght to live and to reign with him for ever and ever. Amen.

The.iij. Homily.
In this third Homily is described Antichrists person, what his propretie
is, and by what marks he may be lightly known.

LIke as in matters of war it is not only profitable, but also necessary for
us thoroughly and fully to know both our enemy and his weapons, his politic
wiles also and embushementes, his devises and forcastes, so as they may, the
more easyly be avoided and repulsed, with like power and discrete aduisement:
even so is the same knowlage as much necessary in all the continue of our
life: In ye discourse whereof we must abide a certain perpetual and always
contynuyng warfare, by the helping mayntenaunce of our most high emperor, our
Lord Jesus Christ: which bids us not set upon any carnal and mortal
enemy, but commands those that are his appointed men of war, to be armed
against the spiritual adversaries of our salvation, and Ephe. 6.
(as the apostle Paul says) against the Lords of this world, the rulers of
the darkness of this world, yea rather against the Devil him self (yt old
and mighty serpent) whose subtlety is infinite, and his wyles innumerable:
which also has the cast to transform him self in to every facion, and to
counterfaicte even the angel of light. But although that common enemy of our
salvation lays embushes for us, with wonderful and sundry his politic wily
prankes, but above all other specially with the iuggling deceates of false
doctrine: yet has he (for all that) some chief guide and emperor of his
armies, who^ he has most thoroughly instructed in all his streynghtes, in all
his power, wyles, frauds, deceates, and all the knackes that he has, to
destroy mankind wythall.

This man the holy scriptures set furthe in many places, by the name and figure
of Antichrist, forsomuche as being in all things contrary and against our
Lord and saueour Jesus Christ (who is become unto us of God 1. Cor. 1.
the heavenly father, wisdom, righteousness, sanctificacion, and redemption)
he makes war against him, and draws away us (whom Christ has redeemed
with his blood) from his company, service and partaking of salvation. It is
therefore necessary for us to mark diligently, and to epsy out this fellow:
and it is convenient for us also, to give the eyes of our hearts attentyuely
unto this purpose (especially the world that now is) to the intent we may be
hable to know (out of the scriptures) both him and all his wyles, and to
beware of him, that he begyle us not. And as for this knowlage, it may fully
and lightly be perceived of the two places of scripture, which I lately
brought furthe of the most excellent Prophet Daniel, and the Apostle Paul:
which paynt out Antichrists visnomye unto us with such light and evidence,
that all the hole matter of him might be comprehended in six chaptres, or
proposicions. And therefore I have lately expounded two the furst, by the which
we are taught, that he shall spring up, place his seat, and reign at Rome.
And there with also it is showed by what means, deceates, subtilties, treasons,
and wicked devises, he shall come to, and obtain his kingdom. All which
things verily are set furthe with such light, as it is declared with
sufficient playnesse, that they are fulfilled by ye bishop of Rome (which ought
to be taken for that very principal and mighty houge Antichrist) after the
same sort, as they were in times past spoken of before, by the prophets and
Apostles.

Now the next is, that we step over to the third place of the matter we are in
hand wythall. Wherein the The. 3. Antichrists person.
person of Antichrist, his nature, disposicion, manners, and all his propreties
(whereby he may be known) are described. These are written by Paul ye
Apostle, who in that place which we have before rehearsed, does workemanly
paynt out all the hole face of Antichrist with four names or titles, as it
were with certain lively colors.

And the furst title that he decketh him wythall, is, that he names him, The
man of Sin.
the man of Sin. This form of speaking smells the Hebrew phrase, and
wants not in this behalf the express signification of the thing that is
intended: in that he calls him, not (after a simple manner) A sinful man, or
a wicked, or an ungracious man, but the Man of sin, or the man of
wickedness, mynding this wise to speak of a certain greater thing: that is to
say, even the same thing, that the servant and slave of sin is, and as he,
that is addicte al together to the laws of sin, in all the hole discourse of
his life. To be short, to the intent we may fully understand the meaning of
this title, and that we may see wythall, whether this same title, do agree
fittly with the bishop of Rome, we must mark anon furst of all, what the
scripture purporteth in this word, Sin. Holy writours call it sin, what so
ever is committed what Sin is.
against the will of God the heavenly father, and the authority of his holy
word, either concerning faith and religion, or concerning the office of
charity, either yet concerning the innocence and pureness of life. For in
these three specialties, the hole life of a faithful christen man, and what so
ever be customly required thereunto, are comprehended. And if we would a litel
more diligently and more narowly mark ye hole papacy, with his head and
members, we shall find them to be such, as ought worthyly to be called, most
filthyly polluted men with sins, and even the very right Men of sin. For as
touching the faith and religion, which is observed and set furthe in the
papacy, it is evidently apparent, to be clean contrary unto the true and
right faith and religion: seeing it was not taken out of the regestre of the
holy sacred scripture, wherout the doctrine of all faith and religion ought to
be taken: of which matter we shall more fully treat, wha^ we com to the
exposicion of the third title. To be brief, albeit we would grant them in this
behalf, that concerning the doctrine of their faith and religion, all things
were pure, and set furthe according to the sentence of Gods word, yet it can
in no wise be denied, that the popes and their accomplices, do grievously offend
concerning the same, if we do considre the abominable sin of Symonie, by
Symony
the which they do so many robberies (one upon an other) with such
shamelessness and gredinesse, in those matters of God. For we se the^ come at
lenght, to so high wickedness by the shameless practice of symonie, that they
bestow not only benefices and the rentes of Colleges and Monasteries, and
other such like goods of the church, to the possession of most unworthy
persons (that is to wete, of such as be of counsel of their viciousness:
messagiers, coll cariers, bawdes, horse kepers, mule dryuers, cokes, and
infinite others) being another of honest co^uersacion nor good learning (and all
for money, or else for private favor or auau^tage) but also set a sale, and
offer to be bought for every man's money, the holy sacred gifts of the holy
Ghost, remission of sins, the grace of God the heavenly father, the communion
of the sacraments, the lauer of Baptism, yea and their own God made of
bread, with the kingdom of heavens, and everlasting bless: and that with such
shamelessness, that their own most gredy chapmen and brokers are not ashamed
(with a loud and a shoutig voice) to praise their wares, and to require for the
same al manner of money, whether it were gote^ in wars, or by theft, or by
rauine, or yet by bloodsheading. For they have called the pelf gotten with
these crafts, no less holy than other is, if they be all shuffled together.
Yet all men know (even as many as are madded with their supersticion, and have
thought good to buy their wares) yt I feyne not these matters, either of envy
or malice: but even the truth of the matter it self, is more clear, than
needs any further declaracion in this bebalfe. What shall we tha^ say in this
case, well-beloved brethren in Christ? Must we not needs confess, that they
which have done such things, were in that chief and principal point of all the
hole life (touching faith and religion) very wretches, and in all things,
plainly blinded men of sin? For furst with most arrogaunt temeritie they have
taken upon them selves the things that they never hade, nor were delivered to
them of Christ Jesus, that is to say: remission of sins, the grace of God,
the kingdom of heavens, and everlasting life and blessedness. All which
things the hole scripture teaches, were redeemed with nothing else, but with
the precious blood of Jesus Christ alone. Tha^ making sale of the gifts of ye
holy ghost, they made of the temple of God, not the house of prayer, but a
certain mart: yea even a tavern of cheopping and changing. Thirdely they
have made all religion, to be a cloak of naughtynesse and iniquity, under
which cloak every body might freely entreprise, and do what so ever he would.
For might not a man, under this false show of religion (not only without
punyshement, but also no man saying: wrong he did) be an horemongre, break
wedlock, be a rybaulde, haunt naughty games and sportes, be dronke^, fight,
rob, steal, oppress Christ's poor servants, sheade innocent blood: and
finally to do all mychief with sweorde and fire? Might not a man that were
burdened and ouerlayde with all these vices, be made free and cleansed out of
hand, as soon as a sacrificeing hired priest hade said mass for him, or hade
gote^ him assoiled, for money? The saying therefore of Christ our king and
priest ought rightefully and according to their own deserts, to be thondred
in their ears: My house shall be called a house of prayer, but you have made it
a den of thieves. Among these we Math. 21.
may reckon the pilling and rauine, that they use openly with to much
shamelessness. For the most rauenyng merchants are not content, to have
spoiled men of their goods, while they were alive, but they go about to rob
and pille men's heirs, their wives, and children also, when they are dead,
and in another life. For to this end they have ymagined trentalles, sacrifices
of Massing for the dead, anniuersaries, and infinite such like: and unto them
men must needs either bequeath perpetual rentes and revenues in their
testament upon their death bed, or else their heirs must provide and give
them. And what a thing is this else, but the same that Christ obiecteth to the
Scribes and Pharisees of the Jews, where he says, that they devoured and
robbed poor folks and wydowes houses, under pretense of long prayer. And who
is it, that shall in this case, acquit them from sin and trespace, seeing they
bewray them selves by their own deeds, yea and even by the testimonye of their
own mouth, to be thieves and sacrileges?

For if the pardon bulls which they offer to sell for large money to men, wha^
they were yet living, were sufficient for remission of sins (as they make
boast of) what need is it, to buy it daily afreshe with new sacrifices for
them, wha^ they be dead? And forasmuch as they say, men have need of this
ware, and that dead men's souls can not be delivered without them, they do
verily show themselves to be deceauours, in yt they deceatfully and
fraudulently wyped their money from them, wha^ they were alive, promisyng
perfect remission of sins, which they them selves say afterward, is
imperfect, and has need of moo, and that new wares. To be short, the B. of
Rome is the author and inuentour of all this gaire, with his mystery workers of
his own religion, which have planted the seeds of supersticio^ (yt he has
sowed) after a wonderful ymaginacion of feynyng and lyeng. And therefore we will
say, that this furst title, that Paul decketh Antichrist withal, does most
rightly accord unto him: that he is called the Man of sin, and the man
addicte unto si^ne, yea the servant of sin, and a trusty slave not only of
sin, but also of most chief wickedness and blasphemye.

Finally if Christ our Lord so often and with so vehement diligence, requires
of us those things that perteyne to christen charity, and comprehends all
his laws and precepts in the title of charity: in case we mark and compare
the life and manners of popes with it, we must remedilesly confess them to be
void of all charity, and concerning it, to be also the Me^ of sin. For it
is to be showed by the examples and histories of many years, that they have at
all times set less by the public peace and sauegarde of the greatest
naciones, than by their own private commodities, wantonness, and rau^geing
liberty to do what they lust them selves. And I (least I should seem to be
ouermuche tedious) shall chose a few certain specialites out of many, and they
shall be eue^ ye same, yt have chanced with in these CCCCC. years last past.

In this behalf let the emperor Henry the. 4.
Henry the. 4. of yt name stand furthe furst of all. Which about the year of
our Lord Mlvij. was made emperor being but a boy at that time in deed, but
yet for all that, joining his wisdom and dexterity in handling of matters with
his years, he became a right noble and a valeau^t Prince. Whilst Hildebra^de,
otherwise called Gregory the. 7.
this man governed the empire, not without commendacion and victories against
his foes: one Hildebrande a monk occupied the sea of the papacy, being not
called by any laufull ordinance, but by his own private wilful lust and
sleightie co^ueyau^ce: and he was called Gregory. ye. 7. Who inasmuche as he
walowed altogether in ye forcasti^g study of covetousness, hatred, envy,
pride, and new fa^gled matters (as the Italian writours, and among them cardinal
Beno make mention of him) considering it requisite for him to follow yt steps
of some of his predecessors popes, went about to depryue ye emperor of that
right and power, which he hade of ancient custom, in ordaynyng of Bishops
and ministres of the church. For by that occasion he saw, that not only
exceeding great richesse, but also much more honor and power should com to the
sea of Rome. The emperor wtstode ye wicked purposes of Gregory, and
perceauing his ambicion well enough, he thought it not good to lose any of his
right, but he rather kept it still to him self, as right was he should. But
that was so pleasant a thing, to pope Gregory, that for love of it, he another
spared treason nor slaughters, but stered up civil watres in many places of ye
empire, and all manner of myschief that he could ymagine. For furst he
conspired the emperors death, and devised by sundry means to despeche him:
In so much that even in ye temple he would have murdered him, as he was at
his prayers. But wha^ he saw his co^spiracies framed not to his purpose, he
began to use open force and enemytie: and having excommunicated Henry, he
assoiled al me^ from their oath of faith and allegeau^ce (as they call it) and
sent over ye crown of ye empire garnished with this verse, to Rodulphe the duke
of Sweuianes.

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodulpho.

That is to say: Christ ye rock, called in latin Petra, gave ye imperial
crown to Petre, and Petre has given it to Rodulphe. This deed was ye
occasion of most bloody wars, in that (you must understand) Henry having his
empire taken violently from him, revenged it by force of arms. Whereupon at
leynght, after many terrible batailes and bloodsheadde, the false emperor
Rodulphe was ouercome^ in batail, and so lost his life and empire al at once.
And when he was despeched, they created a new emperor by ye popes
commandment, which (favoring his side) had rejected Henry. And he that was
elect, was Herman the earl of Lucelburgh, which also being driven out, lost
his life and empire by and by. Yet for all this, another the pope him self nor
his fauourours could be restrained by these just judgments of God, but they
would also chose a third against Henry: that is to wete, Marquis Ecberte, which
was also (shortly after) slain in a myll. Than all the residue being afraid
with the mysfortunes of these three princes, no man could be persuaded any
more to take upon him the title and honor of the empire. Notwithstanding, the
malicious madness of the pope and his was not yet staunched, but they (like
most wicked men) could bring thus much topasse, that they caused Henry the
fourthes son (whom the history writours name Henry the. 5.) to make war
against his father. Hereof sprung wonderful, heinous, and horrible hurly
burlies, seeing the father and the son made cruel batailes, one against the
other. But at leynght the son being aided through the popes craftye sleightes
and false fatches, took his father (being a worthey old man) by treason: and
than having deprived him of al his reign and dignity, he caused him (being so
depryued, and a prisoner) to dye. Mark this tragedy (and more than a bloody
tragedye) well-beloved brethren in Christ. What man is it in all ye wide world,
that is hable to show herein so much as one spark of charity? Truly ye
history writours bear us record in this behalf, that in these hurly
burlies, and among so vehement stering of wars, Henry gathered his
standards, and fought three score and two times. By which nombre of batailes
every man, that has any common wit, may easyly considre, what innocent
blood was sheadde, how many towns were taken, how many fields wasted, how
much corn spoiled, and what nombre of widows and fatherles children were
occasioned to be (moo than was before) thereby. For if there hade ben but one
spark of charity in Gregory's heart, ought henot rather to have given over
all his dignity, and have depryued him self of the hole papacy, than for
temporal substance and power (yt shall last but a while) to stere up so great
wars and myschief? But he was not satisfied, another with batailes, ne with
fiere, ne yet with streams of bloodsheadde, til he saw the son defile the
laws of nature, and make wars against his own father in this own realm,
whose age it hade ben his duty rather to have defended and helped. And the
same whom the popes office of duty hade ben to fear away from sheading of
any man's blood, he was not ashamed to encense, to ye abominable wickedness
of father murdering. Therefore what shall we hensfurthe call wicked, hard
hearted, cruel, bloody, or horrible, if this be not? The son (yea eue^ the
only son) being provoked by no manner of injury, either of his own, or of ye
common wealth, did not only contemn his father, forsake his father, leave his
father destitute of his help, but also set upon his father in batail, pressed
his father with besieging him, he enuyroned him and took him by treason: he
robbed him of his empire, and so taking him prisoner, suffers him miserably
and sorowfully to dye. And these prankes were not played by the commandment
of any barbarous tyra^ne, nor by ye ince^seme^t of any Phalaris, but by the
cou^sail of the Phalaris was a tyranne in Agrigentine.
most holy father, in ye deuilles name.

Rejoice now you Caligulaes, be merry you Neroes, and as many as have hade ye
famous report of cruelty: For you have one which (though he left The. B. of
Rome is more cruel than either Caligula Nero. Friderich the. 1.
you a long space behind him, yet) he acquieteth you from ye infamy and
remembrance of a cruel name, even the bishop of Rome, which commands the
son, to bathe his sweorde in the fathers blood.

And God wotteth, the noble feats of Adriane the. 4. and Alexander the. 3. may
be also coupled to these rehearsalles, which they practiced (with most high
wickedness) against the very godly and most valeaunt prince Friderike, whose
surname was Barbarousse. For albeit he hade the upper hand over al his
enemies, yet it was not in his power, either to avoid or to break ye tyra^nie
of ye popes: but after heinous batailes, and most lamentable flaughtres, he was
compelled (perforce) to fall humbly to ye popes fete, and to lay down his
neck, for Antichrists filthy fete to tread upon.

Now who is it, that would seek any charity at their hands, which have not
learned so much, as to bear favorably with the dignity of an Emperor.

After yt, about ye year of our Lord Friderike the. 2.
MCCxx Friderichus ye second suffered no less wickedness and false head of
the^ also: For when he made wars against ye Turks, they (with most spiteful
vilany, and abominable force of arms) resisted him: and as he (with luckie
success) warred against the enemies of Christ's cross, they with their false
driftes drove him back: and layeng at him with their thonderboltes, they
depryued him also of the communion of faithful christen people, and of his
Empire: and chosed other emperors against him. Which thing was in deed the
cause of most grievous batailes, and engendered innumerable much bloodsheading.

Morouer, in the year of our lord. M. CCC. when Albert the duke of Austrike
was chose^ emperor, Pope Bonesace the. 8. of that name, would another confirm
him, nor crown Boniface the. 8.
him, except he would furst promise, that he would make war against Philippe
the French king, and drive him out of his realm. And the cause of that war
was this: that Philippe (wha^ he espied the sleightie shifts of the sea of
Rome) denied ye pope al his revenues of the realm of France. And for that
cause, that holy father having goodly in mind the precept of charity (to
the intent he might provide for his own private commodity) purposed to set two
the mightiest naciones of christendom (France and Germanye) together, to
war cruelly the one against the other: and glad to give the loking on (him
self) of the destroyeng of cities, wasting of fields, slaughter of men, and all the myschief besides, that war brings with it: so that it turn to his own
aduau^tage. But the father of heaven prouydeth better for men's matters. For he
put those kings in such mind, that they forgate the pope, and layeng down
their weapones, converted the lamentable wars in to a joyous marriage.

And here it is not to be omitted, that the bishopes of Rome (being of the same
spirit) did unto Ladislaus king of Vngarie and Polone. He hade Ladislau.
overcome (with wonderful luckie and notable victory) Amurathes the most
mighty prince of the Turks, and scatred the turkishe army, and obtained
perforce such condiciones of peace, as were hard to be obtained of the enemy.
But when the Turks hade the overthrow in that skyrmyshe, they were feign
perforce (and because of the conditions of peace) to meddle no longer with
inuading Vngarie, and began to make new roades in to Italy, and to stere up
dangers against the pope: Eugenius the bishop of Rome (to deliver him self and
Italy from Eugenius pope.
all daungier) sent Cardinal Iuliane to Laudislaus, to condemn his league with
the Turks, as wicked and unworthy: and to persuade with all, that christianes
are in no wise bounden to keep promise with infideles. And he gave not over
counsailing and provoking, till he hade persuaded the king, compelled him to
break the league, and so to become a promise breaker. Anon than by the
forwardenesse of the most holy father, and the legate Iuliane the apostatalike
(apostlelike I would say) blowing to the field, there was most cruel batail
renewed: which having unlucky success, king Ladislaus was slain, and
Amurathes carried away a large and a gorgeous victory. This was done in the
year of our Lord. M. CCCC. xliiij. Lo, this is the most holy fathers charity,
this is the love that he bears to ye Lords flock, by the cou^sail whereof,
he teaches the King rashly to violate his promise of peace, and shamelesly to
fail his fidelity, that he hade made: and not that only, but he also casts
both such as be very good and to much simple kings, and the people (ouerlight
of belefe) upon the most cruel weapons of Christ's enemies the Turks, so as he
him self may live safe and sure at Rome.

To be short, least through aboundau^ce of examples, my tale grow out to over
great a matter, it seems not necessary, that we should set forth (with a busye
painted show of words) the things that the Bishops of Rome have in times
past done, against the law of charity, seeing that these our own days can
evidently enough bear witness of the same. For look you (dearly beloved
brethren in Christ) upon these present hurly burlies, and wars of Germany, at
home wtin the^ selves, which is undoubtedly occasioned by ye travail and
devise of pope Paul ye iii. and of his me^bres. And search diligently Paul
the 3.
(if it please you) whether so much as one token or spark of charity, be
showed in this deed doing. For who knows not, that the greater part of
christendom (especially the hole flock of them, that are right wise and
learned men) have already complained (these many years) of the tyranny and
intolerable yowke of popes? And Emperors have been in the same thought, which
have (with most earnest faithfulness and godly advise) admonished them both
to amend their own manners, and restrain the ecclesiastical ministers, and
their lascivious lives, and to exercice a worthy discipline among them, to
frame their hole life by. But all is in vain. For they (like most naughty me)
would another hear ye co^playntes of the congregacions, nor do after the
admonishementes of emperors, because they have always loved their own lust
more than all the discipline and honesty in the world. Whereupon (all things
set aparte) they have used their own lusts and vicious demeanor, with all
losenesse of liberty. In this behalf (therefore) God the father of heaven,
seeing their licenciousnesse to be both intolerable and incurable, has chosen
aparte some of the nombre of his ministres, and has enlumined them with the
light and shynyng beams of his spirit, that knowing the Popes tyranny and
wicked lordlynesse, have also throughlye perceived the truth of Gods word.
These men have laid their hands to work, and brought light into the world
(that tu^bleth in darkness) and have reproved openly the cruel and horrible
abominacions of the papacy, admonishing every body to beware of the^. By
means whereof, that sea has felt exceeding great loss, and where as no power
of emperors was hable (hitherto) to drive it to a downfall: now being a
great part dyminished in it self, and in his members, both in his honor and
richesse, it begins even already to come to naught.

For from hencefurth the Germans (whom this light shone furst unto) would
not run gadding to Rome, and there seek soul health, seeing they knew Christ
Jesus, to be the true way of salvation. And they have no mind to buy Romish
pardones and bulls with money, seeing they understood, yt sins are forgeuen
by Christ, and that men are certified by faith, of the forgiveness thereof.
What need many words? That most gayneful furnace of the popes pikepurce
Purgatory is quenched out, with the lively waters of the Gospel among the
Germaynes, and all the battefowling tools and knackes of the sea of Rome, are
despeched quyte out of the way. Hereof those most holy fathers have complained
in every place. And where as before they turned the deaf ear to other men's
complaints, now they begin to compain them selves, and with fair
flattering words, most large promises, and much feyned holiness, they have
gone about to bring them that are instructed in the doctrine of the truth, and
have renounced papistrie, under the yowke of their tyranny again. But when
they prevailed nothing for all their crafts, by and by they besought aid of
Emperors, Kings, Princes, cities and people: they begone to arm them
against the professors of the truth, whom they cry out on, and say, they
follow a new and an heretical religion.

In this case therefore, the Magistrates (being stered up by the popes
incensementes) begone violently to rage with force of arms, against the
faithful servants of Christ. And than a man might have seen them, that
confessed Christ (to be the only way of salvation) burned with cruel fire,
hanged upon galowes, choked in waters, slain with sweorde, and murdered with
al kinds of death. Yea the matter came to so merciles a cruelty, that they
spared none, another man nor woman, young nor old. And yet those noble
rutterkines of the church, did more cruel feats than these: for they enticed
princes and people (whom so ever they could) for money, to stere up wars
among them selves, and to extinguishe the religion (that is contrary to them)
with sweorde and fire. So that hangmen were sent out of these parties, and
raunged about here and there, to murthre the ministers of the word, by what
mean so ever they could. And they found and took up burners, whom they hired
privily, to thrust under fire, and so to spoil, both the faithful
christianes, and their cities and fields. And yet this read purpled church
(embrewed with the blood of saints) not satisfied with all these (as wicked
cruel deeds as they were) ceased not, before they perceived these heinous and
bloody wars brought upon sely sorrowful Germanye, stered up all them that they
trusted, to make batail against it. Bring us out here the fruits of charity, O
you bishops. Show here some special token of christen gentilnesse, O you pope
pleasing slaves. Is it the office of charity, to murdre men, who^ Christ has
redeemed with his blood, to spoil cities, to waste fields, to mar corn, to
defile matrones and maide^s, and finally to run rageing (after al kinds of
injuries and reproaches) with sweorde and fire, upon all ages, man, woman, and
child?

But they are heretics (say they) and no true christen people, that we
persecute. And the chaste spouse of Christ (the church) is by these heretics
most impudently defiled, and also the seameles coat of our saueour Jesus, is
(by their rashenesse, and false doctrines) miserably torn, and rent in pieces:
which we goo about to amend, and repair again.

Ha, and will you needs be both most bloody tirannes, and most shameless liars
to, you cruel blood thirstye wolves? what adoo have you, to speak of Christ's
coat? For by you it was cut in pieces, and marred all ready a great while
agoo: yea and by most wicked loctecasting (as it was before time among the
soldiers of ye Jews) it came in to most filthy men's handelinges Therefore
you are not sorry for tearing of Christ's coat: but it greueth you, that the
veil of wickedness, and the clooke of impiety is (through the preaching of
the gospel) cut in pieces, which you being covered withal, have continually
hitherto practiced al kind of wickedness, and beasly lust, without correction.

It greueth your hearts, that the sackes are open and torn, which you have
hitherto hidden the true Joseph, Jesus Christ's cup, and all other your
church robberies in. Now your sleightie shifts are open, your lies are open,
your false deceates are open, now is your (more than the Sicilianes) tyranny
open, and abhorred of all men. Your tyranny was the tool, with the which you
raged together by heaps, not only against men's bodies, but against their
souls also. It is the coming of this gaire to the open light, that greueth
you, hereof comes your lamenting, this is the cause of your sorrow taking.

For as touching the horrible crime of heresy (which is always in your
mouth) which of our sort is it (I beseech you) that you could convince? have
you yet hitherto proved any of them, an heretic?

They are heretics, that make who is an heretic.
new articles of the faith, contrary to the truth of the scripture, and do
stiffely mayntene them.

This crime is most far from us. For there is none of the articles of the
apostolic faith and Creed, that we deny. And moreover, we devise no new
ones, we change none wrongfullye, we another take from, nor put to any thing,
touching any of them. But such masking visours you hade need of, to bring the
doctrine of the truth, and of the true faith, in to hate and contempt, with
the simple and rude common people, by means of this horrible and slanderous
report of us, to be heretics. But if ye loved the church of Christ, so much
as you boaste in words to do, if you cared so much, for the noble and most
valeaunt nation of the Germaynes: truly you testifye this your love and care,
with most unjust and most unworthy behaueours, in that you visit it, with
abominable force of arms, and most cruel heinous enemies, procured out of
every country. Did Christ our Lord entreprise, to train the world to his
lore, by the same like reasones? Have his Apostles left you any example of
this practice? Paraduenture you may pretend Paul for you in this case, which
breathed the like threattes, and impugned the faithful christianes with like
force of arms, when he was Christ's open enemy: and wha^ it was said to him,
that he persecuted the Lord, and spurned Act. 9.
against the prick. But as soon as he was converted, by the power of Christ, he
began to teach and plant the christen faith in every place, and followed
far other manner of ways. But what need words, against that scarlet blood
thurstye, and read ruffling Synagoge, colored with saints blood? For there is
such obstinacy, and blyndenesse of heart in that Synagoges stomach, that
they will not vouchesafe so much as hear the Lord him self.

It is our part (dearly beloved brethren in Christ) to learn here, that
these me^ ar clean void of al sparks of charity, and al together cold in
their co^scie^ces. For if they were any whitte charitably affected, surely that
bitter famyne and intolerable dearthe of vitaile, which the country of
Germanye has been miserably pressed withal (and now at leynght is scarcely
rid of it) would never yet have gone out of their minds: and having
remembrance thereof, they would never have admitted, that (for their own
private profit) the people should be destroyed now with sweorde and fire, whom
so sore an hongre has so bitterly vexed.

But no common miseries move them, no casualties move them, no lamentacion also
of the sorrowful wretched people move them, so they may see their own matters
provided for. As for the complaints and pitiful cryenges of the poor, none
pearceth their ears. The gronynges also of the afflicted, strike nothing in to
their ears, another do they give any head to the wailinges of the hongrie. But
this is their common study, this is their care, this is their pains taking
and travail, to hunt away the sely poor sheep (whom Christ has redeemed with
his blood) from the most wholesome pastures of Gods word, in to that old
stynking slaughterhouse of theirs again: and to the intent when they have them
under their subjection, they may not only fleece them at their pleasures, but
also pull of their skin: and not that only, but also bocherlye to slay them,
woorie them, flea them, and devour them. Although there perish men
innumerable, though fields be wasted, towns destroyed, private and public
goods violently taken away, though wives cry out for the slaughter of their
husbands, the parences of their sons, the children of their parents, the
friends and alliance, of their friends and allyaunce: though the honestye of
matrones be defiled, although the maidens (being subject to the co^querours
filthy appetite) do make moan, though every body (both man, woman, and child)
do perish: and to conclude, though al hole Germanye were set on a most
terrible read burning fire, yet they will think all this damage easyly
recompensed, if they may live safely, and take their pleasure, with their
covent of erraunt hoores, flattering belly cheer myniones, and detestable
daunceing lecherours. They are therefore void of all charity, and (as
concerning it) they are Men of sin, and in all things given to al manner of
wickedness and abominacion.

Let us proceed now over to the third point, which concerns the leading of a
righteous and an innocent life: and therein we shall perceive them to be Men of
sin, no less tha^ in the other points before. For the innocence of a
christian life requires this specially above other, that we avoid the common
enemy of faithful Christianes, Satan: that we abhor, flee and deteste to
have any thing a do with him. But and if we would considre the acts of
bishops of Rome, we may find mo that have not be^ afraid, to bind them
selves holly to be the servants of satan, and therewith have set their
studies upon such practices as are deuelishe, and forbidden by the laws of
God. And in the nombre of these, Cardinal Beno does freely record, that
Gregory the. 7. is to be compted, and brings out many abominable testimonies
of that matter.

Of Siluester the second of that name, the most diligent patron Siluester
the. 2.
and mayntenour of the popes dignity, Platina is ye author: yt he was a
practicer of naughty arts, and therein addicte him self (all together) unto
the common enemy of mankind. And in deed furst he gate ye Archebishopriche
of, Reme and afterward of Rauenna through gift of money: last of al (with
greater forcast, by the deuilles forewarding help) he gate also the occupacion
of the popes sea: howbeit under this condition, that when he departed this
life, he should be all holly the deuilles, by whose false deceates he obtained
so high dignity. Whereupon also (as the same Platina makes report) where this
Siluester was not circumspecte enough, in being ware of the deuilles baits, he
was killed, all The mass could not defend the pope him self from the Devil.
to pulled, and suffered openly of that noble promotour and fou^dour of his, as
he was Massing in the church. And who is it, that can not understand, what a
manner promocion this is, what kind of dignity this is, and what manner office
this is; that the devil can give unto his servants, and that the most
vnthriftye persons living, can get with deuillishe and abominable sciences?
And whereto should we speak of these matters, seeing the common people do know
evidently, that the most conyngest doctors and maistres of magical arts, and
other sciences forbidden by Gods laws, were always either sacrificeing
priests, Leui. 19.
or else monkishe or frierishe cloisterours, marked with this beasts mark,
which have been wont with their studies, to betraye (after this sort) the author
of their sect and faculty.

Furthermore there is no man so ignorant, but he knows, that the study of
temperate sobrenesse and chastity is required in the laws of a christen
innocence, inasmuche as for the love of innocence, it is most certainly
manifest, that the use of wedlock was instituted, straight ways at the furst
beginning of the world.

But how far wide the bishops of Rome have gone from that study, it is
more commonly known, than needs demonstracion of many examples. For when they
had ones forbidden and taken the laufull and right chaste use of holy wedlock
out of the way, they were not afraid to plant the studies of lecherous lusts
and abominable hooredome. In this case I report me to Johan the. 13. of that
name, who (as I have lately said before) was taken in hooredome, eue^ at ye
deed doing, and so (according to his merits) was slain. The same thing is
also verified before Johan, yea rather cried out upon, by that unworthy and
almost incredible pranke, whereby (as we read) a most shameless brothel queen
crept up (through hooredo^) even to be pope, and was called Johan the. 8. And
truly Johan the 8. a woman pope.
albeit a sort of filthy fellows would feign deny it, yet they are hable in
no wise to say nay to it. For there is a notable place, that is slaundred with
that naughty matter, between the plaieng place, which they call Theatrum
Colosseum, and G. Clementes, wherein the hoore pope (being taken in ye neck with
sudden panges and throws) was delivered. Which place the popes (remembering yt
detestable deed, and being ashamed of it) shonne eue^ now to this day. There are
also credible histories of writours, yt have nombred yt excellent pastor of
Christ's shepfold (with her childbearing) in the noble ragge man roll of those
most holy fathers. For yet though they would, they dare not ouerhippe her (if
they would be reckoned trusty credible writours) because of the fresh memory
of that fact. For it chanced after the time of Charles the great, about the
year of our Lord. DCCCLviij.

Of the same lecherours lust we have Alexander the. 6.
a witness, Alexander the. 6. which being pope within our remembrance, lived
after such rate, that he could not acquyte the brute of his name, from
suspicion of incest committed with his daughter. We have also record of all
the hole life of all Cardinals, bishops, prelates, abbottes, monks,
Chanones, Friars, and sacrificeing priests: who like as they never avoided the
shame of open hooredome, even so have they filled almost ye hole world with
their bastardes, and unlawfully begoten children. As we may also (in the mean
time) pass over in silence the beastly lust of the abominable sin of
Buggery, unworthy to be heard of christian ears: and many other wicked vices,
that the common people certainly know, that they are out of good name with all.

But least any man would say, that Here follow a mischievous holy company of
popes.
we were to much unjust reportours, and in the rehearsal hereof playde not an
upright faithful part, as though we noted al foul blemishes, even in the
most holy fathers, with to quick and ouermuche iudgeing eye: and to this end,
that we might afterward for the faults and errors of a few, renounce and
condemn all the holerable of popes, and the papacy it self to: it seems not
unprofitable, nor from the purpose we are in hand wythall, to discribe in a
short rehersall, out of Platina (the most diligent registr our of the popes
names) the life and names of a great meignye of Popes, which within this few
years, have so arrayed and defiled that sea of pestilence and abominacio^, with
most heinous cursed prankes, that even the very papists could not pass over
their deeds in silence, ne yet by any clooking means excuse them.

About the year of our Lord. DCCCC. stephan the. 6.
there was one Stephan the. 6. of that name, which had obtained to be pope. He
persecuted the name of Formosus (which was pope but a few yea res before him)
with such vehement Note.
beadly hate, that by and by he abrogated his decrees, and made his acts of
non effect. So that the consideracion of the good turns yt Formosus hade done
for him, and made him bishop of Anagnia, could not reclayme him from his
cruel purpose. But because he hade hyndred Stephan before; that he could not
com to be pope, even wha^ he would: he was so rageing mad against him, when
he was dead, that as soon as he hade kept a counsel, he commanded Formosus
body to be drawn out of his grave, and to be stripped of his po^tifical
habit, and to be lapped in a secular habit, and so to be laid in the lay
men's burial. But yet he caused two fyngres of his right hand to be cut of
(those two namely that the pristes use to consecrate wtall) and to be cast in
to Tiberis, because (as he said) he hade (contrary to ye laws of ye sacrament)
come to Rome and taken his priesthode again, whereof he was deprived rightly by
ye law of John ye. 8. Mark.


After this man by and by followed Romanus the. 1.
pope Romanus the furst, who in that he favored Formosus parts, allowed his
cause, and disallowed and took away Stephanes decrees and acts out of hand.
His fotesteppes also followed his two successors, Theodorus the. 2. and John^
the. 10. Which immediately restored Formosus cause in to his entier perfection,
against the wills of a great part of the people of Rome: by reason whereof
there rose so great a sedicion, that they hade ben very like to have layen
together by the ears for it.

A litell after this, when Leo the. 5. Leo the. 5 Christophor.
clymbed up to the honor to be pope, anon, the. 40. day of his
pontificalitie, a familiar of his own, one Christophor (being gredy to reign
aloft) took him and cast him in prisone: which thing could not be done without
great sedicion, and loss of many me^nes lives. But Christophor invaded and
occupied the popes sea by violence. But he gate it with naughty arts, and
naughtyly he lost it. For in the. 7. month he was thrust out of his dignity,
and constrained to take upon him a monastical life, the only refuge (as platina
says) of comfortles persons: and sone after, he was drawn out of the
monastery, and cast in prison, by his successor Sergius the.iii. Sergius the.
3.


But this Sergius is he, that so repealed and disanulled Formosus acts, that
it was necessary to admit them afreshe unto holy ordres again, who^ Formosus
hade before admitted, to the order of priesthode. And yet not Note.
contenting him self with this shame done to the dead man, he drew his
carcass out of the grave, and caused him to be headed, even as if he hade ben
alive, and cast his body into Tiberis, as unworthy the honor of human
burial. Who is it, that can not see hereby (right loving brethren in Christ)
how litel authority ye bishops of Romes acts and decrees ought to bear with
any body, seeing they condemn each one other with mutual cursinges, and throw
away their dead men's carcasses, with so vehement surie and shamelesnes,
Anastasius the. 3. Laudus the. 1. John^ the.11.
as it were raue^s and grypes? After Sergius there succeeded popes Anastasius
the.iii. and Laudus the furst, which were somewhat more quiet and gentil, than
their predecessors. But John^ the eleventh succeeded them, who carried a
stomach more given to war than to religion, and at leynght in an vproare of
war, he was taken of men of war: and being cast in to prisone, he hade a
keuerchieff thrust in to his mouth, and so was killed. And again after a
certain few bishops of Rome being between, that honor came to Johan ye 13.
of that name: of whom this is reported by ye Romayne writours, that there was
never none more mishieuous, nor more ungracious a man, occupied the sea of Rome
before him. And in deed the end of him was answerably like unto his life and
manners. For after many filthyly and wickedly played pra^kes in horedome (as we
said before) he was taken and sticked to death.

When Johan was despeched, Benedicte ye. 5. was created pope, by making
Benedicte the. 5. John^ the. 14.
of a sedicion. And shortly after Johan the 14. took the seat: who being in an
vproare (by the Romans) driven out of ye city, and returnyng the eleue^th
month of his exile, used such cruelty against his foes, as hade ben mete to
have been practiced rather by the most bloodthursty tirannes, Phalaris, Dionise,
and other like them, than by the apostles of Christ.

After Johan succeeded Benedicte ye Benedicte the. 6.
6. which was taken of Cinthius a citeze of Rome, and shut up in to Adrianes
pile, and shortly after he was strangled in the same place. Whom albeit Platina
would feign excuse with worthy reasones, yet being offeded with those bishops most
mischievous manners, he is enforced to say: Vereor ne talia fuerint Benedicti
merita, quale praemium a Cinthio consequutus est. That is to say: I am afraid
least Benedictes desartes were such, as the reward was, that he received of
Cinthius. Than next after Donus the second, Boniface the. 7. whose surname
Bonisace the. 7.
and country (by reason of his basse astate) is uncertain, obtained to be
pope, through noughtie sciences. And by ye power of ye magistrates, and ye
setting on of good citezenes, he was compelled to flee ye city, and stealing
away al ye preciousest Iewelles out of saint Petres church, he fled to
Consta^tinopole, and tarried there so long, till he hade sold the wares, yt he
had taken away by sacrilege, and so hade gote^ together a great deal of money,
which he used as an help to practice his tyra^nie, and came again to the city,
going about to corrupt ye citezenes of Rome with rewards. But ye good men
wtstode his purposes, and specially Ioha^ yt diacon Cardinal, whom wha^ ye B.
hade taken by the help of a sort of myschieuous fellows, he thrust out his
eyes out of hand. Howbeit yt author of so great myschiefes (ye sedicion
encreaceing more and more) without fear, and (as Platina having always a better
hope of those holy fathers, says) without repentance of the deed that he
hade done, died miserably and filthyly.

Johan ye 15. of ye name, in the third month of his popeheadde, was taken
John^ the. 15.
by the Romans, because of his tira^nye using: and being shut up in
Adrtanes pile, as in ye common ward, was pyned there so long, with ye stynke of
ye prison, with hungre and grief of mind, till he shamefully fynished his life.

After him succeeded John ye 16. who was in wonderful hot hatred against John^
the. 16. The charity. of the Pope and clergy.
ye clergy, whereupon he was justly hated of ye clergy again. But specially,
because he gave out al (both divine and humane) treasures to his kinsfolks
and alliance: and so (God wotteth) he set aparte ye honor of God, and yt
dignity of yt sea of Rome, leaving an example of this right naughty usage to
his successors, which the bishops with most dilligent endeavor, follow the
like even at this present day.

Now therefore let every hearty man judge (right loving brethren in Christ)
whether all good men have not justly co^playned of ye bishop of Romes
tyranny and wickedness: seeing that sea has hatched up so many knaves,
tyrannes, thieves, robbers, murtherours, sedicion sowers, and open church
robbers, as we have rehearsed, and all within these lxxxv. years. And I pray
you who would honor it as an holy see, inasmuche as it could abide so many
pestilent myschiefes? And for all these, their regestres were never full enough
of such mischeuous villanes popes, as these were. For scarcely a dousin years
after yt, John John^, the. 18.
ye 18. of yt name stearte up, who (pope Gregory ye 5. being yet a live)
occupied ye papacy, by means of division and rewards. And for that cause,
Platina calls him a thief and a robber: and in the. 10. month of his
usurped popeship, he made a shameful end of his life.

His successor was Siluester the second, who (as we said a litel before) was
promoted to be pope by the deuilles diligent pain taking. Anon after this
followed Benedicte the. 9. Benedicte the. 9. Siluester the. 3. Gregory the. 6.
Siluester the. 3. and Gregory the. 6. three most vggly monstres, which like as
they sought gredily to have yt see by rewards, eue^ so playeng wickedly among
them selves, they were not afraid to sell this honor and dignity, and to
redeem it again one of another for money. Whereupon sense they were notoriously
bruted to be wicked users of Symonie, they did great injuries, and there withal
great shames, unto the sea of Rome.

After these succeeded Clement the second, whom Damasus poisoned, Clement the.
2. Damasus.
and took the popes rowme upon him self, with shame enough. And these six most
naughty villane knaves (as we read) were all bishops of Rome, within 46.
years space. But what need is it to recke^ the^ up, which without all doubt
have either unlawfully occupied this see, or else more wickedly have ordered
it, and all but a few years a goo: inasmuche as three bishops of this see of
Rome, are yet fresh in memory, which by the authority of the cou^sail of
Constaunce, were depryued of their dignity, for their most ungracious
desartes? Let them be marked also, if it so please you, that within our fathers
remembrance and ours, have be^ bishops of Rome, and we have seen, that by
their devises and crafty conueyaunces, they have passed over the top of the
Alps, and com through even to our country of Heluetia: as Sixtus Sixtus the
4. Alexander the. 6. Julius the 2. Leo the 10. Clement the. 7.
the. 4. Alexander the. 6. with his son duke Valentine the monstre of all
mischief, ungraciousness, and vice: Also Julius the second, a man that
delited much in blood sheading and burning: Leo the tenthe, Clement the 7. of
whose false crafty arts and traitorous deceates, Florentia (an unfortunate
city to hatche up so unthankful a babe) was a feling witness. And who will
not say, that these merchants were not only like unto the other before, but
many ways much worse? For let them com furthe, as many as ever have dwelt in
the city of Rome in their times, and have marked well their life and manners, or
have been knowing of their counsels: and I know they will confess (if they
will confess the truth) that they were notable naughty packes, not in common
trifling vices alone, but also in all manner of most ungracious and notorious
wickedness that could be.

Finally mark ye most holy father Paul the third, that late was. And Paul
the 3.
let his children and childres children be marked also. And we shall find in
them no less myschieuous, cruel and abominable parts. But this must needs be
confessed, that if Rome should see two or three popes of his like condiciones,
that would (as he is used to do) bestow the goods of the church, cities,
towns, castles, villages, and lands upon their children, nephues, alliance
and kinsfolks, there should not of S. Petres most ample and most rich
patrimony, scarce so much as a cotage return to their successors. Wherefore
seeing these great and most notorious wickednesses (wherewith they defile them
selves) are most notably known even to ye common people, we need not to be
oner long, in speakig of their daily used naughtynesse. For inasmuche as
(though they are ye most shameless of al men) yet they can not (by any mouth)
say nay to this gayre, what need we to talk of their intemperau^ce,
ruffionyng, gl^^^nie, horekeping, and of their most wa^ton saye^ges and
doings? And if you lust, let the^ be witnesses, yt be ye louingest fauourours
of ye see of Rome. which have been not the seers of this gayre only, but also a
great part the^ selves: And yet they shall never be hable, either to clooke,
or to excuse this stynking synke of mischieues, and this horrible hell of
wicked doings, by any reasones that ever they can make.

Therefore this furst title that Paul gives them, is expounded (or else I am
begyled) plainly enough, and largely enough again: and thereof also it is most
manifest, that the same title agrees with no man in the world, better than with
the bishop of Rome: forsomuche as out of his doctrine and example of living,
all these abominacions (which we have made rehearsal of) flow, as out of a
most plenteously springing fountain: all which are contrarily repugnaunt
against the verity of faith, against the law of charity, and against the
innocence of life.

The second title that the Apostle Paul decketh Antichrist wythall, is, The
son of perdicion
that he names him The son of perdicion. But this title we must needs take
two manner of ways: that is to say, both actiuely and passiuely: so as furst
he is in deed lost and damned him self, than he also loses and destroys al
those that be his accomplices and folowers, and makes them bond slaves to
everlasting death and damnacion. But after what sort this title also is aptely
fit for ye bishop of Rome, it may be declared in few words. For furst it
is manifest by the authority of the gospelles doctrine, that all they are lost
and subject to eternal damnacion, that another believe in Jesus Christ, nor
cleave to his faith and doctrine. For Christ is the way, the light, and the
truth. And he is the only Io. 14 and 10.
door by the which al we must enter in to his sheep fold: that is to wete,
into the congregation of saints: and who so ever seeks any other door, or
coueteth to enter in any other way, he bewrays him self to be a thief and a
robber. And thereupon we hear John^ Baptist say: The father loves the son,
and has given him all things Io. 3.
into his hand. He that believes his son, has everlasting life: and he that
believes not the son, shall not se life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Now it is not possible, that there should be any salvation, where it is sure,
that the wrath of God abides. But for as much as the bishop of Rome believes
not in the son of God, nor has not al his faith and trust set in Christ
alone, ye only saueour of the world: it must needs be, that ye wrath of God
abides upon him, and that he is the lost and bond slave of da^nacio^. And the
bishop of Romes hole life and doctrine argues, that he is most far of from
the faith in Jesus Christ, which being made man for our sakes, redeemed us all
with his precious blood, upon the altar of the cross, brake the power and
lordship of death through his death, and by his glorious ascension in to
heaven, set open the gates of everlasting blessedness unto us wretched
sinners, and now before God the father of heaven, he appears our only patron
and mediator, and makes sure entrance for us, unto the throne of grace. For
if aman note the B. of Romes doctrine (Obiter) but even lightly by the way (as
you would say he teaches not Christ to be the only way of salvation, but
besides him he sets out innumerable other ways: as, so often repeted
sacrifices of masses, the hipocriticall exercice of false penance: auricular
confession (the most sit bayte of all treason, conspiracy, sedicion, lechery
and all wickedness) markettes of pardones, the cold scalding fire of
purgatory pikepurce, prayeng to saints departed, and infinite other. For
although he confess Christ Jesus the saueour of the hole world, in words and
in mouth, and so glories in his name, yet he denies him, so often as he
attributes to an other (whether it be saint, or work and merit) the offices,
that perteyne to none but Christ alone. For by what reason shall we say, that
he believes, that our Lord Jesus Christ being sacrificed once for all, upon
the altar of the cross, offered a perpetual sufficient sacrifice unto God the
father for our sins, when he goes about to offer him daily afreshe, at the
celebracion of the Mass? How shall he believe, that he was delivered and fully
redeemed from the filthynesse of his sins by Christ's merit, which goes
about to redeem him self, with his own merits of his own works? How shall
he also know Christ Jesus, to be his only Mediator, Patron, and
intercessour, which has infinite other, whether they be he saints or she
saints, instede of mediators and intercessours? And yet it is certain, that
men are brought to yt point, by ye B. of Romes doctrine, yt they follow both
these and many other things, yt are clean co^trari to Christ, and his
doctrine. Therefore this is evidently manifest also, that ye Bis. of Rome is
most far of (matter in deed) from the faith in Christ, although he use to
profess him with his mouth, and brag much of his name. As for this matter,
the example of his life is not behind also, in bearing what faith is.
plain record of. For faith is a certain living and a continual working
power and energie, that sits not idle in men's consciences: and is not (as
many false christianes think) a certain naked and vain opinion, that is
desritute of certain reasones: but it is a good tree, and nourished with
perpetual juice, which bears no evil nor rotten fruit, but is always
abundauntly full of good and acceptable fruits to God, of innocence and
charity. But it is now proved already by sufficient demonstracion, that the
bishops of Rome have no charity, they have also no innocence of life and
manners, but they are most far of, both from the true faith, and true
religion: Whereupon this plainly follows also, that they bear in no condition
that good tree of a sincere faith in their heart, but rather that evil and
unprofitable one, at whose root the are is already set, that it may be cut
of, and overthrown, and cast in to the unquenchable fire of hell.

Therefore who will hensfurthe acknowlage the bishop of Rome, to be the head of
the saints, and faithful people? Who will call him holy father, yea rather
holiness it self? Finally who can say, that he is the leader unto salvation,
and the portour of heaven gate, when by the example of his own life, and
precepts and decrees of his wicked doctrine, he bewrays him self (according
to the apostle Paul's sentence) to be both Antichrist, and the son of
perdicio^?

Hereof also that other matter is gathered, that like as he him self is lost,
even so does he make all the disples of his religion and sect, bound slaves
to perdicion and everlasting death. For how ca^ it possibly be, that they shall
be hable to com to the heavenly hal of blessedness, which follow a guide, that
gothe (with straight and steadfast steps) the hye way to hell?

How shall we also say, it may be, that they should be united to Jesus Christ,
the only redemour of us all, which have chosen such a one to be their guide,
that is against Christ in all things, and robs him of his honor, and
shamelesly attributes the same to other? In this case therefore, it is
necessary to use most diligent circu^spection. In this behalf it stands us
in hand, strongly to sharpen our wits. Herein it behooves us to open the
eyes of our mind, most dearly beloved brethren in Christ. For it is no
flyrting matter (as many men think) to stick still in the B. of R. ways, and
so to hold hard ye popish religion to the and nail. The salvation of souls
is in hasarde, dearly beloved. For either we must be united to the heavenly
father, by the intercession and benefit of one only Christ, and so live for
ever: or else be drawn away from him, and perish with Antichrist for ever.
And there is so much ye more grievous present dau^gier henging over our souls,
that ye Lord would have ye knowlage of his word, to be opened unto us. For
inasmuche as the light of Gods word has discussed and wyped away, those
grievous and horrible darkenesses of Antichristianitie, so as the health giving
face of Christ, and also the compass of this cruel beasts mouth, and the
seat of abominacions, is showed openly before our eyes: we may never (from
hensfurthe) either pretend ignorance, to clooke our unbelief, or excuse it
with the godliness and feruencie of our zele or good intent. For God has
prescribed the rule of his word unto us, for this end: that we should honor
him according to his own commandment, and that we should not follow that
folishe carnal zele of ours, which is without knowlage of all truth. The
stubburnesse of such men is much lamentably therefore to be bewailed
(brethren) which wha^ they hear Gods word with their ears, and are
conuicte with the truth thereof in their consciences, so as they may see their
errors, and feel the intolerable burden of such exceeding tyra^nie: yet had
rather stick stiffely to their known supersticion, than to follow Christ the
only way of salvation. But wha^ men most myserably become to that poi^t, that
a man may warn and exhort them, and all but lost labor, we must permit
them to their own appetite. For they shall surely feel, that their stubbernesse
shal-be ones a great deal to their cost.

Now are we come to ye third title, An adversary.
wherwyth Paul painteth out the person of Antichrist: which conteyneth the
self same propretie, and the disposicio^ of so mighty abominablenesse, and the
certain sure mark, for the which he is called Antichrist. For he calls him
an adversary: that is, he myndeth to set him out to be-suche a one, that
should be against, contrary, and in all things (as it were) utterly set
foranempst Christ, of whose name and title he only braggeth, The right
understanding of this word Adversary.


It is plain, that he glories in the name of Christ. Whereupon even the right
understanding of this word, teaches this, that he shall be an adversary to
Christ our Lord, and gayne-saye all those things, that are set out by Christ,
either in doctrine, or in example of life, with the statutes of his doctrine,
and with the example of his life.

Than if we can give the bishop of Rome this title also, with sufficient
demonstracion, as his own propre good (as in deed we have overcome all, that
we took in hand to prove yet hitherto) it shall also manifestly appear, that
the B. of Rome, is necessarily that very right and great Antichrist, altough
the authority of all the world cry out against it: which (if it would
contrary the word of God) were non authority at all. And forasmuch as all
things yt are in Christ our saueour, may be comprehended in his life and
doctrine, as in two most general chaptres: it behooves, that we considre them
both, that it may thereby evidently appear, that the B. of Rome does
contrary to Christ, both in life and in doctrine, and therefore is his
adversary, and very Antichrist. And furst of all, we will speak of both
their lives, that is to say, of Christ and Antichrist.

Christ Jesus ordered his life so, as The difference between Christ's life and
Antichrists, the B. of Rome.
most low humility (proceeding from the heart) might appear most clearly in
all his sayenges and doings. For we read, that he used so much lowlynesse
and modesty, that he was co^uersaunt among his disciples not like a maistre,
or a Doctor, but as a servant, and a waitour. As it is proved, in that he
served their commodities, not in teaching them only, and in refreshing and
defe^ding them, and in other things innumerable, but also in that solemn last
supper, which he hade with the^, he washed al their fete. But from this
spirit of christian humility the B. of Rome is so far of, that like the
most cruel tyrannes (the mention of whom even the gentiles take for heinous and
filthy) he sets out his fete to be kissed, not of the common rascal sort
of people only, but also of very princes, kings, and emperors: yea and is not
ashamed to tread ye Lords anointed necks, under his abominable fete: which
insolent foil the right valeaunt Emperor Friderichus Barbarossa was compelled
per force to sustain.

Christ was the most studious seker of his fathers glory, and went about Ioh.
5. and. 12.
only to advance it. But the B. of Rome neclecting that, in all things,
sets his study upon his private glory, and his own propre honor, after
such sort, that he thinks, he must not spare extreme force of arms; if any
man offend him in any condition.

Christ spent ye better part or time of his life, among the companies of the
poor, nedy, sick, and afflicted: and he him self also was borne in extreme
poverty, and became poor for our sakes, in so much yt he hade not where he
might hyde his head: and sustained the grievous burden of poverty patiently,
to make us rich with the benefits and treasures of everlasting blessedness. But
the B. of Rome following far wide other contrary purposes, sets his delight
to have a do with them, that be of ye most wealthy, and the most mighty
astates. He plays, he ba^ketteth, he keeps all manner of voluptuous cheer
with the most delicate companies of the most fine me^. Besides this least his
statelynesse and rufflyng riote (yea above the ryote of Siracuse) should bring
him into poverty at any time, his custom is, either by false countrefaicte
supersticion, or else by open force and arms, to get the richesse of al
nations, into his own hands.

Christ, wha^ the people would have given him the title and crown to have Ioh.
19.
ben a King, fled away, mynding so to avoid that honor, and said with plain
purposed words, yt his kingdom was not of this world. But ye b. of R.
chale^geth to him self the title of a King, and wickedly coueteth the kingdom
that is of this world: and to that purpose he has always applied him self
with all his forcast, and with al ye powers, both of his wit and of his body,
until he became, not above kings only, but also above emperors, and made
them feign (perforce) to fall down (like an hou^de) and kiss his fete. Yea he
boasts him self, to be heir of the empire, if an emperor dye: as ye shall
find Cleme^tines the 2. book, the 11. title, and, 2. chaptre.

Christ used a more diligent study, to excute his fathers will, which he was
sent for, tha^ to promote and encreace such as were his kinsfolks (as
concerning ye flesh) with worldly wealth and honors. But ye B. of Rome study
and forcaste (for the most part) how they may endue, such as be either their
kinsfolks, or their alliau^ce, or else their bastardes, with greatest pleintie
of richesse, and to aduau^ce them to ye most high honors. And (that they may
yt more easily bring yt to pass) they use many times, to put away ye
treasures of ye church (which they call, with to much shamelessness, S. Petres
patrimony) and to bestow them upon their own friends. Which thing, like as
many other have in times past done, eue^ so is our Paul ye third not afraid
also to do ye like openly, without blushing.

Christ was co^tet to submit hi^ self, to ye authority and laws of ye
laufull magistrate, and paid (with a good will) ye revenues of ye taxes and
tributes: and being asked of others, he taught that those were due to the^.
Matthew. 17. and 22. But ye B. of Rome, thinking to provide better for him and al
his, has forged a certain immunitie for ye church, which makes al those, yt
are marked with his mark, free from al lauful and public burthe^s: and sets
the^ in such case, yt sense they owe naught to no man, they give themselves,
to do what they lust, and serve their belly, and vicious carnalitie: wherein ye
mean while, al me^ (as well magistrates as subjects) are occupied and busy, how
they may with their sweat and substance uphold and mayntene those most holy
fathers intentes. Christ led a life al together given to ye notable Matthew. 11.
study of al peace and softness, and co^me^ded ye same virtues to us also.
But the B. of Rome is fearre, swelling and rageing in malice, and desire of
reue^gemet. He passes not also, to move horrible batailes, and to set al
folks together by ye ears among the^ selves, for light tryfling causes, which
thing they have so shamelesly practiced these v. hundred years, even unto our
times, that it needs no further declaracion.

Christ led an innocent, a blameles, and Io. 8. Matthew, 26
an vnreprouerable life, so as his enemies could another find nor ymagine, any
thing worthy of death in him, for all ye lies yt the false witness made. But
ye B. of Rome being most far of from this study of innoce^cie, is ye man of
sin, drowned in sin, and given in all things, to al kind of vicious living,
as I have already declared. Christ took to be his disciples, such as were
poor, Matthew. 4. 1. Cor. 1.
vile, and of no reputacio^, and me^ of simple wit. But ye child of this
world, ye B. of Rome (mynding to seem wyser in his generacio^) choseth men out
of the most noble houses of Italy, France, Spain, and other naciones, to be
Bishops and Cardinals, to thinte^t being afterward supported by their
authority and favor, he might not need to pass upon his enemies threattes and
mighty powers. Christ sent out his disciples, to preach ye Gospel. But ye
Matthew. 10 and 28.
B. of Rome suffers none of his, to go any whidre from him, but loves to be
waited upon with their presence and rufling: or if he send out any, he bids
them not preach ye gospel, nor teach faith to win some to Christ, but with
their false wyles, frauds, lies and deceates, to begyle princes and ye people,
and to stere up hurly burlies, and civil mocions of wars. Christ was
dilligent to care for his sheep, and used ye office of a most Io. 10.
faithful shepeherde, in yt he fed the^ and taught the^ continually. But ye
B. of Rome, being given to ye wealth of richesse and delicacies, pilleth of
the shepes wolle, yea ye skynnes and ye flesh to, and as for fedi^g of the^,
he makes litel matter

Christ never enforced any man, unwillingly to cleave either to him or to Luce.
9. Matthew. 26
his doctrine, nor compelled ever any man by violence, to grant on his side,
but with fre^dely and faithful teaching, he studied to move ye hearts of me^.
But ye B. of Rome, as a right warlike emperor, yea like a young Salmoneus
rather, and as a new countrefaicte Jupiter, shakes the thondre of
excomunicacion, the thonderbolt of cursing, and externe gonneshote also, and
weapones at all men, as many as goo about to slyppe from his doctrine and
supersticion: as the horrible vproare of this present warring does most
evidently prove it.

Christ sent out such Apostles to preach the gospel, as were most readyly Act.
2.
instruct in the ample large gifts of the holy ghost, in the understanding of
tongues, and in the knowlage of the scriptures. But the B. of Rome not caring
for the provision of Christ's sheep, but mynding to gratify his own sect
folowers, commits the cure of the congregacions almost to none, but to his
Curtisanes, bawdes, cokes, hu^tors and mule dryuers, which though they be
clean void of all manner of learning both divine and profane, yet they are
connyngly skilled in abominable sciences, lecherous lusts, and corrupt filthye
manners

Christ having co^flicte with satan his enemy, won not the victory, with the
Matthew. 4.
weapones of this world, but with the sweord of ye spirit, the word of God.
But the Bishop of Rome mystrusting Christ, sets upon his enemies, with
worldly weapones, conspiracies, treasones, robberies, poysonynges, and also
with sweorde and fire.

Christ our Lord oftentimes seeing Matthew. 6. Luc. 19.
the dispersed sheep of the house of Israel, and pitieng them (even from the
botome of his heart) wept over their unlucky fortune. But the B. of Rome
takes no care, nor is moved with any loving compassion, although he hear all
the hole flock of Christ miserably scattred, through the wicked wild
wilderness of men's tradicions, seek after the pastors of Gods word, with
continual crienges, wepinges, and gronynges, and desire to have their souls
fed therwyth: so that by ye famyshing of Christ's sheep, the bishops have
to mayntene their voluptuous pleasure wythall.

Christ bare the cross, that he was Matthew. 27.
nailed on for us, and for our sins, upon his own shoulders. But the B. of
Rome is used to be borne easyly and softly, upon their shoulders, whom Christ
has redeemed with his death. Christ suffered him self to be crowned with a
crown Matthew. 27.
(...) cast buyers and sellers out of ye temple, and in his teaching he said,
yt they made the house of God (which should have been the house of prayer) a
de^ne of thefes.

But the B. of Rome catches them in both his arms, and brings the^ again
in to the temple of God, and restores the^ to their old seats, that they
occupy by force and crafty conueyaunce: yea like the chiefest of all
merchants (and as a most famous merchant venterour) he has devised new
wares, and that with so great luck, that he can sell lead, ware, perchement,
and other such kind of trifles, for a great deal more, than the Iewishe
priests could in times past sell their bulls, lambs, rams and bullockes.

Christ forbad his disciples, to bear Math. 20 Mar. 10. Luc. 22.
secular authority, and to reign like princes of this world. But it is
evident, that the B. of Romes chief and principal study, is, that under ye
false pretense of the church, he claymeth hothe to him self and to his
cardinals, all the kingdoms of the world, and the title of the same.

Christ gave us a perfect and a full perfice absolute doctrine, to instruct
Math. 28. and. 2. Tim 3.
men sufficiently in all things perteynyng to everlasting life and salvation.
But the B. of Rome, seeing that it hyndreth his markettes, says, it is
imperfect, and that all things perteynyng to the declaracion of faith, to the
affairs of religion and instruction of life, are not fully contained in it:
and for that cause, he adds unto the same (to help it with all) the canones
of the Counsels, and the tradicions of certain fathers, that serve to his
covetous purpose and appetite.

Christ expresses him self to be our Ioh. 4. Romans 8.
only righteousness, wherewith we must be clothed, that we may be hable to
appear before his heavenly father, and abide his judgment. But ye B. of Rome
shows an other far wide rightousnesse in his tradiciones, which he teaches
to consiste in our own works, and in our own powers, and in saints merits
also.

Christ teaches, that he him self is our only mediator, patron, and
intercessour, and the apostles inspired 1. Timo. 2 1. Ioh. 2.
with the spirit of Christ confess the very same. But we see, that by the B.
of Romes doctrine, a certain thousau^t of patrones and mediators, be set out
unto us: yea and new mediators may be created daily, by their canonizacions.

Christ teaches, that remission of sins is freely given, and that we be
partinars thereof, through only faith, with Esai. 55. Ioh. 6. 7. Math. 11. 28.
out any meriting mediacion of our works. But ye B. of Rome mynding to hunt
out most plenteous gain by remitting of sins, and having it to sell, teaches
us to redeem it with money.

Christ is described by the doctrine of the gospel, as the only head of the
church. But the B. of Rome chalenging Ephe. 5.
yt honor to him self, says, that he is the head of ye church. And in thus
saying, he either robs the church of her head, Christ: or else in making
himself the head, he makes ye church a double faced church, and a most vggly
mo^stre. Christ's doctrine sets out but one only Priest, yt is to wete,
Hebre. 4. 5. 9. 10.
Christ the very son of God, which being made man for our sakes, offered him
self upon the aultare of the cross, for the sins of the hole world, once
for all: and with his sacrificeing, he found eternal and sufficient remission of
sins. But the B. of To. not contented with this so excellent a priest,
chalengeth the title of the high priesthode to him self, and commonly
consecrateth new priests daily, to offer up Christ Jesus every day, for the
sins of the quick and also of the dead. Christ has prescribed a true form
of penance, and an acceptable to God, according whereunto Act. 2.
we confess our sins to God, unto whom we have offended: and from hensfurthe
we cease from sin, and amend our life, but as for remission of sins, we
seek it no where else, than at God alone. But ye B. of To. teaches a far
contrary penance from this, which bids us confess our sins to one
massemonging priest or other, and to desire forgiveness of sins at him, yea
though the same priest were drowned in hoordo^, dro^kenesse, glotonie, dyceing,
and other vices innumerable: and there with he gives such occasion to ye wicked
lyce^ciously to si^ne, yt as soon as ye massemonging priest has once received
the money (I mean the hyre of absolucio^) and wha^ yt vain and hipocritical
satisfaction (yt he enioineth) be accomplished, they may return to their
vomit, as dogs are wo^t to do, and walow the^ selves in the old puddle of
wickedness.

Christ said, it is more godly to Act. 20.
give tha^ to take. But the B. of Rome perceauing the sentence of Christ's
words, to be against his ruffling estate, and lecherous lust, turns the
meaning and order of the words ersye versye: and says it is better to take
than to give. And so in deed he confirms the ordres of beggyng frieres with
his decrees, and has set out a certain pouertye (which is such a matter, that
nothing is either more delectable or pleasant) as though it were the most
perfect rule of christian faith and conuersacio^. Hereof spring the most
shameless rablementes of begging friars and other monkishe ordres besides, which
by their impudent proud popish begging, have gone through all cities, have
strayed through all villages and ferme places, and thus being a grievous burden
to all me^, as well of the town as of the country, have scraped every way by
hook and by crook, and eaten up all feldes and towns, like most devouring
locustes: and yet led a life most filthily spotted with all riotous ruffionyng,
and lecherous losenesse.

Christ says: That that enters in Math. 15. 1. Timo. 4.
to the mouth, defiles not the man. Upon the authority of which words, the
apostle Paul taking his ground, teaches, that it is lawful for us to eat
all meats that God made, with thanks giving, without remorse or conscience of
any manner sin. But the B. of Rome has forged differences of meats, and
persuaded the simple people, that a great part of christian pureness
consists in outward eating: and has also brought in a great deal greater
rabble of ceremonies, both in these matters and many other, than the Jews were
bounden in times past to observe, living under the bondage of the law.

Christ confirmed with the authority Math. 19. Hebr. 13.
of his doctrine, the state of marriage, ordained of his heavenly father. And
the apostles being instrucce by his spirit, taught that wedlock is honorable
among al me^, and the marriage bed undefiled. Whereupon they (...) And yet he
makes more bold entr^prises: and gothe about to drive Christ our Lord out of
his church and kingdom, in that he calls him self Christ's vicare. For if
the B. of Rome be Christ's vicare, it must needs be, that Christ is not present
with his church. The false boast of the B. of Rome. to be christ's Vicare.
For he that any where occupies an office, and keeps residence presently upon
it, as apperteyneth: has no need of any vicare. But Christ Jesus, inasmuche
as he is the head of his own church, can in no wise be disseuered from his
body, which is the church, but is inseperably present with his church
spiritually, contynually to the worlds end. Therefore the B. of Rome is not
moved by any warrau^t of the truth (but of a wicked lust to blaspheme) to
boast him self to be Christ's vicare.

Hitherto therefore I suppose it be sufficiently enough declared, that the B. of
Rome deserves this third title, wherewith Paul painteth him out, after such
sort, that he may (by all means) be called An adversary, that is to say,
contrary and against Christ in all things, inasmucheas all his conuersacio^
and his doctrine are clean contraryly repugnaunt against the doctrine and
conversation of Christ.

Now remains the fourth title, wherewith Paul decketh Antichrist, Exalted
above God.
whom he does not comprehend in one only word, but describes it in moo. For
he says, he shall be stately and proud, and exalte him self (with notable
arrogauncie) above all, that is either called, or worshipped, by the name of
God. Yea his folly shall proceed so far (says he) that he shall place his
seat, in the Temple of God as God, and show him self, as though he were a God.

To these words of Paul, the desirous man Daniel consents, who speaking of
Antichrists mysteries, says, that the litel horn (by who^ Antichrist is
figured) hade a mouth, wherewith he spoke certain presumptuous things: that is
to say, in talking of divine matters: of chaungeing of laws and times, and of
other matters infinite which (it is plain) are in the power of none but God
alone. And again in the. 11. chap. Dauiel (speaking of the same) says thus:
And the king shall do what he lusts, and exalte and enlarge him self, above
all Gods, and shall speak marvelous things against the most high God. And a
litel after. He shall not also care for the Gods of his forefathers, no, he
shall care for no God at all: for he shall prefer him felf above all.

Now if we compare all these things, which are spoken by the apostle Paul,
and Daniel the prophet together: the understanding of this fourth title (which
is attributed unto Antichrist) shall appear manifest unto us. For this is the
will of the spirit to say: that Antichrist shall be a man of most high
arrogauncie, and swelling folishe insolency, which (with proud bold
enterprise) shall take upon him self those offices, which are mete to be
attributed to none, but to God alone: and are to be applied to none but only
God. This is not meant by Paul's words, and the literal sense of the same:
Noman at all can make him self a God: nor also, there is none other God, but
that one only eternal God, al though any man (having authority to persuade,
joined with arrogauncie) come to so high a pride and statelynesse, as to be
honored and worshipped, of a sort of leude persons and fools, as we read,
that Caligula and Domicianus were. We must therefore mark well the B. of Romes
matters, whether we can be hable to find any such, as take upon them selves
this most arrogaunt title also: to the intent the hole perfect descripcion of
Antichrists person may be evidently manifest unto us. And that there are such
in The B. of R. takes upon him the honor of God head. what God is.
deed, it shall appear of their own sayenges and writings.

And furst of al, God is naturally he, yt is ye essence and life of al things,
of who^ also al things have received and have life, and to be yt they are. And
thereof it is, yt our Lord Jesus Christ ye son of God ye father, and of ye
virgin Mary, very God and man, is commonly called in ye scriptures, the head
of his church: because they yt are endued with faith in him, obtain life of
him, not temporal life only, but the life also yt never shall end. For like as
out of a man's head (as it were out of ye pype of a fou^tayne) the nourishemet
of life flows down in to the hole body and all the me^bres, and from thence
is distrubuted, as it is needful to every membre: even so out of Jesus Christ,
all the me^bres of his body, that is to say, all faithful people receive the
spirit of life, and that streinght of faith, by whose mocion and instincte,
they order their life, according to the heavenly fathers will, and when they
are departed this temporal life, they live with him everlastingly. This is the
plain undoubted office of the head: and Christ (the head of his church)
perfourmeth the same abundauntly. Than if we mark well ye B. of Rome (whom we
call Antichrist) it shall appear more clear than the day light, yt this
arrogau^cie is in him, by yt which be openly boasts him self, to be the head
of all the hole church. And if he (as he is a most insole^t man) glory of the
title of the head, surely he says, that the body of the church and every of
the me^bres, receive ye spirits of life, and very life it self of him: and
this he can not say; except he claim Gods offices to him self, and so show
him self proudly in name, as though he were God. In this matter we pass not
greatly upon ye papists obiectiones, that think they can avoid ye note of so
great an infamy, with this one refuge, in ye they say, we expound to subtillie
the B. of Romes title, whereby he braggeth him self to be ye head of the
church, and yt we suck out thereof over much matter to argue upon. For the B.
of To. (say they) teaches not, that he is the head of the church, to that
end, as though he would take upon him (over much insole^tly) either ye
spirit of life, or life it self, but that he might (like the most high
shepehearde of ye christian flock) bear witness of his authority over
Christ's sheep.

O vain defense, and eue^like ye fig tree. For like as Christ's church
has no need of this Romish head, even so does it not know him, to be his
shepehearde: inasmuche as Christ Jesus (which is the head of ye church) is also
the best shepehearde of his flock. Ephe. 5. Io. 10.

But let us look a littel nerer upon your wares, O you right valeau^t
defendours of the popes dignity. For how shall this stand together, if you
will affirm the B. of Rome, to be the head of Christ's church, and yet will
not say, that he either conteyneth wtin him self, ye spirits of life, and
very life it self, ^e yet that he distributeth them in to the body of the
church, and the members thereof? Shall not the head than be a dead head, if it
want the spirit and power of life? And what shall we than say of his church, o
you good gentilmen? Woo is unto that feeble and weak body: woe unto those
members (halte and out of joint) whose head lacks life and spirit. For how
shall we say, that church is alive and lustye, whose head you your selves
confess, wants spirit of life, to be distributed in to the rest of the
me^bres? Will you not now reknowlage your errors, you very folishe dotypolles?
Do you not now understand (you folyshe sophisters, blynder than any molle) to
what purpose these your wares te^de, when ye say, that the B. of Rome is the
head of ye hole universal church? For in thus saying, you either make him a
God, and so by this means you set him furthe to be Antichrist, or if you feign
him to be a certain head, out of whom no spirit of life stilleth down in to
the other members, you knowlage your selves to be a church feeble and sickly,
that has no whitte of the spirit of life in it at all. And if you have not
the spirit of life, truly you shall not be the church of Christ. For the
church of Christ has in possession, both the spirit of Christ and life in
him. But the B. of To. will never acknowlage him self, to be a dead head: and
therefore as long as he (like a right folishe insolent man) is proud of that
title, he sits in the temple of God, and boasts him self to be God. Now
there follows an other matter, wherein the B. of Rome boasts him self (no less
than in the other before) to be God: and exalts him self above the only and
true God. For he rejoices to be called holy father, and yet not contented with
this to much arrogau^t title, he takes upon him also to be called holiness.
In this case we will be reported to as many as be the most devout reuere^cers of
yt sea: who wha^ they talk of him, name ye popes holiness with a wonderful
advised gravity, thinki^g it another good manner, nor godly done, if they call
him but plain pope. But and if he be holiness (as they call him, and as he
will be called) it behooves of necessite, that he may sanctify or make other
holy, yea as many as are and be called holy, shall be sanctified or made holy of
him. But we be taught a far contrary judgment (from the^) out of the holy
scriptures, O brethren. For the scriptures teach, that the one only God is
proprely (by him self and of him self) holy, and very holiness it self: and
also that as many as are called holy for faithes sake, are not sanctified, that
is, are not pourged from the filthynesse of sins, and consecrated unto God,
of them selves, nor of their own power, but of Christ Jesus, by the holy
ghost. And in this matter, there may many things be brought out of the books of
the holy scripture, which most evidently report the same. For in deed Christ
(as Johan makes mention) co^monyng Io. 3.
with Nicodemus concerning the mystery of regeneracion (whereby we must needs
be borne a new, and sanctified) says, that we must necessarily be borne of
water and the spirit. And that there is nothing else understood thereby, but
the grace of God, and the operacion of the holy ghost, it is more evidently
known, than needs long demo^stration. Of this same sentence and argument, be
the sayenges yt S. Paul (in his furst Epistle to the Corinthianes) writes in
these words: You are washed, you are sanctified, you are justified by the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

What can be spoken more briefly, tha^ these words are? What thing also can be
spoken more openly and plainly, concerning our sanctificacio^? For he takes
quyte away all manner reason of sanctificacion, that can be ymagined of me^, to
co^ by any other means else: and teaches that we are washed, justified, and
sanctified of non other, but of our Lord and saueour Jesus Christ alone, and
that by the holy spirit of our God, which also is very God him self. And
hereof it comes, yt the holy ghost is often times (in the scriptures) compared
to water, because in deed, like as water washes away the filthiness of the
body, even so does the holy ghost scowre and cleanse the soul. For the same
cause sake, the holy ghost is compared also unto fire, because he enlumineth
not only our consciences with his power, but also co^sumeth what soever earthly,
carnal, or other thing is in us, disposed to sin.

And as this is the power of none but of the holy ghost alone, so is there none
other sa^ctificatour me^cioned, unto us in any place of ye hole scripture, but
he alone, which is also very God him self, and of one self same substance
and power, with God the father and the son.

In as much than, as ye B. of Rome (being a man most impure, and the very slave
of al lecherous lusts, and wickedness) takes upon him ye name of Holiness,
he does also therwt take upon him, and usurp the power and operation of the
holy ghost, by the same arrogauncie: and so shows him self to be God, as
Paul says.

This also belongs to the same title, that he takes upon him the grace, to
bless and give benediction it self, with no less shameless folly, than the
other before, and sets it out galau^tly, in all his lettres, wha^ he uses
(with great gravity) to wish unto his well beloved children, Health, and
benedictio^. But the authority of ye holy scriptures makes report of non
other blessing Genesis 3. 2^ Gala. 3.
of health, but of that one only blessing, which is set out, both unto the^
of old time, and unto us in the promised sede, Jesus Christ. And therefore where
the B. of Rome prowdely aduau^ceth his blessi^g, he takes upon him the glory
of Christ Jesus also in this case, and so with ye statelynesse of his intolerable
shameless folly, he exalts him self against the very true and only God.

To this title there makes an other matter also, yt is to say, forgeuing of
sins, which is so evidently proved in all ye hole scriptures, to be ye work
of non other, but of ye only grace and mercy of God, yt ye very scribes and
priests of ye Jews (as blind and as stubburne as they were) were not
ignorant of it. And yet, ye B. of Rome ascribes yt matter (that is to say,
forgiveness of sins) after such sort to him self, yt he wickedly
peruerteth many places of the scripture, and exerciceth the greatest part of
his tyra^nye under pretese of it. For hereof sprung the hard holding
disputacion of the Keys, of power to bind and lose, of ye feding of Christ's
sheep, and of other matters in numerable. Hereof proceeded auricular confession,
priestishe mumming absolucio^, practiceing of countrefait penance, the sheoppe
of cases reserved, the markettes of pardons, and infinite other mo things,
ymagined to torment men's confiences with all. All which things (if we look
more narowly upon them) do attribute to the B. of Rome, and to his massing
sacrificers (which are men drowned in the synke of all naughtynesse) and to his
cloistred monks, chanones, friars, bishops and cardinailes, what so ever are
the offices of none other, but of the only grace and power of God, and of the
merit of Christ. Wherefore in this point, he also makes him self God, and is
exalted above the only and true God.

Nevertheless I am not all ignorant, what answer as well the bishops of R. them
selfs, as they that stowtely mayntene their parts, will obiecte in this
behalf. For the B. of Rome (say they) takes not these matters, and other such
like upon him self, as though it were in his own power to do them of him
self: but he exerciceth the power in yt church, which he received, and was
delivered him of God: that is to say, the power of God, working by him
toward sinners. For the Lord him self wypeth away all this excuse, which
with his own word spoke to the purpose, by Esaye the prophet, the. 42. chap.
says thus: I am the Lord, this is my name, and I will not give my glory to
any other, nor my praise to graven images

And what other glory is it, that the Lord receaueth of us, but yt those what
glory God receaueth of us.
which be faithful folks, acknowlage him to be their saueour, redemour,
iustifiour, sanctifiour, and the only autour of their salvation? These
things, in as much as he gives to none other, and specially to graven images,
whom he excedingly abhors: truly he will not also give them to the B. of
Rome, nor yet has he granted them to any other, which by making and
worshipping of Images, are become like unto them. There is no cause therefore,
why ye B. of Rome should say, he received those things of God, which he of
his own temerarious and church robbing sawcye entreprise has taken upon him
self.

To be brief, if we will set all this aparte, and look upon their own Canones
and decrees, than we shall at leynght hear those wonderful and presumptuous
things, which Antichrist (according to Danieles prophecy) is accustomed to
bring out against ye Lord. For they are not content to have claymed to the B.
of Rome, the dominion of all the church, and of the hole compass of
christendom, but they also write, that he has such power and authority,
either to command or inhibite, what he will at his pleasure, that all men are
bounden necessarily to obey him, yea even in those matters, which are scarcely
tolerable, that he commands. Besides this, they proceed further on, and
say, that non other man has any authority at all, to judge of him: and so
attribute such authority unto him, yt they say, he ought to be judged of no
mortal man, in what deed so ever he does. But now let us hear ye beast him
self speak. Pope Agatho in his 19. did. Pope agatho.
writes to all bishops on this sort: All the decrees of the sea apostolic,
are so to be accepted, as though they were confirmed by the divine word of
Petre him self.

Again Boniface theight, in his Extrauagauntes. Com. Li. 1. Tit. De Maioritate
and Boniface the. 8.
obedientia comprehends the hole mystery of this beast in such wise, that
if there were non but that one only place, it were hable to prove him, to be the
same, that we say he is. For furst after he has proved, that there is but one
church, he claymeth the supremacy and dominion of it to him self, with a very
goodly kind of argument.

This (quod he) is the seameles coat which was not cut in pieces, but came by
casting of lottes.

And these words Boniface speaks truly, as the matter is in deed. For if
Christ's coat (the church) came to ye bishops of Rome by casti^g of lottes,
than truly they are not successors of the apostle Petre, but of the most
wicked hangmen, that cast lottes for our Lords coat under the cross, when he
him self looked upon the^. Thus ye barlot bewrays him self, in his own tale
telli^g. But let us tell on: Therefore there is but one body of one only church,
and one head (not two heads, like a monstre) that is to wete, Christ and his
vicare Petre, and Petres successor.

What an open contradiction is in these words? He says, there is but one head
of the church, least he should make the church a monstre. And yet in thus
saying, he sets two heads upon it, far unlike the one to the other: that
is to say, Christ very true God and man, and Petre a mortal man and a sinner,
which acknowlageth him self, to be delivered, not by his own righteousness,
but by the merit of Christ. And yet for all yt, they thrust them self
shamelesly in withal.

Tha^ what shifte shall the most holy fathers make in this case? Will they say,
that Christ and Petre are both but one, and the self same one? That they can
not be hable to do in any wise. But they say not, yt Petre is the very head
self, but the vicare of Christ, the very true head. And tha^ they make them
selves successors to Petre. Now good me^, at what time does Christ the head
depart from his body, to give place of vicarship unto Petre? Wha^ also does
the office and glory of the head return unto you, if Christ and Petre be
both absent. Verily you seem to make the church like unto those images, which
have two heads, the one for work days, and the other (being a more galaunt
head) they commonly wear at no time, but upon their own holydaies.

But least the father of this mo^stre Boniface, might lightly have been laughed
to scorn, he would ground him self upon the authority of scriptures. For he
says, that these words ought thus to be believed, yt our Lord speaks to
Petre: Feed my sheep, Mine (quod he) and that generally and not singularly
these or those sheep: by the which it is understood, that he committed all
unto him universally. Therefore whether they be greeks or others, ye say, they
were not committed unto Petre and his successors, they must confess of
necessite, that they are none of Christ's sheep: Where as the Lord says in
Johan, that there is but one shepefolde, and one shepehearde.

Who is he, yt would not be astonished at this gaire, brethren? who is he, that
would not abhor ye force of this argument? Christ said to Petre, Feed my
sheep. Ergo ye B. of of Rome is ye head of the church. A ioyly conclusion. But
how shall it be proved, yt to feed Christ's sheep, and to be ye head of the
church, signifies al one thing? Did Paul, wha^ he spoke to yt ministering
elders of the Ephesians, and called the^ bishops, put in authority over the
Lords flock, make as many heads of the church, as were elders there? Or what
shall we say, to yt which was enjoined to the other disciples, when the Lord
said: Go into the hole universal world, and preach the gospel to al
creatures? And yet that shall you confute to, in case you prove the gospel, to
be another yt food of the soul, nor ye pleasant pastures, for co^scie^ces to
feed on. But admit we grant you this: what a do has Christ with Belial, with
Simon Magus, or with the B. of R? But they must needs be shameless ha^dlers of ye
scriptures, yt in humane things, are void of al shame.

Well, in ye same Canone, Boniface gothe on, and claymeth also the secular power
of ye emperor to him self, least in disputing of divine power, he lose yt
other. And at leynght he comes to the full purposed end of his disputacion,
and concludes after this sort. Therefore who so ever resists this power thus
ordained of God, resists gods ordinance, except he feyne two beginni^ges,
as Manicheus did: which we judge to be false and heretical. For as Moses
records, God made heaven and earth not in the beginninges, but in the
beginning. And finally we declare, say, define and pronounce, to be of plain
necessity of salvation, yt al human creatures be subject to the B. of R.
Do you now make us a new article of faith and salvation, Boniface? But the
Lord says, those sheep are saved, that follow him their shepehearde, yt
know his voice, and that seek to enter into ye shepefolde by him.

But these matters make but a very litel to thestablishme^t of ye B. of R.
tyra^nie and lustye ruffling. Therefore say they, the B. of R. must be obeyed of
necessity. Do we not know now those presumptuous and wonderful things, yt
Daniel told of before, that Antichrist should speak?

But let us pass over to other matters, so as ye more plainly we se this gaire,
the more lightly we may dephie the^. For the 9. Quest. 3. Pope Gelasius writes
to the bishops throughout Dardania, Gelasius,
on this wise: Al ye church throughout the hole world knows, yt the seat of
S. Petre ye apostle has power to lose, what so ever is bounde^ by ye
sentences of any bishops, who so ever they be: because (you must understand)
it has power to judge of all churches. And again. All the church throughout ye
hole world knows, yt ye holy sacred church of Rome has authority to have
ye judgment over al me^, and yt no man may laufully judge of her judgment.
For unto it must al ye parts of yt world appeal, but from it no man is
permitted to appeal.

Hereunto is applied the saying that is written. Cap. Quanto de. Translat.
Episc. tit. 7. the pope is reported to be ye arbitre of heavenly things, and
therefore he changes the nature of things, in applieng the substaunces of one
thing to an other. And he of nothing can make something, and can make a sentence
of nothing, to be somewhat. For in those things that he will, his will stands
instead of reason. And yet there is none, that may say to him, why do thou
so? For he may dispense above the law, and make right of unright, in
correcting and chaungeing of laws. For he has the fullness of power in his
own hands.

Lo, these be those presumptuous and wonderful words of Antichrist, dearly
beloved brethren in Christ: by the which he gothe about to seem, not only to
be like God, but also to be greater and of more excellency than God. For he
says not only, that he can make something of nothing (which is the office of
non, but of the only power and virtue of God) but also (according to Daniels
prophecy) he teaches that all rightes and laws are under his arbitrament: so
much that even in them he may dispense, as it pleases him self, and make
wrong to be right, yea and that unright shall be taken for right, if he so give
sentence. And least any saucy boldness should be wanting in him, he
usurps the old propretie of tyrannes. Sic volo, Sic iubeo, Sit pro ratione
voluntas. This I will, thus I command, let will stand for reason. For in
those things (quod he) that he will, he has will instead of reason. And there
is none, that may demand of him a reason and causes of his doings.

O slanderous infamye, o inexcusable shame of a christian man's name, Whereto
do we any more laughe the Jews dreams to scorn? or deteste the blasphemies
of Mahomete, seeing greater matters and of more cruelty are spoken, and (not
without fear) heard of among christian men, and that without correction as yet
hitherto? Let us be ashamed of our neclege^t naughtiness. Let us be weary of
so great heartlesnesse, Let us also repent our wicked sufferau^ce in hearing so
abominable blasphemies. O foles, that se not this gaire: O wicked ones, that
wha^ they see them, yet can hear the^, and bear with them. For albeit they be
cruel and abominable matters, that we have talked of, yet there follow more
abominable, more blasphemous, and more heinous matters, that they are not
afraid to speak of. For in the. 40. Distinction, Chap. Si Papa. We read that
it is thus written.

Though the pope neclecte both his Note.
own salvation, and his brethrens, and be found to be unprofitable and slack
in his doings: Yea and moreover though he speak never a wit of goodness at
all (which is more hurteful to him self and all men) and lead innumerable
people by heaps, with himself to ye chief devil of hell, there with him to be
whipped with many strypes for ever, yet may no mortal man in this case rebuke
his faults, for he shall judge al, and be iuged of none him self, except he be
depre hended out of the way, from the faith.

Hark (brethren) the presumptuous and horrible words of Antichrist, yea
hear them not, but rather spitte them out of your ears, and out of your
hearts, yt you be not polluted with them. For what christian man can away with ye
hearing of the^? Who is it, yt can patiently abide the^? We see (brethren) ye
readynesse of God toward us, we see ye softness and hearty purpose of
Gods righteousness toward us to be such, yt he disdayneth not to declare
unto us wretched persons (which shall live here but a short space) a plain
reckonyng (almost) of all his judgments. But this man of sin, ye son of
perdicio^, and ye brothel of al fleshely filthiness, and of all wickedness,
wha^ he is waited upon, with his train of daunceing lecherous ruffianes, and
buggerours, will be under the judgment of no man, nor render account of his
office using unto no manner man in the world, although he bring infinite souls
of men, (that were redeemed with ye precious blood of Christ) and bind
innumerable people prentices, with the common enemy of mankind the Devil,
unto the slaughterhouse of everlasting damnacion. And even this man it is, that
takes upon him, to be the head of the church, and the only and most high
shephearde of Christ's shepefolde.

Is it than the propretie of an head, to rage against his own members, and to
cast them upon sweorde and fire, to be destroyed? Is it the propretie of a
shephearde, to run mad upon his flock, worse than a wolf would? If the B.
of Rome hurt the body of such as be his, if he rashly hurt ye name of them yt
be his, if he take away their goods for filthy lucres sake, the apostolic
Canones despeche him quyte out of his office: And shall all the hole church
than suffer him rageingly to run upon me^nes souls, to destroy them,
without correction? But to the intent they might mitigate ye outrage of their
blasphemy, by some manner of clooked pretense, they devised to add this to:
Except he be deprehe^ded out of the way from the faith.

Forsothe a goodly addicion, O you block headed Canonistes. Will you than
say, that these be the works of faith, for the Pope to make innumerable
people bond men, to the everlasting fire of hell? Or shall we say, that he
has faith, which makes them subjects to the torments of hell, whom Christ
(the son of God) has by his death and bloodshead, delivered free from hell?

But this conclusion of this Canon was not added, without the prouide^te of
God. For by this means it is evident, that the B. of Romes faith is not a
lively and a health giving faith, whereunto iustificacion and salvation is
commonly attributed in the scriptures, but a certain other faith, far
contrary from it. Which, like as it is in their power, to withdraw men's
souls from salvation, and make them bond slaves unto perdicion, so it pulls
all them, that obey his laws, away from Christ, the only redemour of the
world, and depryueth (...) and danined, so has he bound all other that obey
his voice, unto damnacion: He is also that great and notable Adversary, Which
is contrary to Christ in all things, and repugneth clean contrary against his
life and doctrine, and is a tyranne most insolent, most arrogaunt, and most
disdayneful, exalted in his blasphemous heart, not only above miserable and
mortal me^, but also above the almighty and immortal God.

Let them therefore have him in admiracion, honor him, reverence him, follow
him, who so ever hade rather perish, than to be saved. But let us (dear
brethren in Christ) render thanks continually to god the father, and his son
Jesus Christ, our supreme king and only bishop, which has vouchedsafe to
reveal unto us the filthe of so exceeding abominacion, and to deliver us from
his tyranny, and to set us free by the aid of his word.

Let us also pray, that he would bring other in to the knowlage of his truth,
and to uphold us with such constauncie of faith, that we may be hable to
continue still in the known truth, and to serve him constauntly in the middle
of the storms and floodes of tentacion, and to cleave unto him inseperably
without shrynking: that we be not everlastingly lost with Antichrist the son of
perdicion, but that we may be made partakers of the salvation and kingdom,
which was prepared before the making of world, by our lord Jesus Christ, our
only redemour and saueour. To him be glory, praise, and thanks giving for
ever world without end. Amen.

Thus ends the third Homily.
The.iiij. Homily.
In this.iiij. Homily are described the works and weapones of Antichrist, and
whom he shall have power to fall upon, and destroy with his works and weapones.

LIke as it is not only profitable and wholesome for all manner of men, but also
necessary to the atteynyng of salvation, to have the true, certain and sure
grounded knowlage of our Lord and saueour Jesus Christ, that they may cleave
hard unto him with a fast and a constaunt says, and through him to obtain
eternal salvation and life everlasting: so is it no less profitable and
necessary, that in these later days, we know them also, which set out
themselves falsely, as though they were Jesus Christ, that is to say, as
though they were saueours and redemours. In whose nombre specially (above
other) that great and notable Adversary of our Lord Christ, and of all
faithful, that is to wete, the very right Antichrist is to be known, that we
may avoid his wiles, subtle crafts, frauds, and most pernicious devises:
and escape the da^nacion, that he purueyeth and purchaceth, for those that his
be.

Moreover, where as there are (by the spirit of Satan) many falsely feyned
fables of Antichrist, by reason of the which, it is so far of from us to com
in to the knowlage of him, that we shall rather be blinded, seduced, and
deceived: it is necessary for us to respect the vnfailing truth of the holy
scripture: to the intent, that being led by the doctrine of it, we may learn
to know him in deed. And for yt cause, I have lately brought furthe of the
scripture, two most manifest plain places, for the declaracion of this matter:
wherein there are already three specialties declared, which paynt out the
disposicion and propreties of Antichrist, and show what a manner a one he is,
as it were, poyntyng 4. Antichrists works.
him with a man's fyngre. Therefore it co^seque^tly follows, that we step
over now to the fourth specialtie or principal matter, wherein are declared his
most special chief works, whereunto he is given, and by the which he vttreth
him self openly. And albeit these self same matters are comprehended of the
apostle Paul, and ye desirous man Daniel ye prophet, in those places, which I
rehearsed before, yet for as much as they are over short there, in plain
openyng of them, we must here mark the. 11. chap. of Daniel, wherein many
things right worthy to be known, concerning the mystery of Antichrist, but
specially concerning his works are in this manner written

He shall bring in men, to forsake the covenant wickedly, yt they may work by
craftye wiles through hypocrisy: but the people that will know their God,
shall have the vpperhande, and prospere. But the king shall do what he
lusts, he shall exalte and amplify him self against all that is God: yea he
shall speak marvelous things against the most high God, and he shall have
prosperous fortune, so long till the wrath be fully consu^mate, wha^
wickedness shall be come to the highest. He shall not regard the God of his
fathers, nor care for the lust of women. Yea he shall not care for any God, for
he shall exalte him self above all. In his iurisdicion shall he worship the
God Mayzim, and the God whom his fathers knew not shall he honor, with gold,
and silver, and precious stones, and other costly gaires.

And he shall convert them in to the strong fences of the God Mayzim, with his
strange God: and he that will acknowlage him, he shall advance him unto
honor, and shall make him Lord of many people, and distribute the land unto
him, with rewards. And a litell after. He shall also have dominion over the
treasures of gold and silver, and over all precious Iewelles. etc.

These are the undoubted words of yt prophet Daniel, wherein six principal
Daniel ^^^scribeth. 7. works of Antichrist
works of Antichrist are described: and unto them we shall afterward knytte
the seventh also, out of thafore mentioned seventh chap. of the same Daniel.
These shall we mark in order, and consider wtall, how they are put in bre in
the papacy, of the bishops of Rome. 1. Antichrist makes men covenant
breakers.


The furst work that the prophet Daniel attributes to Antichrist, is yt he
shall bring in men to forsake the covenant, and shrynke from it wickedly. But
he speaks here of that great, no table, excellent, and saving covenant, that
the eternal almighty heavenly father has vouchedsafe to make with us wretched
me^, which (by nature) are the children of wrath and damnacio^. This is made
plain by Moses, in the 17. of Genesis, and by ye prophet Iere. ye 31. chap.
and is comprehended in two chap. or articles. For furst, God which is ye most
high and everlasting goodness, and what the covenant is.
eue^ the only fou^tayne of al goodness, calls him self our God, our full
feding, and the perfect sufficie^ce of al things, and promises wtall, that
both he him self and all yt he has, shall be ours. Secondarily, even he (the
same God) requires this of us again, yt we be his people and his catail, that
we walk before him, as it becomes his people to do, that we obey and serve
him, not as the frowardenesse of our own reason enueagleth, but as he
commands, by ye authority of his word. And his commandment is, that we
should acknowlage him alone, to be our only God, yt we should not have, seek,
nor worship any other Gods but him: yt we should make no Idols, graven
images, nor any manner of similitudes: and yt we should not worship, such as
were made of other me^, another with semelinesse, nor reverent behaueour of the
body, and much less with the devotion of the heart: but that we should be
most far of from al manner of Idolatry, both inward and outward: yt we
should also another defile nor blemishe his holy name, but yt in all our doings
and sayenges, and in all our hole life, we should halowe it, and honor it, to
the best of our possible powers: and that we should not defyle any of the time
(which he would have hallowed, and to be appointed to serve him, and to the
considerate meditacion of his benefits and works) with no profane uses, but yt
we should also keep continual holy day, from wicked works and studies:
Finally yt we should apply our selves, in all those things, yt we owe, both
unto him and to our neighbor (according to ye offices of faith and laws of
Charity) after such sort, yt we may be an holy people as he is holy. Leui.
19. and 20.

But albeit (through the deceaueablenesse of our own infirmity, and corrupt
nature of our flesh) we do never acco^plishe ye chief poi^tes of yt covenant
(which belong unto us) as we ought to do, another yet are hable to accomplish
them: yet that gentil hearted and merciful father will not cast us away, nor
drive us out of the inheritance of his kingdom but like as he furst offered
the covenant unto us, even so (mynding also to succor our infirmity) he gave
his only begoten son Jesus Christ, which being very man, and made like unto
us in all things (sin only except) performed in his own person, all that,
which God ye father (according to his justice) required: and satisfieng the
law in all things, at leynght he suffered also death for us: and having shed
his blood for us, he confirmed most fully that covenant of God, and testament
of our salvation, like as in his last supper, yt he kept with his disciples, he
him self recorded. This (I say) is the covenant, whereof Daniel in this place
makes mention, and says, that AntiChrist shall draw men away from this
covenant, so as when they have forsaken it, they shall also be spoiled of the
benefits, that are promised the^ in it. But that ye B. of Rome does this same
thing plainly in his doctrine, and in the decrees of his religion, it may be
showed without any business, and easily perceived of any man.

For as touching ye furst point of yt covenant and promise of God, which is
given unto us, the B. of Rome propou^deth a far other manner of God, by his
doctrine and religion, than the words of the covenant make mention of. For
they promise, that God shall be ours in all things, so that (being knytte and
joined unto him) we may suck out of him most pleynteously, what so ever is
necessary unto salvation. But the pope feyneth us such a God, that were like
unto a high, stately, and an earthy prince (yea rather like a tyranne) that
would receive no man's suits nor bills of suplicacio^, another would allow any
man, to com to his speech, ne yet would hear any man's cause, except he either
obtained his favor with bribes, or else with much suit maki^g and gifts, he
bought friendship of courtyours, to speak for him.

And in deed, thus has the pope be^ the author of extreme desperacion unto
sely wretched people. For this has been the constaunt opinion almost of al
men, that they believed, no man (being infected with the spotte of sins) could
com to the sight of God, yea that it was not laufull for a wretched sinner to
be bold, to flee unto the succor of the righteous God. By reason whereof, as soon as they have forsaken God, the only omnisufficie^t fullness of mankind,
they turned the^ unto Idols, and worshipped the^, with gold and silver they
honored the^: and being desirous to obtain the intercessions of saints, they
brought al ye money they hade, their clothes, their corn (yea and their catail
to) yt they might have the^ yt more favorable, and yt than (having their way
made sure, by ye mean of saints help and intercession) they might preace
forewarde into ye sight of God. What other thing shall we call this, but the most
gross unknowing of God? through ye which me^ being blinded, have not
acknowlaged yt God any more, which in his covenant making, promises, yt he
will not only be beneficial and merciful unto us, but also yt he and al ye
goods he has, shall be altogether ours. Moreover, they have openly set this
out in their religion, yt they hade no whitte more knowlage or remembrance of
Jesus Christ, in whom this covenant of our salvation is confirmed, and by whom
the spirit of adoption and of the children of God is given unto us, which
bearyng record unto our election, brings to pass in our consciences, that
we may surely trust in god and cry unto him, Abba father. For they turned not
unto Christ, which is our only intercessour, but were gredily desirous rather
to get the help of saints, although they heard Christ our Lord cry, with a
loud shril voice, and plain words: Come to me al you that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I Matthew. 1^.
shall give you rest. Which words, if they would either have kept in their
minds, or have understood, they should have seen (doubles) yt they (how
great sinners so ever they were) ought to run unto Christ, and to none but
him. For the Lord confesses unto the^ plainly, that he calls not righteous
men, nor such, as in all things be thoroughly upright and perfect (for among
al mankind, there are none such but those, which are ouerlade^ and pressed with
the burden of sins, and can find peace and quietness no where else, but in
him. And as for those, he sedeth the^ away no whider else, nor bids the^
seek peace and comfort any where else, but to com unto him, that they may
lay down that intolerable burden with him, and receive the peace and
quietness, that is ordained for them.

And what man is it in the world, that can say, that those which live under
the laws of the papacy, have faithfully standen, or do yet at this hour
stand faithful, in this point of the covenant? Shall it not be of force
plainly confessed, that they have all forsaken this covenant, and sought the
comfort and remedy of their souls, the grace of God, and the salvation of
eternal life, by other means? And not yt only, but we must also needs
confess, yt we stood not in yt other point of the covenant, which belongs
to us, and informs us, how to order our co^uersacio^: that is to wete, in
that we have custo^ly used to serve God the father of heaven, by a far other
manner and sort, than he would be served: whereof we shall anon hereafter speak
more at large.

To be short, seeing that we are hable (by no means) to deny the things that
are now spoken of: and seeing it is manefestly evident withal, that we were
brought (by the Popes decrees and establishinges of popish religion) in to
this madness and wickedness: we have found the furst work, which Daniel
attributes unto Antichrist, in the B. of Rome, who (as it is now plainly
declared) is he, which withdraws men from the covenant of God, and causes
them to be quyte stripped from God, and all the goodness of God. 2. Antichrist
is the father of hipocrites.


Secondarely, he says, that Antichrist shall bring in men, which shall work
sleightily, through hypocrisy: that is to say, such manner me^, whose faith,
religion, holiness, and all the ordring of their hole life shall be
hipocriticall, and most far of, from the truth. But that men are become such
in the Papacy, by the tradiciones of the Popes religion and doctrine, it is so
manifestly known to all men, though they take but small head thereof, that
there needs no longer reasonyng about it. For what shall we say, that the hole
universal religion (which is practiced in the Papacy) is else, but
hypocrisy, and countrefayting of a certain false feyned holiness: which in
deed (in outward show) is busye, and much adoo is about it, and promises
great matters, and plain divine matters. But if a man lust to look for them
more nerelye, he shall find none at all. And furst let Monks, Chanones, and
friars (which are called among them spiritual men) be specially noted and
marked, which will seem, and be called more holy, and more religious, than all the rest: and we shall most clearly see the hypocrisy which Daniel attributes
unto them. For when they take the order of Monkerye or Frierhode upon them,
they make their vows almost after this sort:

Ego frater N. promitto Deo auxiliante perpetuam continentiam, carentiam
proprii, and obi^am tibi pater N. and successoribus tuis canonice instituendis
secundum regulam beati N. and secu^dum constitutiones Capituli nostri
generalis.

That is: I brother, N. or I friar N. promise by the help of God, perpetual
continency, the wanting of propretie, and obedience to thee father N. and thy
successors, to be canonically instituted, after ye rule of S. N. and after ye
constituciones of our general chaptre.

Three things here those right holy men vow: wilful poverty, which they (as
they are most studious of the elegaunce of latin) call Carentia proprii,
wanting of property: and also obedience and continency, in the namyng wanting
of propretie, is to have no good of his own, as in deed few of those Votaries
have any good condiciones of their own.
whereof they mean chastity, and absteynyng from fleshely doale. Now unto
these, all their outward toys are almost answerably like, so yt they profess
these things, not only with words and writings: but also with certain notable
sentences, spoken briefly by way of exhortation, to the same. For they lie
closely mewed up in the Monastery, to testify, that they play the solitary
men, and are disseuered from ye world, and estraunged from al mynding of the
world. There are some, whose rule forbids them to handle any manner money,
with their hands: and that they will have to be a figure of that wilful
poverty, which they have vowed.

As for obedience, they say they have accomplished it fully and perfitly, if
they live in subjection, under ye governance of the abbot or prior, as they
call them. There are so^, which (in their rayme^t) profess chastity, and
purity of life, in yt they are apparailled in white garments. There are some,
whom their black clothing admonishes of ye mortificacio^, where by they ought
daily to dye unto sin. There are some, which being girded with coardes, crack,
yt they are (every moment) girded, and ready, to the studious mynding of
godliness, and serving of God: and that they have girded up their reins (ye
place of carnal lust) least they be overcome with desires at any time, and so
sin through fleshely lust. They goo crowching and lusking, with their heads
down toward the ground, that they may remember the^ selves to be mortal
and earthye men, and therefore they are drowned with no myndynges of this world,
but set their continual studies upon heavenly things. And in deed such is all the passing of their life, and what so ever they do, their manners also, their
gestures, their fastinges, their watchinges, their synginges, their readinges,
and such is all the outward religion, that they occupy, doubtless after such
sort, that in all these trynkettes, they profess (as it were) certain
wonderful mysteries of holiness.

But if a man compare their conversation and deeds, with these external matters,
he shall see them countrefaict all that they profess so goodly, that lady
Hypocrisy her self could not handle yt matter more fittly. They say, they have
forsaken the world, when no man in all ye world lives more drowned Their
wilful Poverty.
with ye world, and ye forcastes of ye world, than they do. For they do not
only flow in all kinds of voluptuous pleasure, but also they set al their
hole minds and studies, upon al things, that this world desires or does. I
would feign have the^ answer me, whether they ca^ show me in all ye wide world,
where is more envy, more hatred, more evil will, more pride, more contencion,
ambicio^, bralling, and stryuing than in monasteries, which (as they say) are
disseuered from the world.

But what is their poverty, and want of propretie? Forsothe this: that they
walowe in most pleynteous habundaunce of wealth: and like most mighty
princes, have all the world to welde, at commandment: another feel they any
pynching of poverty, ne yet want of things necessary. Yea a man may find
of them, which where they had either a very small, or else no living of
enheritaunce, nor substance at al, thrust them selves in to one monastery or
other, and profess wilful poverty, but there having habundaunce of al
things, they lead a life without want of any thing: and at leynght being
made either Abbotes, or Priours, or Prouincialles, either Bishops, and
Cardinals, yea and Popes to: they clymbe to ye most high These holy men can
clymbe no higher, except they chance to clymbe to the galowes.
estate of wealth, pleasure, and empire. And yet for all that, they say, they
vow poverty, where as they catch hold of such manner of occasiones, that
they may be made superiors, to the most mighty princes, and kings upon
earth. Therefore are they most subtle sleightie Siomedes, which (wha^ Glaucus,
that is to say, the rude common people, takes no head) change copper for
gold. And a man shall find no great difference from this gaire, if he mark
their obedience, that they vow. For by reason of that obedience, they look
aloft, even against all Magistrates, Cloistre obedience.
and governors openly, because they boast them selves to be exempte, and that
no man (in all the world) has ought to do to meddle with them. If the lauful
Magistrate (that is ordained of God) demand any thing of them, they lay for
the^ selves straight ways, their exempcion and privilege of the church, which
sets them fre from al charges, that the common people and public state are
burdened wtal. But in case any man would go about to co^straine them, and to
frame the^ in to an order, by and by they make war against him, and lay at
him with cursing and tho^dre boltes of Romish exco^municacions, wherwt even
emperors them selves, have been so often and so shreudly ha^pred, that they are
taught (to their cost) to be afraid of it yet still, to this day. Therefore what
shall we call their obedience else, but that for as much as they are lords
over all men, they pass not a pynne of the Magistrates, they make all people
their servants, and (like Penelopes wowers, and an unprofitable burden of
the common wealth) they devour and consume in loytring idleness, those
things, that can scarcely be earned, and gotten together, with the toil and
travail of a great sort of sore laboring me^. And after ye same rate (if we
will speak Cloistre Chastity.
the truth) we must speak of their Continence and chastity, which will not
suffer the^ (in any wise) to be called fathers without a cause. For with their
chastity, they are wont to fill all the world full of bastardes, to lay
baits to deflowre honest maidens in every place, and to entice all other
women, of what place, order or condition so ever they were, unto hooredome: and
that with such shamelessness, that they will not let to play the hooremo^gres
parts, even at their holy service time. For to this use serve so many drinks
and sibber sawces, that they charm (by the deuilles connyng) in their masses,
to make women mad upon their love. To this end are so many maidens and
matrones entired, in their whispering ear shrifte. To this purpose serve some
men's feyned sickenesses, that have given mass priests, friars, and
cloisterers occasion, to rauishe both mayde^s and married women. And doubtless
this rule is so notablye known to al me^, that a man can scarce find any so
beggarly a suburb, or so pelting a village, which has not ben garnished with
some example of horedome, by these kind of men. I talk not here of their
filthier and more abominable tricks, which we shall speak somewhat of in their
own place.

But who is that (brethren) that has brought in these sortesof men? Who is he,
that has laid such a burden and heavy weight, upon sely wretch people?
Even the B. of Rome, which has not only confirmed their ordres and rules,
with the authority of his testimony and privilege, but also (because no quick
spur Magistrate may correct the^, nor rob him of this his so honorable a
baudie barn teame) he names them in all his wrytinges, most dear children.
Than the B. of Rome is even he, that (according to Danieles saying) has made
right stowte and notable mighty hipocrites, which have done all things,
concerning faith, religion, and outward conversation of life, by subtle
fleightes, and with false color able prete^ces.

Hereunto perteyneth not only the life and behaueours of them, that are called
spiritual persons (which in every thing are like to the state of Mo^kerye, as
the right children of al one father) but all ye hole religion of al manner of
folks living under the papacy, ought also to be referred hereunto. For it is
nothing else, but a certain mere hypocrisy: as (to let many other things
pass) the only form of their popish penance (if there were nothing else) is
hable to prove to be true. For although a man were soiled in ye synke of all the
sins, that are in ye world, and led a life full of al myschief and
wickedness, all the hole year long, yet the only time of lent (though a man
continue still in sins) were hable to make him holy and righteous. For if a
man fast from flesh yt space, as soon as he has gotten him a massemonging
priest, to be his goostly father, as verteous a man as him self Nay, his
goostly enemy.
(and therefore the more gentil) and has ones whispered out all the
raggemanrolle of his sins in his care, and greased his fiste with some pe^ce,
and bought a mass or two: by and by he has full forgiveness of al his
sins, and may fall again to the same trade of life, and give him self to the
same vices, and filthye sins, that he did before.

Besides this, it is more clear than the sun light, that there can non so
outrageous, none so cruel, non so heinous, non so abominable a sin be
committed, but it may be clooked by ye popes Bulls, and pardoned and quyte
remitted by the authority of his sea.

Than seeing this gaire is commonly thus, all the papists must needs confess
(in despite of their noses) yt the B. of Rome is the chief author of al
hypocrisy, and the most fruitful father of hipocrites: and that he (with all
trusty diligence and studious endeavor) does also accomplish that other
work of Antichrist, and therefore (according to Danieles prophecy) he is to be
taken for the very right Antichrist him self.

Daneil describing the third work manship of Antichrist, says thus. He shall
not regard the God of his fathers, yea he shall not care for any (...) tie and
strong God: that is, he has devised for him self such a God: by whose
service and religion, he is advanced with great abundaunce of richesse,
honor, and glory. And to understand this matter the more fully, thus we must
take it, good brethren; If we mark the B. of Rome, he will profess with his
mouth the self same God, whom we acknowlage in the articles of the apostles
Credet howbeit playeng the hipocrite in this point, as he does in all other
matters, he believes him not to be such a God, as he uses to profess him to
be. For if a man mark his tradicions, and strain him a litell harder, he
shall see, that he believes not, that God the father has a son, which became
man for our sakes, and (being offered up once for all on the altar of the
cross for us) obtained forgiveness of sins, righteousness, and salvation
for mankind. But he ymagineth a far other manner of God, that is daily
coniured by massemonging priests enchauntementes, to come down in to bread,
or in to the form of bread, and the substance of bread being changed in to
the very substance of Christ's body, to be offered every day by the priests,
upon the altar, for the sins of the quick and the dead. In what poi^t is
this pretty Cake God like unto him, whom we say in our Creed, rose again from
the dead, ascended in to heaven, and there sits on the right hand of God
the father almighty, until he come to judge the quick and the dead? Do we
not see him plainly, to be a new God, and clean contrary from ye God of our
fathers and elders?

For these are plain contraries: to be incarnate, and to com down in to a
cake of bread: to be offered up once for all, on the aultare of the cross, and
many times upon the popish priests aultares: to be offered only once by him
self, and every day a thousaunt times by other priests: to be ascended in to
heaven, and to lie locked in a golden Pixe: to sytte on the fathers right hand
in the kingdom of heaven, unto the day of judgment, and to com down daily
at the priests coniuring in his bodily presence in to a piece of bread.

And yet this is even that strong and mighty God, by whose service and help,
Antichrist is promoted unto most high power and dignity. For after that the
rude ignorant people were persuaded, that Jesus Christ (very God and very man)
was called out of heaven, by the priests words, and that they handled him
with their consecrated hands, and offered him for men's sins, anon they were
in such authority with all men, that every man hade them in most high honor,
yea there was none almost so evil advised, that thought not him worthy to be
punyshed, who so ever attempted any thing against them.

And this augme^ted their dignity and power also, that when they hade made
this their God with their own words, they delivered him to other also to be
eaten, howbeit not unto every body at aue^ture, but unto such only, as were
contented to shryue them before hand unto them, of all that they hade sinned,
either by word or deed. For by this secret Legier demayne of Confession that
they have devised, they could know the botom of all men's hearts, they could
learn out all men's purposes, they could boult out, what al me^ thought: yea
they could (by those gostly fathers of their own making) know the most
secret intentes and pryuie cou^sailes of kings and princes. For this was the
oath of them all, that they were bounde^ to the sea of Rome by, that they
should (to the uttermost of their possible power) withstand al men's purposes
and entreprises, and by all possible means, to let those things, which they
knew to be noyso^ to the B. of Rome and his sea. By reason whereof, as soon as
the B. of Rome began to have any king or prince in suspicion, that he bare
but small good will to his popish dignity or power: anon these gostly fathers
would grope him, and with crafty tricks handle him so, that there were no
remedy, but he must needs shryue him, and pour into their bosoms, not only
all yt he had done, but also al his intentes and purposes. Tha^ when they saw
any danger like to rise, or already in hand against the sea of Rome, they
were bounden by their oath, to open all the hole matter to their ordinary. And
the ordinary must show it to his superior, and bid him declare it to his
bishop, or to the archbishop, by whose means it came at leynght to the pope
him self. And when he once knew the matter, he could sone make shifte, to
turn up side down all the attemptates, that any prince hade intended against
him.

And by this means (brethren) we see it come to pass by experience, that there
is no king nor prince, no nor yet emperor, that could be found either so
prudent, or so valeaunt a man, in compassing of his matters, that if he were
offended at the tyranny of the bishops of Rome, was hable yet either to
suppress it, or to escape it: no mary, a great sort of them have been
conquested and oppressed, by the driftes and crafty conueyaunces of the
bishops of Rome. For the God Mayzim has a myghtier power, tha^ they are
hable to abide, when so ever they dare once attempt any thing against the
tyranny of Antichrist, the bishop of Rome.

This can Emperor Henry the seventh of that name (among many Emperor Henry
the 7. poisoned with the Sacrament.
other) well testify: who when he hade purposed to have made the bishop of
Rome, not very pleasant tarieng in Italye, was (by poison ministered unto him
in the sacrament of the aultare) by a black friar of Senes, quycklye rid out
of the world, in the Castle of Bonecouent, as they call it.

This we read was done the year from Christ's birth, M. CCC. XIII. well, like
as the B. of Rome has begoten us this new God, out of the ymaginacion of his
own brain, even so has he ordained new manner of god service for him. For
he worshippeth not, nor serves him, as the true living God ought to be served
and worshipped, in spirit and truth: but as the prophet Daniel spoke
before-ha^de, with gold, silver, precious stones, and other gaye gaire, as they
can not deny, seeing all the hole god service, yt they occupy them selves
withal, is as I say. For because you must serve this God Mayzim a right, there
must needs be a chalice of gold, and a patine of gold, or else gilt at
least. There must be also vestimentes, and copes of silk or velwet, dashed with
gold and precious stones. There are tapers sticked on every post, and light
lamps hanged round about the church. And the roof of the church makes a
dynne, with their synging and organe pyping: so that if a man mark every one
of their knackes in ye right kind, all their god service is rather like the
ruffling and ioyly swashing of a princes court, than the form of religion.
Now this is the third work manship of Antichrist, which the most excellent
prophet Daniel ascribes unto him.

Fourthely. He shall not care (says Daniel) for the lust of women: that is,
4. Antichrist shall not care for the lust of women.
he shall have no laufull affection of love toward women. For Daniel speaks
not here, of the dishonest filthy love and beastly lecherous lust, but he
means that natural and lauful love, which almighty God graffed in to men's
hearts, at the furst original beginning of things, for the generation and
preseruacion of mankind: and did therwythall (by his grace) ordain the holy
band of matrimony, mynding that man should not live alone, but in the laws
of wedlock or matrimony, which we call the laufull coupling together of one
man and of one woman, according to Gods institucion. The lust of this love,
that is to say, the love of wedlock (says Daniel) Antichrist shall not care
for, nor shall have any mind unto it. Well now, like as I have showed, that
the sayenges of Daniel do hitherto agree directly to the B. of Rome, even so
shall I be hable to prove this no less manifestly. For furst of all, this
kind of men speak of the holy state of wedlock (which ye authority of all
the hole scripture declares to be Gods own ordinance) after such sort,
yt they deem it a profane and an unclean state. For how shall they chose, but
think it a profane and an unclean state, seeing they will not have the
Ministres of the church in any wise to meddle with it, and forbid them in
their open laws from marriage.

And because we should understand, that this is the very propre workmanship
of Antichrist, he went about this by and by at his furst entrau^ce, seeing it
was he, that should by leisure work the mystery of iniquity. For as ye
history writours make report, in the days of Emperor Constantine the great,
there were some at the cou^sail of Nice, which thought it good to bind
bishops, Ministres and diacones from marriage: Howbeit their sentence was at
that time repressed by Paphnutius a man both of a singular godly life, and of
a notable constaunt faith. For he confessed marriage to be honorable, and that
it is chastity for a man to lie with his own wife, and persuaded the Counsel,
that they should not make such a law, as might ministre occasion either to
the^, or to their wives, to commit fornicacio^

Nevertheless albeit the furst way spedde not, yet they went to their bulynesse
an other way, and never ceased, till (with alluring now these men, now those
men, to say as they said) they obtained their purpose: and yet it could not be
brought to pass among the Germans, until it was almost to late, that is to
say, about CCCCC. years agoo, in the days of Emperor Henry yt 4, it was
brought about, by (helhounde hildebrande, called) Gregory the 7. the varlet of
all wickedness and mischief.

But to tell what fruits have proceeded of this law; it needs not much
rehearsal. For in this case though no man speak a word, their own beastly
lusts tell, their own hooremonging declares, and their own cuckolde making
(wherwyth they have defiled the hole church) cries out upon them.

Well, if we take here this word lust, either for ye only love to women, or
for ye desire of womanes company, we must speak yt of these most holy and most
blessed fathers (and God before) yt is to filthy, and to badde to be spoke,
yea no christian cares could abide it, but yt ye plain truth of the matter
would force me^ to speak. For we must say, yt these me^ are not so much
enamoured with ye lust and natural company of women, as they are mare wood upon
ye abominable beastly lust of buggery, which sin God revenged in times past
with flaming fire from heaven, and commanded it to be punyshed with like
correction. And yet these helhou^des so hau^t it, and are so rageing mad upon
it, yt it is manifest, both they and their courtyers commit it, and no man
says, black is their eye. In this behalf I will take record to as many, as
by any evil luck have ever ben brought to that Sodomitical stewed state, and
have hade to do in Popes, Cardinals, and bishops courts and retinues.

Fyfthly Daniel says, that Antichrist shall also reward them with his 5.
Antichrist gives rewards to such as obey him
treasures, that will be content to serve, to honor, and to acknowlage that God
Mayzim of his. And Daniel makes mencio^ here of three manner of rewards. For
furst he says, that he shall advance them to honor, that is to say, with
glorious titles and names. Secondly he shall make them lords over many people.
Thirdly he shall distribute the land unto them with rewards. Which things
(if we will search the deeds and stories of bishops of Rome) we may find to
be, even as Daniel told before.

Furst the very trick of their own workmanship is, to set up those, that be
of their sect, with high honorable titles, and to advance their names with
glorious gaye styles. So in times past he adourned Pipine with the style of Most
christian King, because The style of most christian king given by the B. of To.
to pipine the traitor.
he aided the sea of Rome, and delivered the God Mayzim, from the power of
Lumbardes, and enriched him also with great lands, and exceeding great
privileges. And the French kings bear them selves high, upon the honor of
that style even at this present day.

Likewise mynding to deck the king of England also with a new style, Defendour
of the faith.
he gave him (above. 20. years agoo) the name of Defendour of the faith, in
so much that he made a great a do, without regard of the kings regal estate,
to have set the king (because of that style) against Lutere, ye most earnest
adversary of ye sea of R. and most invincible beater down of the Popes
tyra^nie. But what need we to make rehearsal of kings, and other folks (of
whom some are called most renowned, some catholic, some defendours of the sea
Apostolic) when we see before our eyes, a mighty rabble of popish prelates,
yt brag and look aloft, by those glorious gay styles? For of them there be,
that they call Cardinals, as though they were Cardines ecclesiae christianae,
the very true and perfect sure banks of Christ's church. There be yt have
obtained to be called not only (Patres) fathers, but also Patriarchs, as though
they were new Abrahames, and fathers of the faithful. And there be some, that
we must needs call bishops, as yt give attendaunce to the charge of the
church, and have the office of overseers and watchmen.

Hereunto perteyne ye names of most profounde learned Doctors, Our maistres,
the Reuere^de, the most Reverend, the Seraphical ordres, ye malles or
confoundours of heretics, most dearly beloved children, and infinite other
such, which a man may think do far excede ambicio^ it self. And these be
the honors, which the B. of Rome aduau^ceth the^ ye follow his sect, wtal.
But like as his wonted custom is, to adourne these with glorious gaye styles,
eue^ so contrary wise, those yt dephye his tira^nye, are wiped besides al their
honors and dignities, and are called by most bitter and horrible names. For ye
papists cry out upon the^, and (as though it were but a small matter, to call
them wicked) they name the^ tearers of Christ's seameles coat, Disturbours of
the church, corruptours of christ's spouse, Seducers, heretics, church
robbers, Traitors, and damnable wretches: yea there can not be devised so
cruel, nor so horrible a kind of villainous speech, but ye papists think it
not bad enough, to be spewed out against such men. Also the B. of Rome
accomplisheth ye second poi^t according to Danieles prophecy, yt is, he
makes them yt serve him and his God mayzim, Lords, and princes, and kings.
As about ye furst beginning of his power and tyra^nye, he deposed Chilpericus
ye French king from his regal estate, because he was a quiet, sobre, and a
soft spirited man, and nothing for his purpose: and makes Pipine (his great
friend, and a wo^derous expert and a forward man in co^passing of matters) ye
king of France. And after the same facion, because he was grieved at ye Greek
emperors, for disobeyeng him, he put the^ out of their empire, and made
Charles ye son of pipine emperor, because he was a zealous follower of his
fathers examples. Again this pranke ought to be reckoned among his fellows,
that chanced afterward to ye French kings also by like enter* (...) or
bear them a grudge: and straightwaies puts in other, whom he perceaueth
more fit to serve his turn: yea he does also grant men authority, to cast
out, whom he will have cast out of their kingdoms, and to take upon the^ the
government of those realms, having otherwise no title thereto, either by
gods law, or man's law

Such a manner of part (we read) was plaide about the year of our Lord MCCC.
when the B. of Rome appointed the realm of France, to Albertus ye king of ye
Romans, and would have depryued king Philip of his ancient possession,
because he would have stopped the open entries of his realm, to hold out the
rauenyng Romans. The like chance happened also, to the Archbishop of Mence,
by the drift and false fetch of Pius B. of Rome. For when the archbishop
somewhat grudged at the unreasonable sommes (whereof the bishops of Rome polled
al ye bishopriches of Germany) and would feign have hade his tenauntes and
people of his iurisdicion no more so pilled and polled by their false crafts
and subtilties, by and by the B. of Rome stripped him out of his bishoplie
honor and dignity, and a new bishop (at the same B. of Romes commandment)
was put in his rowme. That matter was the occasion of wonderful sore
dissensiones, and wars, that many princes of Germany (yea and that the
greatest princes) were combred with all. But the end of that tragedy was a
most bloody piece of work. For at leinght the city of Mence (after grievous
and bloody fields foughten) was betrayed and taken, every street ran
streams of the slain citezines blood, and all manner of wickedness done in it
(that the insolency of a proud conqueror lusts to do) and so the city
was miserably spoiled of her liberty: that where it hade ben before an emperial
city, it is in subjection (perforce) to abominable bawdie bishops, and
lecherous polleshorne massemo^ging priests, eue^ unto this day. But what deed
is it to rehearse old matters, when present new matters can bear large witness
thereof enough? For after that Germanye being lightened by the word of God,
received her eye sight, and having thrown away the yowke of the popes
tyranny, will another acknowlage the B. of Rome supreme head of the church,
nor vouchethsafe to worship and serve that God of his, Mayzim: the B. of Rome
thought it not enough to make wars upon the wretch people, that hade ben
long punnished with hongre, and dearthe of every thing: but also (to make
merciles cruel soldiers the more gredy upon us) he would have al Germany,
and all the substance thereof, to be his men's pray. And thus the. 5. piece
of Antichrists workmanship must needs be fulfilled, according to Danieles
prophecy: that he must bestow realms and lands at his pleasure, for reward
and feo, upon them, which serve Mayzim that God of his,

The sixthe work that Daniel ascribes 6. Antichrist has dominion over
treasures of gold and Silver etc
in the same place unto Antichrist, is this: yt he says, he shall have
dominion over treasures of gold, and silver, and al precious iewelles.

As for this matter we shall be hable to take the bishops of Rome, nolesse
apparently with the manner hereof, than we have proved those matters, yt we have
treated upon all this while hitherto. For after that the church (in the time of
emperor Constantine the great) began to possess gold and silver, and to
florishe in ye wealth of this world, than it began also to abuse the same
wealth in religion, to set up a god service: by and by a folishe and a
pernicious error took root and growed up, in the simple common sort and
unlearned peoples hearts, Note well
so that they thought this gaye, gorgeous, and rich golden glystring
godseruice was better, and more acceptable unto that God, than their old bare
religion was. Now this error being fastened in folks hearts, engendered an
other error more grievous and more pernicious tha^ it self. For hereof came the
opinion and belefe of many, that the salvation of souls and the kingdom of
heaven might be redeemed for gold, silver, precious stones, and other earthey
substance, if they gave them either unto priests or unto religious men, to
the maintenau^ce of their churches, monasteries, colleges, and other external
god service.

Now here came the sacrificeing Note how error caused lands and riches unto
the shauelinges, church.
popish priests gain in, the devil and all. Hereby also was great
substance gathered in every place, under a vain pretense of the church,
whereby their tyranny was mightily establyshed. For king Pipine being bewitched
with the persuasion of this error, gave Rauenna, and all the Exarcheship, with
many other places (which he hade taken from the Emperor of the Greeks) unto
the church of Rome: to make amended for his sin, that he hade done, both in
wrongfully taking the kingdom upon him, and in much effusion of blood, which
he hade unjustly spilte.

After that, Pipines son Carolus magnus, being deceived with ye like error,
confirmed that his father had given: and gave more also of his own. And that
made him (without any other consideracion) to leave so many churches enriched,
so many colleges and monasteries excedyng rychely endued, with his substance.
Than his son Lewis (which was called Pius) succeding his father, vouched safe
(upon the same persuasions) not only to confirm the gift of his graundfather,
and of his father: but also to give the city of Rome, and all the liberties
thereof, freely unto the bishops of Rome.

Other princes also followed their example, and so did lords and gentilmen. Yea
citezines and vplandishe men (as many as were somewhat wealthy) gave
wonderful much treasure of gold and silver, to serve the God Mayzim withal:
and so they furnished Antichrist and his, with exceading great abundaunce of
richesse.

In the mean space there crept out Cloisterer^ fratres in vnum knaves all quod
william Somer.
a new kind of men (Cloistre men) and of them there became diverse ordres,
which were the actiuest men alive, in scraping of richesse together. For they
get not only great treasures of ready money, but also very large possessions of
lands in a short space. Herein I will be reported to ye wealth of them, that
lived after the most beggerlye sort among them: even the frau^cisce friars and
the Dominike friars, whom they called by an other name, Friars preachers. For
albeit their ordres were confirmed by authority of the bishops of Rome with
in these LLC. years past, that is to say, the years of our Lord. M. LLXX.
and. M. CCxxiij. yet they have gotten so much substance and richesse with in
so short a time, as were enough to find many thousauntes a living. Besides
this we see, that they have builded so many monasteries (much fairer than
kings and princes palaces) so as a man can not find either any king or
emperor, that were hable to bear the costly charges thereof. And yet not
content with these, they have gote^ together so many images of great wedges of
gold and silver, so many chalices, so many patines, so many candlestyckes, so
many dishes, and infinite other such kind of vessels of gold and silver,
yea and so many copes and vestme^tes, broudred with gold, and set with
precious stones, that if they were laid all upon an heap, they were hable to
excede the wealth of Craesus and Myda.

This we may say furthermore, as the truth of the matter it self appears:
that these holy thieves (that are the chiefest braggers of poverty) are come to
so high wealth, that a poor greasy graye friar may walk all the world over
almost, and cost him never a penny, because he may find every day a house of
graye friars, and there live as it were of his own, among his brethren. And
indede these me^ are the most beggarly, of all the me^bres that Antichrist has.
I speak not now of mytred bishops, and swashing abbottes, which will be called
and regarded as princes, and keep astate as if they were Lords. I speak not
of Cardinals and popes, which goo far beyo^de worldly princes, in wealth
and in streynght of reignyng. Tushe, the devil is so much these men's good
Lord, and they have so much dominion over the treasures of the earth, that
those things be eue^ their own good, which other men have the possession of,
and are not yet delivered unto their hands. For as soon as their desire is, to
enlarge their substance, they have an hundred knackes in their budget, to pike
men's secret treasures, out of their privy coafers. For the help of this
matter serve their often chaungeing and encreaceing of their pardon bulls, their
new stacio^s, new found relics, and preaching of the cross, against the
invasions of the Turks, and other such like tricks, wherwt their custom is
(like insatiable cormoranes) to rauine and devour up all to them selves. These
be ye six works of Antichrist, which are mentioned in the. 11. chaptre of
Daniel.

Now remains the seventh and 7. Antichrist moves batail against the Saints.
last work of Antichrist, which is specified in few words, by Daniel in his
7. Cha. where he writes, that the litel horn (that is to say, Antichrist)
made batail against the saints, and prevailed against them. And in deed this
is his own right natural work, for without it he could in no wise be
Antichrist. For seeing Antichrist is ye adversary of Jesus Christ, our Lord and
only saueour, both in name and matter, he must needs make war against all
them, that faithfully believe in Christ, and are sanctified by his merit and
death. For they are not only called saints in who be called Saints in the
scriptures.
the scriptures, which are departed this life, and reign in heaven (as the rude
sort of popish people are wont to think) but al such also as are
sanctified, cleansed, and washed by the blood of the son of God, yea and all
manner of faithful people, that know that they are scoured clean, from the
filthe of their sins, by ye only merit of Christ's death and passion, and
steadfastly believe, that they are made righteous before God the father, and
shall live after this life for ever, and enjoy the benefits of such a joyous
felicity, as never shall end. And these saints has the B. of Rome always
made bataile against, with the violent force of his tirannie, as one that could
never abide the faith and religion, that they were of. For if men hold of
none, but only Christ, if they put their hole trust in the merit of his death,
and if they confess him to be the sole and only saueour and redemer of all the
hole world: tha^ may the B. of Rome put up his pypes, tha^ may he take his
leave of his great gainyng money mart, tha^ his pardone marchaundise stynketh,
tha^ his Bulls are not set a straw by, than gothe his great gaynes of gold
and silver away, that hade wont to come in for ye souls, that lie pewling in
the paynles pains of his pikepurce purgatoire. Than may he piss out the
flaming fire of that cold scalding house, for any more vau^tage it brings.

But how would ye have me^ to abide this, that are all together given to
delices, voluptuoussnesse, and pride? Therefore there is clashing of old
harness, and batail is a brewing against the Lords saints, whereunto the B.
of Rome both gives the on set, and takes up the matter. As for this gaire,
we may see it to be true, more clearly tha^ the day light, if we note, what
has happened wtin the space of this one age. In Boheme, God by Ioh. Hus.
his decreed providence stered up John Hus (a singular famous man, both of
learning and of godly life) which when he hade diligently searched the
mysteries of the holy scripture, sone espied also the B. of Romes tyranny, and
abominable ambicio^ in ye church, and disclosed it unto many me^ of his time.
But as soon as he (like a godly and a blessed man) begone to attempt this
matter, these purpled fathers, and ambicious ruffli^g lusty guts, being
afraid, least their power and dignity would decay, never ceased layeng
baits to catch him, till they hade (through false flatring promises) brought
him wtin their clowches, at the counsel of Constaunce, and there (contrary to
their open fidelity, yea contrary to the emperors faithful promise also)
they burned him: and for non other cause, but for the truths sake. And yet not
being content with yt heinous cruelty, unjust doing, and falsehead, they also
moved much cruel wars, against the Bohemies, and stered up the force and
power of ye hole empire, sundry times against them.

But what need we to rehearse old examples? Let us mark their doings in our
days, and we shall sone know ye batailes, that Antichrist makes against the
Lords saints. For every man knows, that his tyra^nie has been so cruel
(now for these 20. years and more) that no man living might (so hardye) find
fault at their abominable popish supersticion: no man might also affirm, yt
Christ our Lord is the only king, the only priest, and the only saueour of the
world, but he should be had by ye back for it. For as soon as any man
confessed Christ, to be the only head of the church, and the only saueour of
the world, he was hade straightwaies to prison, and laden with as many
fetters, as he could bear: and either he died there miserably (with the stynke
of the prison) or else he was hanged, or slain, or else burned, and suffered
as much torment, as could be devised: so that the lightest punyshement was to
be banished. And if any prince (abhorri^g such horrible cruelty) would not be
their slaughterman, upon his own subjects, by and by he began also to be
suspecte of heresye: and was laid watch for, by these gaye goostly fathers.
In this behalf, I report me to those faithful christianes, that lie yet still
in prison. I report me to the swords, to the halters, and ryuers, wherwyth
they were murdered most cruelly. I report me to ye galowes and stakes in
every place, where their dead bodies heng. I report me to ye feldes and
grou^des, where an infinite nombre of them were slain, for they are moo than
any true christian man can think, upon without weping tears. And yet for all
this, ye cruel beast (not contenting him self to be filled with so bocherly a
slaughter of saints) when he perceaueth, that the doctrine and faith of
Christ, is stronger than all his torments and punyshementes, thought good to
stere up the most cruel people in all the world, and ye most deadly foes of
the name of Germany, to destroy (with fire and sweorde) the^ that take Christ
for their only saueour, and will not be content, to worship the B. of Rome, nor
his God Mayzim.

In this place we ought also to Antichrist shall prevail against the Saints.
mark this well (most loving brethren in Christ) that the prophet Daniel
says, that Antichrist shall not only make batail against the Lords saints,
but also that he shall have ye vpperhande of them. For he speaks not thus, to
the intent we should be afraid, and cast down our hearts al together, but he
vttreth and means (by these his words) after ye sort yt Christ our Lord
speaks of, in John: The time shall com yt who so ever kills you, shall
think, he does God service Io. 16 Io. 16.
For what so ever is spoken concerning Antichrists success and victories, it
must be vnderstande^, but of ye bodies, and external goods of the saints, or
faithful people. For God our heavenly father does somtymes permyt either
Antichrist or other adversaries of his name, and of his people, to have some
power and to spoil his flock of life and goods, because where they (which
ought to have served him) were given to much unto the world, and neclected
those things, that are divine and heavenly. And this (we read) has been the
principal cause, almost of all persecucio^s. Howbeit the Lord does not
neclecte, to save those that his be, for all that: but defends the^ under his
own fatherly protection, most safely. And when his people be tried with the
cross, and blustering storms of persecucious (as Gold and silver are tried in
the fire) they are ^. Pe. 1.
scowred clean, from all dross of man's infirmity, and of fleshly desires:
so that their souls depart, not only without any harm, but also more holy
and much the perfiter.

Wherefore it is convenient for us, not to be afraid in any wise, of this
present persecucion, which we see raised by Antichrists drift and false
fetches: But (as it becomes hearty soldiers) let us rather rejoice that there
is occasion offered us to show a specialtie, and a perfect lesson of our
faith, and (with lusty courages) to beat Antichrist back, by the aid of so
noble a captain, Christ our most victorious king: but not with outward marcial
weapones (which Antichrist is smally afraid of) but with true repentance,
with the amendment of life, with constaunt faith, with patience, and with
continual fervent prayers: for as these be most acceptable unto god, even so
their custom is to burst asondre all the violent force that satan be^deth
against us, and also to overthrow the cou^sailes of Christ's enemies. For
these are the weapones, that the Lord has delivered unto his church, and he
has promised to be present him self, to assiste it. Therefore (brethren)
Christ sees the dangers, that his church is in, he beholds the painful
labors of his people, he sees the cruel and horrible devises and doings of
Antichristian me^, he sees his enemies, and ye wolves yt vex his church: yea
he not only sees them, but he also brydleth the^ and rules the^, another does
he suffer the^, to rauine any farther, tha^ he sees it profittable for us, and
al his faithful flock.

Necligent and forgetful children must needs taste of the rod: and the
rebellious stubburne flesh must needs be walked with a good cudgel, and in a
staves end. The Lords rod and staff is the cross of persecucio^, which he
sends by the cruel enemies of his name.

As for them, they follow their own lust, and are given al together to the
serving of the filthy flesh: and even the^ the Lord uses as a mean, to
chastise our flesh wtall. And in case God find yt in us (by their means)
that he is desirous to do, he is hable (in a moment) both to deliver us, and
to tame their tirannie, surely enough. This matter is witnessed by the
ungracious end of Pharao, the shameful death of Senacherib king of the
Assirianes, and the most woeful end of many such tirannes as they were. Now
let these suffice to be spoken in the fourth place, concerning Antichrists
works and practices: Whereby it appears most manifestly (as it does by the
other sayenges that are me^cioned before) that the B. of Rome, is that notable
and mighty houge Antichrist, whom God would have revealed, in ye oracles of his
word, by Daniel, and the rest of the prophets.

Now therefore, let us pass over unto the fifthe special poi^t of that we 5.
Antichrists. weapones.
have in hand, that we may considre with what weapones Antichrist shall obtain,
enlarge, and mayntene his kingdom. And these it is necessary for us, to have
skilful knowlage of, that we may the more handsomely beware of them, and arm
our selves the more strongly against his tirannie. For as in feats of war,
it is a good piece of the victory, if a man can know his enemies weapons, and
put by ye strokes: even so the same is specially requisite for us, in this sore
fraye of Christ our king. And as for the hole furniture, and all the weapones,
wherewith Antichrist does both defend him self and make batail against other,
the apostle Paul in his second epistle to the Thessalonianes comprehends
them all in few words, saying that Antichrist shall come after the working of
satan, with all power, and with lyeng signs and wondres, and with all
deceaueablenesse of unrighteousness,

In these words we must note (brethren) that the apostle says, all
Antichrists power, al his streynght, and all his weapones shall be deuillishe:
so that he teaches us, that Antichrist shall order all his affairs, after the
working of satan. Therefore if we mark, what kind a thing the what the power
of Satan is
power of satan is, we shall also most perfitly perceive, what Antichrists
streynght and weapones be. And albeit Paul's words might suffice, to make this
matter plain, yet let us hear Christ the eternal wisdom of God the father
speak, which talks thus of satan the prince of the world: He was a
murtherour from ye beginning, Io. 8.
and stood not in the truth, for the truth is not in him. When he speaks a
lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of lies.

Christ here comprehends all the streynght, and all the weapones of the
deuile in two kinds: murder, and lyeng. By this word (Lies) he understands
Lieng.
all that is contrary to the truth, and also his sleightes, his giles, his
false frauds, and deceaueablenesse, as well in words and deeds, as in miracles
and doctrine. And this term (Murder) co^teyneth al wrongful violence, Murder.
al temerarious atte^ptates, all the force, al ye tirannie, and all the power
that men are violently pressed withal. And that these have been always yt
deuilles tools and weapones, it is manifest by many examples, sense the
beginning of the world. For thus he deceived our furst pare^tes with false
promises, and robbed them of paradise, and of their blessed state: and (as much
as in him lay) he spoiled the^ also of everlasting life. And afterward
(through murder) he made war by their furst begote^ son Cayn, against true
religion and ye folowers thereof: and ever sithence, he has showed him self
such a one, as his furst fruits hade showed, that he would be. Now seeing the
holy ghost reports, that Antichrist shall be armed with the deuilles weapons
(Lye^g and murder) it stands us in hand to try these also to be in ye B.
of Rome whom scripture they have for their trinkettes, they are not ashamed, to
say, that they lack that: but they rather heap lies upon lies, and bring out
a certain new lye^g blasphemous gloss: Tushe say they, al is not contained in
yt scriptures, that is necessary for man, to obtain salvation by. As for the
authority of the holy ghost, they are not afraid of it, which making answer to
their blasphemous saying, speaks by the apostle S. Paul, in plain words:
All scripture given by inspiracion 2. Timo. 3.
of God, is profitable to teach, to reprove, to amend, and to inform in
righteousness, that the man of God may be hole or perfect, prepared to all
good works.

What can be spoken more clearly, more pithily, and more evidently, tha^ these
words be? The apostle Paul (the chosen instrument of God) being endued with
the spirit of Christ, says: that all the scripture is inspired of God, and
that therefore it is profitable and effectual, not only to teach, to monishe
and amend, but to this use, that also the man of God may be hole, perfect, and
fit to do all thing that God judges to be good, and is good in deed.
Howbeit those most shameless and most lyeng deceauours (without reverence to the
authority of these words) where they dare not deny, but the scripture is
inspired of God, yet they say, it is imperfect: and prate, that all things
are not contained in the scripture, that man has need of, to salvation and to
religion.

And is God imperfect? O shameless impudency. Shall we call that imperfect,
which is set forth by god, through the spirit of truth, and think that
perfect and absolute, which was inverted by the rash reason of man? But Note
well.
Paul's words teach us a greater matter yet, tha^ all this. For if the
scriptures make a man perfect and fit unto all good works, than can it not
be a good work, that is required, having Good works.
non authority of ye scriptures to bear it: and therefore they shall never,
worthily be called good works, which they require besides the autoritte of the
scriptures. Let these vain helhoundes lose and rid them selves out of this
knotte, if they can. But they must needs fight with lies (the very own propre
weapons of satan) that in thus speaking, they may both pluck the unlearned
rude common people, from the truth of the scriptures, and also to tie them to
the lick penny tradicions of men's devising. Yet to vttre them selves more
openly, they do not only set up these kind of lies, but also they fight with
false tokens and lyeng wonders, whereof Paul makes mencio^ here, and Christ
has bidde^ us, to beware of the^. For who is it, yt knows not the endless
heap of tokens, yt flyering friars and mu^myng massepriestes were wont to
prate openly of, in the papacy? For sometime they feyne, that souls appear,
and make moan unto them, sometime they declare miracles wrought by images,
sometime they preach of wonders, wrought by the bread God of the aultare, and
infinite such other tricks they ymagine daily, whereby they may the more
easily cheoppe men down, into the kingdom of darkness, and hold the^ down
surely, wha^ they have them once there. Therefore (brethren) to the intent we be
False tokens.
not begiled herein, we must note, that there be false signs and wonders: and
that, by two manner of false means. For furst there are oftentimes signs
feyned, that are false in deed, whereby yt is thought to be done, that is not
done in deed. And of this sort, are sleighty wiles, frauds, enchau^tementes,
and al deceaueable tricks, yt simple souls are deceived wtall. Seco^dely,
there are other tokens, wherein it is done in deed, that we hear or see done:
and yet it is not done, either by ye working of God, or naturally, but by the
very working of the Devil. And those are worthy also to be called false tokens,
and lyeng wonders: because they lead me^nes consciences, not into the knowlage
of God, and of the truth, but rather pull them from it, and most commonly they
bind men to lies, to ydolatrie, and to supersticion, or at least confirm them
the more surely, that set their minds upon such fantasies. And of this kind
of tokens, we read partly that those were, which the scripture says, Pharaos
sorcerers fought against Moses and Aaron withal: and yet they were in no wise
hable to abide those mirables, that were done, by ye workyng of gods power.
For like as the Devil can not abide ye majesty and power of God, even so are
not his works hable to stand, in the presence of the works and miracles of
God. And if we will boult out the papists prankes, and their feyned fantasies,
we may find false tokens of both these sorts. For how many times, do these
false deceaueable varlettes affirm things to be done, that were never done?
how often do either the sacrificeing priests feyne, yt souls appear unto
them, or friars and cloisterers make lies of good spirits or evil spirits,
where as they either hunt for aduau^tage, at the ruder sort of peoples hands,
or have a pleasure to see, how simple folks be, or else (under that color)
they serve their own lust and hoorishe filthiness? I report me to their own
deeds, entrepryses, manners, and consciences, and if they will say truth, they
shall tell of such knackes, as it is abominable for any man, to have written
them, and a christian man's ears can not abide the hearing of the^. And I
pray you, what great town, or what monastery shall we speak of yt has not
ben aduau^ced by one false and lyeng token or other? how often have the graye
friars made lies of their Francisce? how often have the black friars made
loud lies of ye blessed virgin Mary, of Barbara, Katherine, and of Christ our
Lord him self? And among these, it shall not be far amiss to reckon, what a
miracle they have feyned of the sacrement of the aultare.

For they say, that the bread has changed his substance, and is altered The
bread God the chief of all miracles.
in to the very substance of ye body of Christ, and yet the accidents
remaynyng still: that is to say, the quality and quantity. And ye doctrine
they beat upon so shamelesly, yt albeit they see all the senses of man to deny
it, and that non authority of the scripture serves to their feyned fantasy,
yet they are not afraid, to make men to take it for a miracle, and to believe
it, whether they will or not.

And like as these rakehelles are most nymble in forgeing of miracles. so they
want not their other manner of lyeng wonders, which are done by ye working of
the Devil. For he is present with his chosen instruments, and (like a diligent
preaching prelate) he watches that he be not disturbed of this so pleasant a
tragedy: Whereby it is certain, that many wonders be done by his power. For
herunto perteyne the sundry appearinges of spirits about graves, their moan
making, their groninges, their howling, their weping, and also their fyrie
facio^s, and horrible likenesses, who^ the simple common people has believed
(all this while) were dead men's souls. But whose this tragedy is, and who is
ye playour of it, it may easily be perceived, if we mark their co^iuringes.
For as soon as those spirits be coniured by a priest, they feyne the^ to be some
dead men's soul, they tell what incredible pains they abide in the fire of
purgatory, they compain of their tormenting, and require help of their
heirs. And if the question be asked, what it is, that must help them, they
say, a certain no^bre of masses, certain mynnyng days, certain meritorious
prayers, and certai^ such other gayre which get friars, and priests money,
but they pluck men's hearts from God and from the truth, and wrappe them in
supersticious and idolatrous errors. But as soon as their heirs have done
once, as the devil moves them to do, there is no more sorrow, there is no more
mourning, there is no more gronyng: no, there is no more voice heard: and so the
wretch people think they have helped a soul, that was in daungier, when they
have done nothing else, but most acceptable service to the devil.

Of the same sort be the miracles, that are wrought by images, whether they be
feyned by the false lyeng craftye conueyaunce of man, or stered up by the
working of the devil him self. For there were of the most famous images, that
men believed, some wept, some spoke, some shifted them selves from one place to an
other. And some of them were called great workers of healing miracles, and were
set furthe gorgeously with a great sight of curses henged about them. And
because me^ should not only thank saints for their health, and other good
turns (which was wicked enough of it self) we are sure, yt they gave names to
sai^tes, after yt places and images, which they were worshipped in. By There
were such ladies pleyntie in England, besides roodes, and many other.
reason whereof, they said that our lady of Aquen wrought one miracle, our lady
of Laurete an other, our lady of the wood an other, and our lady of
Regensburigh an other: tushe there be other miracles besides these that I
reckoned up, a great deal more worthy to be wondered at: howbeit I dare not
say, whether our posterity will give credit to them or not. For I have seen
(with in the time of my remembrance) men in a great sodayn (not purposing any
such thing before) re^ne as fast as their fete could bear them, and as if they
hade ben out of their wits, three or four miles to an image, and there lie
prostrate.ij. or.iij. hours together, as if they hade ben half dead, and than
come to their mind again, and so rise up and com (fair and manerly) home.

This matter is more new, and over lately done, than to be denied. At
Regensburgh there was a lady (that was much spoken of for this kind of
miracle) whom they called Our lady of beauty, trymmed with a crown and a
regal scepter more like Juno tha^ yt blessed virgin Mary. But what need we to
make many words about this matter, seeing all men know, that there was exceeding
great pleyntie of such manner of miracles, in every place: which not wtstanding
were lies, as a man may perceive clearly by this one argument, that what feate
so ever they attempted to do, was clean contrary to the trade of Gods word.

And forasmuch as al men are not Antichrist fights! with open force.
so ignorant and blind, that all do suffer them selves to be deceived and
blinded, with this furst sweorde of Antichrist, that is, lies and false
miracles: Paul ascribes unto him that other sweorde of satan also, that is,
open violent force and power to do wrong, wherwyth he may openly lay upon
them, that resist him, and oppress and make them to couche, that speak
against him. And this we may see, as plainly in the Bishops of Rome, as we
do their lies and falfe crafts. For furst, they are furnished well enough,
with their own streynght, and their own power. They have great cities
obedient at their commandment. They have great countries, and great men
under their subjection and authority, they have great hosts of valeau^t and
well furnished warlike me^, they have also harness and weapones for the wars,
and all that can be required unto marciall affairs, and to make wars withal:
yea they not only have them, but also they occupy them openly, against kings,
princes, cities, and people, that refuse to be under their subjection, and dare
be so hardy, as to withstand their laws. Notwithstanding, because they have
perceived (by experience) the chance of wars to be uncertain, and doubtful,
the myschieuous subtle helhoundes have made them new kind of armor, and a
new sweorde, so kene, that they have strike^ down eue^ most mighty kings
and emperors with the edge of it: Excommunicacion I mean, which a man may
call rather a thonderbolt, that they use to strike and to curse such princes
withal, as be not their friends, and to depryue them of their princely
dignities; and when they have put down them, to set other in their places. And
to the intent their tyranny should want nothing, they have made their power so
strong, with other men's marcial force, that they never myssed of some, either
princes or common people, which were content to put their judgments and
sentences in execucio^, against such as were enemies of the sea of Rome, and
to hasarde them selves in most dangerous wars for the mayntenaunce of it. Of
this tirannie (joined with wonderful much politic falshead) ye Greek
Emperors felt their part. For the B. of Rome procured the Lumbardes in to
Italy, to make wars upon the^, till he hade wiped them besides the Empire of
al Italy. And yet the lumbardes them selves tasted of the like falshead and
tirannie. For when they began to wexe to sore upon the Bishops of Rome, and
to covet the empire of Italy and Rome: where the Bishop durst not meddle with
them him self, he calls the French kings to help him, by whose power he
furst repressed the Lumbardes, and at last he ouerlaide them so by Charles the
great, that he left them nothing of their realm, which they hade kept in
possession.CC. years, save only the bare name. And in our time we have seen
the B. of Rome do to much wrong, to the French men. For he drove them also
(after his own practiced manner) by other men's power, namely by ye armies of
the Heluecianes, at yt time out of al Italy. In deed these are the craftye
tricks of this bawdye hoore of Babylon, yea she is so connyng in these wilye
knackes, and can brewe mad love cups so fynely, that she can get her lovers
in every country, so trusty and so constraunt, that they will not stick to put
their own lives in hasarde, so they may defend and mayntene her maistresship.

Yet least she should be constrained to seek her new lovers and defendours, or
rather protectours every day afreshe, she is crept so deep in to the bosoms
of emperors, that they suffer them selves to be bounden, by their solemn
oath, to defend this beast, against all her foes, who so ever they be: as we
may understand, by the form of the oath, lately prescribed unto the emperor
Ottho, and as it is somewhat more evidently recorded in other of ye popes own
Canones. For in the Extrauagauntes, Com. li. 1. Tit. De Maioritate and
obedientia, he writes thus.

We are taught by the words of the Gospel, that in this church (meaning the
church of Christ, which he understands to be ye church of Rome) and in the
power of the same, there be two sweordes, a spiritual sweorde, and a
temporal, sweorde. For wha^ the apostles said, Lo, here are two sweordes,
that is to say, in the church: the Lord answered them not that they were to
many, but ynowe. Doubtless he that denies the temporal sweorde to be in Petres
power, does mark evil the word yt the Lord speaks: Put up thy sweord again
in to the scaberde. Therefore the church has power of both sweordes: that is
to say, the spiritual sweorde, and the material sweorde. But the material
sweord must be exercited for ye church, and the spiritual sweorde of the
church. The spiritual sweorde is in the priests own hand, and the material
sweorde in the hand of kings and knights: howbeit at the appointement and
sufferaunce of the priest.

Mark here now (brethren) Antichrists external power, and his bloody
murdering sweorde, which the B. of Rome chalengeth to him self by so plain
words, having no grounded reason of the scriptures, but wrasteth them so
blasphemously and so violently. For he says, there be two sweordes in the
church, that is the Ecclesiastical power, and the Emperors power: and he
makes them both subject to the B. of R. And he says, that they
misunderstande Christ's words, which deny the Emperors power to be subject
to the B. of Romes pleasure. And herein (in deed) the beast says most true.
For they that deny this, do the greatest displeasure that can be to the sea of
Rome, while they would set the Emperors power at liberty, and wype the sea of
Rome beside so great authority, to appoint and command.

But let it suffice us, to have learned thus much hereout, that it is out of
question, that the B. of Rome has snatched to him self, that other kind of
Antichrists weapones. And what need we to beat any longer upon this matter,
seeing experience tells plainly, that I say the truth? For is not the
Emperors sweord drawn now at the B. of Romes berke? Does it not rage and make
havoc (already) of the Lords saints? And I think there is no man, but he
knows, for what cause the B. of To. commands this sweord to be drawn.
There be bulls yt came from Rome, which testifye the same: Mary, that the
Germans must be brought again to the obedience of the church of Rome, with
fire and sweorde, and be spoiled quyte of the joyous comfortable fodder of the
Gospel. Yet to bring us the more out of doubt, let us hear, what the beast
him self says. The words of the Indulgence, Idibus Iulii. 1546


Therefore where we utterly despered of their amendment (meaning the Germans)
and seeing that they were open enemies to the holy church of God, and at utter
dephyaunce with all godly men, and that they contend and labor with all their
possible policy and diligence, to draw all other people in to yt same pit
of wickedness, yt they the^ selves are fallen into: it chanced by the
inspiracion of the holy ghost, that our most dear son in Christ, the most
valeaunt and most religious prince, Charles emperor of Rome, always Augustus
purposed to take weapon in hand, against the same, both Gods enemies and
his rebels: whose godly and laudable purposes, and excellent devises for the
christen common weal, we shall aid with all the treasures that we and the
holy church of Rome have, for the health of the godly, for the defense of
religion, for the honor of God, and for the public peace and tranquillity.

In deed these be the beasts own words, which as they mean bloodily, so
(with certai^ foxlike wylynesse) they clooke the bloody meaning, under the holy
and honorable names of the church of God, of peace, of religion, and of
tra^quillitie. But if any man think this unavailable, to prove his tirannie
withal, let us mark the matter it self (brethren) and the subtle fatches of
this bloody tragedy. Ca^ ye miserable murder of ye right blessed Io. Diasius.
man Ioa^nes Diasius the Spanyarde, be now out of mind, who^ his own brother
slew with his hand, here in the myddle of Germany, this year, the. 26. day
of March. And yet the most cruel brother murtherour and thief escaped quyte
away, and suffered not according to his desartes. Open your eyes therefore
(brethren) and know the abominable procedinges and driftes of Antichrist, and
all his ympes, by one man's wicked deed. The B. of Rome has whetted Diasius
axe for your heads. The Spanyardes com upon you. Your cause and the cause of
your wives and your children is in hand: and Antichrist lays about him so
woodly, he is so furious, he is so desirous to have us destroyed, that he
makes it laufull for a man, to murder his own brother, and gives such
murderers hyre for their labor. Therefore Antichrist fights with both those
sweordes, that Paul ascribes unto him. For he has the^ that are desirous to
overcome by flattery, provoke by promises, and ^o enueagle by persuasiones,
who^ so ever they perceive to know the truth of the matter, and to be
ouermuche vnfrendely to the B. of Rome. But for all that, in the mean time,
they make hot wars, ye enemies sweorde slasheth, Germany is on fire in
every corner, and Antichrists power rages in every place. Therefore let us
watch brethren, let us hold up our heads, and pray continually, yt our
Lord would vouchesafe to help his church, and to deliver it from yt hands of
ye furious rageing enemy. Now forasmuch as in this fifth point, we have
learned by perfect tokens and proves, yt ye B. of Rome is yt right and mighty
houge Antichrist: 6. Upon whom and how far Antichrist has power to rage.
before we make an end of this place, there is an other matter also to be
known: I mean, yt we may understand, upon who^ Antichrist has power to rage
with his weapones, and how far God permits his fury to exte^de against ye
saints. This does Paul teach in few words, in ye ij. epistle to his
Tessalonianes, writing thus: His coming is after the working of satan, with all power, and lie^g signs and wonders, and with all deceaueablenesse of
unrighteousness, in them yt perish, because they received not yt love of ye
truth, yt they might have been saved. And for yt cause, God shall send the^
strong delusion, yt they should believe lies, that all they might be damned,
which believed not the truth, but hade pleasure in unrighteousness. These
words of Paul are full of comfort. For like as Christ our saueour does (in
Matthewe) make plain signification, yt Antichrists miracles shall smally (yea
nothing) avail to deceive ye elect: eue^ so Paul also teaches, yt God
suffers his tira^nie to be exerciced, only upon them, whom ye justice of God
judges to be destroyed and damned. But least we should think, yt God does
save some, and da^ne some, without certain discrete judgment, like a tira^ne, he
tells by and by in ye words following who they be: and says, they be those,
yt hate ye truth, and will not receive it, nor do after it, and have more
delight in ye darkness of lies, tha^ in the light of ye truth. And they yt be
such persons, are used to be blinded by ye just and upright judgment of God,
yt being deceived with lies and false deceates, they may be in subjection to ye
yowke of Antichrists tira^nie, yea they rather thrust the^ selves under his
subjection, for their own pleasures. For seeing all manner of unthankfulness is
odious before God, and worthy of punishment, yet that kind of
unthankfulness, whereby the most bou^teous benefit of Gods grace, that is to
say, the knowlage and plain declaracion of his word and truth is wont to be
contemned and rejected, does justly deserve (of all other) the most sore
punishment.

This matter has examples ynowe, in every place of the scriptures. Yet the
most notable and most horrible example hereof is in Pharao. For while he did
not only not receive nor allow the truth of Gods word, and the most holsom
warnynges of God, but also reiecte them with an unthankful heart, and with
threattenyng and blasphemous words, he was cast in to so great a folly and
blyndenesse, by the just judgment of God: that he could not considre his
present miserable destruction, but threw him self and his, in a wilful lust of
wickedness, headlo^g in to the rageing read sea. And it does not much
diffre from this, that we read chanced to wicked Achab: which while he
dephieth the holsom monicions of Micheas the prophet, and does after the
pestilent counsels of the false prophets, he falls in to present
destruction. The like judgment of the righteous God fell upon al Israel, when
they were seduced with ye lies of the false prophets, in the days of king
Zedechias and of the prophet Jeremy, while they renou^ced ye courteous
monicio^ of the Lord God. And in deed if we behold the furst springing up of
Antichrists tirannie, we shall see, that the same matter chanced at that time
also, in every point. For while the people mynding to gratify the B. of Rome,
were better content to receive the use of images, and to be instructed and
taught by them, in ye matter of Christian faith, and of christian life, than by
the holy scriptures, they were taught such lessones by their images, as the
devil is used to teach his scholares (I mean) supersticion, abominable and
wicked Godseruice: and there upon (as the case was among ye heathen Idolaters in
times past) there followed al kind of vice and wickedness, yea and yt error
(by littel and littel) crept up so high, that at lenght we were made subjects
to Antichrists yowke in all matters, and were compelled (mawgre our heads) to
allow al his trynkettes for good ware, and to be obedient to al his Canones,
and statutes. We need not to make long rehearsal of things done long agoo, but
let us behold ye state of things, that are presently in all men's eyes, and
in all men's hands. Almighty God our most merciful father tedring the
treason and ruinous state yt we have suffered, has vouchedsafe in these our
days, to reveal unto us (through the light of his word) al yt is necessary
unto salvation. And yet here a man may find an infinite multitud of me^ which
being given to the affection of their own fleshely fantasy, hade rather be
governed, and guyded by lies and false doctrine, tha^ by ye light of the
truth: yea Hark my gentilmen Iackes on both sides to this saing.
mary, to thinte^t they may freely follow their own affectiones and filthy
fleshely lusts, and serve all vicious wickedness, their trade is not only to
be haters of the truth, which they embraced before, but also as much as in
the^ lies, to psecute and oppress it. But if we look upon ye life,
behaueours, and religion of those same me^, we shall see more clearly tha^ ye
day light, yt it is ye just judgment of God, which Paul makes me^cio^ of in
this place. For ye wicked helhoundes are dropped in to so great a folishe
fo^denesse, and are so far past the^ selves, yt now they have rejected and
dephied ye true preachers of God, and ye trade of Gods holy word, they The
praise of Maide^ priests
hear those me^, and obey their doctrine, whom they see most shameful
hooremo^gers, cuckold makers, dycers, dro^kerdes, and full of al kind of vices:
yea they require to be pourged of their sines at those me^nes hands, who^ they
know to be ye very bond slaves of al wicked sins and mischief. They also
will be taught by those me^, whom they them selves confess to have less
learning than an ass. And yet they are not co^te^t to be thus fo^dly mad,
but now in this dangerous peril yt al Germany stands presently in, they
hold with those me^nes entreprises, and further their inte^tes with al their
diligence and power, yea and with their prayers both privately and openly, who
(as al me^ may Italiane^ and Spanyardes, Antichrists guard.
see) are the most deadly enemies of the common wealth of our country. For
shall we think any man to be so folishe and ignorant, that he can not
perceive, what malicious hearts the Italianes and Spanyardes bear to all
Germany? Is there any man so deaf and doltishe, that he never heard, how they
rail against us? They think it not enough to call us barbarous rude beasts,
lowtes, fools, and dogs, but their manner is to burden us also, with the
horrible crime of heresye, yea they think it laufull for the^, to exercice all
kind of wickedness, tyranny, and merciles So they are welcome in to England
also, to traitourous popish priests, and to hoores, bawdes, cuckoldes, etc.
cruelty upon the Germaynes, as though they thought the Germaynes, not worthy
to be counted among the nombre of men. And yet we see these men the most
welcome gestes yt heart can think, unto many in Germany: yea there be so^,
that believe, they shall be defended, and have a merry world by these men's
marcial powers, which have always hitherto (by so many evident tokens) vttred
their malicious hearts against all Germans. But this is the very just
judgment of God, that they which hate ye light of the truth, shall not only
be blind, but being robbed also of their common wit, they shall not be hable
to see, that they see with their open eyes, nor hear that they hear, with
their own ears.

Now must we diligently observe in this place (loui^g brethren in Christ) what
is our office to do, if we be desirous to escape this grievous hurt of so
pernicious a blindness. That is, we must beware, that we be not so
unthankful: we must arm our selves also with such faith and diligence, as
may worthily receive the light of Gods word and truth, wha^ God offreth it
us. Wherein above all things, we must beware of this (brethren) that we give
not our minds to our own private affections, nor set more by them, than by
the knowlage of the truth. For who so ever has mind to follow his own
pleasur, shall never com to the true faith.

Therefore it stands us in hand, to tame our affectiones, and to bring the^
under the obedience of the spirit. And among other things, this also does
much hurt, for folks to hunt gredily after the pleasures of carnalitie, and
present prosperity of worldly things: for that we see, is the cause of the
greatest wickedness that can be, and the undoing to many a one at this day.
For there be some, that could be well content to bear the gospel, and the
glad tydinges of salvation purchaced by Christ, if it wanted the cross, and
storms of persecucio^. But when they see them once com, they not only let the
most holsom doctrine of the gospel god, and grievously blaspheme it, but also
they dare rail most deuillishlye against Christ our Lord him self.

But let the invincible and hearty ma^ful constauncie of the most holy men
that were our auncettours, make us hearty in this behalf, brethren. For with
how glad an heart, and with what thanks to God, shall we think, that they
would have received yt doctrine of the gospel, if any man hade preached it unto
them, in the days of the emperor Lewis the. 4. When they abode the
tho^derclappe and most heavy burden of Antichrists curse, eightene years
space, like right hearty true men to the emperor? And shall we than (being
perfitly instructed by the light of the truth) be more cowheardly afraid of
this enemy (the B. of Rome) than they were? Shall it be seen, that we are more
cold and faynter hearted to Christ our king and saueour, than they were to
their emperor, that was but a mortal man? And shall we pass less of our
faith, that we have promised to Christ, than they did of their fidelity that
they promised to a mortal man? Deliver your selves (brethren) from the
slanderous infamye of so great a wickedness.

Think it a goodly thing for you, to follow the virtuous heartynesse of your
elders. Think it well done, to bring men's souls out of bondage in to
liberty, though you should sheade your heart blood for it. Take it for a
goodly matter and a joyous for you to suffer death for the love of your
country, for your wives, your children, and for the saving of men's souls,
and for the glory of our saueour Christ.

There are the fotestepppes of so many martires, that are gone before us, and
the example of Christ him self, that it is not possible for us, to shrink
without to much shame

But above all things, it shall be necessary for us, to pray heartily and
continually, that he would vouchesafe to deliver us from the tyranny of
Antichrist, and to instruct us with his spirit and faith, that we may be
hable to persiste manfully in the truth that we have received, and finally to
be saved in Christ. To him be honor, glory, and praise for over and ever Amen.

Thus ends the fourth Homily.
The.v. Homily.
In this.v. Homily is described the end and final destruction of Antichriste,
and what christen faithful peoples duty is to do in the rage of Antichrists
tyranny.

IN these other four Homilies (loving brethren in Christ) I have hitherto
plainly declared those scriptures, yt serve to know the feate, the springing
up, the person, the works, and the weapones of Antichrist by: which if they
be compared with the seat, starting up, person, works, and weapones of the
bishop of Rome, we must needs confess, that what so ever is spoken of
Antichrist, by the prophet Daniel, and the apostle S. Paul, agrees rightly
with the B. of Rome, in every condition. And therefore this must of necessity
follow, that the B. of Rome (which delyteth to be named the head of the
church; Christ's vicare, the portour of heaven gate, yea and holiness it
self) is that undoubted and mighty houge enemy of our saueour Christ: that is
to say, Antichrist, the manne of sin, the son of perdicion, and that high
abominacion, which nestleth his seat in the temple of God, and exalts him
self, above all that is named God: in that he (to much sawcely) takes that
upon him self, which belongs to none, but to ye only grace and power of God.

Now remains the last matter, which makes mention of the fall and destruction
of Antichrist, which also is to be known, by the places before rehearsed,
whereof we may suck not only excellent good learning, but also exceadyng much
comfort.

But the Apostle Paul (speaking of the end and destruction of this ungracious
The end and destruction of Antichrist.
and wicked monstre) says: The Lord shall destroy him with the breathe of his
mouth, and shall despeche him with the brightness and glory of his coming:
that is to say, at his bright and glorious coming. Two things therefore the
apostle would have us to note, concerning the destruction of Antichrist. Furst
he says, that he must be destroyed and slain with ye breath of ye Lords
mouth: which saying is taken out of Esaias, as I said a litel before. For Esaias
speaking of Christ our Lord and of his works, reports the self same matter,
in ye very same words. And there we must more depely mark the meaning of yt
words, Antichrist is destroyed with the breathe of the Lords mouth.
whereby we may the more easily understand, yt these are also fulfilled. The
breathe of the Lords mouth, is yt eternal and almighty word of God, by the
which it is manifest, that al creatures were made at the beginning of the
world, and are conserved eue^ unto this day. And this word (ye Apostle
says) shall be the sweorde, wherewith Antichrist must needs be destroyed.

And in deed the same Apostle calls the word of God a swcorde, writing thus
to the Hebrews in the. 4. Chap. The word of God is quick and mighty in
operacion, and sharper than any two edged sweorde, and pearceth through even
unto the dividing asondre of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and
the marye, and judges the thoughts and intentes of the heart.

Surely they that have their sins opened, and reproved by this word,
perceive by experience, yt it is such a manner of sweorde in deed. Furthermore
when the same apostle armeth us, and trymmeth us against our common enemy, he
reaches us the sweorde of the spirit, which is the word of God, wherewith
Christ our saueour him self has taught us to fight, by his own example. For
wha^ satan (that wicked temptour) came to him being, as he was very man in
deed, Christ does ward and stryke by all Satanes blows, with this one only
sweorde, holding out (against every assault of temptacion) such fit textes
of gods word, as he might put him to flight, and break his weapones
withal. Wherefore seeing we see the devil him self ouercomen with Gods word
long agoo, we shall think, that Paul hade good matter to say and teach us,
that Antichrist (the chosen instrument of the devil) shall also be overcome
and destroyed with the breathe of Gods mouth: that is, by the word of God.
But the mystery of this sentence we must more depely search out.

Paul in the same place (treating of Antichrists weapones and works) said,
that his power and working shall be deuillishe, and that being trymlye furnished
in false wyles and lies, he shall do all that the prophets report of him,
yea that he shall reign (like a king) in men's consciences, through the power
of lies. For there would never a man in all the world receive so heinous an
abominacion, that knew perfitly what it were. But forasmuch as he crepeth in
to men's consciences with wily crafts and false sleightes, he disse^bleth
him self to be an other manner a fellow, tha^ he is in deed: Yea by the reason
of false citing and expounding of places of the scriptures, he knows the
cast, how to cover his monstrous face. Anon after, they (whom with his false
doings he has made tame fools) have once received him, he reigns and
rules the roast in their consciences, after such sort, that they give
credence to him, and do what so ever he bids them, and refuse what so ever
he forbids them: yea they pass their time being all together addicte to him.

Now seeing all Antichrists tirannie and emperious kingdom has none other
sure foundation, but only lies and false crafts, it must needs have a
downfall also, as soon as the light of Gods word, that is, the light of
eternal truth shyneth into men's consciences, and reproves craftye
sleyghtes and lies. For it is not possible for men to give credence to lies any
more, which know them to be lies, but it makes them rather to be abashed, to
be so shamefully deceived: and to bear a deadly hate unto them, that made the^
to do amysse, by their deceauyng. Than therefore Antichrist has lost both his
life and his royalty, through the sweorde of Gods word, albeit he live yet
still in body, and reign still in very many of his members. But that we may
perceive this gayre more certainly, we must note the matter it self: that is,
how it does fittlye accord to the condition of the B. of Rome.

When the bishop of Rome began to be desirous to bear the bell, he set out
himself and al his purposes, for men to see, not to be such as they were in
deed, but painted and flourished over with sundry countrefait colors. For at
the furst yt simple rude common people must needs be persuaded that Petre had
the supremacy, yea ye principality among Christ's Apostles, and at leynght
was brought to Rome, and there preached the Gospel, and that he was the furst
bishop of the church of Rome. By this reason the supremacy of other churches
might be translated to ye church of Rome, and this might be obtained with al,
that the B. of R. is the head and ye universal bishop of all the church, as
he that being successor of Petre, ye prince of the apostles, and Christ's
vicare, has his sea in the principal church. And because this so ambicious
and lickepeny lieng gloss should not lack his countrefait color, these
arrogaunt saucy helhou^des have brought forth places of scripture violentlye
and wretchedly wrasted for their purpose. And where as we read, that Christ
said to Petre, when he confessed him to be ye son of God: Thou art Petre, and
upon this rock will I build my church: They said, Christ's words are thus
to be understood, that Christ made Petre the foundation of his church, and
that al churches are bounden therefore of duty to be under the obedience of
Petres successor, the B. of Rome. Again where the Lord says, Petre feed my
sheep, these men have expounded this word (feed) so, that they would needs have
the authority and supremacy of all bishops and churches given to the B. of
Rome, as unto Petres successor. They have also violently wrasted this unto the
same purpose, ye Christ speaking of the keys, says: What so ever thou shall
bind in earth, shall be bounden in heaven: and what so ever thou shall lose on
earth, shall be losed in heaven. For they said, whom so ever either the B. of
Rome him self or any other sacrificeing priest (being consecrated by the B. of
Romes authority) assoiled, was losed and rid from the bonds of sins: and
contrary wise that unto whom so ever that manner of absolucion was denied, he
was bounden still in the cheynes of sin, and in the state of damnacion. These
toys (I say) and infinite other have the subtle sleighty merchants beaten
in to the ears and hearts of the common simple sort. And as soon as these
matters began once to grow in to credence, men began also to taste of the
B. of Romes power and tirannye. For if any man hade so good a stomach, that he
durst set his foot either against the B. of Rome or his, he was straightwaies
knocked in the head, with the thonderbolt of excommunicacion, and reputed of
all men for a damned and an undone man: and thus the matter growed so far
furthe, that even most mighty emperors began to be afraid of the B. of Romes
power. For they spared not emperors, but shot of their ordinance at them
also, and commanded straightly under great pains, that no man should obey those
emperors, that were excommunicate: as it is to see in ye chronicles of the
greek emperors, and by ye unworthy falls of the emperors, Henry ye. 4, and.
5. Lewis ye. 4. and Friderike ye. 1. and. 2. And doubtless albeit they did (with
al dilligent forsight) resist ye wicked tira^nie of ye bishops of Rome, and
entered Italy sundry times, with royal strong armies, and drove their enemies
ye bishops of Rome out of ye title, and set others in their rowmes, yet all
their travails were vain and to no purpose, another were they hable to twytche
away so much as one hear of ye bishops cruel violence, nor to pull it under
any whitte at all. For as soon as their backs were once turned, and departed
Italy, ye bishops of Rome came in to the city again, and occupied their
lost tirannye afreshe, and with the thonderclappes of their curse, they made
the Emperors feign to be obedient unto them. And the only cause of this
mischief was, yt the B. of Rome was not yet dead in men's consciences: because
they believed, that he was Christ's vicare, and hade power to lose and bind,
yea and power over heaven and hell to. Therefore the streinght and power of
emperors was never hable to prevail or bring any thing to pass against the
craftye doiges and force of the bishops of Rome. For although emperors the^
selves and other of their courts and householdes espied ye romish frauds and
deceueable wiles well enough, yet ye vulgar people being ignorant of al yt,
thought yt the B. of Romes decrees ought to be honored as the laws of God:
and because they dradde ye thonderclappes of his curse, as though they hade ben
the fearful sentences of the judgment of God, they would another meddle nor be
of counsel with such, as they saw knocked down with the laitbolte of
excommunicacion. And this the bishops of Rome could the easylier bring to
pass, because there were bishops and doctors of churches scatred throughout
all the coasts of christendom, which set furthe the authority of the church of
Rome, for apostolic and godly.

But now let us speak also of such matters, as have chanced in our time, that
we may see, how Paul ye Apostles prophecy is fulfilled at this day. At such
time as it pleased God our heavenly and merciful bou^teous father, to set his
people at liberty, which had been long holden in bondage, and to bridle
Antichrists tira^nie, he chosed the small vessels and such as were of no
reputacio^, to co^fou^de by the^ those things yt seemed most mighty and
invincible. For two or three faithful doctors and ministres of churches being
enlumined with the spirit of God, when they were grown to more perfect knowlage
of the scriptures, vttred openly the breathe of the Lords mouth, that is to
say, the word of God, and weaponed many a one with the same sharp strong
sweord. Tha^ wha^ men hade once gotten that weapon in their hands (to keep
their heads against the craftye wiles of the false prophets) they began to
acknowlage Jesus Christ, and to believe, that he is the only head of his
church, the chief priest and king, the sufficient sacrifice for the sins of
the world, and the only mediator and advocate with the heavenly father, yea
and such a one that is never absent from his church, and needs not the
service of any vicare in his rowme. And in deed the knowlage of these matters
does also reprove the lies and legier demayne of the B. of Rome, to the intent
they might see on ye other part, that he is another the head of the church,
nor the high priest and king, and much less the vicare of Christ our saueour.
They have moreover learned, that ye Mass is no sacrifice for sins, nor ye
popish absolucion is of any authority. Furthermore those places of scripture
which the bishops of Rome (like most shameless helhoundes) hade violently,
wickedly, and sawcely wrasted, were plainly opened in their own true meaning,
when the light of the truth was laid to them. And out of those places men
learned, that Petre is not the rock it self, but that he hade his denominacion
of Petra, that is the rock, which he confessed, Christ is the Rock, and not
Petre.
and so they acknowlaged, that Christ is the rock, which is the only
foundation of the church, whereupon the church of faithful people (being
surely buylt) can not swerve, 1. Cor. 3. Men have learned also, that the office
of feding signifies not an empire or a kingdom, but the office of teaching,
monishing, exhortyng, reproving, correcting and comforting, which be all
comprehended in the ministry of the word: which as it manifestly appears
Matthew. 28. was not committed to Petre alone, but to all the apostles wtall.
This is also manifest, yt the Lord never granted unto Petre the apostle any
supremacy over the rest of his disciples, but that he rather repressed (with
sore sharp words) al their ambicion and desire of rule bearing, if they began
once to be ouercomen with the infirmity of the flesh, and strive who should be
chief, above the rest. Matthew. 18. 20. Luc. 22. Io. 13.

Concerning the keys, it is evidently declared also, that they signify not
what the keys signify.
the thonderbolt of the popes curse, or his pelting pardones, but the virtue
and power of the gospel and word of God, which proclaymeth forgiveness of
sins, to all them that trust faithfully in Christ, and are heartily repentaunt
for their sins: and it seals up and confirms their consciences, with the
promises of God. And on the contrary part, it threatteneth the punishment of
everlasting damnacion, to them that are unfaithful, and can not repent

These matters and infinite others such like, when men hade learned by the light
of Gods word: and on the other part, when they thereby hade once espied ye
B. of Romes sleighty iuggling, deceates, and lies: than was Antichrist slain
with the breathe of the Lords mouth, and lay dead in their consciences. For
after that time, they passed not upon him, but began to esteem his blessings
for cursinges, and his cursinges for blessings: as for the thonderboltes of
his excommunicacion, they laughed them to scorn, and reckoned all his power to
be nothing else, but wicked and blasphemous tirannie. Therefore as Golias was
(in the old world) under David, so do we see, that the B. of Rome is now
slain with his own sweord, I mean, with yt same places of scripture, by ye
which (being miserably and violently wrasted) he has established his tirannie.

And thus we see it truly fulfilled, that the Apostle Paul (being inspired
with the spirit of Christ) spoke before hand concerning Antichrist. For
although he rage horriblye in his members, and blustre out threatteninges and
tho^derclappes, yet those people are nothing moved with his procedinges, which
are true faithful christianes in deed, and have their Bishop, king and priest,
and their only head and mediator in haven, unto whom (having their minds
lifted up unto those things that are in heaven) they do obey, and pass not a
pynne of the popes masking visours, nor the procedinges of ye hoore of Babylon,
for all that she is rose colored with many a saints blood.

Now unto this furst part, Paul Antichrist shall be despeched at the Lords
coming.
adds also the other point, concerning Antichrists destruetion: and says,
ye he shall utterly be despeched at ye glorious coming of our saueour Christ.
This he does speak of the last day, and final judgment when Christ ye son
of God and of Mary shall give vnreuocable sentence, upon all flesh: and thus
the Apostles mind is to teach us, with what judgment Antichrists
wickedness shall be than punished: and that Daniel the prophet does more
pleyntifully, and more clearly describe in these words. I looked till the
seats were prepared, and till Daniel. 7.
the old aged sat him down. His clothing was as white as snow, and the
hears of his head like the pure wolle. His throne was like the fyrie flame;
and his wheles as the burning fire. There drew furthe a fyrie stream, and went
out from him a thousau^t times a thousaunt served him, X. M. times X. M. stood
before him. The judgment was set, and the books opened. Than I took head there
unto, because of the voice of the proud words which that horn spoke. I
beheld til the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given over to be
brent in the fire.

In these words is described Antichrists pain, and the punisheme^t that he
shall suffer. And in deed Damel does furst paynt out almightye God the judge
with all his majesty, to teach us, that it is God (of whose power, name and
authority Antichrist braggeth) which shall punish Antichriste.

More over he says, that ye judgment shall be just and upright, wherein ye
books of gods providence and justice shall be necessarily opened: which no
privileges, no bulls, no seals, or any such other matter shall be hable to
cou^trepaise. Last of all he reports, yt the hole beast with this little horn
is cast in to the burning stream, or burning rooke of fire, that is, in to the
fire of everlasting damnacion, as that well-beloved disciple of Jesus Christ
teaches. Apoca. (...) and. 20. chaptres.

Therefore must Antichrist (the head of wickedness and abominacion) with all his
members; that is, with all them that believe his doctrine, cleave unto him, and
serve him, be needs cast holly into the eternal fire of ever lasting
damnacio^, accordingly as the prophets, Christ, and the apostles have told
before. I am not ignorant, that it is a sore and dreadful sentence. I know
that to vttre this sentence, is not only odious unto many, but it is also
exceeding dangerous. Howbeit we must needs speak that, which the spirit of
truth has spoken before us, and that Christ would have to be instead of a
faithful warning unto us. therefore it shall stand us in hand (most loving
brethren in Christ) to considre diligently this last and final judgment, that
Antichrist and his me^bres shall receive: and herin we shall note two chief
specialties. The abominable condition of the popish religion.


Furst what a heinous and abominable pestilence, the papacy and the Pope him
self is, who^ I have all this while declared to be that right and mighty houge
Antichrist. For in this behalf are some simple (that otherwise are no evil
men) very much deceived, which confess in deed the popish faith and religion
to be false, and contrary to the truth, yet in the mean while, they take it
but for a common ignorance, and a tryfling error, and an error that is easy
to be pourged, whithe they may follow, and yet be saved to. And forasmuch as
they are brought in to a fools paradise with this opinion, they do not much
abhor the wares of the Antichristian faith, another do they think it wicked
or much dangerous for them, to stick still within the filthe thereof, or for
aduauntages sake, to turn to that vomit again, either yet to make their
children subjects to the yowke of Antichrists tirannye, by bonds of marriage
or other such like means.

But we are told an other manner of tale (far wide from their minds) by the
oracles of Christ and the Prophets, which testifye with one accord, that
Antichrist (even the bishop of Rome) with all his members shall be cast hole
into the unquenchable fire of ouerlasting damnacion. This are we taught not
only by oracles reporting this matter, but there are infallible reasonos of this
sentence contained in the word of God, and in the holy articles of our faith.
For we learn by both, that our Lord Jesus Christ is ye only way, the only
door, and gate of salvation, whereby we may enter in to the kingdom of heaven.
Furthermore they teach us, that Christ Jesus is the only head of his church,
the only and chief priest, the only sacrifice for the sins of the world, and
the only mediator and advocate unto God the father for ma^kinde: so that as
many as vouchesafe to believe in him, shall live for evermore, and as many as
will not receive and acknowlage him to be their saueour, shall be utterly cast
away.

Hereof we have testimonies occurraunt in every place of the scriptures. For
Christ our Lord speaks alowde, and says with plain words: I am the life,
the light, and the truth. No man comes to the father, but by me Io. 14. Also
Io. 10. Verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. Al even as many as
came before me, are thieves and murderers, but the sheep heard them not. I am
the door: by me if any man shall enter, he shall be saved, and go in and come
out, and shall find pasture. And a litel after: I am that good shepherd. A
good shepehearde gives his life for his sheep. To the same purpose are many
other such like sayenges in other places, as these: Come to me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I shall give you rest. Math. 11. If any man
thirst, let him com to me and drink. He that believes in me (as ye scripture
says) there shall flow ryuers out of his belly of living water. Io. 7. Also:
This is the work of God, that you believe in him, whom he has sent. I am the
bread of life. He that comes to me shall hongre no more: and he that believes
in me, shall thirste no more. Io. ^. To the same effect we must refer the
words, that we read, the apostles spoke and wrote by the inspiracion of the
same spirit. Petre speaking of Christ before the priests, Act. 4. says:
This is the stone, that was refused of you builders which is the chief of the
corner, and there is salvation in non other. For there is no^ other name under
heaven given unto me^, wherein we most be saved. And ye apostle Paul judges
him self to know nothing, but Jesus Christ, eue^ him yt was crucified. 1. cor.
2 And in an other place: God forbid yt I should rejoice, but in the cross of
Jesus Christ, Gala. 6. Also, Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners,
of whom I am chief. 1. Tim. 1. And again: For Christ was not offered up often,
but once for all, to take away the sins of many, Hebr. 9 There is one God,
and one mediator between God and men, the man Jesus Christ. 1. Timo. 2. etc.
And what do all these places report else, but yt Jesus Christ alone is given
unto us of God the father, yt we might be saved in him, setting all our hole
faith assuredly on him, seeing by only faith we have free access unto him.

Hereof than this must needs follow, that we must reckon them undoubtedly cast
away from salvation, and (as Johan baptist says) under the wrath of God,
that will not believe in him. Finally if we will believe in Christ Jesus, we must
of necessity acknowlage him to be the only saueour of the world, after such
sort, as the scriptures purporte him to be. But that shall thou never do, nor
never shall be hable to do, if thou will follow the bishop of Rome, and
receive his faith and doctrine. For how shall thou acknowlage Christ to be
the only head of the church, if thou say, the bishop of Rome is the head of
the same also? How shall thou also confess Jesus Christ truly, to be the chief
high Priest of all the hole world, if thou will acknowlage the bishop of Rome
also to be the head and universal bishop (or priest) of all churches? How
shall thou believe Christ to be thy only righteousness and satisfaction, if
thou seek to be saved by the righteousness of thine own works and merits?
How shall thou be hable to believe Christ to be the only sacrifice for the
sins of all the hole world, and that he being offered upon the aultare of the
cross, made full satisfaction unto his fathers righteousness, if thou will
confess, that he in his own natural humane body is offered up daily by
dronke^ and hooremo^ging filthy varlettes, I mean, the greasy mass priests,
for ye sins both of ye quick and of the dead? How shall thou believe, that
Christ Jesus is the only mediator and advocate of al men, if thou pray and
call upon the saints departed continually, to be mediators for thee? Finally
with what faith shall thou acknowlage Christ to be ye only way of salvation,
and the door of true blessedness, if thou strive to goo to heaven by ye
merits of thine own works: yt is to say, by fasting, shryuing, masses,
staciones, and by the protection and aid of popish bulls and pardones, or by
broiling in the burning colle pit of the popes purgatory.

Do thou not see, that this gaire is clean contrary repugnau^t to that
faith, which teaches us to stick to Christ alone? Therefore thou must of
necessity confess, that thou cannest not chose, but be most far of, from
believing faithfully in Christ, if thou wilt follow the doctrine of the B. of
Rome, and embrace the faith that he sets furthe. And if thou be void of
faithful believing in Christ, doubtless the wrath of God abides upon thee, in
that thou wilt not give credence to the son of God. So that in case thou goo
on still in thy infidelity once received, and continue still a membre of the
popish faith, and of yt popish church: thou cannest look for non other
judgment, but to be cast with thy head, Antichrist, at the last day, in to
vnque^ceable fire. For here appears no manner of mean for us, but either we
must be saved by him, which only has salvation in him felf, or be excluded
from him, and be damned for ever more.

Therefore the papistical faith and religion must not be reckoned a certain
light ignorance and tryfling error, which thou may easily excuse, another
must we believe, that any man in all the world can be saved, in case he stick
stubbernly unto it. In this behalf (most loving brethren in Christ) our souls
are in hasarde: it is their cause, that is in hand, yea and so in hand, that
we may make them bound slaves (through our wilful stubburnesse) unto eternal
damnacion. And therefore the merciful and most gentill hearted doctor of all
the world Jesus Christ, as he instructs us in all other things, so he gives
us faithful warnyng in this behalf. For in Matthewe; he bids Matthew. 7.
us beware diligently of these false prophets, that we should observe them,
and note them in our hearts diligently, and never forget that in any case,
which he vouchedsafe to warn us of, with such earnest fidelity.

Moreover when he should expou^de (in his holy sacred reuelacio^, which it was
his pleasure to show unto his entierly beloved disciple John^) the sore and
dredefull pain of Antichristianitie (which he would have figured in the name of
Babylon) among other things he speaks thus in great sadness. Get you our
from her my people, be not partakers of her sins, that Apo. 18.
you be not partakers also of her plagues.

Christ our faithful schole master bids us get out from thence, that we be
not made partakers of her wickedness, idolatry and supersticion: Yea and
onles we do so, he threatteneth the pain to heng over our necks. Would to God
those men would po^dre, and think upon this in their hearts, which for fear
of losing of a litel paltring pelf, or else for a muckering vile advantage
sake, hade rather he under the tirannie of Antichrist, than to abide still in ye
feloweship of Christ and of his church: Yea and they also which witting and
willing (and with circumspecte aduisement and deliberate for sight) put their
children in subjection to the churches of the popish religion, where they are
compelled to worship Idols: yea and though they know the true faith, yet
dare they not confess it.

I know what many will obiecte against me, in this behalf: if thou Note well.
make all them damned (say they) that follow the trade of Antichrist, that is,
of ye B. of Rome, tha^ must our fathers and auncetours needs be damned also.

In deed this is the common querel of ye papists, which they are always
prating and beating in to the rude and unlearned common peoples heads, and
trouble many folks minds therwithall: which think it were a most unworthy
matter for them to believe, that their elders were the children of damnacion. And
this their meaning is to gather hereof, that if our auncettours, which lived
under the popish religion, were saved: than they may be saved by the same
means also. As for me, I will speak somewhat sobrely of these matters, another
will I search, nor rippe the judgments of God to depely. For to what purpose
were it, to search, what manner of judgment almighty God used toward our
auncettours, which departed this life before the truth came to light? Howbeit
touching his grace and mercy, we will not hope but the best in every
condition: namely seeing it were not impossible for him, to lighten them (that
erred and were deceived with a common ignorance) even at the last breathe of
their life, that they might acknowlage and receive the true faith in Christ,
and so be saved. But in the mean space, this we are sure of, that if they were
saved (as we trust they were) they were saved by non other reason nor way, but
by the merit of Christ, and not by the help of popish supersticion. There is
no cause therefore, why you should goo about to clooke your errors and
supersticion, with the examples of our elders, O you most shameless protectours
of the Romish abominacion. For there is no like comparison, nor agreement in
them. Our elders could not see the light of ye truth, which shyneth most
brightly at this day, although they were men otherwise, another wilfully
stubburne, nor openly wicked. Besides this Christ our Lord calls them damned
and lost, which (when they heard the word of the gospel) disdain to be leave
it, or to hear it wha^ it is brought to them. Wherefore seeing our elders another
heard, nor could hear ye gospel, you shall never be hable to no^bre them
among the rabble of you, which sin against the holy ghost him self, in that
you will another hear ye truth wha^ it is offered you, nor give crede^ce to it,
when it is plainly known. And this so manifest a wickedness does press you
so heavily, that we may truly and freely say, by the authority of Gods word,
yt as many as at this day in so great a light of the truth, do follow and
defend the tirannie of Antichrist: and contrary wise do wickedly persecute
the health giving word of the gospel, and the faith that men have in Christ,
shall at leynght be tormented with their head the Romish Antichrist, in the
pain of everlasting damnacion, except they learn to renounce their
wickedness in time, and turn their hearts to God, with a true faith. And that
they may so do spedily by the light of Gods grace, it shall be our parts
continually to pray. Let these now suffice, to be spoken concerning the
abominable, cruel, and perilous tyranny of Antichrist.

Secondely, this is to be noted (loving brethren in Christ) that by Paul's
saying, Antichrist shall endure, til the last coming of Christ unto judgment,
and reign by one manner or other. For albeit he be dead flayne by the breathe
of Gods mouth, and with the sweord of Gods word in many folks consciences,
yet he lives (through his sleightes and false wiles) in many Antichrist
abides til the Lord's coming
peoples hearts yet still, and because he abuses their power against
faithful christianes, he stereth up batail continually.

Therefore we shall never be quyte rid of him for good and all, as long as the
world abides in this state: but he shall always have servants and accomplices
of his own, to rage and play the tyranne against us withal. So that it
stands us in hand, to watch continually, and fight (like tal fellows) night
and day, that he overcome us not, and pull us under his fete.

Now brethren we have seen the hole mystery of that mighty houge Antichrist.
We have seen, that the B. of Rome is only worthy of this name and title, and
ought to be taken for Antichrist. We have seen, how great and heinous his
abominacion is, and how perilous a thing his religion is. We shall therefore
give thanks unto God, from the botom of our hearts, in that he has
vouchedsafe to reveal unto us so great an enemy. and to open his false snares
unto us. And we shall pray unto God also, that it will please him to defend
us, with the protection of his grace, from all this enemies tyranny.

Now remains the last, and faithful admonicio^ of Christ, whereby he teaches
us diligently, what we ought to do in this last time of Antichrist. For where
he has declared, that periles shall arise hereof, he warns us to beware of
them, in these words.

Than if they shall say unto you, Lo Matthew. 24
he (meaning Christ) is in the deserte, goo not furthe: Lo he is in closettes
or secret places, believe them not. For like as the lightenyng comes from the
cast, and shyneth in to the west: even so shall the coming of the son of
man be. For where so ever the dead carcass is, there also shall the eagles
resort.

In these words (most loving brethren in Christ) we are taught three things,
which it is convenient for us (during the reign of Antichrist) not only to
know, but also to follow. And furst he repeteth the same that he hade spoken
before, and bids us believe Believe the^ not.
them not, that say, Christ is here or there: that is to say, that goo about
to show us a false Christ, or tell us yt the gifts of God, which are given us
by non, but by only Christ, are to be hade else where. Now that we may
understand and follow this warnyng, as we should do, it is necessary for us
to call to remembrance, yt sayenges that are spoken in the Homilies before,
both of ye true Christ, I mean, the only saueour of this world, and also of
the false Christ's. He is ye true Christ, whom the authority of the holy
scripture describes to be very God and very man, the only saueour of the
world, ye only priest, the only sacrifice for the sins of the world, yea
the only head of the church, and men's intercessour in heaven. As many tha^
as show this Christ any where else, than in heaven: as many as appoint other
heads of the church, other redemers of the world, other sacrifices for the
sins of the world, and other advocates, intercessours, and mediators, are
comprehended in these words of Christ: and those be even they, whom it is not
laufull for us to believe, or to give credence unto. And this is so openly done
in the papacy, of the pope him self and his members, that no man can say nay
to it. For furst, they are not wont to show Christ our Lord in heaven, which
was crucified for us, and died, which rose again, and ascended in to heaven,
according to the articles of the apostles Creed: but to tell folks, that he is
either contained in a pretty litel white cake, or in churches consecrated for
that purpose, which they are not afraid to dress with these written words:
Hic Deum adora. Here worship God.

Are not these they than, that show Christ our Lord in closettes or secret
places, as he hi^ self told before hand? As we will speak nothing, how their
use is to teach us a far other Christ, tha^ is purported in ye holy
scriptures, for ye scriptures bear record, that he was only incarnate, and
made very man for our sakes. But these men not contenting them selves with
that, feyne him also to be impanate or embreaded: Yea and they ymagine him to
be such a one, that he may be called every day in to a piece of bread, by the
priests enchauntementes, as though he were a certain new Elicius Jupiter.

Furthermore, if they purpose to speak of those things, that Christ our Lord
has purchaced with the merit of his own death, as of remission of sins,
the grace of God the father, justice, right of adopcion, and the possession of
everlasting blessedness: than their manner is (with such open wickedness and
shamelessness) to show them else where, tha^ in Christ alone, that they can
not deny it, though they would never so feign. The Apostle Paul says, that
Christ is made of 1. Cor. 1. and. 2.
God unto us, wysedo^, righteousness, sanctificacion, and redemption: and that
he knew nothing else, but Jesus Christ, even him yt was crucified. And in an
other place declaring the certainty of his doctrine, he says: Although we
Gal, 1.
or an Angel from heaven shall preach unto you any other gospel, than that we
have preached unto you, cursed be he. But we hear the popish shauelinges and
greasye doctors preach a far other manner of Gospel, than the Apostles have
sent unto us in their writings. For they teach righteousness to be in men's
own works and merits. They teach folks, to seek forgiveness of sins, at
the hands of wicked, and hooremonging, yea most filthy rakehell mass
priests. As for the grace and favor of god, they ascribe it (against Gods
commandment) unto images, that they set up: and therefore they use to name
them, gracious, as Our lady of grace, and such other. Tushe, if a man would
reckon up all the hole dong hill of popish religion, unto these, he shall see
that they ascribe all that is necessary unto salvation, to external toys and
trifles.

And where the scriptures show us, one only patron and mediator, eue^ Jesus
Christ, very God and very man: they have devised as many mediators, patrones,
and intercessours besides him, as they believe there be saints souls in heaven.
Therefore will we, nyl we: we must needs say, that they be the same, that the
redemour and undeniable scholemaister of the world makes mention of, in this
place.

What must we do now in this behalf, you me^ and brethren? Christ says,
Believe them not. Lo, our saueour gives a short, simple, and plain
commandment, which is a present medicine against all the obiectiones, that
man can devise. Thou shall take them to be deceauours, as many as goo about to
bring in this manner of doctrine, and therefore thou shall not believe their
sayenges.

Here therefore lies all the authority The B. of Rome
of the bishops of Rome, of fathers, and of the counsels in the Dust, which
they hold them most chiefly by. For if they would obiecte the B. of Rome, as
though men must needs believe him, because he is (with to ambicious a name and
title) called the head of the church, yet there is no cause why we should be
afraid of his authority. For here we do hear the true and supreme head of the
church, and our chief priest say: Believe them not.

Another is there any cause, why they Counsels and fathers
should vaunt of the canones of counsels, and decrees of fathers: For the
authority of them is spoken against, by this counsel, which is the holiest
counsel, that may be hade or devised: and the president and head of this
counsel is the only begoten son of God, and the eternal truth of God: who
having communicacion in the presence of his well-beloved apostles, of the
deceauours that should com, in the later age of the world, commands them,
not to believe them.

Now let them hearken to the decrees of fathers, let them behold the Canones
of counsels, and make the^ selves subjects unto the ymaginacions of most
shameless vile men, which sermore by lies, tha^ by ye truth, and hade rather be
damned than saved. For whereto do we pass upon them any more? Whereto do we
wretches take heed, to the authority of cou^sailes? Ca^ not the authority of
Christ deserve credence at our hands, onles it be approved by the consent of
me^? Nay, let us rather hear Christ him self, and him that Christ ordained to
be ye doctor of the gentiles. If an angel from heaven preach any gospel,
besides yt we have preached, cursed be he. And: If they say unto you, Lo here
is Christ, or there is Christ, believe them not. Who so ever therefore dare be so
sawcye, as to declare forgiveness of sins, righteousness, the grace of God,
and salvation any where else, than in Jesus Christ alone, and to show him any
where else, than in heaven, cursed be they, and let them not be believed, how
gaye fellows so ever they be, how fynely so ever they ca^ tell their tale, and
of how high authority so ever they are But if so^ be so wilfully stubburne and
blind, that they will rather believe them tha^ Christ our saueour (giving us so
faithful monicion) we must needs let them alone, to do after their own lust.
They shall feel (like wretches) one day to their own great pain, what a guide
it is, yt they have followed.

Secondarily the Lord warns Goo not furthe.
us, that we goo not out, if they either teach a false Christ, or show Christ
any where else, tha^ in heaven. Which words, although they may be expounded to
mean (concerning the body) yt the Lord forbids all stacions and
pilgrimages, that are done for salvation and religion: yet they ought chiefly
to be applied to our soul and mind, so that the soul goo not out from Christ
our Lord and saueour, nor seek salvation any where else, but sattle it self in
him, with an assured and vndoubting faith. And herein verily are all things
closed, that make unto our salvation. For like as a man may find the favor of
God the father, the remission of sins, and salvation in Christ alone: eue^ so
as many as go out from Christ, and think scorn to believe steadfastly in him,
can not chose, but goo out quyte from life and salvation. Therefore it is very
much profitable for us to know loving brethren in Christ) after what sort we
may abide in the Lord, and tarry with him still, unto the end: specially seeing
we hear him say. Not every one that says, Lord Lord, shall Math. 7.
enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does ye will of my father
which is in heaven. These same words teach men what becomes them to do,
that are desirous to abide in Christ, and enter with him in to the kingdom of
heaven. We must needs do God ye the heavenly fathers will: Mary, what that is,
we may know, by ye words of Christ him self and the Apostles.

And furst in deed, the Lord him self speaks of the will of the father, Io.
6. chap. and says: This is the will The will of God is that we believe in his
Son.
of him that sent me, that all that see the son, and believe in him, have
everlasting life.

Therefore the will of God is good and holsom unto us, which has this
appointed end, that we shall have everlasting salvation: but with this
condition, that we should know the son, and believe in him, whom he
vouchedsafe to send in to the world for our sakes. Tha^ the furst point of
Gods will requires of us a very, a certain, a perfect, and an vnwauering
faith in Christ our Lord and saueour, to cleave fast unto him withal, and to
seek in him alone for those things, that are necessary to com to eternal
salvation. And this faith requires a certain and a perfect knowlage of
Christ, to the intent that least (while we make boast of our faith) we carye in
our heart nothing but as it were, a bare and a vain fa^tastical opinion: but
we must believe faithfully (and without al doubting) those things, that are set
furthe unto us, in the word of everlasting truth, by Christ our Lord.

This word describes our saueour How the scriptures describe Christ.
unto us, after this sort. Jesus Christ is the true and natural son of God
the father, of all one substance, nature, and majesty with ye father from
everlasting. And at ye time appointed, he became man for our sakes, not by
laye^g away his godhead, but by receiving of Ma^head, so that he which was God
from everlasting, is now both very God and very man, in one inseparable
person. And forasmuch as he became man, he suffered all things that a man may
do, sin only except. For he was borne as man, and growed and waxed strong in
body, streynght, and process of age. He was weary with trauaili^g, he rested,
and he suffered both hongre and thyrst, he also wept for sorrow of heart. Yea
he was afraid of death, and of the pains of death, and yet he abode them
pacie^tly and strongly, for our sakes. But before ye time of his death
approached, his will was to have his divinity known to men, not only by
miracles and wondrous signs, but also opening the will of his father, he gave
us a certain, and an absolute doctrine of salvation and blessedness. He chosed
disciples also, yt after he had instructed them with his spirit, and in the
doctrine of the truth, he might at his asce^ding in to heaven, send them
furthe in to all the wide world. And when he dyed, he satisfied his fathers
righteousness by his death, and offering him self for us once for all, he
made a sufficient sacrifice for the clensyng of the sins of the world. For
by his death he brake the old serpents head, all to clattred his power, and
took his streynght from him, and than by his glorious resurrection he overcame
death it self. At last, when he went up in to heaven, he set heaven gates wide
open for us again, the which sin hade locked us out of: and would have the
flesh which he took of us, to be the earnest penny and pledge of our
resurrection and salvation in heaven. And now he sits in heaven, and is our
only and supreme bishop: which as he offered his body a sacrifice for our
sins, even so does he make intercession for us continually before our
heavenly father, so as we (as much endaungered with sin as we are) may
safely approach to the throne of grace.

Such a manner Christ (I say) and such a manner saueour the oracles of the
scripture purporte unto us: and the will of God the father is, that we
steadfastly believe him to be such a one: and that we goo not about to seek any
where else those things, that are given us in him.

Now the faith that we talk of, is not a certain bare and a vain
fantastical opinion, that consists in bare words and in nothing else, but
in the speech of the mouth: but it is a quick lively strong power, which
being (by the spirit of God) graffed in men's consciences, conteyneth all the
hole matter of salvation and religion. For it is necessary for us also, to know
God the father, that we may be truly and faithfully grounded in Jesus Christ,
Gods own son. If we acknowlage him rightly to be such a one as he is, we
shall fear him also: and not that only, but also we shall love him above all
other things, and being bounden to him with such fear and love, as children
owe to their natural parents, we shall willingly obey him in all things.

Out of the spowte of the same fou^tayne, shall spring what so ever can be
required also, unto external religion. For in this faith we shall not hear
the ymaginacions of our own reason, but have respect only unto the doctrine
and example of Christ, and depend holly of it. And when we see, that he has
provided so for his church, that he would not burden it with an unprofitable
pomp of ceremonies, but (contenting him self with a few) has appointed only
those that might be sufficient unto salvation: as these almost are, the
preaching of the word, baptism the token of regeneracion, and the Lords
supper, that acceptable remembrance of the Lords death, and of our
redemption.

And so we contenting our selves also with those same, will think that nothing
is to be added besides these, another will we search any deper, if we will
believe in him, and acknowlage him to be our saueour, king and priest, and the
faithful scholemaister of ma^kinde. As many therefore as diligently follow this
simple plain doctrine of Christ, and the oracles of Gods word, and suffer
not them selves to be drawn away with other me^nes vain ymaginacions, unto
them this faithful admonicion of Christ is both wholesome and profitable. But as
many as will not have their faith and religion hedged within these bonds, but
leap over the hedge (like a wild beast) and judge otherwise of Christ, than
is taught in the scriptures: and seek salvation and life else where, tha^ in
Christ our only saueour: and also lade the church with new ceremonies, and
with a new form of religion: they forgette this faithful admonicion, and do
contrary to Christ's commandment goo out, and suffer them selves to be
seduced, not without the present danger both of their own souls and other
folks.

And therefore I think al men may plainly see, what the causes are, that let
us, and hold us back at this day, that we can not for sake either ye known
truth and Christ our Lord, or become papists, and submit our selves to the
B. of Romes doctrine and religion. For the commandment of Christ holds us
back, which it were not only abominable for us to transgress, but also it is
tied unto us with yt extreme perile of our souls. And I think there is no man so
blind, but he sees, that the B of Romes doctrine is such a one, that he
pulls away such as follow his trace with it, and makes them to goo out from
Christ our only saueour. For he speaks not of Christ, as the scriptures
purporte. For his wo^ted manner is to show those things which are freely given
unto mankind by Christ alone, else where (yea in other places i^numerable)
besides christ.

The B. of Rome reasons of religion (as well inward as outward) far
otherwise, than Christ did in times past. He sends men to saints and pulls
them away from the maker of all. He has brought a co^fused muckeheape and
burden of ceremonies in to the church, a great deal heavier than the
leuitical priesthood was, wherewith the unlearned common peoples consciences are
miserably tormented. Moreover he teaches me^ to buy those things out with
gold and silver, that are freely given us by Christ, and yt ought to be hade by
only faith. What need many words? he shows Christ and the salvation that
Christ has wrought, in such places, as another Christ nor salvation is.

With what heart than, and with what conscience shall we be hable to follow ye
B. of R. trade, seeing we hear Christ with plain words, and an open loud
voice bid: Goo not out. Shall we be so hardy than, as to pass the bonds of
the faith and religion, that Christ has prefixed unto us? God defend us
from that wicked temeritie, brethren.

Though the prince of the world rage, though his vicare and minister the B. of
Rome stamp and stare, though princes that are stered up by their driftes,
play the devil: though Cardinals, patriarchs, bishops, prelates, abbottes,
prouostes, deanes, suffraganes, monks, chanones, friars, and all the hole
rabble of sacrificeing massemongers and religious persons (of both sexes)
run out of their wits for anger: and though men cry every where,
Cou^sailes, Counsels: yea though the cou^sailes blow and blustre, lighten
and thondre never so thick: yet that one only saying ought to be of more
authority with us, than that we should be afraid of all the men's streinghtes,
power, and policy in all the wide world, and (for dread of them) to goo out
from Christ, contrary to Christ's commandment. For Christ is that king of
glory, the most victorious triumphaunt Emperor, and that holy sacred
Majesty, yt is mighty in deed, in whose sight all knees ought to bow. For he
shall beat his proud scornful stubburne enemies in pieces, with his iron
rod, and make the^ a fotestole for him, to tread upon under his fete.

Let us now step over unto the other The will of God is our Sanctificacion.
chief point of Gods will, which Paul in his. 1. Thessa. 4. expounds on
this wise: This is the will of God even your sanctificacion or holiness, that
you should abstain from hooredome, and that every one of you should know,
how to possess his vessel with holiness and honor, not with the lust of
concupiscence, as the heathen do, which know not God.

Here O you Romish rufflers and most shameless papists, lend me your ears a
litel. You (I say) that go about to bring the faith in Christ, and the holy
sacred doctrine of the gospelles truth into slander and hatred, under
pretense as though it never required good works, but rejected and forbade
them, as unprofitable and superfluous. For where we ascribe all the glory of
our redemption and salvation to Christ alone, and attribute nothing unto your
works and merits, by and by ye burst out in a great rage, and cry that we
damn al good works, and open a wyndowe for me^ to commit al wickedness.
But how falsely, how wickedly, how unadvisedly, and how shamelessi ye do this,
learn it not of us (whom ye hate already before hand) but of Paul the
Apostle that chosen instrument of Christ our saueour. For albeit he does every
where harp and beat upon this one thing, that men should know, they are
saved by Jesus Christ, and confesses also with plain words, that he knows
nothing else save Jesus Christ, and that he was crucified: yet he says not
yt good worckes are either unprofitable or superfluous, nor bids men follow
the lust and the synful affections of their own flesh, another does he appoint
such a faith, as may make men to sin carelessly, as these wicked,
blasphemous, and antichristian Papists conclude. But this (says he) is the
will of God, even your holiness.

For seeing Christ Jesus has washed us with his own blood, and sanctified us,
and made us the temples of his spirit, the apostle would have us to be after
such sort, that we continue still in this sanctificacion or holiness, and not
defile our selves with the filthiness of sins. And for that cause, he makes
mention of hooredome most chiefly in this place, because the hooremonger
vnhaloweth that holy sacred temple, most specially in synnyng against his own
body: yet under the name of hooredome, he will have us understand all
uncleanness, that man is spotted wythall. For he says moreover: That every one
of you know, how to possess his vessel, that is, his body with holiness
and honor: I mean, so as the name of God may be sanctified and hallowed in us,
and in our conuersacio^, and not to live like the heathens, which are most
far from the knowlage of God. But this sanctificacion or holiness is the
fruit of faith, yea such a fruit, that faith can not possibly be without it.
For if thou do believe, that thou art redeemed from the tira^nye of sin, and
from the fire of damnacio^, by ye bitter death and most painful sorrows of
Christ, and haste this only hope of thy salvation and life: suerly thou wilt
not cast away nor set so light by this thy salvation, which is redeemed with so
dear a price by the son of God, yt thou wilt lose it, for yt pleasures of
thy carnal affectiones, which shall vanishe away eue^ in a moment. Besides
this, if thou have put on Jesus Christ truly by faith, thou wilt not soil
him, that is so noble a garment, and of more value tha^ al ye treasures of
gold and precious stones, with ye filthy works of sins: but though thou be
ouercome^ and fall through the frailty of man's nature, yet thou wilt up
again quickly, and bewail thy fall bitterly. And for yt cause ye scriptures
say, yt faith is the good tree, that can not bring furthe evil fruits. For
inasmuche as faith is the work of ye holy spirit of God, it must needs also
bring furthe the fruits of the spirit: double love, that is, of God, and a
man's neighbor: hope, comfort, justice, innocence, pureness, patience, and
all the company of other virtues.

Therefore we learn by this (brethren) furst that they are most principal
blasphemers against ye true faith and religion, that is builded upon Christ
alone, as many as say, that ye doctrine of the gospel is an enemy to good
works: secondly, that they truly abide in Christ, and cleave co^stau^tly unto
him, that boaste of their faith, not only in their words, and brag not in
the only speaking of faith, but give them selves unto holiness of life, and
apply them selves to this end only, that they may keep their vessel (which
is washed with the precious blood of Christ) pure and clean. For he can not be
called a membre or a disciple of Christ, which forgets christian pureness
and holiness, and makes him self the bond slave of sin, and an instrument
for ye devil to pype in. Therefore in this admonicion and cou^sail of our
saueour Christ, is secretly comprised that true and eternal law, and
vnfailing rule, that he would have common to al his disciples, and with
singular forsight requires them to frame their life and religion according to
this rule: Mary it is a pretty short rule, a plain rule and easy to be
perceived. For he co^man^deth us, not to believe them, that either show a false
Christ, or teach us to seek Christ him self and the things that are given us
by his merit, in any place else: but to stick fast to the scriptures, and
not to starte from them one ynche, but in all things that perteyne either to
God him self, or to the service of God, he bids us haunt those things, with
a constau^t and vnwauering faith, in charity and in pureness and innocence
of life, that we be taught in the holy scriptures to do.

Unto this rule it is necessary, that all the constitucions and rules of monks,
chanones, friars, and nonnes give place, which they are toto proud of in the
papacy. For who so ever they be that walk according to this rule (as Paul
says) peace and mercy be Gal. 6.
upon them, and upon the Israel of God. And contrary wise they shall one day
feel, that they have gone to far out of the way, as many as considre not so
faithful a monicionar, and devise an other rule of life and faith for them
selves to follow.

Now are we come to the third Of the lords last coming.
and last special point of this admonicion, where in Christ makes plain
mention of his last coming. Furst he teaches us, in what sort, form,
facion, and glorious royalty he shall come: and than he expounds the
condition and state of the saints and faithful people, which they shall
receive at the time of the last judgment. Concerning the furst, he speaks
these words. As the lightenyng gothe from the east and shyneth to the west, so
shall the coming of the son of man be.

Here we are taught (brethren) that the Lord shall com at a sodayn cheoppe,
like lightenyng: and at such a time as men shall think, that (of all other
times) they are like than to have most peace, security, and worldly wealth.
For so does Paul in his furst epistle to the Thessalonianes expou^de Christ's
words, saying: Concerning the times and seasones (brethren) I need not to
write unto you. For you know plainly, that the day of the Lord shall come
like a thief in the night. For when they shall say, peace, and all thing is
cock sure, than hengeth over them sodayn destruction, like the travail of a
woman laboring of child, and they shall not escape it.

These words are spoken and written to this end (brethren) to stere us up, to
watch and prepare our selves, that we may be found ready like thriftye
servants at the Lords coming. Moreover the Lord uses also the similitude
of lightenyng, to show the manner and facion of his coming. And thereby he
gives warnyng, that he will not come in a poor estate, bassely, nor as a
contemned person, or like a cast away, as he was when he lived in the flesh,
when he spoke these words: but with a mighty train in great shynyng
brightenesse, glory, power, and majesty, so as all his enemies shall tremble
and shake for fear, at the sight of it.

Hereunto serve Danieles words also (that I rehearsed before, but they are
worthy to be rehearsed and rehearsed again) wherwyth he dedescribeth the Lords
last judgment on this wise: I looked till the seats were prepared, and till
the old aged sat Daniel. 7.
him down, his clothing was as white as snow, and the hears of his head like
the pure wolle. His throne was like the fyrie flame, and his wheles as the
burning fire. There drew furthe a fyrie stream, and went out from him. A
thousaunt times a M. served him, ten thousaunt times.X. M. stood before him
etc. And the Lord speaks like unto these words. Matthew. 25. When the son
of man shall come in his glory, and al his angels with him, tha^ shall he sit
upon the seat of his glory, and al nations shall be gathered together before
hi^. etc. Howbeit these are written (brethren) not as though the Lord would
make us afraid, like a tyranne, but that we should print these words in our
minds, and frame all our life after such sort, that at ye same his glorious
coming, we may be able to stand surely before his righteous and dredeful
judgment. For we shall have him to be our judge, that can another be frayde with
the glory and power of the world, nor be entreated by any noble blood, another
yet brybed with worldly richesse. But the thing that he only regards and
rewards, is faith working by charity. Gal. 5.

The second thing that the Lord speaks of in this last chief point of his
admonicion, is that he teaches The state of the faithful at the Lords coming.
us, what the condition (or state) of his people shall be at this his coming
and glorious judgment. For it seems a hard and a fearful matter to the
flesh, when it hears, that all the pleasures of this world, wherein it only
delyteth, shall perish once, and that all we shall be presented before so
mighty a judge.

But it is full of comfort, that the Lord speaks here: For where so ever
(says he) the carcass is, there also shall the eagles resort, or be gathered
together.

Here he compares the faithful people unto eagles, and him self unto yt
meat, whereunto they fly. For like as the eagles with their high flyeng mou^te
up to the clouds, and (with great delight) behold the brightenesse of the sun
(ye shyning beams whereof non other living creature is hable to look directly
upon) even so those that be faithful people being carried with the wings of
faith above all the cares of this world, lift up their hearts to heaven,
where their co^uersacion is, and their right city that ever shall endure: and
so with ye eyes of their mind, they behold the sun of righteousness Jesus
Christ, which is our righteousness, and the only quickenyng meat of the
faithful. For he is the bread of life, which being eaten by faith, fedeth us
unto life everlasting. And Christ says, that these eagles, that is, the
faithful people shall resort unto him: so that they shall be gathered to him as
it were in one moment, as well those that were departed before in the true
faith, as those who^ ye Lord at his coming shall find prepared and ready in
faith. For thus does Paul 1 Thessa. 4. expound Christ's words. This we say
unto you in the word of the Lord, that we which live, and are remaining in
the coming of the Lord, shall not com ere they which sleep. For the Lord him
self shall descend from heaven with a showte, and the voice of the archangel
and trompe of God. And the dead in Christ shall arise furst, than shall we
which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the clouds, to mete the
Lord in ye air. And so shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort your
selves, one an other, with these words.

Mark (loving brethren) how joyful, how pleasant, and how comfortable
those sayenges be, that are specified in the scriptures, concerning the
glorious coming of Christ unto judgment. But if we lust to hearken to the
papists in this behalf, they will tell us such tales, as are hable not only
to drive men's consciences in to fear and dread, but also in to flat
desperacion. For they have forged horrible and cruel tokens, by the rehearsal
whereof they have spoiled the rude people of all comfortable reioyceing, and
have fraide the^ most pitifully. But the spirit of our saueour Christ speaking
by the apostles, makes so plain mencio^ of the matter, as that which made us
afraid, when we wandered in the darkness of popery, is now joy and myrthe
unto us, so that with continual prayers and fervent desires, we look for the
Lord, and would feign have his coming to draw nere. For how great and how
honorable shall the saints glory be, when those that were dead and resolved
in to earth and duste, shall rise again with clarified bodies, and shall live
and be transformed in one moment: and all the nature of corrupcion and what so
ever hade ben corruptible, and mortal, infirm, and subject to sorrows in
them, they shall put of: and by and by they shall be coupled with their spouse
Christ, and be carried with him unto the eternal glory of true blessedness?
Than I say, the faithful eagles shall continually behold their sun of
righteousness for ever, and shall be fed with the meat of eternal life, so
that they shall never feel hongre.

And contrary wise, that bloody and cruel cursed generation of raue^s and
grypes, I mean the wicked tira^nes and enemies of his church, which in this
world persecuted the Lords saints with fire and sweorde, and with al kind of
merciles cruelty: and all beastly belly cheer myniones (men given to their
paunche and hoorishe lusts) shall be gathered also unto their carrion carcass,
to that houge and stinking beast, and her head Antichrist: that they may be
tied up with him, and cast in to the lake that burns with fire and brimstone:
and tha^ shall they feel, who it is that they have done after, and who it is,
that they hated wha^ they lived in this world.

Now for as much as I shall treat more largely of these matters, wha^ I shall
have more opportunity to entreat of them, let it suffice that I have presently
touched the^ now in few words. Hitherto we have heard (in these five
homilies) all the mysterye of Antichrists tirannie, and therwithall we have
also known the faithful counsel of our saueour Christ, which he coummaundeth
men to follow in the last seasone of the world. Let us therefore render devout
and humble hearty thanks to our heavenly father, which has vouchedsafe to
reveal this weighty dau^gter unto us, and to arm us with his counsels
against it. And let us endeavor our selves to take heed to our Lords
admonicio^s, so as we may do after the^, that he think not his admonicions
lost upon us. Moreover where it is manifest out of the apostle Paul's words,
that Antichrist must be destroyed with non other weapon, but with ye sweorde of the
spirit, that is the word of God (for he ca^ not otherwise be destroyed) let
us frame our consciences (brethren) after such wise, as the word may be hade
in authority, and much price among us, that all men may advance ye study of
it, that we may endeavor our selves to read, hear, and know it with such
diligence, that by the power of it, Antichrist may be slain and dye in our
consciences: and that Christ our Lord may live in our hearts, least at the
dredefull day of dome, we be cast with that houge stinking beast in to the fire
of damnacion, and so perish everlastingly, but that we may (like true members
and faithful eagles) be filled with everlasting fode, and be gathered unto ye
meat yt shall never waste, and to ye sun of righteousness that never shall
fade. Amen.

Thus ends the. 5. Homily.
Apoca. 18. Babylon is fallen, great Babylon is fallen, and is become the
habitacion of Deuilles, and the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of all
unclean and hateful birds, for all nations have dronken of the wine of the
wrath of her fornicacion. And the kings of the earth have committed
fornication with her, and her merchants are waxed rich, of the abundaunce of
her pleasures.

