THE LIFE OF FAITH. By SAMVEL WARD Preacher of Ipswich.

The second Edition, corrected and amended. LONDON Printed by Augustine
Mathewes, for John Marriot and John Grismand, and are to be sold at their Shops
in Saint Dunstons Churchyard, and in Paul's Alley at the Sign of the Gunne,
1621.

TO THE HONOR AND USE OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS EARL of Suffolk, Lord of
Walden, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel.
THis Manual, I first consecrate to your Honor. The greatest greatness has no
greater honor belonging to it, then to be an Abrech, to Persons, Books, and
causes of this nature. Such Cedars have their spreadth and talenesse to shelter
such Fowls of the Heaven under their shadow: And Faith is content in this
vallie of unbelief to receive defense and countenance: where it rather gives
both. As Christ in that old Allegory of Christopher seems to be supported by
him, whom in truth he supporteth. And verily such Books as have life in them
give a longer life to their Patrons, then the stateliest Buildings and largest
Moniments.

Principally I Dedicate, and Deuote it to your use; Charity began at home. I
first meditated, collected, and scribled them for mine own benefit, carried
them about me with Antoninus his title (...), Notes for my self. That which
with all my might in seeking I have sought to attain, is the truth and effect
of that which many things promise, but Faith is only able to perform.
Fullness of joy and constancy of content in the midst of the chaunges, wane,
eclypses, and fuls of all external things, and that one day as well as another
throughout the course of a man's life in that latitude and extent whereof this
life is capable. To cry out, I have found it, I have found it, might savor of
vanity and arrogance: Altogether to deny it were an injury to the truth of
Gods Spirit, Word, and Grace. Such as have found out Sailing by the Compass,
the Art of Printing, or should one man discover a speedier passage to the
Indies, or meet with a special Cordial in Physic, or any less profitable
secret, should he not justly be sensured as envious and injurious to let such
an one die with himself. What a sacrilege were it then to engrosse such a
true Elixar of Spiritual life, as upon some proof, I am sure these prescripts
contain. The substance therefore of them, I imparted first ot my Flock in
Sermons. Nextly, considering how much I stood obliged to your Lordshippe, and
what special use you might have of them, I translated, and copied them out in
the form wherein now I humbly commend, and earnestly recommend them to your
serious perusal and through trial. If upon both, good shall be thought the
better, the more communicated, others shall account themselves beholding to
your Honor, as the principal occasion of publication. More I would say, but I
fear to spoil the elegancie of Augustine his Preface to Romanian, Lib. 1.
contra Academicos.
by englishing of it: Wherein is the sum of what I would say. Whither
referring your Lordship, I rest, and continue as ever I have done since my
reference without intermission, publicly, and privately to pray to the Lord of
Lords that you may find all favor in the eyes of God and man, and that all
true happiness may be multiplied upon you, and yours in this life, and a
better.

Your Lordships in the Lord SAMVEL WARD.

The Contents of this BOOK.
THe Just shall live by his Faith. Page. 1 Christ the Fountain, and Faith the
mean of Life. 6 The third kind of the Life of Faith. page 12 The use of Faith.
16 The first use of Faith ot newborn Babes, 24 The use of Faith to young men
in Christianity. 34 An inforcement of the former use, with a reproof of the
neglect and disuse of Faith. 43 The use of Faith to a grown Christian. 51 An
objection answered, and passage made to the life of Sanctification. 60 How
Faith Sanctifies and Mortifies. 67 How Faith Viuifies. 78 How Faith vpholds
life in Affliction. 86 An Epistle to the Reader pressing the use of Faith. 100
THE LIFE OF FAITH.
CHAP. I. The Just shall live by his Faith.
THE basest life excels the best mere being, as much as Adam, the red lump
of earth whereof he was made. The living Dog, the dead Lion. Between life and
life what a breadth of difference is there? from the Mushrome to the Angels how
many kinds of life? Yea, in one and the same kind how many degrees? The
bondslaue has a life as well as the King, the sick man as the whole; but
such, as in comparison may rather be termed a death. One best there is in
every kind as it approaches nearest to that Fountain of Life and Being, with
whom to be, and to be most happy is all one. Poor Man has, or rather had a
certain pitch and period of happy life, consisting in the Image and favor of
his Creator, from which having once fallen, it would pity one to see how
lamely and blindly he reaspires thereunto. The most part groaping as the
Sodomites after Lots door, the blind misguiding the blind in the common
Labyrinth of error; each one imagining he has found the way, and so tells his
dream to his neighbor for a truth. The Covetous when he has got goods, as
if he had gotten the true Good, applaudes his soul, as if it were the soul of
some Swine, Soul thou have many goods, now, etc. The Voluptuous when he has
satiate himself with the husk of pleasure, cries out he has lived the only
royal and Iouiall life. The Ambitious when he has climbed the pitch and
slipperie hill of Honor, builds his nest in the stars, thinks himself in
the sky and highest sphere of happiness. Alas, alas, do not all these know
they are in the Chambers of death? Dead whilst they are alive, no better then
walking ghosts in the shapes of living men: seeking and placing a spiritual
and heavenly Jewel, in earthly pelf, in watery Pleasures, in ayerie Honors,
which being all dead, cannot afford that life which they have not themselves.
Verily, if one live an hundredth years, beget children, plant and build, and
see no other good but such as these, the untimely birth is better then he. What
then? Is this tree of life not to be recovered, no where to be found again,
yes doubtless, though there be many by-pathes, there is a Way; though many
errors, there is a Truth; though many deaths, there is a Life. And behold, oh
man that stand upon the ways, inquiring after life. He that is the Way,
Truth and Life that came from heaven to vanquish death, and by his death has
brought thee to life again, who only has the words of life, He has showed
thee the true way to life. Has he not twice or thrice showed thee in this
lively Oracle of his, Heb. 2 4.
The Just shall live by Faith. Yea, Romans 1. 17.
but if a man like to our selves might come from the dead that has made proof
of this way and life, Gal 3. 11.
and would speak of his own experience: Heb. 10. 38.
would we hear? Behold Paul, slain by the Law, revived by the Gospel, what
do we think of him? Did he not from the time of his conversion to the time
of his dissolution, enjoy a constant tenor of joy; live, if ever any,
comfortably, happily: And does not he tell us, even while he lived in the
flesh, that he lived by the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 2. 20,
Surely he must needs be blessed that lives by the same faith with Bloffed
Paul. Come therefore, you which desire to see good days and lay hold on the
ways of life. Believe and live.

CHAP. II. Christ the Fountain, and Faith the mean of Life.
WHat then? Commit we sacrilege against Christ in deifying of Faith? Rob we
the Lord to adorn the servant with his divine honors? God forbid. Let that be
given to Christ which is Christ's, and that to Faith which is Faiths. Let the
power of life and death be entirely reserved ever ascribed to the Lord of life,
the well of life, the light and life of the World, the breath of our nosthrils,
the life of our lives. Thy body, oh man! has it soul which enliues it, and so
has thy soul its soul whereby it lives, and that is Christ the quickening
spirit. Take away the soul from the body, and earth becomes earth; sever
Christ and the soul, what is it but a dead carrion? Elementary bodies lighten
and darken, cool and warm, die and revive as the Sun presents or absents it
self from them, Christ is to our souls the Sun of righteousness: Sin parts
us; Faith reunites us: And so we live primarily and properly by Christ as by
the soul: by Faith, secondarily, as by the spirits, the bond of soul and
body: by a personal and special faith appropriating Christ to the believer,
as the leg or arm lives by proper sinews, arteries and nerves, Chrysostom. in 1
Cor. 1. 10. (...).
uniting it to the liver, heart and head, such an one as Paul had in Christ
that dyed for him, whereby he ingrosseth the common God to himself, as if his
and no bodies else.

Thus says he himself that is the Truth and the Life, John 11. 25.
I am the Life and Resurrection of the World, he that believes in me, though
he be dead, yet shall he live and not die. And this is the testimony of those
three heavenly and earthly witnesses. 1 John 5.
God gave life to the Son, And he that has the Son has Life. And he that
has Faith has the Son. So that whateuer we lend to Faith, it redoundes to the
honor of Christ; neither have we any sinister intent to praise the womb or the
paps of Faith, but to cast all upon Christ who gives and works this Faith in
us, vivisies and nourishes it, yea iustifies the imperfection thereof by the
perfection of his merit. Nay, let Faith know that if she should wax arrogant
toward her Lord, or insolent over her fellow servants, she should Lucifer-like
fall from her dignity, and in so doing, of the best of graces, become the worst
of vices. Verily, what has the habit of Faith in it self considered better
or equal with love? Is it not a poorer and meaner Act to believe then to love:
more like a beggarly receiving, then a working and deserving hand? Hail then
oh Faith freely graced, graciously exalted above all Christ's Handmaides. Thy
Lord has looked upon thy mean estate, because that having nothing of thine
own, as other Virtues have, whence thou might take occasion to rejoice,
thou might the better exclude that hateful Law of boasting, the more humbly
and frankely reflect all upon thy Lord: who willingly emptied himself that he
might fill thee with honor, whiles he says to the cured of the Palsy Go
thy way thy Faith has saved thee. Hence forth calls he thee no more servant or
friend, but styles thee as Adam his Spouse, Chauah, the Mother of all Living:
Counts it no injury to divide his praises with thee, likes it well that thou
which do nothing but by him, should be said to do all things which he
does: To purify the heart, Act. 15. 9.
to over come the world, 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
to save men, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 9.
And e contra, he to do nothing without thee, which yet does all of himself.
He could work no Miracles in Capernaum because they had no Faith. So glorious
and wonderful things are spoken of thee: (I had almost said) so omnipotent is
thy strength which have said to the Sun and Moon, Stand ye still; yea if
but as big as the least grain, can say to the greatest Mountains, Remove.
What can God do which Faith cannot do if requisite to be done?
Questionless, Justifying Faith is not beneath miraculous in the sphere of it
own actiuitie, and where it has the warrant of Gods Word. It Is not a lesser
power then these, to say, Thy Sins are forgiven thee, thy person is accepted
of God, what-euer thou ask thou shall have, etc. Wherefore we need not doubt
under Christ without fear of Praemunire, or offense to his Crown and Dignity,
to affirm of Faith, That it is Gods arm and power to the enliuing and saving
of every believer, as it is written, The Just shall live by Faith.

CHAP. III. The third kind of the Life of Faith.
But least we seem to speak swelling things, whiles we soar in the Cloud
of generalities, let us descend to some solid particulars. Three things there
are whence comes Death to the Soul of Man, Sin with the guilt thereof
gives the first deadly blow, exposing it to the wrath of God who is a Consuming
fire, whose anger is the messenger of Death, whence came the first Thunderbolt
striking thorough the Soul, that sentence of God to Adam, Thou shall dye; And
such as Nathans to David, Thou have sinned and art the child of Death.

The second, is the spott and corruption of sin deprauing, yea, deading all
the faculties of man to spiritual actions, which made Paul cry out, That which
I would do, I do not; And wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of Death.

Thirdly, that swarm of plagues and army of punishments, in the re-reward
whereof comes first a second death. All which made Job cry out, Job 3. 20.
Why is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in
soul? which long for death more then for treasures; and joy when they can
find the grave.

Were it not for these three, man might live, fare, and do well, but sin
having entered into the World, brought in Death with it, which reigns and
triumphs over the sons of Adam with this three-forked Scepter, of Guilt, of
Corruption, of Punishment.

Here comes in Faith with a three fould Antidote, brings us to the Tree of
Life, whose fruit and whose leaves heal us of the sting and deadly poison of
Sin: working in us a threefold life opposite to the forenamed deaths.

The first is the life of righteousness, discharging us from the sentence of
death, restoring the light of Gods countenance appeased in Christ our surty:
which made David cry out, Psalm. 32.
Blessed is the man whose sin is covered.

The second is the life of the Spirit, or new life, regenerating and reviving
every faculty, and quickening us to every good work; which maks Paul glory,
that he is able to do al things through Christ inabling him. Phil. 3


The third, is the life of joy and comfort, cheering the soul in the midst
of all trials and tribulations; which made Job in the valley of death exult and
trust in his living Redeemer, and Paul insult over all kind of Calamities as
more then Conqueror, Romans 8.

In these three, being contained what-euer accomplisheth the life of the soul:
may not Faith well be said to supply abundantly all things pertaining to life
and godliness? But what do I treating of the kinds of life? what should I
blot paper and tire my Reader in writing of the kinds of Faith, the degrees of
Faith, or any other motions of Faith: things so well known of those that know
any thing of Christ? That nothing so much vexes me to see so much spoken and
written of faith, so little done by it, the Theory of it so thoroughly canuased
and cleared in Controversies and Sermons, and the practice of it so obscured
and disgraced in the lives of Christians.

CHAP. IIII. The use of Faith.
OH Faith when I read of thee, when I meditate of thee, when I feel any part
of thy virtue, I find thee to be a wonder-worker, I conceive nothing but high
and stately things of thee. When I look into the World and upon the lives even
of such as call themselves believers especially of the common sort, I begin to
question my thoughts for dreams, and to say; Faith, thou art but a name, a
sound, a mere word, no powerful thing. Why are many of thy followers so dead,
so mopish, so melancholy? why are worldly men as merry, as iocund as they?
Yea, why are many civil men as righteous as they? whence should this wrong and
disparagement proceed? Is thy Virtue exhaust, thy strength decayed in this old
age of the World? or is it because men know thee not? verily neither of these.
No drugge, no herb so commonly extolled, so famously known.

Paul of old, Luther of late, with infinite more, every Catechism have blazoned
the name, described the nature, set out the properties and effects to the full.
Only the misery is, the World either knows not the use, or forgets the
practice of it. There wants a practical Luther which should deal by Faith, as
Socrates by Phylosophie, who brought it out of the Skies and Books into Cities
and Houses, taught and urged the familiar and quotidian use of it.

Does not all the praise, beauty, and luster of Faith, as well; or more then
of other virtues consist in action and not in motion? Is not the gain and
benefit of it in sense and feeling, not in knowledge or discourse? Is not the
throne and seat of it rather in the heart then in the head? Who knows not
there is a Doctrinall speculation and discourse of Faith easily by reading and
hearing attained, such in one as Scholars, that never went out of their
Studies and schools have, of remote Countries, of their commodious situation,
pleasant rivers, high mountains, costly buildings, rich mines, jewels, and al
other commodities: which, what a frigid and ieiune contemplation is it, in
comparison of that delight and benefit which the Merchant and Trauiler enjoys
by a real sight and fruition of them? What is the notionall sweetness of
honey or sugar to the experimental taste of them? And yet this Aerie, windy
stuff is all, the World at this day cares for and hunts after. The Schoolmen
and Casuists, what do they but languish into vselesse, needless, and endless
questions, spending their thoughts about this magnificent virtue in cold and
bloudlesse subtleties of the subject, object, kinds, etc.

Preachers for the most part inuring themselves to declaime in praise of some
moral virtue, and to inueigh against some vice of the times, happily sometimes
find leisure to weaue a curious spiders web in commendation of Faith, rarely
showing or pressing the life, and use of it.

In a word, will you see the fashion of the World. The Schools disputes of it,
the Pulpit Preaches of it, Profession talks of it, profane men swear by it,
two or three, few or none live by it. I met with a story of an ancient Hebrew,
a reverend Rabby, who that he might the more lively convince the people in his
times of their neglect of practice of this excellent Grace, put himself into
the habit of a Mountebanke or traveling Aqua-vitae-man, and made Proclamation
of a sovereign cordial Water of Life he had to sell: being called in and
demanded the show of it; Turned them to the Bible, the Fountain of Life, and
to several places of it, as the thirty four Psalm, etc. intimating, that if
they would make use and daily drink of the water they had, they might (as it
should seem he did) live far better, and more comfortably then usually they
did.

And indeed, why is there such a price put into the hands of fools that know
not the worth and improuement of it? As secrets and mysteries in good Artisens,
that have sometimes a faculty whereby they can earne ten or twenty shillings
the day, and might live as well as landed men; but then they have another boon
withal, they love idleness, pastime and good fellowship, and so live like
beggars: or as land and money in the hands of those (whom we therefore aptly
call misers) to Have and to Hold, but never make good use of it: Who may well
be said to use the World, as if they used it not, for they put it forth to
use, or lock it from themselves and others; go basely, fare hardly, live in
debt to back and belly, as if they knew not it would buy them good meat and
good clothes, and other necessaries and conueniences for their lives. It is
possible a man may have a tool, a medecin, or an engine, and not have the
skill or strength to use it. It is possible a man may have a gift of God, and
not the gift to use it thoroughly, else needed not Paul call on Timothy to
stir up the gift that was in him. Among all the gifts of God there is none
more useful then Faith: others are profitable for some few things, this is for
this life and the life to come, for all parts and purposes of our lives, in the
use of it manifold and rich every manner of way.

CHAP. V. The first use of Faith to newborn Babes.
AND first, let me begin with thee that art beginning to live this life, thou
Embryo that art in hatching, that have so much life, as to know thy self dead
in sin, and to desire to live in Christ, (for what should I cast away speech
upon scelets and skulles, carnal men I mean mere Strangers to this life of
Faith, I expect not reading should put life and spirit into them, only I pray
for such that they may hear Gods voice in the Ministry, and live:) but as
for thee whom the Law has wounded, and the Gospel is healing, who art even at
the birth, and stickest between the knees, only want power to come into
the light; who live but feel not thy life, hold Christ but with
benumbed hands; beleeuest, but can not yet believe thou have Faith: What is
the matter thou art still ensnarled in the cords of death? Why loosest thou not
thy handkerchiefes and come out of thy Grave, and walk chearefully in the
Land of the living? Suffer Faith to do her perfect work in thee, to form
Christ in thee, suffer not thy self always to be detained in the throws and
throbs of fear and doubt.

The Common causes of this slownesse of belief and snares of Death, I observe
in most to be one of these three.

First, Immoderate aggrauation of sin. Secondly, Foolish and proud humility.
Thirdly, Preposterous desire of Sanctification before Justification.
First, Thou would believe, but thou have been a sinner. Whom came Christ
to save but sinners? And whom does he justify but the ungodly? Oh! but thy
sins are Scarlet, crying, scandalous sins. Said I not all things are
possible to Faith, only if thou can believe. Are not all faults easily
pardonable to an infinite mercy, which exceedes Man's, as Heaven does Earth;
which can redilier forgive seuenfie, then Man seven offenses. Well did Mar^^^s
answer the Devil, himself obiecting his former life to him, that even his
might be pardoned if he could believe. Did not Christ take the flesh of Rahab
and Bathsheba, and did he refuse to take their sins upon him? Did not his
blood wash David's bloody sin as white as snow? Does not he delight to forgive
much, that he may bind to love much? Shall not his favor abound to the sense
of thy Faith, where sin has abounded to the wounding of thy heart? But thou
art an old habituate sinner. As if Christ came from Heaven to cure only small
fearres, green cuttes, and not deep inuetorate wounds, diseases of eight, of
twelve, of eight and thirty years old: to cast out single Devils, and not
Legions also? Oh then take heed thou add not to thy great and many sins, a
greater then all: Cains sin, which was greater in infidelity then in
fratricide. All thy help is to look of thy self an object of confusion, and
to look upon Christ an object of consolation: And then how fiery and deadly so
ever thy sting be, by mere looking (a strange cure I confess, yet most
approved) that is, by sole believing thou shall be cured and live.

Secondly, But forsooth thou will be more mannerly then so with Peter thou will
not suffer Christ's precious hands to wash thy foul feet. Take heed thy
modesty turn not into pertinacy, lest he swear in his anger thou shall have no
part in him, if thou stubbornly refuse his gracious offer: he liked well the
humility of that Cananitish that bore the term of dog, but better her
confidence, that would not be said nay of the crumbs of his table. And shall
thou not ten times, more honor him and please him, in trusting his mercy and
sealing to his truth, then in fearing his justice and dreading his power? Take
heed of pride in the clothes of humility. Be not deceived, It is pride and
high pride, not to come when thou art called. Faith is obedience, and obedience
is more acceptable then courtesy and complement. The sooner thou come the
better welcome. It is rudeness and not good manners not to do as thou art
bidden to do, yea, so often and earnestly charged to do. To do the work of
God is to believe in him whom he has fealed and sent to be thy Savior. Ioh. 6.


Thirdly, Oh! but thou would feign first repent, amend and do some good
works, and then thou would be bold to come. That is, thou think thou
shall not be welcome unless thou come with thy cost. Thou would accept of a
pardon if thou might pay for it: but his are free, and he bids thee come and
buy without silver, or else he says, thou and thy money perish. Thou would
go the old and natural way to work. What shall I do to inherit everlasting
life, but that is now farre-done and impassable through our infirmity: Besides,
before thou can walk or work, thou must be alive. Did Christ indent with
Zacheus for Restitution and alms? or Paul bid the Iaylour first repent, become
a new man, and then believe? No they knew that the one would voluntarily,
necessarily, together, and immediately follow or rather accompany the other.
Wherefore swim out of these weeds, lay hold on the Rock, and to facilitate
thy birth by the Act of believing, set before thy eyes Christ's freedom to all
suitors in the time of his flesh, repelling none that truly desired the price
of his blood: And especially, Gods esteem of Faith above all other Graces,
Deeds, or Acts of thine.

Study, strive, endeavor to believe, as thou do in a difficult point to
conceive. Pray for a faculty and for the act of believing. Be not ever
believing, and never a believer; ever beginning to live, and never living. Live
to day, to day is Salvation offered, step from death to life, and write this
day thy birth day, and number from hence the days of thy life, in which of a
Child of perdition, thou are made the son of GOD through Faith, and so made
forever. Do thou believe this with thy whole heart? Drive on the Chariot of
thy life with joy and rejoicing till thou come to the mark.

But what sign shall I have of the truth of my Faith? May it not be
presumption if without repentance and sanctity? How shall I be sure it is not
that vain and dead Faith Saint James speaks of?

At the first, it shall suffice to find and feel a change of the mind, an
unfeigned purpose, desire, and resolution of new universal obedience, which is
contemporary with Faith, though the younger and a second brother in order of
Nature: which where it is, suffices to warrant Faith, and to embolden the
confidence in the first act of conversion. Zacheus, the Iaylor, and all new
Conuerts had not any more, could have no experience of amendment of life, and
yet relied upon the word Believe, and thou shall be saved.

CHAP. VI. The use of Faith to young men in Christianity.
PVT off now thy sackcloth and ashes, put on the garments of joy and gladness.
Let not white raiment be wanting, nor oil to thy head. Live I say, live to
day, live to morrow, live oh Christian for ever. Not for one or a few days,
But all the days of thy life.

This thou may do, if thou will learn to use thy Faith, not as men use
Wedding apparel, for a week or two after Marriage, and then lay it up for
high and solemn days only. This indeed is the fashion of believers at their
first conversion: being justified, to have peace and joy in believing the
remission of their sins, and for a while to be glad of their estate; but
then to neglect and determinate the use of Faith, as if it had now done all it
should or could do: except till they relapse again into some foul sin,
then to recover life again, using it as Vsquebath and strong Waters for swones
and heart qualmes only, not being acquainted with a daily and quotidian
improuement of it: which ought to be as constant and continuate as is the use
of Fire and Water, of Salt, of Bread, or Wine, or whateuer is more ordinary and
necessary then other: such as no part of our lives may well be without. Serves
Faith for entrance and beginnings, and not for proceedings and encreasings. Are
we not nourished by the same Elements of which we consist?

Is Faith the Midwife and breeder of joy and peace, and not the Nurse and
Foster-mother of them. Cherishing and feeding thee till thou come to a full and
perfect age in Christ? Is not the fruit of it sweeter in the ear then in the
blade?

Hearken therefore to me, oh thou of little Faith, and less use of it. Do
thou desire to have a continual feast, to rejoice always in the Lord? I know
thou desire it with all thy soul.

Let me prescribe a Diet, a daily diet without omission, strictly to be kept,
(The Lord give thee and me grace to observe it) Look how duly thou refreshest
thy bodyly spirits by use of repast, or recreations; so often at the least be
sure to cheer up thy Soul by the use of thy Faith.

Let thy soul have two or three walks a day up to Mount Tabor, that is, into
some retired place of Meditation and Prayer, such as Isaaks Field, Gornelius
his Leaded, David's Closet, etc.

But what is there to be done? I answer, Still make use of thy Faith.

But what is that you call using of Faith? I now come to the point, to the
chief mystery of Spiritual life. Shore up thy soul in this Mount to
converse with Christ. Look what promises and privileges thou do habitually
believe, now actually think of them, roll them under thy tongue, Chew on them
till thou feel some sweetness in the palate of thy soul. View them ioyusly,
severally: Sometimes muse of one, sometimes of another more deeply, and lest
(as Patients often do in Physicions Bills) thou still complain of obscurity:
thus do, think with thy self how excellent a thing it is to have all thy
debts cancelled, how sweet a thing to have God appeased, how glorious a thing
to be the son of God, how happy and safe a condition for thee to be sure
thy perseverance and salvation, how pleasant a state to be ^^^^^ of the fiere
of death ^, how ^ of glory.

Feastmakers in ancient time had special officers that cheered up their
guests, they thought it not enough to set store of meat before them, but one
must come in and say, Fall too and be merry, Let us eat and drink, It is a
good time, etc.

Thus say thou to thy self, as Paul to the Corinths ((...)) Let us feast and
be merry. Christ has made us Holy Days, our Paschall Lamb is slain, Have
any more cause to be merry? With these Soliloquies mingle some Eiaculations to
heaven, for grace and aid: And leave not, descend not this Mount till thou
find and feel thy soul in some cheerely plight, revived and warmed with
these spiritual Flagons of Wine, in the strength whereof thou may walk all
the day following.

This is that which the Sp^^se calls, Walking into the Gardens and eating of
the fruits, etc. which in plain terms, I call, using of Faith, and living by
Faith. Which if thou will duly inure thy self unto, thou will not marvel why
I called it, Ascending Mount Tabor: thou will say thy self, upon good proof,
It is good to be here, daily to be here, often to come hither. This is that
exercise of Faith, which paul inioynes Timothy, and calls stirring up, or in
kindling.

Fire in the Embers unstirred, glowes not, heats not the house; Sugar in the
cup unstirred sweetens not the Wine. And in such it is all one not to have
Faith, and not to use it. It may well be said of Money-hoorders, they have no
quicksiluer, no current money, they have no more that which they have, then
that which they have not. And so of such believers as do not thus use their
Faith, they have no lively Faith, They were almost (for matter of feeling, and
for present benefit and comfort) be without Faith. A man is little the better
for a sleeping habit. It is a rare portion, says Solomon, and that which GOD
gives only to such as are good in his eyes, to make use of wealth, to eat,
drink, and be merry: it is a much rarer to use Faith. What is a man the
better for a Lock if he have not the Key to use it withal? It is not a Trade,
but a Trade well followed. It is not Land, but Land well tilled that maintains
men.

Oh that this did as clearly appear to the world in the matter of Faith, as
it does in all other habits, graces, gifts, virtues and good things
whatsoever, that the principal beauty and benefit of them consists in use,
fruition and action, not the bare profession, yea the very increase and
perfection of them. Use limbs and have limbs, the more thou do, the more
thou may. The oftener the liberal man gives Alms and does good turns, the
more his liberality grows, and shines. Use will breed perfectness, and
through disuse things perish, and come to nothing; as the Plowsheare laid up,
rusts and consumes; employed, glisters, does good and lasts the longer. Let any
man diligently and thoroughly improve, and great will be his faith and great the
joy it will bring in.

CHAP. VII. An inforcement of the former use, with a reproof of the neglect
and disuse of Faith.
WHerefore I say again, Live by Faith, again I say, always live by it,
rejoice always through Faith in the Lord. I dare boldly say, It is thy fault
and neglect of this exercise, if thou suffer either thy own melancholy humor,
or Satan to interrupt thy mirth and spiritual alacrity, and to detain thee
in dumps and pensiveness at any time. What if thou be of a sad
constitution, of a dark complexion? Is not Faith able to rectify nature? is
it not stronger then any ellebore. Doct. Bright of Melanch.
Does not an experienced both Divine and Physician worthily prefer one dram
of it before all the Drugges in the Apothecaries shop for this effect? Has it
not sovereign virtue in it to excerebrate all cares, expectorate all fears
and griefs, euacuate the mind of all ill thoughts and passions, to exhilerate
the whose man? But what good does it any to have a Cordial by him, if he use
it not? to wear a sword soldier like by the side, and not to draw it forth
upon an assault? when a dump ouer-takes thee, if thou would say to thy soul
in a word or two; Soul, why art thou disquieted? know and consider in whom
thou beleeuest? would it not presently return to it rest again? would not the
Master rebuke the Winds and Storms and calm thy mind presently? Has not
every man something or other wherewithal he uses to put away dumps to drive
away the ill spirit as David with his Harp: some with merry company, some with
a cup of sack, most with a pipe of Tobacco, without which they scarce ride or
go, if they miss it a day together, they are troubled with rhumes, dullness
of spirits, they that live in Fennes and ill airs, dare not stir out without
a morning draught of some strong liquor. Poor silly smoaky helps, in
comparison of the least taste, (but for dishonouring of Faith, I would say)
whiffe, or draught of Faith.

Oh! that wise Christians would as often take the one, as idle Guls do the
other? would not the drawing in of sweet air from the precious promises
breed excellent blood and cheerely spirits; It is a mystery in bodily health
that to keep the arteries and the nosthrils, veins, and other passages to the
head, heart, and liver, clear and free from colds and obstructions, maintains
a healthful and cheerful temper. The Pipe of Faith is the same to the soul.
He that is Astmaticall, narrow breathed or straight breasted in his Faith,
cannot be but lumpish and melancholy. Wherefore as thou love thy mirth
above all other, tend this vital artery above all keepings, keep thy Faith
and it will keep thy joy: It will keep it an even euerflowing current,
without ebb and flow, clouds and eclipses, turning ever upon the hinges of
heavenly and solid mirth. And indeed, how or why should it be otherwise? Do
not Christians consider how unseemly it is for them, to go drooping, hanging
the head? Is any so simple to think because he is a Christian that he should
affect a sad carriage, a dejected look, a demure countenance like an image?
Away with such Monkish hypocrisy. How does it become the Righteous to rejoice?
Do they not consider how they wrong themselves of the maine benefit of their
Justification? what is a Christian but his mirth? wherein does the kingdom of
Heaven consist but in Joy? Do they not see how they offend standers by and
beholders? Is not heaviness a check that drives away and mirth as a lure that
wins to the liking of their profession? Men wonder to see a rich man that has
the world at will, all things at hearts desire, to be but in a fit of
heaviness. What, say they, should he ayle? The Irish ask such, what they
mean to die? but I wonder a thousand times more to see one that has Christ to
friend, that believes God to be his shepherd, that knows all must work for
the best, to be at any time out of tune or out of sorts. For a N^abal to be
all a mort like a stone, it is no news to me; but to see Nehemiahs countenance
changed, there must needs be some extraordinary cause: should such a man as he
fear, or carke, or grieve? What if it do not yet appear what thou shall be?
Is a young Ward prouder and gladder (in his minority) of an uncertain
reuersion, then a yeoman of his present estate? And is not Faith an Hypostasis
and evidence to thee of an infallible inheritance? Can thou be sad, which
may say, not to thy belly, but to thy soul, Thou have, not many goods, but
fullness of all treasures, laid up, not in the earth, where moath and canker
and thieves may come, but in heavenly places, out of the Devils reach, and that
not for many years, but for ever and ever, never to be taken from thy soul,
nor thy soul from them. Oh thou vain man! show me thy Faith by thy joy: if
thou live dumpishly, and yet say thou live by Faith, I will as soon believe
thee as him, that shall say he has the Philosophers stone, and lives like a
beggar, If it were ever well with thy Faith, could it ever be amiss with
thee: should not the temper of thy body follow the temper of thy soul, and the
temper of thy soul, the temper of thy Faith? The body may incline thy soul,
but the soul commands the body, and Faith is the Lord of them both. According
to thy Faith, so be it unto thee, so will it be with thee. Use thy Faith and
have joy: increase thy Faith, increase thy joy.

CHAP. VIII. The use of Faith to a grown Christian.
NAy Christian, now I have gotten thee hither, I must draw thee yet a pegge
higher, and tell thee, it is a small thing for thee to come to an ordinary pitch
of cheerfulness, except thy joys exceedes the mirth of a worldling, yea of a
professed Epicure in the quality and quantity of it. If thy mirth be not a
sweeter and more rauishing mirth of an higher kind, of a more pure defecate
nature, of a more constant tenure, then any Carnal man what ever, thou
disparagest Faith, thou art very little and young in the Kingdom of Heaven,
which consists not in meats and drinks, but in joy unspeakable and glorious,
in the joy of the Holy Ghost. And must not that needs be another manner of
joy then ever entered into the heart of a natural man, then ever a Sardanapalus
tasted of? Yes undoubtedly. So must be construed that text, 1. Cor. 2. not of
the joys of Heaven, which here the spiritual man himself cannot tell what
they shall be, but of the Gospels joy, of the Wine and Fatlings already
prepared and now revealed to the believer by the Spirit: which if the carnal
man scorn and scoff at, thou can no more help him or prove to him, then a
seeing man to a blind man that he sees orient rich colors. It is enough for
thee to secretly feel and enjoy it. Only it ought in thy life so to be
expressed; yea, so to shine in thy forehead, so to be read in the very face of
thee, that their teeth may be set on edge, and that they may enquire, what is
thy beloved above other beloueds? what is that makes this man thus merry in all
estates? Thus let them envy at thine, let not thy soul descend to theirs.

Are not the gleanings of Ephraim better then the vintage of Abiezer? Should
thou that have tasted of the grapes of Canaan, long after the Onions and
Garlic of Egypt? Is Pharphar like unto Jordan? have not thou Rivers of water
ever flowing out of thy belly? and will thou stoop to their puddle waters, to
their stolen waters, blousing, carding, dicing, whoring, etc. which should not
thy soul altogether loathe and abhor, after the taste of Faiths Nectar and
Ambrosia. But even their ordinary and lawful delights, the wine and oil,
music, hunting, hawking etc. to these God allows thee to stoop for thy
bodies sake, as the Eagle to the prey, or as Gideous soldiers to soope thy
handful, not to swill thy belly full. If Plato could tell the Musicians, that
Philosophers could dine and sup without them, How much more easy is it for
Saint Augustine to weane himself from the childish rattles and may games of
carnal delights, to be merry without the Fiddle. Good leave have thou, yea,
right and title to use all external recreations, whereof before thou were but
an usurper, but use them aright as if thou use them not, knowing how to put
thy knife to thy throat, and how to be without them: to be as one that lives
not by them but by Faith.

Were it not odious to see a man that has a spouse peerless for beauty, to
live with a deformed blouse? to see one professing some liberal Science, to
live by some base manual trade? no better fight is it to see a Christian
upholding his joy by course and earthly pleasures, that has more noble and
generous, yea, Angelical delights; then which, what has heaven better but in
degree only, and manner of fruition? what has this world comparable? Alas
poor Philosophers, when I read your Treatises of Tranquillity of mind, of
consolation, of remedies against both Fortunes, though in some things you come
near the kingdom of Heaven, yet how dull are your comforts to one of ours?
the highest of yours to the lowest of ours? Had you but through a creuis or
Lettice seen the things which the eye of Faith sees with open face, how would
you in comparison of Christianisme have loathed your Stoicisme and Epicurisme?
Had you but with the tip of your tongue, tasted of Faiths dainties, how would
you have magnified Faith above all your Cardinal virtues? you that so composed
your lives by ieiune and empty contemplations of an autarky in virtue by the
rules of nature; what stately lives would you have led and lived, if the grace
and hopes of the Gospel had appeared to you by the rules of Faith? As for you
Poets of the lighter and pleasanter vein, when I read your oades and sonnets,
chaunting out your choice joys and loves, your wishes and vows, framing a
conceited happiness to your selves, as the highest you could imagine or
desire: what low streines and mean air do I reckon them, in comparison, of
our Christian and divine hymns? what pitiful subjects for such sublimated
wits? what difference between your oaten pipes and our heavenly harpes? Solomon
that loved both these loves, lived both lives, and sung songs of both sorts,
when God raised his muse to an higher tune, and taught it to sing the song of
songs, how despised he his former windy vanities in comparison of his new
spiritual delicacies. Wherefore, O Christian, that have such transcendent
objects of thy thoughts above al other men, why should thou not ever keep
thy soul upon the wing, ever in a manner be in the third heavens, rolling and
tumbling thy soul in these beds of roses: I mean these meditations of thy
Justification, sanctification and salvation through Christ, without which, why
should one day pass thee? why any one part of a day? why should not thy soul
have her due drinks, breakfasts, meals vndermeales, beuers, and aftermeales,
as well as thy body? Thus to redeem time, thus to task and tie thy soul to
such heavenly round of work, would it not make the Mill of time pleasant, the
yoke of business easy? would not precious time glide swiftly and easily away
like a boat with full wind and tide needing no oars; or a free mettald horse
needing no spurs, needing no idle pastime to drive it before thee? shall it
not be a pleasure to thee to want other pleasures? Thus may thou make all
thy days Christ-tides, Easters, Whitsundaies, Birthdaies, and Holydaies: not
envying Foelix his felicity, Festus his festiuitie, nor Dives his daily purple
and delicious fare: but living a life kingly and Angelical, in comparison of
the vulgar sort.

CHAP. IX. An objection answered, and passage made to the life of
Sanctification.
HAppily thou replyest, all this were possible and easy, were it not for that
even amiddest this diligent practice of Faith, even in the stricktest watch, in
many things the best fails, many known frailties will escape, and more
escape unknown: And how can mirth choose but be damped with frequent slips?

The answer is, such an one as keeps the watch of his God, and pretermits no
day without the forementioned duties, shall seldom or never fall into any foul
slough, and dash the ship of his Faith against any dangerous Rock, and if he
do, long he cannot lie, but his Faith will set him on work to go out, weep
bitterly, and make his peace presently with his Lord, and Conscience, that he
may enjoy his wonted repasts: And for his ordinary infirmities it will daily
fetch him out a pardon of course, washing and scouring his soul every morning
and eueuing, more duly then any Pharisie his face or hands: and set him on
work every day as he runs into arrerages, to draw the red lines of
Christ's Cross over the black lines of Gods Debt Book. And what if as an
All-seeing God he sees our violation of his Law, and knows better then our
own Consciences every peccant Act of ours in thought, word, or deed? what if
GOD look upon the Handwriting against us? Does he not see the Bills
cancelled with the Precious Blood of his Son and our Surety? Which for
matter of guilt, defilement, and punishment is all sufficient to expunge,
cover, nullify, abolish, and wholly to take away our sins, in such sort that
he neither sees, will see, nor can see them as sins and debts bearing action
against us, obliging us to any penalty; no more then the Creditor who though
he sees the Items in his Book, and knows what debts have been, yet sees
them crossed, cleared: And what thought then need the Debtor take for such
debts? Why, but is not this to make Faith a Pandar to sin? And to make good
the Papists and Worldlings slander of Solifidians. that make no more of it, but
drink and take Tobacco; sin, and believe; get a pardon of the old, and a
license for the new.

Oh peevish and froward Generation to whom it is not given to know the
mystery of Faith, which is of the nature of Sovereign mundifying waters,
which so wash off the corruption of the ulcer, that they cool the heat, and
stay the spread of the infection, and by degrees heal the same: And of
Cordials which so comfort and ease the heart, as also they expel the noxious
humors and strengthen nature against them.

These are ministered only to prepared bodies, these pearls are not for Swine,
this Divinity we Preach not in Gath and Askelon to uncircumcised profane ones
that will turn every good thing to their own destruction: But this belongs to
the sealed Fountain, to the Spouse of Christ alone: which when she has
washed her feet how loath is she to foul them again? When she has
appeased her Beloved, how does she adjure her-selfe and others by the Hyndes
and Roes, not to awaken and offend him again?

The Text says, Not every hypocrite, every profligate professor of Faith that
lives as he listes, shall live by his Faith, but the Just or Righteous? Which
golden sentence is indeed ambiguously enunciated of purpose by the Holy Ghost
that it may either way be taken, The Just by his Faith, shall live: Or, The
Just shall live by his Faith, yet so as it has but one right ear to be
holden by, and that is only for the hand of the Righteous man: Implying, that
whosoever believes, or lives by his Faith, is also and must of necessity be a
righteous man, a Just man, not only imputatiuely, but inherently in part: such
an one as unfeignedly loves righteousness, studieth the practice of it,
denies and hates all unrighteousness, endeavors every day to be more and
more righteous, and so deserves the denomination of righteous.

So that look how the rational Soul, includes and implies the animal, so
does Justification, Sanctification, being individual.

CHAP. X. How Faith Sanctifies and Mortifies.
SO I slide into the second part or kind of Christian life, consisting in
holiness and righteousness, which I shall easily demonstrate not only to be
an individual companion, but a natural and necessary effect of Faith.

For look how the strength of the heart breeds, not only cheerfulness but
actiuenesse: Motion as well as health (whence it is that life, is put for
liveliness and agility) drives away all lassitude, hebetude, and
indisposition, brings in aptness and delight to stir: the like does Faith in
the soul: which may as the former in the body, for a time stand with some
slight distempers, spots of the skin, atche of limbs, but not long with
deadly diseases, either vanquishing them, or vanquished by them. This noble use
of Faith will excellently appear in both the parts of this new life,
Mortification and Vivification: And in each of these, two manner of ways does
Faith produce this effect; partly as a moving, partly as a procreant cause. In
the first kind admirable is the Pitho and Saada of Faith above all the Oratory
in the World: All the common incentiues taken from profitte, pleasure and
honor, all the Topicke places of Logic, Figures of Rhetoric, what poor
and weak engines are they to the irresistible pe^arre of Faith, which says,
but Ephata, and presently our Everlasting Gates yield and stand open.

For thus it goes to work with us, Has Christ given himself for thee,
forgiven thee so many debts, conferred, favors of all kinds upon thee, and
what have thou to retribute? If thou give all thy goods to the poor, thy body
to the fire, thy soul, to his service; yea were every hair of thine head a
man or Angel, were not all short of recompense? Love thou, love thou this
Savior of thine, and dare thou, or will thou dare to venture upon any thing
displeasing him, is there any thing too good, too heard or dear for him? Mary,
if thy tears will wash his feet, will thou not pour them out? Is thine
hair too good to be the towell? Is there any Spicknard too costly for his
head? Joseph, the LORD requires the handsell of thy Tomb, and will thou deny
him? Zacheus, love thou thy wealth above his honor that has saved thee?
Stephen, love thou thy life above thy Master? Can, or did any Believer give
the nay to these melting commaundes or commanding entreaties of Faith, will it
take the repulse? Does it not constrain and extort more then all rackes and
strapadoes, allure more then all wages and prizes? Does not this Magnes as
easily draw weighty iron as other Iet does strawes? So that when thou would
be sure to speed and obtain any thing of thine untoward heart, set Faith a
work to make the motion, and that will be sure to speed, not only by this
persuading faculty, but also by a Divine power secretly effecting what it
requires, conueying into the heart, will, and ability unto the deed. It
stands not without doors as a Mendicant Flexanimous perswader, but enters into
the closets of the heart, shootes the bars, unlocks the boults, takes away
all reluctation and redaction, infuseth a pliable willingness: of woluish and
dogged, makes the Will Lambe-like, and Doue-like: of wild and haggard,
morigerous and mansuete.

No otherwise then the medicine curing the vicious stomach, and restoring it
to health, makes it long for wholesome meat, as before for coals and ashes.

All this it does by fetching supernatural efficacy from the death and life
of Christ; yea, part of that mighty power where by Christ raised himself from
the dead, cured all diseases, and wrought all his miracles: By the virtue
whereof it metamorphizeth the heart of man, creates and infuseth new principles
of action. Make trial of this in mortifying the flesh to sin, and quickening
thy spirit to holiness.

For example, complainest thou of some preualent corruption, some violent
passion that often carries thee headlong against thy desire and resolution, as
Castrusius to Hierom, who shall help me subdue Nebuzardan, Goliath,
Holofernes, my raging lusts that are too mighty for me? Answer thy self as
David himself to the like: Through thee O Lord shall we do valiantly, over
Edom shall I cast my shoe, etc. yea, when thou have spent all thou have upon
other Physicians, tried all moral conclusions of purposing, promising,
resolving, vowing, fasting, watching, selfe-reuenging, yet get thee to Christ,
and with a finger of Faith, touch but a hem of his garment and thou shall feel
virtue come from him to the curing of thy disease. What if thou have often
encountered thy enemy, and received the foil, relapsed after victory: yet
cast not away the sheeld of Faith, but with the Israelites against Beniamites
the second and third time, set a fresh in the name of the LORD, and they shall
fly before thee.

Complainest thou with Augustine of his inbred, hereditary, habitual,
inueterate vices, holding thee in the Adamantine chains of custom, against
which thou have often resolved, and resolved, modo and modo, now I will leave
them, and now I will forsake them, why should I not as well as such and such,
as Potitian and Victorinus, and yet they keep thee Prisoner still, full
against thy will and endeauours. Find out the cause, which he had revealed to
him in te stas and non stas.

Thou stand upon thine own feet, and therefore fallest so foulely, thou will like a child go alone, and of thy self, and therefore gettest so many
knocks. Dye to thy self, renounce the broken reed of thine own freewill
which has so often deceived thee: and put all thy trust in the grace of
Christ, And it will crucify the old man, and give him his Hoc habet, his
deaths wound, pierce his sides, and break his knees in pieces.

Be weak in thy self and strong in the Lord, and through Faith thou shall be
more then Conqueror. Leave tuggling and struggling with thy sin, and fall
with Jacob to wrestle with Christ for a blessing: and though thy self go
limping away, yet shall thou be a Prince with God, and be delivered from
Esaus bondage. Yea, what if Satan, what if Legions of Principalities, and
powers have long held possession in some strong fort of thy heart, begin to
plead prescription, scorning as the Iebusites to be eiected out of their
impregnable tower: have thou Faith, and can thou believe, persist in
resisting and he shall fly, and thou shall see him fall like lightening
before thee. Christ raised from the dead, not only the daughter of Iairus
which was yet within bed, not laid forth: nor the Son of the Widow newely
carried out of the Gate to burial, but Lazarus that had four days lain in
the grave; to that end, says Augustine, That such as have long been dead in
sin, yea such as upon whom Satan has rolled the stone of Custom, and such
as stink in the nostrilles of the world through putrified soars of sins,
should not yet despair, but know that which falls out in frequent experience,
Faith can cure diseases past all other cures and hopes. Through Faith thou
shall roll away the stone from the Cave of Makpelah, and take out the five
Kings that have domineered and tyrannized over thee, set thy feet in the
necks of them and triumph over them.

CHAP. XI. How Faith Viuifies.
ANd what is there yet further, thou would have Faith do for thee? Oh
say thou! it is not enough to be healed of the disease, unless thou may
take up thy bed and walk; yea, leap and skippe as the Lame restored to his
limbs. Oh! that I could find that life of Grace which I see in some that can
make it their meat and drink to do the will of God.

Though I be not pestered and mastered with any reigning corruption, yet I
find my self so dull and untoward, that I take no pleasure in my life. Know
also that this quickening power, Faith only can help thee withal. To pray, to
meditate, to have thy conversation in heaven, to keep a Sabbath cherely is as
easy to thee as to Iron to swim, and stones to ascend upward, but nothing is
impossible to Faith: it can naturalize these things unto thee, metamorphize
thee, make thee a new creature, of a moule of the earth a soul of heaven, of a
snaile a dromedarie: such a change as the Sun works in the vapor, when of
an earthy heavy substance, it makes it light and aerie, apt to ascend into the
middle Region. Such a change Cyprian says he felt in his conversion: And how
else came David to that high delight in Gods service, that he loved the
Commandments of God more then thousands of gold and silver, the honey and the
honey comb, that he rose at midnight to meditate in them. The selfsame
duties may be done by the Civil man, and by the believer; for the outside and
deed done, both may go to Church, hear a Sermon, read a Chapter, but the
one goes as the Bear to the stake, as a slave to the mill, and the dullard to
school, in comparison of the other who has a different internal principle:
which is as a spring and oil to the wheels, that makes them go smoothly and
currantly, makes the yoke light and easy. Esaias 40. 31.
They that trust in the Lord shall renew their strength, lift up the wing as
the Eagle, run and not be weary, walk and not faint.

Faith it is that fetches sap from the root Christ, that makes every tree
bring forth fruit in it kind, every Christian in his own calling. What else
made David so worthy a Soldier? what taught his fingers to fight, so that a
bow of steel was broken in his hand? What made Paul an able Minister of the
Gospel, gave him the door of utterance, made his tongue as the pen of a
ready writer? He believed, therefore he spoke. What made Onesimus of a false
eye-seruant, trusty to his Master, as to the Lord? The like might be said of
all trades and sciences.

Look what a full treasury of all sorts of graces Christ has stored up in
him, Faith dreineth and deriueth them out of his fullness to the use of every
several Christian, even Grace for Grace.

Faith is the Conduit Cock that waters all the Herbs and flowers in the
Garden. All which the more I consider, the more I pity the preposterous care
and unhappy travel of many well affected, who study the practice of this and
that virtue, neglecting this cardinal and radical virtue; As if men should
water all the branches of a Tree and not the root: Feign would they abound and
shine in patience, meekness, zeal, yet establish and root not themselves in
Faith, that should maintain all the rest, are ambitious to do good works,
build Hospitalles, give Alms, but study not to do the work of the Father:
And what is the work of the Father, but to believe in the Son whom he has
sealed and sent into the world to be relied on for Salvation; which work is
the gratefullest work that we can perform, and which will make grateful all
that we do besides: without which all that we can do will not please him.

What cares he for thy thousands of Rams, thy Rivers of Oil? Has he not
showed thee, Oh man, that he that trusteh in his Son honors him most of
all in putting to his Seal that he is true? This honor if thou would do
unto him, he would honor thee with all other graces and withhold no ornament,
no good thing from thee, if it be fit for thee. Meek thou shall be as Moses,
patients as Job, zealous as David, thy soul and life embroadered with all
kind of shining Graces, as the high Priests apparel with Jewels Wherefore
add this prescript to the former when thou art on the top of Mount Tabor,
solacing thy soul in thy Lord, and his favor through Faith: feasting and
banqueting with him as Ester with Ahasuerosh. Bethink thy self what suite
thou have to him, what troublesome enemy thou would be rid off, suppose
it be some potent Haman of pride, make but thy complaint, and it shall be
executed and crucified before thine eyes. Consider what grace thou stand in
need of, and make thy petition as Achsah to Caleb, And he shall give thee the
springs above and the springs beneath. Judge. 1. 14and.


This prescript if thou will daily observe, some days more largely and
fervently, as the Spirit that blows how and where it lists shall assist, and
as occasion shall require: but every day some what more or less; though I will
not promise thee thou shall attain to perfection of degrees such as the
perfected spirits of the Just enjoy in glory: because here thou shall ever
believe but in part, and therefore be holy but in part: yet this I dare
promise, as thou growest from Faith to faith so shall thou grow from strength
to strength in all other graces, till by degrees thou attain to the fullness
and maturitie of Age in Christ, which shall make thee a Saint in earth, alight
in this dark world, and make thee able to live in holiness and righteousness
all the days of thy life, with much more comfort to thy self, and credit to
the Gospel, then strangers to this life of Faith, either do, or imagine may
be done.

CHAP. XII. How Faith vpholds life in Affliction.
SAy then, O Christian, is there any thing yet behind that may impeach the
co^pleat happiness of a believers life, speak now if there be any thing that
hinders it, which Faith cannot help?

Oh! yes says the Flesh (which ever is cowardly and loves ease) though a man
be never so justified and sanctified, yet may he live in poverty, in crosses,
yea in great and manifold pressures, and what a life can there be in such
extremities? Oh how does Faith here lift up the Crest, shine and triumph above
Nature, Reason and all Moral Virtues in her incomparable valor? Being in all
these not as they, only a patient perforce, or a mere bearer, but more then
Conqueror; not only, not daunted, but rejoicing to fall into manifold trials
and tentations; knowing it self to be the Adamant, that nothing will break;
the Palm, that sinckes not under the waightiest of burdens; the Oil, that
ever ouer-swims the greatest quantity of water you can power upon it, the
sheate Anchor, that holds when all other Tackling breaks. Here is the Crown
and Garland of Faith. Were it not for Conflicts, what superexcellent use were
then of Faith? Every Cockboat can swim in a River, every sculler sail in a
Calm, in daily and ordinary gusts, every man of a patient temper or cheerely
disposition can hold up the head, but when a black tempest comes, a tenth wave
flows, and one deep calls another, nature yeeldes, spirits faint, heart
fails: then to stand erect, then to live and reign, that only can Faith do,
which has the Word for the Compass, and Christ at the helm. The greatest
adversities that are, are but the exercise, yea the soil and luster of Faith.
Man gloryes when he can tame Tigers and Lions, thinks himself a stately king
when he can make an Elephant bow and stoop to him, when he leads a Bear on
the Ring, or can handle a Serpent without hurt; but what a small conquest is
this to that of Faith? When it makes shame, poverty, sickness, persecutions,
banishment, yea death it self, not only, not dreadful and harmefull, but
tractable and serviceable? Questionless, great and sundry advantages has a
Christian by virtue of his Faith, above any Naturian or Politic by all his
reason; only, here is the defect of Christians that they want skill, or else
forget to hold up their shield when a Dart comes suddenly upon them. Like him
that was robbed by a Thief with a staff only in his hand, having himself a
Pistole at his back ready charged, but surprised upon the sudden, altogether
unmindful, or unable to use it. And if a man has a Target that is
impenetrable, what is he the better if his heart or Art fail him when he
should defend himself by it? This makes Christians when they ayle any thing,
with Saul to run to Endor, 1 Samuel 28 7.
with Asa to send out to the Physicians, 2 Chr. 16. 12.
as if Faith could stand them in no steed. When therefore a storm rises,
presently run and awaken thy sleeping Faith, knock at Faithes door, ho
Faith, help at a pinch, now do thy office, and Faith will presenly aid and
relieve thee with one of these special cordials.

First, whereas sense and reason did but dimmely and cloudily suggest to their
followers certain broken and confused opinions, little better then dreams of
destiny and providence. Faith will confidently and evidently assure thee of
this ground of comfort, that the least ticke befalles thee not, without the
ouer-ruling eye and hand, not only of a wise God, but of a tender Father, and
fellow-feeling elder brother, who knowing thy mould does more exactly measure
out every Cross unto thee, then the carefullest Apothecaries do their Scruples
and Drammes of dangerous Physic.

Secondly, out of this Principle, Faith will, extract these infallible
conclusions, this estate is not the Axe of Perdition but the Pruning Knife of
Affliction: this Cup is not a potion banefull, but medicinable, how bitter
and wringing soever. Whateuer befalls, being in Christ, it cannot bend to thy
confusion, condemnation or utter undoing, but an issue shall be given out of
it. What terrible noise soever the storm shall make over thy head, it shall
be but as Hailestones upon the Tiled or Leaded House that rattle more then
hurt. Thou art kept by the power of his might the evil one shall not touch
thee: thou art in safe harbor under the Rock Christ, and may know in whom
thou have trusted, and art sure never to be confounded. If it be sickness or
poverty, it is in thy Fathers own hand: if the rod be in some malicious
enemies hand, if he turn thee over to a servant to scourge thee, and dress
him in the Devils habit to scare thee, yea though Satan himself buffette thee,
yet he stands by, looks on, will moderate and number the stripes: the Devils
could not go one inch beyond commission in the Swine: he knows thy strength
is not the strength of Whales or stones, and therefore will not permit them to
lay on more, then thou shall well bear: his wisdom and grace will be
sufficient for thee. He that is in good terms with a Prince, fears not the
approach of Heralds or Purseuants: he that is out of debt fears not Baylifes
or Sergeants, but imagines they come upon some good Messages.

Afflictions are scarrbugges to wicked men, as bushes to thieves, but if thou
be a believer, at peace with GOD in Christ, they lay off their terrible
Vizard, and come with an amiable, countenance. GOD thy Father has given the
whole Host and Army of afflictions more inviolable charge then Danids, Do the
young man, my Son Absolon, no harm. Do my anointed no harm.

Thirdly, Faith will further assure that he has not only given them a
prohibition or negative commission but an affirmative iniuuction to do thee
all good that may be: he has said unto them, purge, refine, try, exercise,
breed the quiet fruit of righteousness, give him experience of his faith, make
him bring forth more fruit: so that though there be in thy Physic some
malign or poysonful ingredients, yet being administered by him that knows thy
temper and disease, and entirely affects thy health, it shall be so mingled
with allaies and correctors that the confection shall be good, and all together
shall and must work for the best. When thou feel thy bowels wring, or (as
in a Sea-sicknesse) are dead sick for the present, remember thou shall be the
better many days after. And though with Job and David thy querulous flesh
complain, and grunt, and groan, yet when it is over a little, thou shall be
able to say, Oh this was good for me! I would not for any thing but I had borne
the yoke in my youth, that I may live the more comfortably in age: Considering
that sick thou art, and that of many humors, thy Father should not love thee,
if he should feed thee with sweet meat, and mingle no Aloes with them: much
folly is bound up in thy back, and if thy indulgent father should forbear the
rod he should hate and not love thee.

Fourthly, Moreover Faith will reminde thee of Christ's partnership in thy
affliction, and of thy conformity with him, the first borne, only begotten,
and entirely beloved son of God, if he that was without sin, yet was not
without stripes, will thou look to be a cockered Adoniah? And what if the
Cross be heavy, and thou a weak Child, yet Christ a Giant at one end,
bears part of it, and makes it light and easy, he is quick of feeling, when
Stephen is stoned, says, Saul why persecutest thou me? Besides what more
honorable Badge and Cognizance can thou have of thy Sonship, then this
resemblance of him, not as now glorified in the heavens, which thou must stay
for till thou come there, but as in the way to glory, when he despised the
shame, suffered the Crown of thorns, the Scepter of Reed, the spittings,
buffetings, mockes and mowes, and all reproaches of vile sinners, the piercing
of the Spear, and showed himself to be the Son of God, not by descending
from the Cross but by enduring the Cross: And shall I not (says he) drink
the Cup which my Father has tempered? and if thou will be his Disciple, the
first lesson in his School is, Christ's Cross, Deny thy self, take it up and
follow him, And glory with the Martyrs, now am I like my Lord and Master.

Lastly, Faith will set before thee as before him the infinite recompense of
reward, not only renown in this World, which yet by Faith the patience, not
only of Job, but of all Martyrs have obtained, but that far most excellent
Hyperbolicall weight of glory: Which Paul eying, counted his afflictions (which
to us would have been intolerable) light and momentany, not worthy the naming
in comparison: which made him not only, not weep and howl, but sing in the
Dungeon, and reckon it a special favor and honor to be counted not only a
believer, but a sufferer for Christ. And God forbid, that a believer should
glory in any thing so much as in the Cross of Christ, in his wounds and
scarres for his Lord and Master: As that worthy Vincentius said to the Tyrant,
Threaten these things to your Courtiers and Carpet Knights; Rackes, Strapadoes,
torments, are but a play to us, we Soldiers choose to be in Christ's Garrison,
rather then in the Court, in the Field and forefront of the battle, then in
the Palaces of Princes. The more hazard and peril, the more glory and honor.
And what else desire we but to dye daily, that the life in Christ may be
manifested in us? Yea, in the very instant of Death, Faith helps the believer
to live, so as he may be said not to see death, and never to dye, (but that
requires a just Treatise by it self.) Let all the complaints, greeuances,
wants, and miseries of the world be searched and gaged; the bottom will be
found either to be want of Faith, or of the use and practice of Faith: So that
we may well say with Augustine, to any christian sinking under his cross, or
shrinking at his enemy, Have thou lost thy Faith? And conclude with that worthy
Ensigne-bearer of Christ, Many are the troubles of the Righteous, Fox in 14.
but by Faith we stand, Apoc.
by Faith we fight, by Faith we overcome.

CHAP. XIII. An Epistle to the Reader pressing the use of Faith.
NOw Reader, for so I choose to call thee in a Postcript, when thou have read
the Book, rather then in a Preface, when thou may there leave as many do.
Give me now leave to grapple with thee, and minister to thee an Iutergatory or
two.

How many do thou know within thy conscience, live this life of Faith? Many
thou see live by their Lands, by their wits, by their shifts: but how many by
their Faith? For the want of this use of Faith, Do not many poor christians
think, and say of it, as a poor laboring countryman said to his neighbor
in serious private talk, That he never believed there was any such sum as a
thousand pounds of money, but that only rich men gave it out so, in boasting,
or policy to excite others to labor: so says the common Protestant, out of
doubt there is no such sweetness in the life of Faith: for we see not
believers so cheerful and contented above other men. If Attists and
Tradesmen did no more daily and duly follow their work, then most Christians
do practice their Faith, would they not be stark beggars? But to ask thee a
more profitable question, Leave iudgeing of others, and answer me in good
serious sooth between God and thy soul, Have, and do thou thy self live by
thy Faith? Let me a little put thee to it, prove and examine thy self, and
take for instance this present week or day past wherein thou read this
little Manuell. How have thou and usually do thou spend the day? what
thought did thou awake withal? what was thy morning draught for thy soul
next thy heart? what has cheered and made thee merry in private and in
company? whether thy sports and meals, more then thy heavenly ejaculations?
Deal plainly, not with me and this book (which yet shall witness against
thee, if thou refuse to practice it when thou have read it) but with thy self.
Have thou, or have thou not challenged some time more or less, half, or
quarter of hour at the least, for this exercise of thy Faith; have thou not
troubled thy self about the many things, that this one only needful has
been forgotten (that which only should be called work and business) have
thou not melted the day, yea, it may be the week, or month past, and made
thy soul wholly to fast and pine for want of these refeshings: if so, as I
most justly fear it in most of my Readers, how much more in such as are
usually no readers? why then let thy heart smite thee for thy folly, smite thou
thy self upon the thigh, and say, how have I lived, or rather not lived, but
consumed precious days in time-eating Vanities? How comes it about that the
greatest part of my life is the least part wherein I have lived.

Oh then recover and recollect thy self before thou go hence, and be no more.
Will thou die before thou have lived, as Boys slubber out Books before they
learn their lesson. Oh learn to live this life, It is never too late, it is
never, I am sure, too soon; it is no shame to learn it what age or condition
soever thou be of. Be thou Prince, Potentate, Nobleman or Gentleman, though
few such Readers I look for: remembering well what Bradford tells the Earl of
Bedford, and Augustine tells Romanian, whiles he was in the mouths of all men,
most honorable, most munificent, most fortunate, in the full of his
prosperity, in the source of pleasures in the top of greatness, etc. who
durst lispe a word of a better life, of true happiness, or what boot was it
for any man to make mention of any such matter. Yet if any such God will
persuade to make trial of this life, thou which say, what is a Gentleman but
his pleasure? shall then tell me, as Solomon of his youth such gentry is but
vanity; true pleasure there is none but in this life. What is a Christian but
his Faith? and what is his life but the use of his Faith? Be thou a
Scholar, a Prophet, or Son of the Prophets, what is thy work? what is thy
scope? or what should it be in thy self and others, but this life of Faith?
What is Paul or Apolloes but such as by whom you have believed? 1. Cor. 3.
What ever you teach, before you have taught this you were as good Preach to
the stools and stones of your Churches? What are your Auditors but dead bones,
and skulles, till they, believe, and till Christ be formed in them. Get first
an hold whereon you may fasten your Engines to draw them to virtues and good
works. You which would do that in souls which Elisha did in bodies, raise
them from their graves: Interpretors one of a thousand get the tongue of the
learned to declare their righteousness unto them, the righteousness I say of
Faith: show your selves skillful workmen, such as have been brought up not
only in moralls of the heathen, subtilties of Scholemen, sentences and
conceits of Postilers, rosaries, destructories, Anthologies, but in the
wholesome word of Faith, which are the Arm and power of God to the salvation
of every believer. Above all let it be our wisdom to live our selves by that
which we teach others to live by; we that have, or might, or should have more
Faith then common Christians, is it not a shame if we live not more happily,
and cheerfully then private Christians? not by our Livings wherein the Laity
has now gotten the start of us for the most part, but by our Faith, wherein
we have the advantage of them, or else shame be it to us.

Is it not a shame to see an honor of a thousand pound a year live as meanly
as a poor Farmer, a Master and professor of an Art, as a mean practisioner.
Yet this I must say even to the meanest tradsmen and poorest people, this life
belongs not to such only that are book learned, but is equally obuious and
open (as the Kings high way) to all sorts of Trauailers to Heaven. Honorable
lives, Pompous lives, voluptuous lives, poor folks have small hope to atteyne
unto: but a true happy life they may and do live as well as the learnedest
Cleakes and greatest Princes, if they get the gift to practice that, which,
such for the most part do but study and talk of. To conclude, what ever thou
art, or who ever that desire to mend thy condition, to better thine estate,
to multiply thy life, to change thy few and evil days of thy pilgrimage, into
good and many: behold here is the Art of living well and living long. Life is
not to be numbered by the hours, but measured by cheerfulness, as moneys not
by tale but value. A little piece of gold conteynes a great many pieces of
silver. Manhood consists not in the bulk of the bones, but in the metal and
spirits. Is not one week of an healthy man, better, then a year of a crasie;
one Sunshine hour, then a gloomy day? I have often mused how a man might come
nearest to that life which Adam lost, and recompense in this latter age of the
World, (wherein the lives of men are so contracted) the longaeuity of those
that lived before the Flood. And this is the best help I find: To live well
is to live twice. A good man doubles and amplifies his days: one may speak as
much in few words as another in many. Persius wrote more in a few leaves then
Marsus in large volumes. One day led by the rules of Faith is better then an
immortality of vanity. A man may live to as good content to himself and
others, in a short space, as others in a long life; some are old in years
tediously drawn out, others in hours cheerfully spent, some have been long,
and others have lived long, and they only are such as have lived this life; of
whom I conclude as does the story of the Kings, Ieremiahs Prophecy, touching
Zedekiah upon his advancement by the King of Babell, His portion was a
continual portion, a Kingly portion, every day a certain all the days of his
life, such I say it is, or might be, if Christians might be persuaded not to
content themselves to profess or think they have Faith, but to live by their
Faith: A needful Caveat.
only before I part with thee, take from me one Caveat, one advise, one
request, and so an end.

First, take heed thou mistakest me not in all this, as if I had spoken of an
absolute perfection in this life equal to vision and fruition in the life to
come, confounded Heaven with earth, as if I thought my self, or any other to
have comprehended. If any man thinks he believes any thing, he believes
nothing yet as he ought to believe, but all things in part, and imperfectly.
We cannot by all our assiduousnesse in Reading, Prayer, and Meditation have
Gods Spirit at an absolute command, no more then Mariners the wind, or
Husbandmen the showers, so as the most obseruant believer has his turbida
interualla, his buffetings, lest he be too much exalted, his desertions
wherein his beloved will hide himself behind the grates, not to be found of
him for a while, that he seek him more eagerly, and prise his presence more
thankefully, more heedefully keep him when he has him, and be wholly
dependant on his grace; yet so as this remains most sure and certain, that
the constant and daily Practiser of his faith shall constantly, and congruously
be seconded with the gusts and gales of his spirit, the only true Zephirus
and Fauonius, shall have Satan tied up from long and frequent molesting him,
shall not have such tedious absences of the Spirit, such uncertain fits and
moodes of his joy and comfort, as the negligent and loose believer, but a more
steadfast frame and tenor of joy, then any other kind of man in the world that
takes not this course.

Provided that thou take this advise, A profitable advice.
that for the better and stronger use of this Faith, thou seele up thy senses
and chain up thy reason. Walking by sight, and walking by Faith are opposite
things: and therefore as men fortify the visuall beams of one eye by closing
the other; so must thou wink and close up the eye of thy soul to all worldly
things, that thou may by the prospectiue of Faith fix thy spiritual eye
upon heavenly delights: not that thou need go out of this world and
sequester thy self like an Eremite into Dens and Caves, retired from all
society, but even in the midst of all glistering objects see them as if thou
saw them not; that is without being deeply affected with them. So looked
Paul from off the things that are seen even in the midst of Rome, and looked
upon things which were not seen: and Moses in Pharaohs Court saw him that was
invisible.

A right believer goes through the world, as a man whose mind is in a deep
study: or as one that has special haste of some weighty business, goes
through a street; that gazeth on nothing, hears nothing, minds nothing that
is in the way, but only that which his head is taken up withal: Our
conversation is in heaven, our treasure is in heaven. Oh! that all our thoughts
were there, so as no earthly object might detain, or distract them, no more
then must needs be in our callings, so that the maine bent and intention of
all that is within us might be set upon the daily nourishing of our Faith.

For which purpose I make this parting and farewell suite unto thee, An earnest
request.
as thou meanest to receive any good by this Book. That thou would even
from this very hour wherein thou endest the reading of it, determine and
covenant, betwixt God and thy soul, never whilst thou live on the face of
this earth to omit one day (God enabling thee by his Spirit) wherein thou will
not vindicate and redeem, at the least, one half or quarter of an hour,
either twice or once in the day, at the least: Wherein all other affairs laid
aside, thou may withdraw thy self apart from all company, and occasions,
with a non obstante, to practice the exercise formerly prescribed. That is, by
Prayer, Reading, and Meditation, to put some strength and life into thy Faith,
till thou have cheered, and revived, and warmed thy soul therewithal. This if
thou shall inuiolably observe, the strength, the feeling, the comfort, and the
fruits of thy Faith will by little and little insensibly, and in a little
while, most sensibly thrive and grow till thou come to the ripeness of age
in Christ.

What hurt can it be to thee if thou should bind thy self by vow
hereunto, or if thou fear thy strength, yet by full purpose thus to do all
and every day of thy life: that so in the Lees and Dregs of time, whiles
fleshly Protestants are raising contention about matters of Faith, or making
Sects and Schisms in the Church about needelesse trifles, thou may edify
thy self in thy most holy Faith and whilst thou live in the dark womb of
this world, live by the Navel of Faith till thou come to have thy mouth
satiate with fullness of all good things at the right hand of God. When, as
Elizabeth Folk said, Faith shall cease to be Faith and be turned into fruition,
and we receive the end of our Faith, the salvation of our souls.

These things have I written that your joy may be full.

The Just shall live by his Faith.

According to thy Faith so be it to thee.

Lord increase our Faith.
The Bookeseller to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I pray thee take Notis that Master Ward, has lately published
a most Remarkable Monument, of the Invincible Navy of 88. and the unmatchable
Powder Treason 1605. Necessary to be had in the House of every good Christian,
to show Gods loving and wonderful providence, over this Kingdom, when the
Papists twice sought their utter ruin and subvertion. These Monuments are to
be sold where these Books are sold in Saint Dunstones Churchyard, and
Pauls-Ally. Vale. 24 of January. 1621.

FINIS.

