A Preaty Interlude called, Nice wanton,

Wherein ye may see,
Thr^e braunces of an ill tree,
The mother and her children three,
Two naught, and one godly.
Early sharp, that will be thorn,
Soon ill, that will be naught:
To be naught, better unborn,
Better unfed, then naughtely taught.
Ut magnum magnos, pueros puerilia deocus.

Personages.
The Messenger. Barnabas. Ismael. Dalila. Eulalia. Iniquity baily errand.
Xantipe. Worldly shame. Daniel the judge.
Anno Domini. M.D.LX.

The Prologue.
^^e messen^^r. THe prudent Prince Solomon, does say,
He that spares the rod, the child does hate
He would youth should be kept in awe always
By correction in time at reasonable rate,
To be taught to fear god and their parents obey
To get learning and qualities, thereby to maintain
An honest quiet life, correspondent always,
To gods law and the kings, for it is certain.
If children be noseled in idleness and ill,
And brought up therein, it is hard to restrain,
And draw them from natural wont evil,
As here in this Interlude, ye shall se plain.
By two children brought up wantonly in play,
Whom ye mother does excuse, when she should chastise
They delight in daliaunce and mischief always,
At last they end their lives in miserable wise.
The mother persuaded by worldly shame,
That she was the cause of their wretched life,
So pensife, so sorrowful, for their death, she became,
That in despair she would ^lea her sel^ wi^h a kinfe
Then her son Barnabas, (by interpretacyon,
The son of comfort,) her ill purpose do stay,
By the scriptures he gives her godly consolation
And to conclud^th, all these parts will we play.
Barnabas comes. Barn^bas. MY master in my lesson yesterday,
Did recite this text of Ecclesiasticus,
man is prone, to evil, from his youth, did he say
Which sentence may well be verified in us
My self, my brother, and sister Dalila,
Whom our parents to their cost to scoole do find
I tarry for them here, time passes away,
I loose my learning, they ever loyter behind,
If I go before, they do me threate,
To complain to my mother, she for their sake,
Being her tender tidlynges, will me beat:
Lord, in this perplexit ye, what way shall I take?

ismael^ What will become of them? grace god them send,
To apply their learning, and their manners amend.

Dalila Here we comen, and here we louen, come in sy^gyng.
And here we will abide abide ay.

Barnabas. Fie brother fie, and specially you sister Dalila,
Sobrenes becomes maids always

Dalila What ye dolt ye be ever in one song,

Ismae^ yea sir it shall cost you blows ere it be long,

Barnabas. Be ye not ashamed the treauandes to play?
Losing your time and learning, and that every day
Lernyng brings knowledge of god, and honest living to get

Dalila Yea mary, I warrant you, master hodypeke,

Barnabas. Learn a pace sister, and after to spyn and sow,
And other honest huswifely points to know.

Ismae^ Spyn quod ha, yea by ye mass, and with your heles up wynd
For a good mouse hunt, is cat after king

Barnabas. Lewd spekyng corrupts good manners s. Paul does sai
Come, let us go, if ye will to scole this day
I shall be shent for taryng so long, Barna^^^" goes out

^smael Go get the hence, thy mouth full of horse donge.
Now pretty sister, what sport shall we deuyse?
Thus paltyng to scole, I think us unwise
In summer dye for thryst, in winter for cold,
And still to live in fear of a churl, who would?

^alila. Not I by the mass, I had rather he hanged were
Then I would sit quakyng like a mome for fear
I am son burned in summer, in winter the cold,
Makes my limbs gross, and my beauty decay,
If I should use it, as they would I should,
I should never be fair woman I dare say.

^smael No sister no, but I can tell,
Where we shall have good chiere,
Lusty companyons two or three,
At good wine, ale and biere.

^alila. Oh good brother let us go,
I will never go more to to scoole,
Shall I never know,
What pastyme means?
yes, I will not be such a fool.

Ismael Have with the Dalila,
Fare well our scoole,
^hey raste ^aye cheir (...)kes. Away with book and all,
I will set my heart,
On a merry pynne,
What ever shall be fall.

^^lalia. Lord what folly is in youth?
How unhappy be children now a days?
And the more pitye, to say the truth.
Their parents mainteyn them in evil ways:
Which is a great cause that the world decays,
For children brought up in ydlenes and play,
Unthrifty and desobedient, continue always,
A neighbor of mine has children here by,
Idle, desobedyent, proud, wanton and nyce.
As they come by, they do shrewed turns daily,
Their parents so to suffer them surely, be not wise
They laugh me to scorn, when I tell the^ mine advise,
I will speak with their elders and warn the^ neighborly
Never in better time, their mother is here by,
God save you gossyp, I am very feign,
That you chance now to come this way,
I long to talk with you a word or twain,
I pray you take it friendly that I shall say:
Ismael your son, and your daughter Dalila.
Do me shrewde turns, daily more and more,
Chide and beat my children, it greueth me sore.
They swear, curse and scold, as they go by ye way,
Giuyng other ill ensample to do the same,
To gods displeasure, and their hurt an other day,
Chastyce them for it, or else ye be to blame:

Xa^tippe Tusshe tusshe, if ye have no more then that to say,
Ye may hold your tongue and get ye a way,
Alas poor souls, they sit a scoole all day,
In fear of a churl, and if a little they play,
He beats them like a devil: when they come home
Your mestresship would have me lay on,
If I should beat them so often as men complain,
By ye mass with in this month, I should make the^ lame

eulalia. Be not offended I pray you, I must say more,
your son is suspect, light fyngered to be.
your daughter has nyce tricks three or four,
Se to it in time, least worse ye do see,
He that spares the rod, hates the child truly,
yet Solomon sobre correction does mean,
Not to beat and bounce them to make them lame:

^a^tippe God thank you mestres, I am well at ease
Such a fool to teach me, preaching as she please,
Dame ye belie them deadly I know plain,
Because they go handsomely ye disdain,

^ulalia. Then on the other as well would I complain,
But your other son is good, and no thank to you
These will ye make naught by sweet Jesus.

^a^tippe Eupliade, my children naught ye lie,
By your malice they shall not set a slye,
I have but one mome, in comparison of his brother
Him the fool prayseth, and despises the other.

^ulalia. Well Xantippe, better in time, then to late,
Seeing ye take it so, here my leave I take. Exit.

^a^tippe Mary good leave have ye, the great god be with you
My children or I be cursed I think,
They be complained on where ever they go,
That for their pleasure they might drink.
Nay by this the poor fowls be come from ferle weary,
I will go get them meat to make them mercy,

^niqui. Lo, lo, here I brynger Iniquity, Ismael, and Dalila, comein together.

^smael What is she now ye have her?

Dalila. A lusty mynyon lover.
Iniqui. ^ll together For no gold will I give her
welcome my honey ay.

Iniqui. Oh my heart. Here he speaks,
This wenche can sing,
And play her part,

Dalila. I am yours (and you mine) with all my heart.

Iniqui. By the mass it is well song,
were ye not sorry ye were a maid so long?

Dalila Fie master iniquity fie, I am a maid yet,

Ismae^ No sister no, your maiden head is sick:

Iniqui That knave your brother will be a blabbe still,
I wisse Dalila ye can say as much by him, if ye will.

Dalila By him quod ha, he has whores two or three,
But iche tell your minion doll, by gogs body:
It skylleth not she does hold you as much

Ismael ye lie falsely, she will play me no such touch,

Dalila Not she? yes to do your heart good
I could tell you who puts a bone in your hood.

Ismae^ Peace whore, or ye bear me a box an theare,

Dalila Here is mine ear knave, stryke and thou dare.
To suffer him thus ye be no man,
If ye will not revenge me, I will find one,
To set so little by me, ye were not wont,
Well, it is no matter.
Though ye do ceteri nolunt,

Iniqui Peace Dalila, speak ye laten poor fool,

Dalila No no, but a proverb I learned at scoole.

Ismael yea sister, you went to scole til ye were past grace

Dalila yea, so dydst thou by thy knaves face.

Iniqui Well, no more a do, let all this go,
We kinsfolk must be friends, it must be so.
Come on come on come on, He casts di^t on the board.
Here they be that will do us al good,

Ismael If ye use it long, your hear will grow throught your

Iniqui. Come on knave with christ's curse.
I must have some of the money,
Thou have picked out of thy fathers purse,

Dalila He, by the mass if he can get his purse,
Now and then he makes it by half the worse.

Ismael I defy you both whore and knave

^niqui. What ye pryncockes, begin ye to rave?
Come on.

Dalila. Master Iniquity, by your leave,
I will play a crown or two here by your sleue

^smael. Then be ye servant to a worshypfull mon.
Master Iniquity, a right name by saint John.

Dalila. What can ye say by master Inquitie?
I love him and his name most hertely,

^niqui. God a mercy Dalila, good luck, I warrant the,
^e kisseth ^er. I will shryue you both by and by,

Ismael Come on, but first let us have a song,

Dalila. I am content, so that it be not long.

Iniquity and Dalila singe. Iniqui. Gold locks,
She must have knockes,
Or else I do her wrong,

Dalila. When ye have your will,
Ye were best lie still,
The winter nights be long

Iniqui. When I ne may,
An other assay,
I will take it for no wrong:

Dalila. Then by the roode,
A bone in your hoode.
I shall put ere it be long.

Ismael She macheth you sira.

Iniqui. By gogs blood she is the best whore in England.

Dalila. It is knauishly praised, give me your hand,

Iniqui. I would thou haddes such in other,

Ismael By the mass rather then.xl. pound brother.

Iniqui. Here sirs come on seven. They se^ him.
A leaven at all.

Isma^^ Do ye nycke us be knave your noly,

Iniqu^ Ten mine
Sire mine, Isma^^ casts ^
Have at it, and it were for all my fathers kyne,
It is lost by his wounds, and ten to one,

Iniqu^ Take the dice Dalila, cast on.

Dalil^ Come on fy^e, she casts, and they fet^
Thryue at fairest,

Isma^^ Gup whore, and I at rest,
Bigogs blood, I wene god and the devil be agenst me He loset^

Iniqu^ If the one forsake the, the other will take the,

Ismae^ Then is he a good fellow, I would not pass,
So that I might bear a rule in hell by the mass,
to toss fierbrandes at these penyfathers pates,
I would be porter and receive them at the gates,
In boiling lead and brimston, I would sethe the^ each one
The knaves have al ye money, good felows have none

Dalila Play brother, have ye lost all your money now?

Ismae^ yea, I thank that knave and such a whore as you,
It Is no marter, I will have money or I will sweet,
Bygogs blood I will rob the next I mete.
yea, and it be my father. he goes out.

Iniqui^ Thou boy, by the mass ye will clyme the ladder,
Ah sira, I love a wenche that can be wylye^
She perceived my mind, with a twinke of mine eye,
If we two play boody on any man,
We will make him as bare as Job anon,
Well Dalila, let se what ye have won,

Dalila Sir, I had.x. shillinges when I begone,
And here is all, every farryng, They tell^^

Iniqui. ye lie like a whore, ye have won a pound,

Dalila, Then the devil stryke me to the ground,

^niqui. I will feel your pocket, by your leave mestres,

^alila. A way knave, not mine by the mass,

^niqui. Yes by god, and give you this to boot, he gives her a box

^alila. Out horeson knave, I beshrew thy heart root
Will thou rob me and breat me to?

Iniqui. In the way of correction but a blow or two,

Dalila. Correct thy dogs thou shall not beat me,
I will make your knaves flesh cut I warrant the,
Ye think I have no friends, yes I have in store,
A good fellow or two percaunce more.
She goes ^^^"te, yea, by the mass they shall box you for this gear,

Iniqui. A knave I found the, a knave I leave the here.
Gup whore, do ye hear this jade?
Loving when is pleased,
When she is angry thus shrewd,
Chief brother, sylter whore,
Two gra^ses of an ill tree,
I will tarry no longer here,
Fare well, god be with ye. he goes out

Dalila. Alas wretched wretch that I am,
^ommeth in ragged, her face h^d or ^isfigured^ ^a^tinge on ^ sta^fe. Most
miserable caitife that ever was borne,
Full of pain and sorrow, crooked and lome.
Stuffed with diseases in this world forlorn.
My senowes be shronken, my flesh eaten with poc^^s
My bones fin of ache, and great pain,
My head is bald, that bare yelowe locks,
Crooked I crepe to the earth again,
Mine eye sigth is dim, my hands tremble and shake
My stomach abhors all kind of meat:
For lack of clothes, great cold I taken
When appetide serves, I can get no meat.
Where I was fair and amiable of face,
Now am I foul and horrible to se,
All this I have I deserved for lack of grace,
Justly for my sins god does plague me.
My parents did tidle me, they were to blame,
In stead of correction, in ill did me maintain:
I fell no naught, and shall dye with shame
Yet all this is not half of my grief and pain.
The worm of my conscience yt shall never dye,
Accuses me daily more and more:
So often have I sinned wilfully,
That I fear to be damned for evermore.

Barnabas. What woeful wight art thou? tell me,
That here most grievously do lament,
Confess the truth, and I will comfort the,
By the word of god omnipotent:
Although your time ye have misspent,
Repent and amend while ye have space,
And god will restore you to heatlh and grace.

Dalila. To tell you who I am I dare not for shame,
But my filthy living has brought me in this case,
Full often for my wantonness you did me blame,
yet to take your council I had not the grace,
To be restored to health, alas it is past,
Disea^e has brought me into such decay,
Help me with your almose, while my life does last
That like a wretch as I am, I may go my way.

Barnabas. Show me your name sister I you pray,
And I will help you now at your need,
Both body and soul will I feed.

Dalila. your have named me already, if I dust be so bold
you sister Dalila, that wreche I am,
My wanton nice toys ye knew of old,
Alas brother they have brought me to this shame,
When you went to scole, my brother and I would play
Swear, chide, and scodle weth man and woman,
To do shrewde turns, our delight was always,
Yet were we tidled, and you beaten now and than,
Thus our parents let us do what we would,
And you by correction they kepthe under awe:
When we grew big, we were sturdye and bold
By father and mother we set not a straw,
Small matter for me, I am past,
But your brother and mine is in gread ieoperdy:
In danger to come to shame at the last,
He frames his living so wyckedly.

^arna^^s. Well siker, I ever feared ye would be naught,
your lewd behauiours sore grieve my heart:
to trayn you to goodness, al means have I sought,
But in vain, yet will I play a brotherly part.
For yt the soul is more precious, most derely bought
with the blood of Christ, dying therefore:
To save it first, a mean must be sought,
At gods hand by Christ, man's only savior.
Consider Dalila, gods fatherly godnes,
Which for your good, has brought you in this case.
Scourged you with his rod of pure love doubtless.
that ones knowing your self, ye might call for grace,
Ye seem to repent, but I doubt whater,
For your sins, or for the misery ye be in:
Earnestly repent for your sin rather,
For these plagues be but the reward of sin,
But so repent that ye sin no more,
And then believe with steadfast faith:
That god will forgive you for evermore,
For Christ's sake, as the scripture says.
As for your body, if it be curable,
I will cause to be healed, or during your life:
I will clothe you, and fete you as I am able,
Come sister, go with me, ye have need of relief. The^ go^^

Dan^^^" As a judge of the countrey^ here am I come,
Sent by the kings Majesty, Justice to do: The iug^^ Iniquitie^ bailey ^rr^
come in, (...) judge ^ir^eth dow^
Chiefly to proceed in judgment of a Felon,
I tarry for the verdite of the quest ^re I go.
Go baily, know whether they be all a greed or no
If they be so, bid them come away
And bring their prisoner, I would hear what they say
I go my Lord, I go, to soon for one,
He is like to play a cast, will break his neck bone,
I beseech your lorshyp be good to him,
The man is come of good kynne^
If your Lordshyp would be so good to me,
As for my sake to set him free, He ^ellet^ him in h^^ ear the (...) may heare^
I could have.xx. pount in a purse,
Yea, and your Lordshyp a right fair horse,
Well worth ten pound.
Get the a way thou hell hound, Daniel t^^ judge.
If ye were well examined and tried, Iniquitye goes over ye judge ^^^keth
styll^
Perchance a false knave ye would be spyed,
Brybes (says Solomon) blind ye wise man's sight
That he can not se to give judgment right,
Should I be a bribar^ nay he shall have the law
As I owe to god and the king obedience and awe.

Iniqu^^ Ye be tied fair enough for runnyng away
If ye do not after me, ye will be hanged I dare say They bring Ismael in bound
^pite a pryso^er^
If thou tell no tales, but hold thy toungue,
I will ^e^the at lybertye ere it be long.
Though thou be judged to dye anon,

^^dge. Come on firs, I pray you come on,
Be you all agreed in one? one of the^ speaks for ye q^est.
yea my Lord, every chone,

^^dge. Where Ismael was intided by.xii. men,
Of Felony, burglary, and murdre,
As thinditement declares, how, where, and when
ye heard it read to you lately in order:
you with the rest, I trust all true men,
(...) for the ^^st Be charged upon your oaths to give verdyte directly,
Whether Ismael thereof be gilty or not gilty,

^niqui. Gilty (my Lord) and most gilty,

judge. Will thou hang my Lord, horeson noddy?

^niqui. The lord have mercy upon the,

judge. Tusshe, hold thy tongue and I warrant the
Thou shall go to the place thou camst fro,
Till to morrow.ix. of the clock, there to remain,
To the place of execution then shall thou go^
There be hanged to death, and after again,
Being dead, for ensample, to be hanged in a chain^
Take him away, and se it be done,
At your peril that may fall thereupon.

^smael Though I be judged to dye, I require respite,
For the kings advantage in things I can recite,

^niqui. A way with him he will speak but of spyte,

judge. well^ we will hear you say what you can.
But se that ye wrongfully accuse no man,

^smael I will be lie no man, but this I may say,
Here stands he that brought me to this way:

^niqui. My Lorde^ he lies like a dampened knave,
The fear of death does make him rave,

Ismael His naughtye company and play at dice,
Did me first to stealyng entice.
He was with me at roberies, I say it to his face,
yet can I say more in time and space,

Iniqu^^ Thou have said to much, I beshrew thy horsons face
Hang him my Lord, out of the way,
The thief cares not what he does say
Let me be hangman, I will teathe him a slight,
For fear of talkyng. I will strangle him straight,
Tarry here that list, for I will go. he would go.

Iudg^ No no my friend, not so,
I thought always ye should not be good,
And now it will prove, I se by the rood, They (...) him in al^ter he fig^teth
with th^^
Take him and lay him in yrons strong,
We will talk with you more ere it be long,

Iniqu^ He that lays hands on me in this place,
Iche lay my brawlyng iron on his face:
By gogs blood I defye thy worst,
If thou should hang me I were a cursed.
I have been at as low an ebb as this,
And quyckely a loft again by gisse:
I have mo friends then ye think I have,
I am entertained of all men like no slave:
Yea, within this month I may say to you,
I will be your servant, and your master to.
ye, crepe into your breast, will ye have it so?

Judge A way with them both, lead them away,
At his death tell me what he does say,
For then be like he will not lie,

Iniqui I care not for you both, no not a sly: they lead the^ out.

Judge If no man have here, more matter to say
I must go hence some other way. he goes out

Worldly shame. Hah ha, though I come in rudely be not aghast,
I must work a feate in all the have.
I have caught two birds, I will set for the dame,
If I catch her in my clutche, I will her tame.
Of all this while know ye not my name?
I am right worshipful master wordly shame,
The matter that I come now about,
Is even this, I put you out of dought.
There is none Xantippe, a cursed shrew,
I think all the world does her know,
Such a jade she is, and so cursed a queen,
She would out scold the devils dame I wene.
Sirs this fine woman, had babes three,
Twain the derest darlinges that might be,
Ismael and fair Dalila, these two,
With the loute Barnabas, I have nothing to do.
Alwas good, that these tidlynges do might,
Swear, lie, steal, scolde or fight:
Cards, dyce, kiss, clippe and so forth,
All this our Mammy would take in good worth.
Now sir, Dalila my daughter is dead of y^ pockes
And my son hanged in chains, and waueth his locks
These news will I tell her, and the matter so frame
That she shall be thine own master worldly shame,
Hah ha ha.

Xa^tippe ^ommeth in Peace, peace, she comweth hereby,
I spoke no word of her, no not I,
Oh Mestres Xantippe, I can tell you needs,
The fair wenche your dear daughter Dalila,
Is dead of the pockes, taken at the stews,
And thy son Ismael, that preaty boy
Whom I dare say you loved very well,
Is hanged in chains, ever man can tell.
Every man says thy daughter was a strong whore
And thy son a strong thief, and a murderer to
It must needs grieve you wondrous s^ro,
That they died so shamefully both two:
Men will taunt you and mock you, for they say now
The cause of their death, was even very you^

Xa^tippe I the cause of their death? She would sown

Worldly shame Will ye sown, the devil stop thy breath?
Thou shall die (I trow) with more shame
I will get me hence out of the way,
If the whore should dye, men would me blame^
That I killed her, knaves should say. Exit.

Xa^tippe Alas alas, and weal away^
I may curse the time that I was borne,
Never woman had such fortune, I dare say,
Alas two of my children be forlorn.
My fair daughter Dalila is dead of the pockes,
My dear son Ismael hanged up in chains,
Alas the wynd waueth his yelow locks,
It fleaeth my heart, and breaks my brains.
Why should god punish and plague me so sore?
To se my children dye so shamefully,
I will never eat bread in this world more
with this knife will A sley my self by and by^ She would stick her self a with a
knife.
Beware what ye do, fie mother fye^

Barnabas. Will ye spyl your self for your own offense
And seem for ever to exclude gods mercy,
God does punysh you for your negligence:
Wherefore take his correction with patience,
And thank him hertely, that of his godnes
He brings you in knowledge of your trespass.
For when my brother and sister were of young age,
You saw they were given to ydlenes and play,
Would apply no learning, but live in outrage,
And mencomplagned on them every day.
Ye winked at their faults, and tidled them always.
By maintenaun^e they grew to mischief and ill,
So at last gods Justice did them both spill.
In that god preseruerued me, small thank to you
If god had not given me special grace,
To avoid evil, and do good, this is true,
I had lived and dyed in as wretched case:
As they did, for I had both suffraunce and space,
But it is an old prouerke, you have herd it I think
That god will have se, shall not wynke.
Yet in this we may al take comfort,
They took great repentance I heard say,
And as for my sister, I am able to report,
She lamented for her sins, to her dyng day:
To repent and believe I exorthed her always,
Before her death she believed that god of his mercy
For Christ's sake, would save her eternally.
If you do even so, ye need not despair,
For god will freely remitte your sins all,
Christ has paid the raunsom, why should ye fear.
To believe this and do well, to god for grace call.
All worldly cares let pass and fall,
And thus comfort my father, I pray you hertely,
Xa^tippe ^oeth o^te, I have a little to say, I will come by and by.
Right gentle audience, by this Interlude ye mayse
How dangerous it is, for the frailtye of youth,
Without good governance, to live at liberty,
Such chances as these, often happen of truth
Many miscary, it is the more ruth,
By negligence of their elders, and not taking pain.
In time good learning and qualities to attain.
Therefore exhortyng al parents to be diligent,
In bringing up their children, yea to be circumspect
Least they fall to evil, be not negligent,
But chastise them before they be sore infect:
Accept their well doing in ill them reject,
A young plant ye may platte and bow as y^ will,
Where it grows strong, there will it abide still
Even so by children, in their tender age,
Ye may work them like waxe^ to your own intent
But if ye suffer them long to live in outrage^
They will be sturdy and stiff, and will not relent:
O ye children, let your time he well spent,
Apply your learning and your elders obey,
It will be your profit an other day.
Now, for the Queen's Royal majesty let us pray, He knele^ down
That god (in whose hands is ye heart of al Queen's,)
May endue her highness with godly puissance always
that her grace may long reign and prosper in all things
In gods word and justice may give light to al Queen's
Let us pray for the honorable council and nobility,
that they may always counsel in wisdom with tra^quility, He make^ cur^esy a^
goes out
God save the Queen, the Realm and cominaltie.

Finis.
A song.
^re^yng (...)answea^^^g other ^^talwaies ^iii. staff ^^ysing to^^ther.
It is good to be merry,
But who came me merry?
He that has a pure conscience,
He may well be merry.
Who has a pure conscience tell me?
No man of him self, I ensure the,
Then must it follow of necessity,
That no man can be merry.
Purity it self may pureness give,
you must ask it of God in true believe,
Then will he give it, and none repreue,
And so we may be merry.
What is the practice of a conscience pure?
To love and fear God, and other allure,
And for his sake, to help his neighbor,
Then may he well be merry.
What shall he have, that can and will do this
After this life, everlasting bliss,
yet not by desert, but by gift ywisse,
There god make us all merry.
Finis.
Imprinted at London, in Paul's Church yearde at the Sign of the Swane by
John King.


